The Spirit of Modern Philosophy (Josiah Royce, 1892)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.96626). Royce's Lowell Lectures: Spinoza to Schopenhauer read as the unfolding of modern idealism.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

4


iSooiw ii? STotfiali Bopcr.


THE CONCEPTION OF IMMORTALITY. Being
the Ingefsoll LfCCture for iSqq. x6mOv gilt top, ^x .00.

THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY. 8to.
gilt top. ^.50.

THE RELIGIOUS ASPECT OF PHILOSOPHY.
lamOt gilt top, ^3*00.

CALIFORNIA. In Atnerican CommofttveaUks
Hifs. With Map. i6mo^ gilt top, Sx.25, wrA Poet*
age xa ccnta.


HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY
Boston and Nbw York


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN
PHILOSOPHY


Iisr TIIM rOIiM OJ^ I.JSCTURSS


BY


JOSIAH ROYCE, Ph. D.

FROVBSSOR or THB HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY
nr HARVARD UNIVRRSITY


BOSTON AND NEW YORK
HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY
Klitaer^ltie Cambritioe


t°IO

/A


Bt josiah royox.

1899,

AU rights resenjsd.


fIttarpQira.
i^ixp No-


p lie LiL — . ,

UAtmi 73


692


TO MY FRIEND


iitarp (Srap SlQUatli ^orr

I GRATEFULLY DEDICATE THIS BOOK
AS A TOKEN OF AFFECTION AND VENERATION
IN RECOGNITION OF THE WISE COUNSEL
THAT SUGGESTED ITS PREPARATION
AND OF THE THOUGHTFUL ADVICE
THAT ACCOMPANIED AND AIDED
ITS GROWTH


PREFACE.


The friend to whom I have dedicated this book asked
me, a little more than two years ago, for some account
of the more significant spiritual possessions of a few
.prominent modem thinkers. I was to tell what I could
about these possessions in comparatively brief and un<
technical fashion. With some misgivings as to my right
and many misgivings as to my power to set forth any
portion of the content of modern philosophy in the com*
pass of a few short lectures, I still undertook the task,
and soon found it unexpectedly absorbing. The com-
pany of friends for whom I was to prepare my lectures
proved to be more numerous than I had foreseen ; the
undertaking became more elaborate and thorough-going
than 1 had any way ihtended ; and the exceeding kindli-
ness and earnestness of my hearers called erelong for a
response that taxed all my poor wit to the utmost. My
lectoi^s once finished in their first, form, under the
general title ‘‘Representative Modem Thinkers and
Problems,” I was asked to read them yet again, before
another equally cordial and stimulating company in
another city. The re-reading suggested, of course, much
revision. In the foUowing year I again offered my
papers, partly rewritten and much enlarged, to the
members of Harvard University, as public evening leo>


vi


PREFACE.


tures. Still other opportunities to present all or part of
the same material to various audiences caused me to get
considerable critical aid. I then resolved to give the
whole discussion a final form.

This volume contains, therefore, an essay, in the shape
of a series of lectures, and with a twofold object. On
the one hand my essay deals not so much with the
minuter details as with the connections, the linkages,
the general growth, of modem philosophical thought
since the seventeenth century. On the other hand my
purpose is constructive as well as expository. I have
my own philosophical creed, — a growing and still ele-
mentary one, indeed; and this creed has been strongly
suggested to me by what I know of the progress and
outc|^me of modern thought. What I have seen I delight
to try to suggest. And the book is the product of my
delight, and the embodiment of my efforts at suggestion.

On the other hand, these studies are not mere frag-
ments, but are bound together by a single principal idea,
this idea being the one that seems to me to embody the
true spirit of modern philosophy, — the doctrine concern-
ing the world which, amidst all dur vast ignorance of
nature and of destiny, wo still have a right to call, in its
main and simple outlines, a sure possession of human
thought. What this doctrine is I have already had occa-
sion to suggest in the more positive chapters of my book
called “ The Religious Aspect of Philosophy.” To the
arguments of that work, particularly to the chapters
therein entitled “The Possibility of Error” and “The
Religious Insight” (the first containing a metaphysical
discussion of the proof of the main thesis of Objective
Idealism, the other a general sketch of certain conse-


PREFACE.


VII


quences of this thesis), I must refer such readers as may
desire a fuller acquaintance with some matters of funda-
mental importance which the present study, in view of its
limitations, will leave more or less incomplete. But these
lectures have their own unity, are intended to be under-
stood by themselves, represent, I hope, a considerable
advance in the organization of the philosophical doctrine
which was set forth in the former book, and meanwhile
have the decided advantage which the historical fashion
of philosophizing always possesses as against the dialec-
tical fashion.

. Our common dependence upon the history of thought
for all our reflective undertakings is unquestionable.
Our best originality, if we ever get any originality, must
spring from this very dependence. Doctrines of genu-
inely revolutionary signiflcance are rare indeed iii the
history of speculation, and they ought to be so. Of
lesser surprises, of marvels, of beautifully novel insights,
all the greater highways of speculation are full; and
yet most of the marvels are only such in so far as they
are set off upon a very large background of the histori-
cally familiar. Only a very few times in the history of
thought is the continuity of the evolution distinctly
broken. The novelties are elsewhere only relative, and
get their very value from the fact that they are so.

For us to-day, after so many centuries of philosophy,
the necessity of keeping in mind our relation to earlier
thought is peculiarly pressing, and tLe neglect (or mis-
understanding) of those historical relations is peculiarly
disastrous. Mere eclecticism in philosophy is of course
worthless. But to condemn the past, as full of error and
delusion, and then to set forth what we imagine to be our


TIU


PREFACE.


own fundamentally significant and wholly new methods
in philosophy, is a procedure that in general can have but
one ending. We, then, but unwittingly transplant old
growths to new soil, seeing not how old the growths are,
and considering only the newness of the garden that we
have planned. But the new soil is of necessity lacking in
the ancient wealth and depth, and the transplanted doc-
trines take little root. Synthesis and critical re-organi-
zation of the truths furnished us by the past, in the light
of present science, is not mere eclecticism, and leaves
ample room for healthy originality. On the other hand,
it is so easy to feel a train of philosophical thought to be
wholly new, merely because we have eagerly thought it
out, and have been all the while unaware of our actual
philosophical environment and atmosphere. And yet this
subjective sensation of originality, — to what unnecessary
cares, to what disappointments may it not in the end
lead us 1

Such misadventures, I, for my part, am minded to
avoid by remaining fully aware of my historical relations.
Faithfulness to history is the beginning of creative wis-
dom. I love the latter, and want to get it. To that end,
however, I cultivate the former.

The present philosophical situation in this country
seems to be peculiarly favorable to such efforts. Two
philosophical branches are especially prospering to-day
in our Universities, the study of Empirical Psychology,
and the study of the History of Philosophy. I believe
for my own part that these two pursuits ought to flourish
and will flourish together, and that they will lead to very
important constructive work. I see no just opposition
of spirit between them.


PBEFAOE.


iz

A student of philosophy, vrho is also occasionally a
critic of his living fellow-students, is of necessity glad to
have applied to his own work the same tests that he would
apply to the work of others, and severer tests, too, than
he would have wit to apply. Where grave errors of schol-
arship or profound misunderstandings of my historical
relations mar my work, I desire to have the fact pointed
out with the utmost definiteness of speech. For I bring
no gold with me unless some portion of my work can
bear the test of the most fiery triaL Let the dross suffer.
I shall never regret the loss of it, nor feel aggrieved at
the flames. I distinguish very easily between a student’s
person and his teaching. Let the man be respected accord-
ing as he has meant well, and has labored with sincere
devotion. 1 myself have never had occasion to critioise
any philosophical writer of whom this could not be sin-
cerely said. But let the teaching be tried wholly without
mercy, whether meant well or not. Were we, indeed, as
negative critics in philosophy, assuming the right to be
judges of the hearts and of the inner and personal merits
of our living philosophical opponents instead of estimat-
ing, as we do in such cases, their published work, I, for
my part, remembering my own weakness and personal
unworthiness, should be the first to echo, just as even
now I do in the presence of God and man, the words of
my departed friend, whose verses entitled “The Fool’s
Prayer ” I have quoted in my closing lecture. But the
criticism of the public deeds of scholarship, offered in the
public service, is wholly independent of our personal fond-
ness for a man, and involves no desire for other than
intelleotnal contest with him. Therefore, such criticism,


X


PREFACE.


whenever its wholly objective motive is understood, does
well to be merciless.

It is perhaps tedious, I am sure that I wish it were
quite needless, to set forth here such obvious truisms as
these. Most readers, indeed, will have them already in
mind. For such they are not intended.

However severe or kindly our critics, it is all the while
true that a book must be judged by what it undertakes,
and that this essay must, of course, have and confess
the defects of its qualities. I have tried, accordingly,
throughout my text, to avoid raising false expectations.
The reader will, indeed, find here many things that at the
outset he does not expect. I hope that some of these
things will be a pleasing surprise to him. But in no case
will he either expect or find technical completeness. To
be sure, the later papers are more elaborate than the ear-
lier ones ; partly because I have added to my text many
passages which were not read at all in my original lec-
tures ; partly because I have expected my hearers and
readers to grow a little in reflective patience as they be-
came used to the argument.

I may add a few special observations on various of
the individual lectures. The traditional beginning of the
story of modem thought with the Cartesian cogito ergo
sum I have not employed, because it is almost universal
in the text-books, and because, meanwhile, in its usual
context, it produces, despite its literal accuracy, a very
misleading impression. The seventeenth century was not
on the whole a period of subjectivism, but the very re-
verse. Descartes was himself best known to his contem-
poraries, not for his theory of knowledge, but for his
physical and metaphysical system. Of the philosophical


PBEFAOE.


xi


Absolutism of the century Spinoza is meanwhile the best,
because the extremest representative. Interested as I
here am in the broad outlines and not in the details,
I have, therefore, chosen to illustrate the general attitude
of the time towards the deepest problems of the spirit by
this extreme but still typical case of Spinoza, and to leave
the rest to a brief general sketch. In the superficial
glance over the period from Spinoza to Kant I haVb
on^itted Leibnitz altogether, and I feel this to be the most
serious error of mere omission in my whole book. Yet
the defect proved to be inevitable, in view of my space
and time limitations.

With the lecture on Kant begins a more careful study
of doctrine. The modem Kant-philology has here been
of indispensable service to me, so far as I have been able
to follow it. Yet I have tried to write my own personal
impression of Kant himself as plainly as I could. To
Professors Yaihinger and Benno Erdmann every student
of Kant owes a debt which, as I hope, I have not obscured
for my readers by my playful remarks on pages 104-106.
In the later historical lectures I have been unable to make
sufficient acknowledgement of numerous literary obliga-
tions. I feel such most of all to Julian Schmidt, to Pro-
fessor Haym, to Dr. Hutchinson Stirling, to Professors
Windelband, Falckenberg, and J. E. Erdmann, to Pro-
fessor Edward Caird, and to Principal Caird. Of foot-
notes I have been permitted by my plan to make only
very scanty use. In case of my exposition of Hegel I
have felt it needful to show by rather more frequent
notes, as well as by appendix C, that between my veiy
untechnical phraseology and Hegel’s elaborate processes
there is a pretty deliberately planned relation, which the


PREFACE.


xii

professional student can verify. Schopenhauer, on the
other hand, very readily lends himself to the method of
these lectures, and footnotes could in his case, although
unwillingly, be wholly spared. Both the Hegel and the
Schopenhauer papers have appeared in the Atlantic
Monthly.” Both are here considerably enlarged.

That the modern philosophical doctrine of Evolution,
in its wholeness is, historically speaking, an outcome, and
not a very remote one, of the Komantic movement, is an
obvious observation for a student of the history of thought ;
and yet 1 am not aware that this observation has hitherto
been frequently made in a form easily accessible to Eng-
lish readers. So important and doubtless permanent an
acquisition of modem thought as is the theory of evolu-
lution deserves to be itself understood as a product of a
genuine and continuous growth, and not as a special crea-
tion of Mr. Spencer, or as the result of any single cata-
strophic change such as even the appearance of Darwin’s
wonderful “Origin of Species.” These things played
their great part ; but the historical motives of the whole
movement were very deep-lying and manifold.

Two of my constructive papers in Part II, the tenth and
the twelfth of the series of lectures, have been entirely
rewritten, and have never been read at all as lectures in
their present form. In the eleventh lecture, on Idealism,
and elsewhere throughout my book I have given promi-
nence to the strictly “ metaphysicid ” rather than to what
is technically called the “ epistemological ” meaning of
the word idealism itself. The technical reader is familiar
with the numerous meanings which this well-known word
has come to possess. In its “epistemological” sense
idealism involves a theory of the nature of our human


PBEFACE.


hrumledge; and various decidedly different theories are
called by this name in view of one common feature,
namely, the stress that they lay upon the subjectivity ”
of a larger or smaller portion of what pretends to be our
knowledge of things. In this sense Kant’s theory of the
subjectivity of space and time was called by himself a

Transcendental Idealism.” But in its “ metaphysical ”
sense, idealism is a theory as to the nature of the real
worlds however we may come to know that nature. Falck*
enberg, in his Geschichte der neueren Philosophie,” p.
476, defines one very prominent form of metaphysical
idealism as the belief in a spiritual principle at the basis
of the world, without the reduction of the physical world
to a mere illusion.” In this sense, as he goes on to say,
namely in the sense that matter is an expression (Pro-
dukt) of the world-spirit, Fichte, Bchelling, Hegel, and
their allies are together named the idealistic school.” As
Vaihinger has well remarked, in his admirable essay on
Kant’s “ Widerlegung des Idealismus ” (p. 95), it is the
metaphysical and not the epistemological meaning of the
term idealism ” that has been customary in the literature
since HegeL This fact every well-informed student will
have in mind whenever he uses the word without express
definition.

The problems of the theory of knowledge exist of
qourse in some form for every serious philosopher. The
analyses suggested by the various forms of epistemolo-
gical ” idealism will have, moreover, permanent value for
the investigator of our knowledge. Every ^^metaphysi-
cal ” idealism will have been affected in one way or an-
other by such analyses. But to imagine that a meta-
physical ” idealist is as such a person whose principles con-


P REPACK*


ziv

sistently involve the doubt or denial of the existence of
everything and every one excepting his own finite self, is
an old and trivial misunderstanding, unworthy of an his-
torical student. A metaphysical idealist will of course
deal with the problem of the relation of knowledge and
its object, and will try to get at the nature of the real
world by means of a solution of this very problem. Plow
he may do this I have tried to show in the proper
place. None the less, a doctrine remains, in the meta-
physical sense, idealistic, if it maintains that the world
is, in its wholeness, and in all of its real constituent
parts, a world of mind or of spirit. The opposite of
an idealist, in this sense, is one who maintains the ulti-
mate existence of wholly unspiritual realities at the basis
of experience and as the genuine truth of the world —
such unspiritual reaKties for instance as an absolute
“Unknowable,” or, again, as what Hobbes meant by
“Body.” The “epistemological” problem, that is, the
question as to how we “ transcend ” the “ subjective ” in
our knowledge, exists at the outset of philosophy, in pre-
cisely the same sense for metaphysical realists and for
their opponents, the metaphysical idealists. Whether and
how they are to solve this problem depends upon their
seriousness of philosophical reflection, as well as upon
what the true solution may turn out to be. My own view
is that only the metaphysical idealist is in possession of
a successful solution for the epistemological problem (see
text, page 882 ).

These last remarks are meant mainly for the technical
reader, to whom, also, appendices B and C are exclusively
addressed.

But Lecture XII, on “ The World of Description and


PREFACE.


XV


the World of Appreciation/* attempts a statement of cer-
tain general speculations in a form which I feel to have
its own degree of relative novelty, despite the fact that
the problems are of the oldest, and that the paper is only
one effort more to define a double-aspect ” theory of the
relations of the physical and the moral and aesthetic
worlds. I hope that the argument of tliis paper will be
on the whole accessible to every reader. Despite the
rapid flight there taken through a very wide region, what
I present may have for some fellow-students a genuine
and not wholly momentary suggestiveuess.

My thanks are due for the constant stimulation and
frequent kindly criticism received from my colleagues
Professors Palmer and James. In previous publications
I have more than once had occasion to acknowledge their
aid, without which all my work would have been impossi-
ble. To repeat such acknowledgment is only to confess
that the debt to my elder colleagues is as enduring as is
my wish to make some return.

Dr. Benjamin Hand, Assistant of the Philosophical De-
partment at Harvard, is responsible for the careful index.

JOSIAH ROYCE.


Cambhidob, MabsachusettSi Jan, 1, 1892.


CONTENTS.


UOTDBB FAOB

L General Introduction 1


PART I. STUDIES OF TIHNKERS AND PROBLEMS.

n. The Peiuods of Modern Philosophy; Characteristics
OF THE First Period; Illustration by means of
THE Religious Aspect of Spinozism 27

III. The Rediscovery of the Inner Life ; From Spinoza to

Kant 68

IV. Kant 101

V. Fichte 135

VI. The Romantic School in Philosophy 164

yil. IIboel 190

VIII. Schopenhauer 228

IX. The Rise of the Doctrine of Evolution 265

PART II. SUGGESTIONS OF DOCTRINE.

X. Nature and Evolution; The Outer World and its

Paradox 311

XI. Reality and Idealism; The Inner Would and its

Meaning 341

XIL Physical Law and Freedom; The World of Descrip-
tion AND THE Would of Appreciation 381

XIII. Optimism, Pessimism and the Moral Order 435

Appendix A. Syllabus of the Lectures 473

Appendix B. On Kant's Transcendental Deduction of

THE Categories 488

Appendix C. The Hegelian Theory of Univxbsals . . 492


THE SPIBIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


LECTURE 1.

GENEEAL INTRODUCTION.

In the followiug course of lectures I shall try to sag*
gest, in a fashion suited to the general student, something
about the men, the problems, and the issues that seem to
me most interesting in a limited, but highly representative
portion of the history of modern philosophy. I under*
take this work with a keen sense of the limitations of my
time and my powers. I plead as excuse only my desire
to interest some of my fellow-students in the great con*
cems of philosophy.

I.

The assumption upon which these lectures are based
is one that I may as well set forth at the very begin-
ning. It is the assumption that Philosophy, in the proper
sense of the term, is not a presumptuous effort to explain
the mysteries of the world by means of any superhuman
insight or extraordinary canning, but has its origin and
value in an attempt to give a reasonable account of our
own personal attitude towards the more serious business^
of life. You philosophize when you reflect critically upon
what you are actually doing in your world. What you
are doing is of course, in the first place, living. And life
involves passions, faiths, doubts, and courage. The crit*
ical inquiry into what all these things mean and im-
ply is philosophy. We have our faith in life; we want


2 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

reflectively to estimate this faith. We feel ourselves in
a world of law and of significance. Yet why we feel this
homelike sense of the reality and the worth of our world
is a matter for criticism. Such a criticism of life, made
elaborate and thorough-going, is a philosophy.

If this assumption of mine be well-founded, it follows
that healthy philosophizing, or thorough-going self-criti-
cism, is a very human and natural business, in which
you are all occasionally, if not frequently engaged, and
for which you will therefore from the start have a certain
sympathy. Whether we will it or no, we all of us do
philosophize. The difference between the temperament
which loves technical philosophy and the temperament
which can make nothing of so-called metaphysics is
rather one of degree than of kind. The moral order, the
evils of life, the authority of conscience, the intentions
of God, how often have I not heard them discussed, and
with a wise and critical skepticism, too, by men who sel-
dom looked into books. The professional student of phi-
losophy does, as his constant business, precisely what aU
other people do at moments. In the life of non-meta-
physical people, reflection on destiny and the deepest
truths of life occupies much the same place as musio
occupies in the lives of appreciative, but much distracted
amateurs. The constant student of philosophy is merely
the professional musician of reflective thought. He daily
plays his scales in the form of what the scoffers call
chopping logic.” He takes, in short, a delight in the
technical subtleties of bis art which makes his enthusiasm
often incomprehensible to less devoted analysts of life.
But his love for speculation is merely their own natural
taste somewhat specialized. He is a sort of miser, secretly
hoarding up the treasures of reflection which other people
wear as the occasional ornaments of intercourse, or use as
a part of the heavier coinage of conversation. If, as non^
professional philosophers, you confine your refiections to


GENERAL INTRODUCTION. 8

momentSi the result is perhaps a serious talk with a friend,
or nothing more noteworthy than an occasional hour of
meditation, a dreamy glance of wonder, as it were, at
this whole great and deep universe before you, with its
countless worlds and its wayward hearts. Such chance
heart searchings, such momentary communings with the
universal, such ungrown germs of reflection, would under
other circumstances develop into systems of philosophy.
If you let them pass from your attention you soon forget
them, and may then even fancy that you have small fond-
ness for metaphysics. But, none the less, all intelligent
people, even including the haters of metaphysics, are
despite themselves occasionally metaphysicians.


II.

All this, however, by way of mere opening suggestion.
What you wish to know further, through this introduc-
tory lecture, is, how this natural tendency to reflect criti-
cally upon life leads men to frame elaborate systems of
philosophy, why it is that these systems have been so
numerous and so varied in the past, and whether or no
it seems to be true, as many hold, that the outcome of all
this long and arduous labor of the philosophers has so
far been nothing but doubtful speculation and hopeless
variety of opinion. I suppose that a student who knows
little as yet of the details of philosophic study feels as
his greatest difficulty, when he approaches the topic for
the first time, the confusing variety of the doctrines of
the philosophers, joined as it is with the elaborateness
and the obscurity that seem so characteristic of technical
speculation. So much labor, you say, and all thus far
in vain I For if the thinkers really aimed to bring to
pass an agreement amongst enlightened persons about the
great truths that are to be at the basis of human life, how
fadly, you will say, they seemed to have failed I How
monstrous on the one hand their toils t Hegel’s eighteen


4


THE SPIRIT OP BIODERN PHILOSOPHY.


volumes of published books and of posthumously edited
lecture notes are but a specimen of what such men have
produced. A prominent English philosopher was flip-
pantly accused, a few years since, in a gay and irrespou:
sible volume of reminiscences, of having been the writer
of books that, as the scoffing author in substance said,
“ fill several yards on the shelves of our libraries.” The
prominent philosopher indignantly responded, in a letter
addressed to a literary weekly. “IBs critic,” said he,
“ was recklessly inaccurate.” As a fact his own collected
works, set side by side on a shelf, cover a little less than
two feet I How vast the toil, then, and on the other hand,
to what end? A distinguished German student of the
history of philosophy, Friedrich Albert Lange, upon one
occasion, wrote these words : “ Once for all we must defi-
nitely set aside the claim of the metaphysicians, of what-
ever school and tendency, that their deductions are such
as forbid any possible strife, or that if you only first thor-
oughly come into possession of every detail of some system
six fat volumes long, then, and not till then, you will rec-
ognize with wonder how each and every individual conclu-
sion was sound and clear.” Does not this assertion of
Lange’s, this definitive setting aside of the claim of the
metaphysicians, seem warranted by the facts? What one
of these systems, six fat volumes long, has ever satisfied in
its entirety any one but the master who wrote it, and the
least original and thoughtful of his pupils? What so
pathetic, then, in this history of scholarly production, as
this voluminous and systematic unpersuasiveness of the
philosophers ? They aimed, each one in his own private
way, at the absolute, and so, if they failed, they must,
you will think, have failed utterly. Each one raised, all
alone, his own temple to his own god, declared that he, the
first of men, possessed the long-sought truth, and under-
took to initiate the world into his own mysteries. Hence
it is that so many temples lie in ruins and so many images


GENERAL INTRODUCTION.


6


of false gods are shattered to fragments. I put the case
thus strongly against the philosophers, because I am
anxious to have you comprehend from the start how we
are to face this significant preliminary difficulty of our
topic. It may be true that the philosophers deal with
life, and that, too, after a fashion known and occasionally
tried by all of us. But is not their dealing founded upon
vain pretense ? How much better, you may say, to live
nobly than to inquire thus learnedly and ineffectually into
the mysteries of life ? As the ‘‘ Imitation of Christ ” so
skillfully states the case against philoso})hy, speaking
indeed from the point of view of simple faith, but using
words that doubters, too, can understand, “ What doth it
profit thee to enter into deep discussion concerning the
Holy Trinity, if thou lack humility, and be thus displeas-
ing to the Trinity ? For verily it is not deep words that
make a man holy and upright. I had rather feel contri-
tion than be skillful in the definition thereof.” And
again, “Tell me now where are all those masters and
teachers, whom thou knewest well, when they were yet
with you, and flourished in learning? Their stalls are
now filled by others, who perhaps never have one thought
concerning them. Whilst they lived they seemed to be.
somewhat, but now no one speaks of them. Oh, how
quickly passeth the glory of the world away! Would
that their life and knowledge had agreed together ! For
then would they have read and inquired unto good pur-
pose.” Or once again, and this time in the well-known
words of Fitzgerald’s “ Omar Khayyam ” stanzas : —

'Why all the Saints and Sages who discussed

Of the two worlds so learnedly are thrust

Like foolish prophets forth. Their words to Scorn

Are scattered, and their mouths are stopt with dust.”

Well, if stich is the somewhat portentous case against
philosophy, what can we say for philosophy? I answer
first, that the irony of fate treats idl human enterprises in


6


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


precisely this way, if one has regard to the immediate
intent of the men engaged in them. Philosophy is not
alone in missing her directly sought aim. But true success
lies often in serving ends that were higher than the ones
we intended to serve. Surely no statesman ever founded
an enduring social order; nay, one may add that no
statesman ever produced even temporarily the precise
social order that he meant to found. No poet ever gave
us just the song that in his best moments he had meant
and hoped to sing. No human life ever attained the ful-
fillment of the glorious dreams of its youth. And as for
passing away, and being forgotten, and having one’s mouth
stopped with dust, surely one is not obliged to be either a
saint or a sage to have that fate awaiting one. But still
the saints and sages are not total failures, even if they
are forgotten. There was an enduring element about
them. They , did not wholly die.

In view of all this, what we need to learn concerning
philosophy is, not whether its leaders have in any sense
failed or not, but whether its enterprise has been essen-
tially a worthy one, one through which the human spirit
has gained ; whether the dark tower before which these
Bolands have ended their pilgrimage has contained trea-
sures in any way worthy of their quest. For a worthy
quest always leaves good traces behind it, and more trea-
sures are won by heroes than they visibly bring home in
their own day. A more careful examination of the true
office of philosophy may serve to show us, in fact, both
why final success in it has been unattainable and why the
partial successes have been worth the cost. Let such an
examination be our next business.


HI.

The task of humanity, to wit, the task of organizing
here on earth a worthy social life, is in one sense a hope*
lessly complex one. There are our endlessly numerous


GENERAL INTRODUCTION.


7


material foes, our environment, our diseases, our weak-
nesses. There are amongst us men ourselves, our rival-
ries, our selfish passions, our anarchical impulses, out
blindness, our weak wills, our short and careful lives.
These things all stand in the way of progress. For prog-
ress, for organization, for life, for spirituality, stand, as
the best forces, our healthier social instincts, our cour-
age, our endurance, and our insight. Civilization depends
upon these. How hopeless every task of humanity, were
not instinct often on the side of order and of spirituality.
How quick would come our failure, were not courage and
endurance ours. How blindly chance would drive us, did
we not love insight for its own sake, and cultivate con-
templation even when we know not yet what use we can
make of it. And so, these three, if you will, to wit,
healthy instinct, enduring courage, and contemplative in-
sight, rule the civilized world. He who wants life to pros-
per longs to have these things alike honored and cultivated.
They are brethren, these forces of human spirituality ; they
cannot do without one another ; they are all needed.

Well, what I have called contemplative insight, that
disposition and power of our minds whereby we study
and enjoy truth, expresses itself early and late, as you
know, in the form of a searching curiosity about our world
and about life, a curiosity to which you in vain endeavor
to set bounds. As the infant that studies its fist in the
field of vision does not know as yet why this curiosity
about space and about its own movements will be of ser-
vice to it, so throughout life there is something unpracti-
cal, wayward, if so you choose to call it, in all our curious
questionings concerning our world. The value of higher
insight is seldom immediate. Science has an element
of noble play about it. It is not the activity, it is the
often remote outcome, of science, that is of practical ser-
vice. Insight is an ally of the moral nature of man, an
ally of our higher social instincts, of our loyalty, of our


8


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


courage, of our devotion ; but the alliance is not always
one intended directly by the spirit of curious inquiry
itself. A singular craft of our nature links the most
theoretical sorts of inquiry by unexpected ties with men’s
daily business. One plays with silk and glass and amber,
with kites that one flies beneath thunder clouds, with
frogs’ legs and with acids. The play is a mere expression
of a curiosity that former centuries might have called idle.
But the result of this play recreates an industrial world.
And so it is everywhere with our deeper curiosity. There
is a sense in which it is all superfluous. Its immediate
results seem but vanity. One could surely live without
them ; yet for the future, and for the spiritual life of man-
kind, these results are destined to become of vast import.
Without this cunning contrivance of our busy brains,
with their tireless curiosity and their unpractical wonder-
ings, what could even sound instinct and the enduring
heart have done to create the world of the civilized man ?

Of all sorts of curiosity one of the most human and
tlie most singular is the reflective curiosity whose highest
expression is philosophy itself. This form of curiosity
scrutinizes our own lives, our deepest instincts, our most
characteristic responses to the world in which we live, our
typical “ reflex actions.” It tries to bring us to a self-
consciousness as to our temperaments. Our tempera-
ments, our instincts, are in one sense fatal. We cannot
directly alter them. What philosophy does is to find
them out, to bring them to the light, to speak in words
the, very essence of them. And so the historical office of
the greatest philosophers has always been to reword, as it
were, the meaning and the form of the most significant
life, temperaments, and instincts of their own age. As
man is social, as no man lives alone, as your temperament
is simply the sum total of your social “ reflex actions,” is
just your typical bearing towards your fellows, the great
philosopher, in reflecting on his own deepest instincts and


GENERAL INTRODUCTION.


9


faiths, inevitably describes, in the terms of his system, the
characteristic attitude of his age and people. So, for in-
stance, Plato and Aristotle, taken together, express for us,
in their philosophical writings, the essence of the highest
Greek faith and life. The Greek love of the beautiful
and reverence for the state, the Greek union of intellec-
tual freedom with conventional bondage to the forms of
politics and of religion, the whole Greek attitude towards
the universe, in so far as the Athens of that age could
embody it, are made articulate in enduring form in the
speculations of these representative men^ They con-
sciously interpret this Hellenic life, — they do also more :
they criticise it. Plato especially is in some of his work
a fairly destructive analyst of his nation’s faith. And
yet it is just this faith, incorporated as it was into his
own temperament, bred into his every fibre, that he must
needs somehow express in his doctrine. And now per-
haps you may already see why there is of necessity no-
thing absolute, nothing final, about much that a Plato
himself may have looked upon as absolute and as final in
his work. Greek life was not all of human life ; Greek
life was doomed to pass away ; Greek instincts and limi-
tations could not be eternal. The crystal heavens that
the Greek saw abote him were indeed doomed to be rolled
up like a scroll, and the elements of his life were certain
to pass away in fervent heat. But then, into all nobler
future humanity, Greek life was certain to enter, as a
factor, as a part of its civilized instincts, as an ennobling
passion in its artistic production, as a moment of its
itualily. And therefore, too, Plato’s philosophy, domS|^
in one sense not to be absolute or final, has its part, as a
fact, in your own reflection to-day, and would have its
part in the absolute philosophical estimate of the highest
human life if ever we attained that estimate. Jf philoso-
phy criticises, estimates, and to that end rewords life, if
the great philosopher expresses in his system the most


10 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHr.

characteristic faiths and passions of his age, then indeed
the limitation of the age will be in a sense the limitation
of the philosophy ; and with the life whose temperament
it reflectively embodied the philosophy will pass away.
It will pass away, but it will not be lost. A future hu-
manity will, if civilization healthily progresses, inherit the
old kingdom, and reembody the truly essential and immor-
tal soul of its old life. This new humanity, including in
itself the spirit of the old, will need something, at least,
of the old philosophy to express in reflective fashion its
own attitude towards the universe. This something that
it needs of the old philosophy may not be that which the
philosopher had himself imagined to be his most absolute
possession. Like the statesman, he will have builded
better than he knew. As Caesar’s Roman empire had for
its destiny not to exclude the Germans, as Caesar had
driven out Ariovistus, but to civilize and to Christianize
them, and finally ,to pass in great part over to their keep-
ing, so Plato’s philosophy had for its office to suggest
thoughts that Christianity afterwards made the common
treasure of the very humanity that his mind would have
regarded as hopelessly barbarian. No, the philosopher’s
work is not lost when, in one sense, his system seems to
have been refuted by death, and when time seems to have
scattered to scorn the words of his dust-filled mouth.
His immediate end may have been unattained ; but thou-
sands of years may not be long enough to develop for
humanity the full significance of his reflective thought.

this curious scrutiny of ours into the truth,
keeps here, as you will see, its immediately unpractical,
its ultimately significant character. There is indeed a
sense in which life has no need of the philosopher. He
does not invent life, nor does he lead in its race ; he
follows after ; he looks on ; he is no prophet to inspire
men; he has a certain air of the playful about him.
Plato, in a famous passage, makes sport of the men of the


GENERAL INTRODUCTION.


11

World, who are driven bj business, who are oppressed by
the law courts, whose only amusement is evil gossip about
their neighbors. The philosopher, on the contrary, ac-
cording to Plato, has infinite leisure, and accordingly
thinks of the infinite, but does not know who his next
neighbor is, and never dreams of the law courts, or of
* finishing his business at any fixed hour. His life is a sort
of artistic game ; his are not the passions of the world ;
his is the reflection that comprehends the world. The
Thracian servant maids laugh at him, as the one in the
story laughed at Thales, because he stares at the heavens,
and hence occasionally falls into wells. But what is he
in the sight of the gods, and what are the servant maids ?
When they are some day asked to look into the heavens,
and to answer concerning the truth, what scorn will not
be their lot ? After some such fashion does Plato seek to
glorify the contemplative separation from the pettiness of
life which shall give to the philosopher his freedom. And
yet, as we know, this freedom, this sublime playfulness,
of even a Plato, does not suggest the real justification of
his work. This game of reflection is like all the rest of
our insight, indirectly valuable because from it all there
is a return to life possible, and in case of a great thinker
like Plato, certain to occur. The coming humanity shall
learn from the critic who, standing indeed outside of life,
embodied in his reflection the meaning of it.

Thus far, then, my thought has been simply this.
Humanity depends, for its spirituality and its whole civili-
zation, upon faiths and passions that are in the first
instinctive, inarticulate, and in part unconscious. The
philosopher tries to formulate and to criticise these in-
stincts. What he does will always have a two-fold limi-
tation. It will, on the one hand, be criticism from the
point of view of a single man, of a single age, of a single
group of ideals, as Plato or Aristotle embodied the faith
of but one great age of Greek life, and did that from a


12


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


somewhat private and personal point of view. This first
necessary limitation of the philosopher’s work makes his
system less absolute, less truthful, less final than he had
meant it to be. Another humanity will have a new faith,
Pi new temperament, and in so far will need a new phi-
losophy. Only the final and absolute humanity, only the
ultimate and perfect civilization, would possess, were such
a civilLation possible on earth, the final and absolute
philosophy. But this limitation, as we have seen, while
it dooms a philosopher to one kind of defeat, doesn’t
deprive his work of worth. His philosophy is capable of
becoming and remaining just as permanently significant
as is his civilization and its temperament ; his refiective
work will enter into future thought in just the same fash-
ion as the deeper passions of his age will beget the spirit-
ual temper of those who are to come after.

There remains as second limitation, so we have seen,
the always seemingly unfruitful critical attitude of the
philosopher. He speculates, but does not prophesy; he
criticises, l)ut does not create. Yet this limitation he
shares with all theory, with all insight ; and the limita-
tion is itself only partial and in great measure illusory.
Criticism means self-consciousness, and self-coiisciousiiess
means renewed activity on a higher plane. The reflective
play of one age becomes the passion of another. Plato
creates Utopias, and the Christian faith of Europe after-
wards gives them meaning. Contemplation gives birth to
future conduct, and so the philosopher also becomes, in
his own fashion, a world-builder.


IT.

But now, having said so much for the philosopher, I
may venture to say yet more, that if his work is not lost
in so far as it enters into the life of the humanity which
comes after him, there is yet another and a deeper sense
in which his labor is not in vain. For truth is once for


GENERAL INTRODUCTION.


18


all manifold, and especially.is the truth about man’s rela-
tion to the universe manifold. The most fleeting pas-
sion, if so be it is only deep and humane, may reveal to
us some aspect of truth which no other moment of life
can fully express. I know how difficult it is to compre-
hend that seemingly opposing assertions about the world
may, in a deeper sense, turn out to be equally time. 1
must leave to later discussions a fuller illustration of how,
for instance, the optimist, who declares this world to be
divine and good, and the pessimist, who finds in our finite
world everywhere struggle and sorrow, and who calls it
all evil, may be, and in fact are, alike right, each in his
own sense ; or of how the constructive idealist, who de-
clares all reality to be the expression of divine ideals, and
the materialist, who sees in nature only matter in motion
and law absolute, may be but viewing the same truth from
different sides. All this, I say, will be touched upon
hereafter. What I here want to suggest is that the truth
about this world is certainly so manifold, so paradoxical,
so capable of equally truthful and yet seemingly opposed
descriptions, as to forbid us to declare a philosopher
wrong in his doctrine merely because we find it easy to
make plausible a doctrine that at first sight appears to
conflict with his own. Young thinkers always find refu-
tation easy, and old doctrines not hard to transcend ; and
yet what if the soul of the old doctrines should be true
just because the new doctrines seemingly oppose, but
actually complete them ? Our reflective insights, in fol-
lowing our life, will find now this, now that aspect of
things prominent. What if all the aspects should con-
tain truth ? What if our failure thus far to find and to
state the absolute philosophy were due to the fact, not
that all the philosophies thus far have been essentially
false, but that the truth is so wealthy as to need not only
these, but yet other and future expressions to exhaust its
treasury? I speak thus far tentatively and vaguely. I


14 THE SPIRIT OF MODER 4 PHILOSOPHY.

must illustrate a little, although at best I can thus far
only suggest.

Some people have a fashion of recording their reflective
moments just as they happen to come. If such persons
chance to be poets, the form of the record is often the
thoughtful lyric. And the thoughtful lyric poem usually
possesses the very quality which made Aristotle call
poetry a ^‘more philosophical” portrayal of human life
than history. It is indeed marvelous how metaphysical
a great poem of passion almost always is. The passion
of the moment makes its own universe, flashes back like
a jewel the light of the far-off sun of truth, but colors
this reflected light with its own mysterious glow. You
are, you shall be mine,” cries the strong emotion to the
earth and to the whole choir of heaven, and the briefest
poem may contain a sort of philosophic scheme of the
entire creation. The scheme is sometimes as false as the
passion portrayed is transient ; but it is also often as true
as the passion is deep, and whoever has once seen how
variously and yet how signiflcantly the moods expressed
in great poeirs interpret both our life and the reality of
which our life forms part, will not be likely to And that
philosophical systems are vain merely because the phi*
losophers, like the poets, differ. In fact the reason why
there is as yet no one final philosophy may be very
closely allied to the reason why there is no final and
complete poem. Life is throughout a complicated thing ;
the truth of the spirit remains an inexhaustible treasure
house of experience ; • and hence no individual experi-
ence, whether it be the momentary insight of genius
recorded in the lyric poem, or the patient accumulation
of years of professional plodding through the problems of
philosophy, will ever fully tell aU the secrets which life
has to reveal.

It is for just this reason, so I now suggest, that when
jH>u study philosophy, you have to be tolerant, receptive^


GENERAL INTRODUCTION.


16


willing to look at the world from many sides, fearless as
to the examination of what seem to be even dangerous
doctrines, patient in listening to views that look even ab-
horrent to common sense. It is useless to expect a simple
and easy account of so paradoxical an affair as this our
universe and our life. When you first look into philoso-
phy you are puzzled and perhaps frightened by those
manifold opinions of the philosophers of which we have
thus far had so much to say. If they, who have thought
so deeply, differ so much,” you say, then what hope is
there that the truth can ever be known ? ” But if you
examine further you find that this variety, better studied,
is on its more human side largely an expression of the
liveliness and individuality of the spiritual temperaments
of strong men. The truth is not in this case ^‘in the
middle.” The truth is rather “ the whole.” Let me
speak at once in the terminology of a special philosophical
doctrine, and say that the world spirit chose these men
as his voices, — these men and othera like them, and that
in fact he did so because he had all these things to voice.
Pardon this fashion of speech ; I shall try to make it
clearer hereafter. Their experience then, let me say, is,
ill its apparently confusing variety, not so much a seeing
of one dead reality from many places, but rather a critical
rewording of fragments of the one life which it is the des-
tiny of man to possess and to comprehend. These war-
ring musicians strike mutually discordant tones. But let
each sing his song by himself, and the whole group of
Meistersanger shall discourse to you most excellent music.
For grant that the philosophers are all in fact expressing
not dead truth, but the essence of human life, then be-
cause this life is many-sided, the individual expressions
cannot perfectly agree. It is the union of many such
insights that will be the one true view of life. Or again,
using the bolder phrases, let us say that all these thinkers
are trying to comprehend a little of the life of the one


16


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


World Spirit who liveB and moves in all things. Then
surely this life, which in our world needs both the ante-
lopes and the tigers to embody its endless vigor, that life
which the frost and cold, the ice and snow, do bless and
magnify, is not a life which any one experience can ex-
haust. All the philosophers are needed, not merely to
make jarring assertions about it, but to give us embodi-
ments now of this, now of that fragment of its wealth
and its eternity. And in saying this 1 don’t counsel you
in your study of philosophy merely to jumble together all
sorts of sayings of this thinker and of that, and then to
declare, as makers of eclectic essays and of books of ex-
tracts love to say, This is all somehow great and true.”
What I mean is that, apart from the private whims and
the non-essential accidents of each great philosopher, his
doctrine will contain for the critical student an element
of permanent truth about life, a truth which in its isola*
tion may indeed contradict the view of his equally worthy
co-workers, but which, in union, in synthesis, in vital con-
nection with its very bitterest opposing doctrines, may
turn out to be an organic portion of the genuine treasure
of humanity. Kobody hates more than I do mere eclec-
ticism, mere piecing together of this fragment and that
for the bare love of producing fraudulent monuments of
philosophic art.^ But the fact is that, frauds aside, the
god-like form of truth exists for us men, as it were, in
statuesque but scattered remnants of the once perfect
marble. Through the whole ruined world, made desolate
by the Turks of prejudice and delusion, the philosophers
wander, finding here and there one of these bits of the
eternal and genuine form of the goddess. Though I hate
fraudulent restorations of a divine antiquity, still I know
that, notwithstanding all, these fragments do somehow
belong together, and that the real truth is no one of the
bits, but is the whole goddess. What we who love phi-
losophy long for is no piece-work, but that matchless
whole itself.


GBNEBAL INTBODUOTION.


17


The kind of philosophical breadth of view for which 1
am now pleading is not, I assure you, the same as mere
vagueness, merely la^ toleration, of all sorts of conflict-
ing opinions. Nobody is more aware than I am that the
errors and false theories of the philosophers are facts as
real as are the manifold expressions which they give to
truth. I am not pleading for inexactness or undecisive-
ness of thought. What 1 am really pleading for, as you
will see in the sequel, is a form of philosophic reflection
that leads to a very definite and positive theory of the
universe itself, the theory, namely, which I have just sug-
gested, a theory not at all mystical in its methods, nor yet,
in its results, really opposed to the postulates of science,
or to the deeper meaning at the heart of common sense.
This theory is that the whole universe, including the
physical world also, is essentially one live thing, a mind,
one great Spirit, infinitely wealthier in his experiences
than we are, but for that very reason to be comprehended
by us only in terms of our own wealthiest experience. I
don’t assume the existence of such a life in the universe
because I want to be vague or to seem imaginative. The
whole matter appears to me, as you will hereafter see, to
be one of exact thought. The result, whatever it shall be,
must be reached in strict accord with the actual facts of
experience and the actual assumptions of human science.
The truth, whenever we get it, must be as hard and fast
as it is manifold. But the point is that if the universe
is a live thing, a spiritual reality, we, in progressing to-
wards a comprehension of its nature, must needs first
comprehend our own life. And in doing this we shall
pass through all sorts of conflicting moods, theories, doc-
trines ; and these doctrines, in the midst o5 their conflict
and variety, will express, in fragmentary ways, aspects of
the final doctrine, so that, as I said, the trutk will be the
whole.


18


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


V.

Thus far I have spoken of the various opinions and of
the general human significance of the philosophers. I
called attention, also, a little while since, to the appa-
rently unpractical attitude that they assume towards life.
In this connection I have already suggested that theii
criticism of life has often its destructive side. In these
present days, when philosophy is frequently so negative,
it is precisely this destructive, this skeptically critical
character of philosophy, that to the minds of many con-
stitutes its best-known character, and its most obvious
danger. It is not mine to defend recent philosophy from
the charge of being often cruelly critical. To many of
us it might, indeed, in pity be said : Mayest thou never
know what thou art.” I have myself more than once felt
the pang, as I have studied philosophy, of finding out to
my sorrow what I am. I have, therefore, many times
lamented that philosophy is indeed often so sternly and so
negatively- critical of many things that our hearts have
loved and prized. If any one fears the pangs of self-con-
sciousness, it is not my office to counsel him to get it.
But I must, indeed, point out here that when a wise phi-
losophy is destructive, the true fault lies not with the
critic who finds the wound in our faith, but with the faith
that has secretly nursed its own wounds in unconscious-
ness. Philosophy, in the true sense of that word, never
destroys an ideal that is worth preserving. Coming to
consciousness of yourself can only bring to light weakness
in case the weakness already exists in you. If you fear,
I say, the pang of such a discovery, — and, as I can assure
you, the pang, is often keen, — then do not try philosophy.
For the rest, however, this relation of philosophy to posi-
tive faith is one whereof I may speak in yet a very few
words before I leave it. Let me point out in what sense
philosophy is critical, but in what sense also it can hope
to be constructive.


GENERAL INTRODUCTION.


19


Of course philosophy, as thus far described, is sure to
begin at once, if it can, with inquiries into the largest and
most significant instincts, the deepest faiths of humanity.
These, when it discovers them, it will single out and criti-
cise. Hence, indeed, the philosophers are always talking
of such problems as duty and God. Hence they inquire
how we can come to know whether there is any external
world at all, and, if so, whether this world is to be treated
as dead matter, or as live mind. Hence they are curious
to study our ideas of natural law, of moral freedom, of
time, of space, of causation, of self. They pry into the
concerns of faith as if these were theirs by divine right.
They are not only prying, they are on one side of their
activity merciless, skeptical, paradoxical, inconsiderate.
They don’t ask, it would seem, how dear your faith is to
you ; they analyze it, as they would the reflex action of a
starfish, or the behavior of a pigeon ; and then they try
to estimate faith objectively, as an editor looks critically
at a love-sonnet which somebody has sent him (a sonnet
written with the autlior’s heart’s blood), and weighs it
coolly and cruelly before he will consent to find it avail-
able. Even so the philosopher has his standard of the
availability of human faiths. You have to satisfy this
with your creed before he will approve you. All this
sometimes seems cynical, just as the editor’s coolness may
become provoking. But then, as you know, the editor,
with all his apparent cruelty, is a man of sympathy and
of more than negative aims. He has to consider what he
calls availability, because he has his critical public to
please. And the philosopher — he, too, has to be critical
and to seem cruel, because he also has a public to please
with his estimate ; and his chosen public ought to be no
less than the absolute judge, the world spirit himself, in
whose eyes the philosopher can find favor only if he be able
to sift the truth from the error. That is why he is rigid.
Nothing but an absolute critical standard ought to satisfy


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


him, because he wants nothing short of the truth itself.
He will fail to get it, but then, as I have said, we all of us
fail more or less in some career or other ; and the meta-
physician, with his one talent of critical estimate, must do
what he can.

Yet I hasten to correct this seemingly too lifeless a
picture of the philosopher’s cruel analysis of passion, by
a reference to the thoughts upon which I have already
dwelt. From the often disheartening difBiculties and in-
completeness of the human search for absolute truth, we
who read philosophy continually find ourselves returning,
hand to hand with the author himself, to the world of the
concrete passions which ho criticises. We find this world
at each return more fair and yet more serious, because we
know it better. The sacred tears that were shed in it are
none the less sacred because we have been trying to find
out from the critic what they meant. Their mystery,
long pried into, becomes even the dearer for that. The
criticised passions become like old letters, treasured up by
a lover after his dear friend’s death, — often read and re-
read, until the reader has looked at every curve to know
why it was traced in just this way. He has found out, or
not, — still the search was consoling. So, too, we have
analyzed our long past life ; and now the more confidently
may we henceforth live in the nevr life before us. We
have criticised, so much the more cheerfully may we en-
joy. I once saw something of a pair of literary lovers,
friends of mine, who, being a trifle reflective, were prone
to amuse themselves by affecting to treat each other’s pro-
ductions with a certain editorial coldness and severity of
critical estimate. They wrote poems to each other, sup-
pressing or changing of course the names, and then each,
wholly ignoring whom this poem might be intended to
mean, used to pick the other’s work to pieces with an air
of gentle and pathetic disdain. Here the sentiment
somehow failed to justify its object, being expressed un*


GENERAL INTRODUCTION.


21

musically. There the experiment was a clever one, but
the lines were such as a dispassionate observer (like either
of us who should happen not to be the author) could not
approve, might even smile at.” These people never pre-
cisely quarreled, to my knowledge, at least over their lit-
erary criticism. I was not able to make out altogether
why they did this sort of thing, but, so far as I could dis-
cover, they both liked it, and were the better lovers for it.
I conjecture that their delight must have resembled the
kind of joy that philosophical students take in analyzing
life. Let me admit frankly : it is indeed the joy, if you
like, of playing eat and mouse with your dearest other
self. It is even somewhat like the joy, if so you choose to
declare, which infants take in that primitive form of hide
and seek that is suited to their months. Where is my
truth, my life, my faith, my temperament ? ” says the phi-
losopher. And if, some volumes further on in the expo-
sition of his system, he says, “ Oh 1 there it is,” the healthy
babies will be on his side in declaring that such reflections
are not wholly without their rational value. But why do I
thus apparently degrade speculation by again deliberately
comparing it with a game ? Because, 1 answer, in one
sense, all consciousness is a game, a series of longings and
of reflections which it is easy to call superfluous if wit-
nessed from without. The justifleation of consciousness
is the having of it. And this magnificent play of the
spirit with itself, this infantile love of rewinning its own
wealth ever anew through deliberate loss, through seek-
ing, and through joyous recognition, what is this, indeed,
but the pastime of the divine life itself? We enter into
the world of the spirit just when even the tragedy of life
becomes for our sight as much a divine game as a divine
tragedy, when we know that the world is not only serious,
terrible, cruel, but is also a world where a certain grim
humor of the gods is at home ; when we see in it a world,
too, where a serene and childlike confidence is justified, a


22


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


world where courage is in place as well as reverence, and
sport as well as seriousness; where, above all, the genius of
reflection, expressing at once vast experience of life and a
certain infantile cheerfulness or even sportiveness of mood,
rightfully lets itself loose in the freest form, now assum-
ing a stern and critical air, now demurely analyzing, as
if there were nothing else to do, now prying into men’s
hearts like a roguish boy playing with precious jewels,
now pretending that all faith is dead, now serenely de-
monstrating unexpected truths, and, last of all, plunging
back again into life with the shout of them that triumph.


VI.

It now behooves me, in conclusion, to say something of
the relation of a course of lectures like the one herewith
begun to the technicalities of philosophical study. There
is a great deal in every noteworthy metaphysical treatise
which can be grasped only by special study. I shall
make little attempt to transgress into this more technical
field during these lectures. I must, indeed, discuss topics
which only a rare kindliness on your part can make clearly
comprehensible, for they are, once for all, serious and diffi-
cult, but I do not understand it to be the purpose of our
present discourse to give what in the University would be
called an Introduction to the literature of metaphysics
proper. The ohly question that can arise about such a
proceeding as I here propose is, of course, a question as
to whether it is worth while to separate the general con-
sideration of philosophical tendencies from a more minute
study of tlie works of the philosophers. Such a question
only the outcome can decide. I am aware that it is hard
to be historically accurate in what I have to say without
being much more specific than I shall have time to be. I
must warn you at the outset that a full and fair under-
standing of any great thinker demands a knowledge, both
of the history of thought in general, and of his own period


GENERAL INTBODUOTION.


28


in particular, which it is very hard, even for the profes-
sional student, after years of study, to attain. All frag-
mentary views, meanwhile, have something of the mislead-
ing about them. Yet, on the other hand, the necessary
imperfections of a partial expression of the truth never
ought to discourage us from expressing all the truth that
we can. The purpose of the subsequent lectures will in
any case be sufficiently accomplished, if they bring you
nearer to the throbbing heart of this intense modem
speculative interest, so that you shall better know that
warm blood flows in philosophic veins.

For the rest, I confess to you that, although I myself
often take a certain personal delight in the mere subtle-
ties of speculation, although I also enjoy at times that
miserliness which makes the professional student hoard
up the jewels of reflection for the sake of gloating over
their mere hardness and glitter, I And always that when
1 come to think of the thing fairly, there is, after all, no
beauty in a metaphysicd system, which does not spring
from its value as a record of a spiritual experience. I
love the variety of the philosophers, as I love the variety
of the thoughtful looks which light up earnest young
faces. 1 love all these because they express passion, won-
der, truth. But alas for me if ever I have for profes-
sional reasons to study a book behind whose technical
subtleties I can catch no glimpse of the manly heart of its
author. His conclusions may be sound. I shall then
hate him only the more for that. Error may be dull if
it chooses ; but there is no artistic blasphemy equal to so
placing the harp of truth as to make it sound harsh and
wooden when you strike it fairly. Philosophical books I
have read, with whose doctrines, as doctrines, I have even
been forced in great measure to agree ; and yet, so life-
less, so bloodless, were their authors, so reptilian were the
cold and slowly writhing sentences in which their thought
was expressed, that I have laid down such volumes with a


24 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

sense of disgrace and rebellion, bitterly ashamed,” as a
friend of mine has expressed the same feeling in my hear-
ing, bitterly ashamed to find myself living in a universe
whose truth could possibly be made so inefficacious and
iminteresting.” To be sure, in saying all this I am far
from desiring to make technical metaphysics easy, for the
study is a laborious one ; and there are many topics in
logic, in the theory of the sciences, and in ethics, to whose
comprehension there is no royal road. But then, once
your eyes opened, and you will indeed find subjects that at
first seemed dry and inhuman full of life and even )f pas-
sion ; as, for instance, few sciences are in their elemen-
tary truths more enticing to the initiated, more coy and
baffling to the reflective philosophical student, in fact,
more romantic, than is the Differential Calculus. But if
such matters lie far beyond our present field, I mention
them only to show that even the hardest and least popu-
lar reflective researches are to be justified, in the long
run, by their bearings upon life*.


PART I.

STUDIES OF THINKERS AND PROBLEMS.


LECTURE n.


rHE PERIODS OP MODERN PHILOSOPHY; CHARACTERIS-
TICS OP THE PIRST PERIOD; ILLUSTRATION BY MEANS

OP THE RELIGIOUS ASPECT OP SPINOZISM.

Our general purpose in these lectures has now been
defined. As wo pass to the study of certain representa-
tive modern thinkers and problems, the difference between
our method and that of a text-book, or of a regular course
of academic lectures on the history of modern thought,
must be well borne in mind. We wish to select certain
tendencies especially characteristic of the spirit of modem
philosophy. We shall therefore lay most stress upon
what happened in the culminating period of modem
thought, — that from Kant to Schopenhauer, — and upon
the problems that seem to me most permanent and signifi-
cant in that period itself. In earlier periods our method
will be one of the briefest sketching. Later we shall
become more specific. Of no thinker before Kant shaE
we give any extended account. Several thinkers of first
rank, such as Descartes, Malebranche, Leibnitz, we shall
barely mention or wholly ignore. Always, even where we
are fullest in statement, we shall select those aspects of
the thinker in question that concern our own undertak-
ing. What this undertaking will lead to will not become
manifest until, in the second part of our course, we have
suggested in outline a certain philosophical creed to which
I wish to direct your attention.

It is in vain that one seeks, in the history of thought,
to choose any perfectly satisfactory place of beginning for


28


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


the purpose of a course of lectures like this. Always one
must run a risk of producing the illusion in your minds
that the point where he chances to begin is somehow pecu-
liarly significant as a beginning. But always, of course, if
you should ever hereafter come to look deeper, you would
find this point of beginning very arbitrary, and what im-
mediately preceded it vastly important for the true under-
standixig of the whole matter. My beginning, therefore,
as I must warn you, will be indeed very arbitrary, just as
my methods will have to be very different from those of
a text-book.

I.

As to the general scope of our course, modern philoso-
phy, our topic in what follows, is as wealthy and complex
an evolution in its way as is the life which it depicts.
What we call modern thought, in these matters, is a very
recent affair, dating back only to the seventeenth cen-
tury. Since then, however, philosophy has lived through
several great periods, which for our purpose we may re-
duce to three.

The first period was one of what we may call natural-
ism, pure and simple. It belongs almost wholly to the
seventeenth century. The philosophy of this first age
lived in a world where two things seemed clear: first,
that nature is full of facts which conform fatally to exact
and irreversible law, and second, that man lives best under
a strong, a benevolently despotic civil government. The
philosophers of this time had left off contemplating the
heaven of mediaeval piety, and were disposed to deify
nature. They adored the rigidity of geometrical meth-
ods ; they loved the study of the new physical science,
which had begun with Galileo. Man they conceived
as a mechanism. Human emotions, even the loftiest,
they delighted in explaining by very simple and funda-
mental natural passions. There is often something mer-
ciless and cynical about their analysis of many things


THE PERIODS OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


29


sacred in human life. They are cold, formal, systematic,
at least as to the outward shape of their doctrines. At
heart, however, they are not without a deep piety of their
own. The nature which they deify has its magnificent
dignity. It is no respecter of our sentimentalities ; but
it does embody a certain awful justice. You would pray
to it in vain ; but you may interrogate it fearlessly, for it
hides no charmed and magical seci^ets in its breast which
an unlucky word might render dangerous to the inquirer.
It notices no insult; it blasts no curious questioner for
his irreverence. This nature is a wise nature. Her best
children are those who labor most patiently to comprehend
her laws. The weak she crushes ; but the thoughtful she
honors. She knows no miracles ; but her laws are an in-
exhaustible treasure house of resources to the knowing.
In fact, knowledge of such laws is the chief end of man’s
life. God is n’t any longer what he had often seemed in
more clerical ages, — a God that hides himself from the
natural and unassisted intellect of man. He showed him-
self of old to the Greek geometers, to Euclid, to Archi-
medes. In these days of the seventeenth century he
unveils new mysteries to the students of physics. In the
world of such a ruler, fear is out of place ; you may even
doubt if you will. The incredulous are no longer public
enemies ; they are merely the learners. Descartes, a rep-
resentative thinker of the century, and the one from whom
our period is often dated, begins his reflection by doubt-
ing everything. As for the method of escaping from
doubt, that consists in the use of reason and in the study
of the facts of experience ; nothing else serves. Bevela-
tion you treat with such respect as political and social
considerations require ; but for philosophy, in this age of
the seventeenth centuiy, the supernatural has only a sec-
ondary interest, if it has any interest at all. Religious
conformity is a matter of policy ; a noisy atheist would
be, of course, a cause of scandal, and might even bring


80


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


philosophy into discredit. Besides, almost every serious
philosopher of this our first period believes in God as in
some sense the source of nature. It is, however, not well
to tell the unlearned too much about what sort of God
you believe in. The unlearned are gross, still dread
witches, carry amulets, know nothing of geometry ; best
be cautious of speech to them. Philosophy makes no
propaganda, appeals to philosophers, lets faith alone.
Besides, loyalty to the state counsels some measure of
religious conformity. Hobbes, the great Englishman,
himself a speculative materialist, and, as I fancy, the
most well-knit and highly organized thinker in the whole
history of English philosophy, was clear that whatever a
man’s' opinion might be, it was his duty to submit aU
matters of religious conformity to the judgment of the
state. “ I submit,” he says in effect somewhere, ‘‘ to the
Church of England, because that is the church ordained
for me by the will of my sovereign, the king of England.^^
And this confession of Hobbes involves no hypocrisy. It
is the frankest confession in the world. His conformity
is openly a conformity to civil laws. Philosophy and reli-
gion are once for all separated. It is a matter of acci-
dent whether the philosopher has or has not a traditional
creed left him by his philosophy. His thought is no
longer the handmaid of his faith, as had generally been
the case with the thinkers of the Middle Ages. But as
for his faith itself, social and political considerations must
decide how and in what way he shall give evidence of it
to his fellows. His very loyalty, his good citizenship, his
frank benevolence, counsel prudence of speech.

And here appears again another side of the philosophy
of this first period. It is a loyal philosophy, a philosophy
of good citizenship ; it has a great respect for the highest
political interests of man ; it studies jurisprudence, state-
craft, international law, natural justice ; it founds its loy-
alty, indeed, upon reason, makes little of the divine right.


THE PERIODS OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY. 81

of kings, loves to declare all men equal, despises tradi-
tion in social matters, throws contempt on the mere cus-
toms of mankind, looks for the sanction of law in the
eternal and just order of the world, in short seeks most
distinctly not in the clouds, but here upon eai’th, for an
abiding city. Hence, it generally opposes clerical inter-
ference in political matters ; it gives to the kingdom of
God a naturalistic interpretation, takes no interest in the
jeweled walls and the pearl gates of a scriptural new
Jerusalem, but undertakes to build a terrestrial one of its
own on a geometrical plan of modern devising, a city
not without foundations, but very sober as to ornamenta-
tion. Better a rational constitution than golden streets.

Does this first period of modern philosophy, thus very
rudely outlined as to its most general interests, seem to
some of you dishearteningly uuspi ritual? Then reflect,
it surely has not pleased God to save his people by an-
archy ; and these who in this recent century, in the age
when science first grew lusty in its young strength, and
when the sanctions of medisevalism were already partly
obsolete, spoke the word for the freedom of human reason,
and the reasonableness of good order, served the spiritual
necessities of mankind no whit the less because they told
only part of the truth. What they bequeathed to us was
a faith in sober realities, a reverence for the dignity of
the world of law, a love of lucidity, for which we cannot
thank them too much. As to their deification of nature,
it was surely the beginning of modern wisdom, an insight
that whatever God is, he is not far from every one of us,
a turning away from the mere gazing up into heaven
after a distant and ascended divine ruler, a sense that if
the spirit is indeed poured out on earth, you have a right
to look upon the simplest facts as containing it. These
tnen may be cold ; for my part 1 find a clearness about
the snowy mountain summits amongst which they live,
which goes far to compensate for the hardness of the out*


82


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


lines of their world. That they, too, have a genuine and
lofty piety to proclaim to us, I shall try to exemplify in
the case of Spinoza. For nature, also, has its divine side ;
the hard, clear outlines of the mountains stand out, after
all, against the heavens of God. He who reflects upon
our human love of clear reason and of sound order reflects
upon certain of the deepest, though surely not upon the
hottest, passions of man. And Spinoza, as we shall find,
knew how to give to this eternal order of nature a mys-
tical and almost romantic glamor. Under the gently
glowing evening twilight of his peaceful reflection, these
mountain peaks, if we may yet again strain our figure,
gleam with an almost ghostly dignity, and seem no longer
sharp or ciaiel. Spinoza, like other mystical soiils, knows
of a peace which the world of sense can neither give nor
take away. This peace he finds in an absorbing contem-
plation of the divine order as eternal and necessary. It
is of the nature of reason, he says, to regard all things
under the form of eternity. So regarded, even this pas-
sionate, struggling life of ours seems an apparition of the
changeless. God is everywhere. The wise man asks no
happy fortune ; his unalterable fortune it is to love God
with the same love wherewith God loves himself.

But the second age of modern philosophy, rejecting
this sublime indifference to the concerns of the individual
human being, turned curiously back to the study of the
wondrous inner world of man’s soul. To deify nature is
not enough. Man is the most interesting thing in nature,
and he is not yet deified ; nor can he be until we have
won a true knowledge of his wayward heart. He may be
a part of nature’s mechanism, or he may not ; still, if he
be a mechanism, he is that most paradoxical of things, a
knowing mechanism. His knowledge itself, what 'it is,
how it comes about, whence he gets it, how it grows, what
it signifies, how it can be defended against skepticism,
what it implies, both as to moral truth and as to theoreti*


THE PERIODS OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY. 88

cal truth, — these problems are foremost in the interests
of the second period of modern thought, whose beginnings
we can see in Locke, and whose culmination was in the
philosophic movement that expressed itself, towards the
close of the eighteenth century, in Kant’s ‘^Critique of
Pure Reason.” The early thinkers of this period, Locke,
the early English moralists, Leibnitz, belong in part to
the first period, as is always likely to be the case in such
orderly evolutions. Gradually, attention is turned more
and more from the outer world to the mind of man. The
first period had been one of naturalism ; the second is one
of a sort of new humanism. In the first half of the
eighteentli century this humanism developed the works of
the great classical representatives of English ethics, as
well as the idealism of Berkeley. Reflection is now more
an inner study, an analysis of the mind, than an exami-
nation of the business of physical science. Human reason
is still the trusted instrument, but it soon turns its criti-
cism upon itself. It distinguishes prejudices from axi-
oms, fears dogmatism, scrutinizes the evidences of faith,
suspects, or at best has consciously to defend, even the
apparently irresistible authority of conscience, and iSO
comes at length, in the person of the greatest of the Brit-
ish eighteenth century thinkers, David Hume, to a ques-
tioning even of its own capacity to know truth, a doubt-
ing attitude which brings philosophy into a sharp and
admitted opposition to common sense. At this point,
however, a new interest begins in Europe. If the age
was already disposed to self-analysis, Rousseau, with his
paradoxes and his even pathological love of limitless self-
scrutiny, introduced into this man-loving period a senti-
mental tendency, from which, erelong, came a revival of
passion, of poetry, and of enthusiasm, whose influence we
shall never outgrow. Contemporaneous with this influ-
ence was the appearance of the modern romance in its
early forms. Not much later came the Storm and


84


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


Stress ” period of German literature, and by the time this
had run its course, the French Bevolution, overthrowing
all the mechanical restraints of civilization, demonstrated
afresh to the world’s outer sense the central importance of
passion in the whole life of humanity.

The philosophy of Kant, developing in the quiet soli-
tudes of his professorial studies at Konigsberg, in far
eastern Prussia, reflected with a most wonderful ingenuity
the essential interests of the time when all this transfor-
mation was preparing. In 1781, he published his “ Cri-
tique of Pure Reason,” nearly, if not quite, the most
important philosophical treatise ever written. The essen-
tial doctrine of this book is the thought that man’s nature
is the real creator of man’s world. It is n’t the external
world, as such, that is the deepest truth for us at all ; it
is the inner structure of the human spirit which merely
expresses itself in the visible nature about us. The inter-
est of Kant’s presentation of this paradoxical thought
lay not so much in the originality of the conception, for
philosophers never invent fundamental beliefs, and this
idea of Kant’s is as old as deeper spiritual faith itself ;
but rather in the cool, reflective, mercilessly critical in-
genuity with which he carries it out. Issued several
years before the French Revolution, the book seems a sort
of deliberate justification of the proud consciousness of
man’s own absolute rights with which, in that mighty
struggle, the human spirit rose against all external re-
straints, and declared, as we in America had already
showed men how to do, that the true world for humanity
is the world which the freeman makes, and that the genu-
uinely natural order is one which is not external until
reason decrees that it shall exist.

And herewith begins what I have ventured to call in
its wholeness the third period of modern philosophy, a
period not yet ended. The great thoughts of Kant ruled
the philosophic reflection of the next fifty years after the


THE PERIODS OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY. 35

appearance of the Critique,” with what extravagancies
and with what excellencies of result we shall in a meas-
ure see hereafter. There is a sense in which this doc-
trine of Kant’s is the very soul of all our modern life,
not, I repeat, as if the philosopher had invented it, but
because once for all this is the essentially humane view of
reality. You can easily make wild and romantic misuse
of it. But when rightly interpreted, Kant’s world, where
the inner reason is lord over the outer sense, will prove to
be as hard and fast a world of fact, of law, and of eter-
nal majesty, as ever the seventeenth century had con-
ceived. At all events, whether we will it or no, in this
universe of Kant’s philosophy we all still live.

But the outcome of these fifty years of post-Kantian
speculation was, after all, an unfinished organization of
philosophic thought. The undertaking was too vast for
one generation. After a period of speculative quiescence,
a period when attention was directed away from philoso-
phy by other human concerns, this, our third period of
modern thought, has come to see a revival of philosophic
activity, a revival in the midst of which we now live. To
the legacy of Kant has been added the wealth of prob-
lems offered to us by recent advances in natural science
and in the study of the history of humanity. Tlie doc-
trine of evolution, itself no novelty in opinion, has re-
ceived a wholly unlooked-for empirical formulation and
confirmation. The sciences have grown until no one can
even remotely hope to overlook their whole field. In con-
sequence, however, external nature has once more gained
for us an imposing authority which makes us in many
ways sympathize afresh with the pure naturalism of the
seventeenth century. Man we once more see to be, not
merely the sentimental rebel and creative hero of Rous-
seau and the romanticists, not merely the organ of the
world-forming reason of the Kantian schools, but also,
and just as truly, the mechanism which the seventeenth


86


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


century declared him to be. How can he be both these
things, that is, both natural and spiritual ? How can he
have sprung from an animal ancestry, yes, ultimately from
dead matter, and yet be the embodiment, the organ of the
absolute reason ? How can he at once be part of the spirit
whose live thinking dreams out this whole frame of things,
and yet he himself the slave of the very order of nature
which this dream creates ? How can he, this mere me-
chanism, this creature of nerves, this mortal thing whose
brain secretes thought, be also, as Kant made him, the
very source of the laws of nature themselves ? How com-
preliend this paradox? Well, I answer, after all, it is
the ancient paradox of the double nature of man. It
would be unpardonably absurd even to mention such a
strange problem, were it not so real, so pertinacious, so
every day a matter, were it not absolutely forced on us
afresh by every new word of modern science, as by every
old word of the devotional books. And this problem, I
insist, is now in the forefront of speculation as it never
was before : in what sense, with what prospect of solu-
tion, with what beauty of statement, with what depth of
significance, with what manifold illustration in facts, with
what passionate longing of inquiry, I should be glad, in-
deed, if I could hope to express in the subsequent lectures
of this course. And so, for the first, our rude sketch
is before us. How much I desire to suggest its signifi-
cance, let one brief illustration suffice to show ere 1 go
further.

There is a certain earlier and idealistic drama of Ibsen’s
which the current public interest in that remarkable
poet seems still disposed to neglect altogether. I mean
the drama entitled “Emperor and Galilean.” In this
play the author introduces the apostate Emperor Julian,
struggling to replace the kingdom whose authority is not
of this world, by an imperial power whose aims and
sanctions shall be earthly, naturalistic, human, and whose


THE PERIODS OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY. 87

ideals shall not look beyond any man’s sepulchre. When
the power of the romantic apostate is already on the
wane, he converses, in one scene, with his confidential ad-
viser, the heathen seer and mystic, Maxitnos. The em-
peror is by this time weary of the strife, fearful of the
end. “ Will the Galilean conquer?” he cries. And he
calls upon Maxinios, as reader of portents, to prophesy.
Who shall win, he says, in this struggle? Is the king-
dom that is from above to destroy the kingdom of this
earth ? Or will the legions and the natural order be able
to withstand the unearthly power of this wondrous and
unseen world of spiritual influences ? Maximos answers
darkly. Neither can succeed, he declares. Both powers,
both kingdoms, the earthly and the unearthly, shall fall.
That is fate. But what, then, shall take tlieir place ? ”
cries Julian. “ Who is, then, the right ruler? ” “ He,”

answers Maximos, “ in whom both Empenor and Galilean ”
shall bo joined. There is to come, he prophesies, the third
realm, neither of earth alone, nor yet of heaven alone, —
“ God-(^msar, Caesar-God, Caesar in the kingdom of the
Spirit, God in the realm of the flesh.” ‘‘This, Julian,”
declares Maximos, “ is the third i*ealm, for in it alone can
be fulfilled the word, ‘ Render unto Caesar the things that
are Caesar’s, and unto God the things that are God’s.’
For only in such a realm, runs the thought of Maximos,
will the earthly and the supernatural, once wholly in unity,
cease to have conflicting and irreconcilable claims. Fate,
holds Maximos, will yet bring this thing to pass, but not,
indeed, in these times of Julian.

I do not feel these words of Ibsen’s to bo more than
merely suggestive. I do* not pretend to find in them any-
thing final. But I cannot do better, as I try to give here
some faint notion of the vast historical process whereof
all this reflective philosophy forms so subordinate a part,
than to point out that the third realm, of which Ibsen
80 mystically speaks, the realm where a rigid order of


88


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHT.


nature shall be one with the most miraculously significant
divine truth, where Csesar shall ^ecome a spiritual, and
God an earthly ruler, is precisely the realm which not so
much our philosophy, but our age, whose echo this phi-
losophy is, is even now seeking to comprehend, and with
prophetic voice to proclaim.


II.

Let us return to. our first period. A long course of
lectures would be needed to give you any full account of
its significance. Let me dwell a moment once more upon
three things of importance concerning its representative
thinkers.

As to the first matter: I have already suggested that
philosophy, in those days of the seventeenth century, was
much influenced hy the example of physical science.
The modern method of what is called induction, that is,
the method of finding the laws of nature from a careful
collection and study of facts, won its first great triumphs
in the work of Galileo and of his contemporaries and
immediate successors in physical science. The Galilean
method of studying nature was for that age one of won-
derful novelty and fruitfulness. Galileo, as you know, in-
troduced the fashion of making exact experiments under
artificially simplified physical conditions. Such experi-
ments showed in intelligible form how natural things really
behave. Nature, as you see her in gross, is too complex
for our simple minds. She hides her secrets from our
untrained reason, by revealing them all at once. Experi-
ment separates out particular groups of facts, and exam-
ines them alone. Thus experiment aids the weakness of
our reason, in its effort to find nature reasonable. Ex-
periment so stands for a sort of cross-questioning of
nature. The answers to our questions show us the ration-
ality of things. But Galileo did not make such experi-
ments at random. He thought out well what questions to


THE PERIODS OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY. 89

ask nature. That is^ by acute observation of what one
might caU the generaji trend of things in some part of
nature, Galileo made exact and mathematically stateable
hypotheses as to the true laws at work. So he did, for
instance, in case of the facts about falling bodies, and in
case of the facts about bodies rolling down inclines.
When he had made his scientific guess, his hypothesis, he
applied, if necessary, mathematics to this guess, and com-
puted what ought to happen, if it were true, in certain
definite cases, such as an experiment could artificially
bring to pass. Tlien, and not till then, he i;ested the hy-
pothesis by the experiment itself. He asked nature, “ Is
it so and so with you, as my hypothesis demands, in this
special case, that it shall be?” If nature, questioned
through experiment, responded “ Yes,” then the hypothe-
sis was verified, and the law was regarded as in its own
proper measure established. Thus reason triumphed over
brute fact.

The brilliant successes of this Galilean method during
his own and the following generations were, as I have said,
immensely impressive to that whole century. Nature had
at last ycen made to answer multitudinous sharp ques-
tions. A^ncl the noteworthy thing was that her answers
were sc exact, and that her laws, when you found them,
were so rigid, so capable of mathematical precision of
statement, so general. Mechanical science, thus early
and very rapidly progressing, soon suggested of itself the
thought that nature was all one vast mechanism. The
philosophers, with their love of grand generalizations,
easily seized upon this idea. They tried to expound it,
to reflect upon it, to defend it, to develop its meaning.
Just imagine it for a moment : could one only seize upon
the genuine and all-embracing hypothesis, could one but
guess by good luck at the one absolute law of laws, as
Galileo had guessed at the law of the falling bodies I
Would not one then have an hypothesis whereof every


40 THp SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

fact of physical nature would be a case, a verification, an
experimental justification ? Sutchpi law, if you found it,
— would it not be mechanical, like Galileo’s special laws?
So, at least, the century declared. But there was the other
side to this idea, a side which suggests my second point.
If this was so, if these exact laws, which so perfectly an-
swer the demands of our reason, are true of things, then
is rCt this world about us one that clear thinking^ exact
definition^ is especially fitted to comprehend ? Previous
ages had found the world mysterious, and had appealed
to faith, which reason could only supplement. This new
age is sure of reason^ makes it lord, reveres it as the
one revealer of mysteries, and as capable of discovering
absolute truth. But this once more brings me yet a step
further, namely, to my third point. Clear thinking about
nature needs a good model. Galileo and all the other
men of the new time had such a model before them in the
geometrical science that had come down from the Greeks,
The hypotheses that Galileo made were of a sort long
since known in geometry, namely, mathematically exact
statements, from which sharp conclusions could be drawn
for verification or refutation. He showed how to apply
such hypotheses to nature, namely, by means of crucial ex-
periments. But the idea of the clearly thought hypothesis
was old. Very well, then, Galileo’s successes suggested
that geometry is indeed the model science, that nature,
being reasonable, geometrizes, so to speak, throughout all
her world of things, so that if you could once get her
laws in mind, as Euclid got his axioms, then all the facts
of nature down to the least would become as clear, as cer-
tain, as demonstrable to you as Euclid’s theorems are to
the student of mathematics. Such a notion it is which is
the common property of the seventeenth century. It was
the presupposition of that time, the cold but deep passion
of exact rationality, upon which the philosophers reflected,
and in terms of which they taught. Hence it was that
they loved mathematical methods in philosophy.


THE PERIODS OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY. 41

Those three ideas, then, that nature is a mechanism,
that human reason is|dompetent to grasp the truth of
nature, and that, since nature’s truth is essentially mathe-
matical, geometry is •the model science, whose precision
and necessity philosophy, too, must imitate, — these are
the ideas of our first period. Descartes shares them with
Hobbes. The widest divergence of opinion does not ex«
elude them anywhere, in the representative men of that
day. Human nature also is interpreted in terms of them.

But how, you may ask, can siicli an age as this grasp
the whole breadth and depth of the deeper passions of
humanity ? Man is n’t merely a computer, nor yet a
geometer. He estimates, he appreciates his world; he
does n’t merely long to describe it in mathematical terms ;
he has religious interests, too ; and what have Galilean
physics and Euclidean geometry to say of these ? Well, I
have already observed that our seventeenth century knew
of such a thing as a philosophical religion, and my illus-
tration of that fact is the man who was in many respects
the deepest speculator of that whole age, namely, Spinoza,
to whom I may now pass.

in.

Every one has heard something of the marvelous and
lonely Jewish philosopher, w'ho, separated from the world
of European cultivation by his race, and from his own
people by his heresy, devoted himself to peaceful and fear-
less reflection, and died early, not without leaving an im-
mortal treatise behind him. And every one must have no-
ticed how singularly varied is the view of Spinoza that one
gets from those who know him more or less superficially.
In his own age he was denounced as atheist, profane per-
son, monster. Long afterwards, however, his works were
re-discovered, greedily read, admired by great poets like
Goethe, and by ardent and even romantic philosophers
like Schelling; and now he has become an authority


42


THE SPIBIT OF MODEBN PHILOSOPHY.


for all students of philosophy, a necessary part of the
knowledge of every one who would comprehend modem
thought. This great thinker himself was, to be sure, no
universal genius in philosophy. lUs doctrine, compared
with those that have come since, is comparatively simple,
clear cut, crystalline in its hardness and isolation, and
yet, how many-sided even this crystal, how varied the
impressions that it has produced on those who have seen
it in different lights I J udging by some of the commen-
tators of Spinoza, you would regard him as merely a lover
of mathematical clearness and coldness of statement, as a
believer in the hard and fast, eternal, but purely natural
order of things. Others, on the contrary, have called
him, in a phrase that has been too often repeated, a God-
intoxicated man,” so that, far from being an atheist, it was
the existence of nature that he in truth denied. Others
have named him a mystic, a seer, a prophet ; have taken,
as .the young Goethe took, an almost sentimental interest
in him ; have found his doctrine poetical and romantic.
Others still have prized in him the gentle humility of life.
He won, as we learn, not only the respect of certain great
men in his own time (who knew him mainly from afar
and by letter), but also the love of the few homely and
obscure people with whom he daily and personally asso-
ciated ; and this has led one of his eulogizers, Ernst
Benan, to remind us enthusiastically that nothing is
worth so much as the judgment of the little ones, for it is
almost always the judgment of God.”

What, then, was Spinoza ? The cold and merciless
mathematical thinker, the remorseless fatalist that some
call him ; or the romantic and poetic soul, the mystic, the
seer ; or, finally, the saint of gracious and gentle life that
others find him ? In fact, Spinoza had something of all
these traits in his character and in his thought. Were 1
expounding his system in full I should make you feel this
fact. It is already a satisfaction to be able to say that


' THE PERIODS OF MODERN- PHILOSOPHY. 48

the least wealthy of the systems which we are to consider
expressed so wide an experience of life, reflected upon so
varied a group of human attitudes in the presence of the
divine order. But still it is not for the purpose of a
panegyric of Spinoza that I now ask your attention to
him. His personal character cannot detain us very long.
Nor yet, on the other hand, can we give much time to ex-
amining the technical details of his system. It was in-
deed a many-sided doctrine, and in some of its aspects
highly problematic. Its sources, its growth, and its mean-
ing have in recent times been the topic .of elaborate
researches, of which I can give you no fair notion here.
I shall dwell upon but a single aspect of the whole, and
this is the religious aspect; for Spinoza had a religion.
There is, then, this one thing in his teaching that I wish to
illustrate, and, if possible, to explain. This is the deep
piety which in Spinoza’s mind is not only consistent with
the belief in a rigid, mechanical order of nature, l^ut
which is even involved, according to him, in the very
expression of such a doctrine concerning nature.

Had Spinoza been any one but himself, he would have
been a materialist, a cynic, and, indeed, the cold and
merciless tliiiiker that many, misled by one-sided views,
have declared him to be. Because he was a man of
profound character, he looked upon the whole order of
things, and said, “ While it is necessary, while it is rigid,
while it is in one sense merciless, it is also divine, and the
value of our knowledge of this order is that thereby we
are led to a love of God, to a peace which the world can-
not give or take away.”

It is surely the office of philosophic reflection to bring
out the deeper problems of our nature. And nowhere else
can one And a more signiflcaut problem than this, that he
who looks upon the world solely with the eye of reason
finds himself, when once possessed of Spinoza’s wisdom,
forced to adore. Listen, then, in Spinoza’s case, to the


44


THE SPHV OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


tale of the religious experience of a great heretic, whom
many men used to denounce as atheist.

The external facts of Spinoza’s life, so far as they con-
cern us, must be very briefly summarized. A colony of
Spanish and Portuguese Jews, refugees from persecution,
was, in the second quarter of the seventeenth century,
resident in Amsterdam, in the enjoyment of the freedom
of the Dutch republic. A son of a poor family, mem-
bers of this Jewish community, Spinoza was born in the
year 1632. He was early distinguished as a studious boy
for his learning in the mediaeval literature of the Jews;
he was an enthusiastic reader of Talmudic interpreters and
commentators ; but he was also not without a wide curios-
ity that led him to the study of the learned language of
the day, namely, Latin, and to an early acquaintance with
thought that lay far beyond the circle of the intolerant
interests of his fellows. These studies of profane learn-
ing led to suspicions of his orthodoxy, and a scries of
events followed of which we have only extremely untrust-
worthy accounts from two of his early biographers.
What happened we do not precisely know. Keport says
that companions and fellow-students of Spinoza, having
drawn from him heretical views concerning the interpre-
tation of the Scriptures, revealed the facts to the authori-
ties of the synagogue; and that Spinoza was called to
account, and was urged in more ways than one, namely,
by bribes as well as by threats, to abandon his heresy or to
remain silent. The affair, whatever it was, seems to have
extended over several years ; it ended in the excommuni-
cation of Spinoza, in the year 1656. Thenceforth he was
alone and free. To most other men this loneliness would
have meant destruction. Even for Spinoza it led to cer-
tain defects of thought and expression which are not with-
out significance for his system as a whole. Spinoza had
thenceforth no reason to 'appeal in the least to the preju-
dices and learning of bis former co-religionists, lie


THE PERIODS OF MODERN pAlOSOPHY.


46


seems rather anxious in all his philosophical writings to
say little of his relation to Jewish philosophy^ and con-
siderable difference of opinion exists among competent
inquirers as to the actual relation between his own phi-
losophical doctrines and those which, from time to time,
had been put in form by Jewish media3va] writers. At
all events, however, he was ratlier a man of liis time than
a J ew. His system has a closer connection with that of
Descartes and with those of other prominent European
thinkers than with any Jewish doctrines. One of his
books, indeed, has a sj^ecial relation to the studies of his
early youth. It is a book on freedom of opinion, called
the “ Theologico-Political Tractate.’* The essence of the
doctrine is that both the formation and the expression of
opinion should be entirely unhindered by legal interfer-
ence. In the course of the book, S])inoza enters upon an
elaborate historical criticism of the Old Testament litera-
ture, and, in many respects, curiously suggests analogies
to the results of modern critical study of the Bible. But
in all his other writings Spinoza is simply the speculative
thinker. His life* in his exclusion from the Jewish com-
munity is as simple and uneventful as ever the experience
of a philoso})her has been. It is, in fact, the peculiar
privilege of the philosopher to live in a certain separation
from human responsibility, which leaves him free to criti-
cise the life that no longer enchains him. It is at once
his privilege and his danger, for freedom from the bond-
age of life may easily mean disorganization or morbidness
of life. Spinoza, however, was not only forced to live
apart from the world, but was able to win spiritual health
in his isolation ; and the result of such separation from
the passions of humanity shovrs itself all the more plainly
in a power of dispassionate criticism which is the very
«life of philosophy. One limitation remains, however,
e|pecially noteworthy in Spinoza’s case. His form of iso-
aon renders him a poor critic -of the deeper social rela-


46 THE SPlAr OF MODERN PHILOSOPHT.

tionships. In fact, had Spinoza lived in an age of great
poetical production, this dispassionate loneliness of expe-
rience would have rendered him much less competent than
he was to reword the meaning of his time. But in an
age of investigation he was enabled to be a model critic,
for the interest of humanity then lay in comprehending
the natural order of things, and one does not need a rich
experience of social life to give expression to the inner
meaning of an undertaking like this.


IV.

If one turns, however, from the thinker himself to his
thought, it is next necessary for us to see what drove
Spinoza to his patient and life-long business of reflection
upon so dry and apparently lifeless a thing as the mathe-
matical and rigid laws of external nature. And here
meets us the most noteworthy fact of all about our phi-
losopher. I have already said that the outcome of Spi-
noza’s reflection is an adoration, an immovably peaceful
reverence, for God’s eternal order. What I have not yet
said is, that the longing for such an object of adoration
is the beginning as well as the end of his whole work.
Spinoza has left us, in an essay on The Improvement of
the Understanding,” a sort of confession of the course of
thinking whiqh led him to his flnal faith. This confession
brings us at once upon ground that is familiar to every
one who knows well the religious passion of humanity.

The higher religious consciousness has its origin in the
human heart in two interests. One is the interest of the
moral being in finding some authority that may guide him
in the conduct of his life. The other is the interest of
the baffled and disappointed soul in coming into the pres-
ence of some external truth, some reality that is perfect,
that lacks our weakness, that is victorious even though wei
fail, that is good even though we are worthless. I nmst
pause a moment to define and illustrate these two ini


THE PERIODS OF MODERN 1%IL060PHT. 47

ests. They are both of them well known to all of yon,
whether you have succeeded in satisfying either of Ihem
or not. What you do not always see, until you reflect, is
that they are really two interests, that they are often very
hard to reconcile, that they lead you by two very different
roads to faith, and are likely to lead to two sharply con-
trasted sorts of faith. Spinoza, 1 am going to show you,
had one of these interests very deeply, the other hardly
at all.

The religious interest of the first sort, I say, seeks an
authoritative guide. If it finds one in som'e conceived
deity, it rejoices. This deity is, in this case, above all a
moral one. He directs me, and I follow. My delight, if
I am devout, is then in the law of the Lord.” The
law may be a ceremonial one ; then I build altars, offer
sacrifices, hold solemn feasts. Or again, bis law may be a
law of righteousness of heart and life ; then, commanded
by God, sure that he knows the right way and has shown
it, I order my life as well as 1 can according to this
righteousness. I become just, merciful, charitable, strenu-
ous. I don’t ask so much who the Lord is, as what his
will is. I may philosophize, but in that case my philoso-
phy will be principally a moral philosophy. The subtle-
ties of theology, the origin of evil, the nature of the
divine plan, will concern me little. God wants me to
work ; he asks service of me, not comprehension. As for
the evils of life, I see that they are mostly the just pun-
ishment of my sins ; I endure hardness as a good soldier.
1 know meanwhile that my will is free, that I can serve
the law of God if I want to, that there is one who does
not serve this law, to wit, the devil, and that I must fight
this devil and all his works wherever I see them. My
philosophy consists in clear thinking about my duty ; my
faith is an assurance that the right will somehow conquer ;
my love is for all who desire God’s kingdom to come ; my
is for the victory that is near at hand, and for the


48


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


word, “Well done, good and faithful servant 1” The
crown of life is beyond, the sword is in hand, the Lord
directs the fight, and, best of all, he need^ me to help
him against the mighty, — neede me, for he says so. In
fact his saying so is just what constitutes his law and my
moral comfort. If he did not need me, my life would be
vain; in his need is my consolation. The world thus
viewed is so simple, so directly present to you, so majestic,
so inspiring ! Love the Lord, love all his friends, and
hate Satan. What could bo plainer ? Here, you see, is
the fine and sinewy religion of St. Christopher. The
Lord is the strongest, fight on his side. He grants you
a place in his service, how great is this reward ! This
love of him and of his servants, how perfect and plain a
doctrine !

« Love-making, how simple a matter I No depths to explore,

No heights in a life to ascend I No disheartening before,

No affrighting hereafter, — Love now will be love evermore.”

And true love will be the fulfilling of the law, — love
of the good, warfare with ill. Here, then, says the active
soul, is peace at length, the only true peace, — the peace
of endless service, the rest of a glorious activity, the joy of
life amongst the sons of God. After this fashion, then,
the religion of duty meets the first of the two interests
which I have been distinguishing. You all well know
what religious faiths express this interest.

Were I just now a practical teacher, I should leave you
to enjoy the thrill of this sort of energetic devotion, and
should not trouble you with the critical observation that
there is quite another sort of religious interest in tlie
world, which is not only very different from the foregoing,
but which is, in the first place and naturally, opposed
thereto. Yet this other interest, this second source of
religion, does exist in the human heart, and gives birth
to some of the deepest forms of piety. I am here, not as
a practical teacher, but as an observer of life, and it^is


THE PERIODS OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY. 49

my duty, therefore, to call your attention to the variety
of these two great interests, and then to show you that
Spinoza’s religious interest, profound, saintly, mystical as
it was, belongs to tlie second sort.

Life has its wounds as well as its weapons. Your
moral hero occasionally sees not only the discomfiture of
Satan, but also the warm blood of his own mortal veins
oozing forth as well. Or again, he finds himself an out-
cast, as Spinoza was, who knows no army that will accept
him, and who hears all human voices call him traitor.
And then, indeed, he knows an experience that even the
weaklings may aspire to share. lie knows, namely, wliat
it is to feel faint and sick at heart, and to see his own
worthlessness. Then it occurs to him that perhaps the
divine order, if haply it does really exist, may possibly
need just his right arm a little less than he had thought.
The idea is so commonplace a suggestion, after all. What
more natural? thinks the injured soul. Here 1 am, a
mere writhing worm, ein truber Gust avf der dunhelen
Erde^ alone in infinite space, and I ])retended to ask for
guidance as to my petty conduct 1 I pretended that the
divine order needed just me ! Why did I pretend this ?
Because of my pride, was it not ? I called this sort of
thing piety, and then kindly offered my services to God,
on the ground that he could do worse than to accept them,
and with the observation that the rolls of his army were,
before my accession, noteworthily incomplete. This, I
called religion ; and now, what happens ? Fate moves on
its own way ; I am wounded, cast down, weak, worthless.
All his billows are gone over me. My righteousness,
what worth was it in his sight? Shall mortal man be
just before God ? After all, if there is a moral order, is
it not complete unto itself? Did God wait all the eter-
nities until I was ripened before He should triumph?
Either he exists not at all, — and then, how shall 1 create
him ? — or he exists, and then from eternity to eternity


50


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


he has triumphed. His holiness I cannot create. Let me,
if haply I may, see it, worship it, enjoy it as wondering,
contemplative, adoring, helpless onlooker, consoled, if at
all, by the knowledge that though I fail and am lost,
he is from everlasting to everlasting.

I do not fear to seem unmindful of the dignity of the
genuine religious consciousness when I thus present to
you the curious and, in fact, paradoxical opposition be-
tween its two typical moods and their interests. The
afiPair is so vital and familiar an experience that nobody
can have failed to pass through this change of mood or
to come close upon the problem involved in it. For our-
selves, as critics of life, we have just now only to look
on while this second form of the religious consciousness
develops itself before our eyes into the form in which
it becomes immediately characteristic of Spinoza. The
problem involved is, as a general philosophical question,
one that will concern us much later on in our course,
when I shall ask how we are really to solve, if at all, the
paradoxical opposition betTinen the active and the submis-
sive forms of piety. For the time being I shall simply
let the helpless mood of the defeated soul find its own
form of religious faith. This form is the one embodied
in many hinds of what is called mystical religion. For-
give me if I dwell upon it a little. The digression will
in the end aid us to comprehend Spinoza.

This second mood, you have seen, began just now with
a somewhat cynical despair, which looked at first sight
rather unheroic, not to say immoral. Well, relatively un-
moral this form of the religious consciousness remains to
the end. It is not its office to inspire the warriors so much
as to comfort the downcast and to succor the wounded.
The honors and consolations of a noble office it has not to
o£Fer you. It finds you despairing, and it teaches you to
despise even your despair, and to rejoice even in your fail-
ure. After all, look about you, and see what you have


THE PERIODS OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY. 61

learned. Is not the lesson of your defeat the lesson of
the universal vanity of every individual undertaking of
man ? And what more comforting than this lesson, if only
you become wise enough to see that above all these fail-
ures of ours there is the strong and divine order that
never strives or is weary, but that is eternally fresh in the
youth of its perfection? If you can but once see that
God reigns, you will also see, says this mood, not only
that mortals must fail, but that they deserve to fail, so
idle is their trust in themselves, so sinful is their pride,
so weak is everything in which they put their hope.

If you want further illustration of this mood, you
might, if you choose, take up that permanently charming
record of experience, the old and thoroughly orthodox
devotional book called Imitation of Christ,*’ and let it
put into words this new feeling. Spinoza, very probably,
never read this book, but, I call your special attention to
it, we shall find him saying much the same thing, nur mit
ein Bische7i andem Worten. The burden of the ‘‘ Imita-
tion ** is the old story of hum|p defeat. Who could say
worse things of life than these ? How can the life of
man be loved, seeing that it hath so many bitter things,
that it is subjected to so many calamities and miseries ?
How can it be even called life when it produces so many
deaths and plagues ? ” ‘‘I resolve that I will act bravely,
but when a little temptation cometh, immediately I am in
a great strait. Wonderfully small sometimes is the mat-
ter whence a grievous temptation cometh, and whilst I
imagine myself safe for a little space, when I am not con-
sidering, I find myself often almost overcome by a little
pufiE of wind.” “ Thou shalt lamentably fall away, if thou
set a value upon any worldly thing.” “ To-day thou con-
fest thy sins, and to-morrow thou committest again the
sins thou didst confess.” What canst thou see any-
where which can continue long under the sun? Thou
believest, perchance, that thou shalt be satisfied, but thou


62 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

wilt never be able to attain unto this. If thou shouldst
see all things before thee at once, what would it be but a
vain vision ? ” “ Trust not thy feeling, for that which is

now will be quickly changed into somewhat else.” In
brief, then, to sum up this whole pessimism of the devout
author of the Imitation,” we, and all finite things about
us, are utterly vain, and so, not only is our life a plague,
but it ought to be a plague ; its miseries, its sins, its fail-
ures, are not only inevitable, but they are somehow justi-
fied by our fatal worthlessness. Yet consider how just tliis
pessimism about the finite is used, in the “ Imitation,” to
produce and to sustain that exalted rapture in the contem-
plation of the eternal which makes the ‘‘Imitation” so
curiously consoling a book. The marvel of this contrast
between the utter corruption of the finite and the glory of
God, the singular effect of it all upon the reader, is one of
the most marvelous psychological puzzles about this fasci-
nating and, I may even add, dangerous work of genius.
Herein lies the wiliness of that melancholy and yet in-
spiring old work : it con^mns your vanities until you
are fairly ashamed of having even once tried to be ac-
tively righteous with this weak will and this worthless
nature of yours. The sword of your moral heroism turns
to rust, and your whole warlike harness fairly rots away
into nothingness as you read. Life is dust and ashes.
Death, yes, annihilation, would be a relief to your hope-
less self-condemnation. And yet, above all, glittering in
the icy glories of its eternal frost, rises before you the
sacred mountain of God^s unapproachable grandeur. You
look upwards to that, and lo I like a shadow every trace
of your misery has vanished. “ When a man cometh to
this, that he seeketh comfort from no created being, then
doth he perfectly begin to enjoy God ; then also will he
be well contented with whatsoever shall happen to him.
He committeth himself altogether and with full trust unto
God, who is all in all to him, to whom nothing pefisheth


THE PERIODS OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


68


or dieth, but all things live to him and obey his word
without delay.” “ Let therefore nothing which thou doest
seem to thee great ; let nothing be grand, nothing of value
or beauty, nothing worthy of honor, nothing lofty, no-
thing praiseworthy or desirable, save what is eternal.
Let the eternal truth please thee above all things; let
thine own great vileness displease thee continually.”
Thus, then, as all readers of the Imitation ” know, the
author, turning steadfastly from the finite, comes at last to
a new life of contemplative freedom, a life where indeed
positive action, service of the Lord with a sense that the
Lord needs one, has small place, but where once more
something called love inspires afresh the heart. This
“ love ” of the “ Imitation ” is no longer the naive, child-
like, warmly vital love of the optimistic warrior who in
this world cheerfully serves God, like a St. Christopher,
because God is the strongest. This new sort of love is a
mystical adoration. It produces acts, but they are done
in a dream-like sort of somnambulistic ecstasy; they are
the acts of one hypnotized, to speak, by a long look
heavenwards. Strength this love has, but it is the
strength of gazing ; movement it has, but it is an anaes-
thetic, unconscious sort of movement. “ Love feelcth no
burden, reckoneth not labors.” This anaesthesia is not
the willing work of the faithful servant so much as an
incident of the rapturous wandering of one lost in God.
“ Nothing is sweeter than love, nothing stronger, nothing
loftier, nothing broader, nothing pleasanter, nothing fuller
or better in heaven or earth ; for love was born of God
and cannot rest save in God, above all created things.
He who loveth, flyeth, runneth, and is glad ; he is free
and not hindered ; he giveth all things for all things, and
hath all things in all things, because he resteth in One
who is high above all, from whom every good floweth
and proceedeth. He looketh not for gifts, but turneth
himself to the Giver above all good things. . . . Love is


64


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


watchful, and whilst sleeping still keeps watch; though
fatigued it is not weary, though pressed it is not forced,
though alarmed it is not terrified ; but like the living
flame and the burning torch, it breaketh forth on high,
and securely triumpheth. If a man loveth, he knoweth
what this voice crieth. For the ardent affection of the
soul is a great clamor in the ears of God, and it saith, My
God, my Beloved! Thou art all mine, and 1 am all
thine.”

V.

I have dwelt upon the expressions of this kind of reli-
gious interest as we find them in such orthodox books as
the “Imitation,” because I want to remind you of the
peculiarities of the well-known mood of the mystics, in
order to make the attitude of Spinoza, the heretic, more
easily comprehensible. Spinoza’s religious concern, I
insist, is of this latter sort. He is n’t a man of action ;
his heroism, such as it is, is the heroism of contemplation.
He is not always, let me tell you, in his religious mood ;
and when he is not, he appears as a cynical observer of
the vanity of mortal passions. But as religious thinker,
he is no cynic. Unswervingly he turns from the world of
finite hopes and joys ; patiently he renounces every sort
of worldly comfort ; even the virtue that he seeks is not
the virtue of the active man. There is one good thing,
and that is the Infinite ; there is one wisdom, and that is
to know God ; there is one sort of true love, and that is
the submissive love of the •saintly onlooker, who in the
solitude of reflection sees everywhere an all-pervading
law, an all-conquering truth, a supreme and irresistible
perfection. Sin is merely foolishness ; insight is the only
virtue ; evil is nothing positive, but merely the depriva-
tion of good ; there is nothing to lament in human affairs,
except the foolishness itself of every lamentation. The
wise man transcends lamentation, ceases to love finite
things, ceases therefore to long and to be weary, Mases


THE PERIODS OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY. 55

to strive and to grow faint, offers no foolish service to
God as a gift of his own, but possesses his own soul in
knowing God, and therefore enters into the divine free-
dom, by reason of a clear vision of the supreme and neces>
saiy laws of the eternal world.

This, then, is the essence of Spinoza’s religion. He
begins his essay on the Improvement of the Understand-
ing ” with words that we now are prepared^ to comprehend.
This essay and the fifth part of the ethics show us Spi-
noza’s religious attitude and experience, elsewhere much
veiled in his works. “ After experience had tsCught me,”
says the essay, “ that all the usual surroundings of social
life are vain and futile, seeing that none of the objects of
my fears contained in themselves anything either good or
bad, except in so far as the mind is affected by them, I
finally resolved to inquire whether there might be some
real good which would affect the mind singly, to the
exclusion of all else, whether there might be anything of
which the discovery and attainment would enable me to
enjoy continuous, supreme, and unending happiness.”
Here is the starting-point. Life for Spinoza is in the
ordinary world a vain life, because, for the first, it is our
thinking that makes the things about us good or bad to
us, and not any real value of the things themselves, whilst
the transiency, the uncertainty of these finite things
brings it about that, if we put our trust in them, they will
erelong disappoint us. Kapidly, from this beginning,
Spinoza rehearses the familiar •tale of the emptiness of the
life of sense and worldliness, the same tale that all the
mystics repeat. The reader, who has never felt this
experience of Spinoza and of the other mystics, always
feels indeed as if such seeming pessimism must be largely
mere sour-heartedness, or else as if the expression of it
must be pure cant. But after all, in the world of spirit-
ual experiences, this, too, is a valuable one to pass through
and to record. Whoever has not sometime fully felt what


66


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


it is to have his whole world of finite ambitious and affeo«
tions through and through poisoned, will indeed not easily
comprehend the gentle disdain with which Spinoza, in thisf
essay, lightly brushes aside pleasure, wealth, fame, as
equally and utterly worthless. We know, indeed, little of
Spinoza’s private life, but if we should judge from his
words we should say that as exile he has felt just this bit-
terness, and has conquered it, so that when he talks of
vanity he knows whereof he speaks. People who have
never walked in the gloomy outlying wastes of spiritual
darkness have never had the chance to find just the sort
of divine light which he finally discovered there. These
mystics, too, have their wealth of experience ; don^t
doubt their sincerity because they tell a strange tale.
Don’t doubt it even if, like Spinoza, they join with their
mysticism other traits of the wonderful Jewish character,
— shrewd cynicism, for instance. When they call plea-
sure and wealth and fame all dust and ashes, they possibly
know whereof they speak, at least as far as concerns them-
selves alone. Spinoza, at any rate, twice in his life, re-
fused, if his biographers are right, the offered chance to
attain a competency, ite declined these chances because,
once for all, worldly means would prove an entanglement
to him. He preferred his handicraft, and earned his liv-
ing by polishing lenses. Steadfastly, moreover, as we
know, he refused Opportunities to get a popular fame, and
even to make a worthily great name. The chief instance
is his refusal of the profes^rship which the Elector Pala-
tine offered him in 1673 at Heidelberg, under promise of
complete freedom of teaching, and with the obvious chance
of an European reputation. So Spinoza did not merely
call the finite world names, as many do; he meant his
word, and he kept it. He was no sentimentalist, no emo-
tional mystic. He was cool-headed, a lover of formulas
and of mathematics ; but still he was none the less a true
mystic.


THE PERIODS OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY. 57

Well, he finds the finite vain, because you have to pur*
sue it, and then it deceives you, corrupts you, degrades
♦you, and in the end fails you, being but a fleeting shadow
after all. “ I thus perceived,’’ he says, “ that I was in a
state of great peril, and I compelled myself to seek with
all my strength for a remedy, however uncertain it might
be, as a sick man struggling with a deadly disease, when
he sees that death will surely be upon him unless a remedy
be found, is compelled to seek such a remedy with all his
strength, inasmuch as his whole hope lies therein. All
the objects pursued by the multitude not only bring no
remedy that tends to preserve our being, but even act as
hindrances, causing the death not seldom of those who
possess them, and always of those who are possessed by
them.” “ All these evils,” he continues, ‘‘ seem to have
arisen from the fact that our happiness or unhappiness
has been made the mere creature of the thing that we
hapT^en to be loving. When a thing is not loved, no strife
arises about it ; there is no pang if it perishes, no envy if
another bears it away, no fear, no hate ; yes, in a word,
nc tumult of soul. These thii^s all* come from loving
that which perishes, such as the objects of which I have
spoken. But love towards a thing eternal feasts the mind
with joy alone, nor hath sadness any part therein. Hence
this is to be prized above all, and to be sought for with
all our might. I have used the words not at random, —
‘ If only I could be thorough in my seeking ; * for I found
that though I already saw afl this in mind, I could not
yet lay aside avarice and pleasure and ambition. Yet one
thing I found, that as long as I was revolving tliese
thoughts, so long those desires were always behind my
back, whilst I strenuously sought the new light; and
herein I found great com|ort, for I saw that my disease
was not beyond hope of physic. And although at first
such times were rare, and endured but for a little space,
yet as more and more the true good lighted up my mindt
such times came quicker and endured longer,”


58


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


VI.

This, then, the beginning of Spinoza’s Pilgrim’s Pro-*
gress. But now for what distinguishes him from other
mystics, and makes him a philosopher, not a mere ex-
horter. He has his religious passion, he must reflect upon
it. The passion any one might have who had passed
through the dark experience of which we spoke a moment
since. The philosopher must justify his faith. And how
hard to justify such a faith it would seem in this cold and
severe seventeenth century. It was an age, you remem-
ber, when everything held to be at all occult was banishe^
from the thoughts of the wise, and when clear thinking
alone was believed in, when man, too, was held to be a
mechanism, a curiously complicated natural machine, when
Hobbes, greatest amongst the English speculative think-
ers of the age — a writer much read by Spinoza — could
declare that the word spirit ” was a meaningless sound,
and that nothing exists but bodies and movements. How
defend a mystical religious faith at such a moment?
Spinoza’s defense is so mgenious, so profound, so simple,
as to give us one of the most noteworthy and dramatic
systems ever constructed. Once more I assure you that I
here expound only one aspect of his thought. I ignore his
peculiar methods ; I ignore his technicalities ; 1 give you
but the kernel of his doctrine concerning religious truth.

Technicalities aside, this doctrine is essentially founded
upon what Spinoza regards as the axiom that everything
in the world must be either explained by its own nature,
or by some higher nature.^ You explain a thing when
you comprehend why it mu%t he what it is. Thus, for
instance, in geometry you know that all the diameters of
any one circle must be precisely equal, and you know that
this is so, because you see why it must be so.^ The diam-

^ See Eik. I. Axioms i. and ii.

* See examples in the TractoA, dt Emendat Int, under the head of
roles for definition.


THE PERIODS OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


59


eters are all drawn in the circle and througli the centre of
it, and the circle has a certain nature, a structure, a make,
* a build, whereby, for instance, you distinguish it from an
oval or a square. This build, this make of the circle, it is
that forces the diameters to be equal. They can’t help
being equal, being drawn through the centre of a curve
which has no elongation, no bulge outwards in one direc*
tion more than another, but which is evenly curved all
around. The nature of the circle, then, at once forces the
diameters to bo equal, — pins them down to equality,
hems in any rebellious diameter that should try to stretch
out farther than the others, — and also explains to the
reason of a geometer just why this result follows. My
example is extremely dry and simple, but it will serve to
show what Spinoza is thinking of. He says now, as some-
thing self-evident, that anything in the world which
doesn't directly contain its own explanation must be a
part of some larger nature of things which does explain
it, and which, accordingly, forces it to be just what it is.
For instance, to use my own illustration, if two mountains
had precisely the same height, ^s the diameters of a cir-
cle have precisely the same length, we should surely have
to suppose something in the nature of the physical uni-
verse which forced just these two mountains to have the
same height. But, even so, as things actually are, we
must suppose that whatever is or happens, in case it is
not a self-evident and necessary thing, must have its
explanation in some higher and larger nature of things.
Thus, once more, you j^ourself are either what you are by
virtue of your own self-evident and self-made nature, or
else, as is the view of Spinoza, you are forced to be what
you are by the causes that have produced you, and that
have brought you here. Cause and explanation mean
for Spinoza the same thing. He knows only rigidly math-
ematical necessity. Yet more, not only you, but every
act, every thought of yours, each quiver of your eyelashes.


60


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHT.


each least shadow of feeling in your mind, must be just as
much a result of the nature of things as your existence
itself. Nothing comes by chance ; everything must be
wliat it is. Could you see the world at one glance, “ under
the form of eternity,” you would see everything as a
necessary result of the whole nature of things. It would
be as plp.iii to you that you must now have this quiver of
eyelasl] or this shade of feeling ; it would be also as plain
to you why you must have these seemingly accidental ex
poriences, as it is plain to the geometer why the evenly
curved circle must forbid its diameters to be unequal. It
is of the nature of reason to view things as necessary, as
explicable, as results either of their own nature, or, if
this is n’t the case, then of the higher nature of thii^s
whereof they form a part.

From this axiom, Spinoza proceeds, by a very short but
thorny road, to the thought that, if this is so, there must
be some one highest nature of things, which explains all.
reality. That such highest nature exists, he regards as
self-evident. The self-explaining must, of course, explain,
and so make sure, its own existence. Spinoza shows by
devices which I cannot here follow that there couldn’t
be numerous self - explained and separate natures of
things.^ The world is one, and so all the things in it
must be parts of one self-evident, self-producing order,
one nature. Spinoza conceives this order, describes its
self-explaining and all-producing character, as well as he
can, and then gives it a name elsewhere well known to
philosophers, but used by him in his own sense. He calls
the supreme nature of things the universal “ Substance ”
of all the world. In it are we all ; it makes us what we
are ; it does what its own nature determines ; it explains
itself and all of us; it isn’t produced, it produces; it
is uncreate, supreme, overruling, omnipresent, absolute,

^ Eth, I. prop. V. ; prop. viii. schol. ii. ; props, xi. and xiv. ; Epi&t
xxxiv. (Hague edition).


THE PERIODS OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY. 61

rational, irreversible, unchangeable, the law of laws, the
nature of natures ; and we — we, with all our acts,
thoughts, feelings, life, relations, experiences — are just
the result of it, the consequences of it, as the diameters
are results of the nature of a circle. Feel, hope, desire,
choose, strive, as you will, all is in you because this uni-
• 'ersal “ substance ” makes you what you are, forces you
into this place in the nature of things, rules you as the
higher truth rules the lower, as the wheel rules the spoke,
as the storm rules the raindrop, as the tide rules the
wavelet, as autumn rules the dead leaves, as the snow-
drift rules the fallen snowflake ; and this substance is
what Spinoza calls God.

tf you ask what sort of thing this substance is, the
first answer is, it is something eternal ; and that means>
not that it lasts a good while, but that no possible tem-
poral view of it could exhaust its nature.^ All things
^that happen result from the one substance. This surely
means that what happens now and wliat happened mil-
lions of years ago are, for the substance, equally present
and necessary results. To illustrate once more in my own
way; A spider creeping back and forth across a circle
could, if she were geometrically disposed, measure out in
temporal succession first this diameter and then that.
Crawling’ first over one diameter, she would say, “ I now
find this so long.” Afterwards examining another diame-
ter, she would say, It has now happened that what I
have just measured proves to be precisely as long as what
I measured some time since, and no longer.” The toil of
such a spider might last many hours, and be full of such
successive measurements, each marked by a spun thread
of web. But the true circle itself within which the web
was spun, the circle in actual space as the geometer knows
it, would its nature be thus a mere series of events, a
mere succession of spun threads?^ No, the true circle

^ Eth, I. def. viii. and Explkaiio.

^ This illustration will easily be recognized as an effort at a paxa-


62 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN FHILOSOPHT.

would be timeless, a truth founded in the nature of space,
outlasting, preceding, determining all the weary web-spin-
ning of this time-worn spider. Even so we, spinning our
web of experience in all its dreary complication in the
midst of the eternal nature of the world-embracing sub-
stance, imagine that our lives somehow contain true nov-
elty, discover for the substance what it never knew before.,
invent new forms of being. We fancy our past wholly
past, and our future whoUy unmade. We think that
where we have as yet spun no web there is nothing, and
that what we long ago spun has vanished, broken by the
winds of time, into nothingness. It is not so. For the
eternal substance there is no before and after ; all truth is
truth. “Far and forgot to me is near,” it says. In^diie
unvarying precision of its mathematical universe, all is
eternally written.

“ Not all your piety nor wit
Can lure it back to cancel half a line,

Nor all your tears wash out one word of it.”

What vrill be for endless ages, what has been since time
began, is in the one substance completely present, as in
one scroll may be written the joys and sorrows of many
lives, as one earth contains the dead of countless genera-
tions, as one space enfolds all the limitless wealth of
figured curves and of bodily forms.

This substance, then, this eternal, is Spinoza’s God. In
describing it I have used terms, comparisons, and illustra-
tions largely my own. I hope that I have been true to
the spirit of Spinoza’s thought. Bemember, then, of the
substance that it is absolutely infinite and self-deter-
mined ; that it exists completely and once for all ; that
all the events of the world follow from it as the nature

phrase of Etk. II. prop. viii. coroU. and schol., a passagfe where, ae
in the illustration above used, one finds presented, but not solved, the
whole problem of the true relation of finite and infinite, temporal
and eternal.


THE PERIODS OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


68


of the diameter follows from the nature of the circle, and
that as for yourself, it enfolds, overpowers, determines,
produces both you and your destiny, as the storm em-
braces the raindrop, and as the nature of a number deter-
mines the value of its factors. Yet now you will ask one
question more. This substance, so awful in its fatal per-
fection, is it, you will say, something living and intelligent
that 1 can revere, or is it something dead, a mere blind
force ? Spinoza answers this question in a very original
way. The substance, he says, must have infinitely numer-
ous ways of expressing itself, each complete^ rounded,
self-determined. It is like an infinite sacred scripture,
translated into endlessly numerous tongues, but complete
inWeaeh tongue. Of these self-expressions of the sub-
stance, we mortals know only two. One is the material
world, — Spinoza calls it body or bodily substance. The
other is the inner world of thought, — Spinoza calls it
thinking substance, or mind. These two worlds, Spinoza
holds, are equally real, equally revelations of the one
absolute truth, equally divine, equally full of God, equally
expressions of the supreme order. But, for the rest, they
are, as they exist here about us, mutually independent.
The substance expresses itself in matter ; very well, then,
all material nature is full of rigid and mathematical law :
body moves body ; line determines line in space ; every-
thing, including this bodily frame of ours, is an expres-
sion of the extended or corporeal aspect or attribute of
the substance. In stars and in clouds, in dust and in
animals, in figures and in their geometrical properties,
the eternal writes its nature, as in a vast hieroglyphic.
Equally, however, the substance writes itself in the events
and the laws of mental life. And that it does so, the
very existence of our own minds proves. Thought pro-
duces thought, just as body moves body, while on the
other hand it is inconceivable that mind should act on
body, or body explain mind. And so these two orders^


64


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


mental and corporeal, are precisely parallel. For neither
belongs, to, or is part of, or is explained by, the other.
Both, then, must be equally and independently expres-
sions of God the substance. Hence, as each of the two
orders expresses God’s nature, each must be as omnipres-
ent as the other. Wherever there is a body, God, says
Spinoza, has a thought corresponding to that body. All
nature is full of thought. Nothing exists but has its own
mind, just as you have your mind. The more perfect
body has, indeed, the more perfect mind ; a crowbar is n’t
as thoughtful as a man, because in the simplicity of its
metallic hardness it finds less food for thought.^ But, all
the same, the meanest of God’s creatures has some sort
of thought attached to it, not indeed produced or affected
in any wise by the corporeal nature of this thing, but
simply parallel thereto; an expression, in cogitative or
sentient terms, of the nature of the facts here present.
Well, this thought is just as real an expression of the
divine nature as is matter. There is just as much neces-
sity, connection, completeness, mutual interdependence,
rationality, eternity, in mind as in body. Of God’s thought
your thought is a part, just as your body is a part of the
embodied substance. His thinking nature produces your
ideas, as his corporeal nature produces your nerves.
There is, however, no real influence of body over mind,
or the reverse. The two are just parallel. The order
and connection of ideas is the same as the order and con-
nection of things. J ust so far as your bodily life extends,
so far and no further, in the mental world, extends your
thought. You make nothing by your thinking but your
o^vn thoughts ; but as your body is a part of nature, so
also is your mind a part of the infinite mind. I declare,”
says Spinoza, in a letter to a friend, declare the human
mind to be a part of nature, namely, because I hold that

^ The illustration is my own. The thought is that of Elh* 11.
prop. xiii. and the scholium thereto.


THE ]^EB10DS OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


66


in nature there exists an infinite power of thinking, which
power, so far as it is infinite, contains ideally the whole
of nature, in such wise that its thoughts proceed in the
same fashion as nature herself, being, in fact, the ideal
mirror thereof.^ Hence follows that I hold the human
mind to be simply this same power (of divine thought),
not so far as it is infinite and perceives the whole of
nature, but as far as it perceives alone the human body ;
and thus I hold our human mind to be part of this infi-
nite intellect.”

VII.

I have thus led you a tedious way through this thorny
path of Spinoza’s thought. 1 have had no hope to make
their connections all clear ; I shall be content if you bear
in mind this as the outcome: our reason perceives the
world to be one being, whose law is everywhere and eter-
nally expressed. Only this eternal point of view shows
us the truth. But if we are rational, we can assume such
an eternal point of view, can see God everywhere, and can
so enter, not merely with mystical longings, but with a
clear insight into an immediate communion with the Lord
of all being. And this Lord, he is indeed the author of
matter. The earth, the sea, yes, the very geometrical
figures themselves write his truth in inanimate outward
forms. But meanwhile (and herein lies the hope of our
mystical religion) this substance, this deity, possesses and
of its nature determines also and equally an infinite mind,
of whose supreme perfection our minds are fragments.
We are thus not only the sons of God ; so far as we are
wise our lives are hid in God, we are in Him, of Him ;
we recognize this indwelling, we lose our finiteness in
Him, we become filled with the peace which the eternal
brings ; we dalm the thirst of our helpless finite passion
by entering consciously into his eternal self-possession

^ Nimirum ejus ideatum, the corrected reading of the Hague edi-
tion of Van Vloten and Land. See EpisL zzxiL p. 130.


66


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


and freedom. For the true mind, like the true natural
order, knows nothing of the bondage of time, thinks of
no before and after, has no fortune, dreads nothing, la-
ments nothing ; but enjoys its own endlessness, its ow%
completeness, has all things in all things, and so cries, like
the lover of the “ Imitation,” “My Beloved, I am all thine,
and thou art all mine.”

In the fifth part of Spinoza’s “ Ethics,” his own descrip-
tion of the wise man's love of God closes his wonderful
exposition. This love is superior to fortune, renounces
all hopes and escapes all fears, feeds alone on the thought
that God’s mind is the only mind, loves God with a frag-
ment of “ that very love wherewith God loves himself.”
The wise man thus wanders on earth in whatever state
you will, — poor, an outcast, weak, near to bodily death ;
but “his meditation is not of death, but of life;” of the
eternal life whereof he is a part, and has ever been and
ever will be a part. You may bound him in a nut-shell,
but be counts himself king of infinite space ; and rightly,
for the bad dreams of this phantom life have ceased to
trouble him. “ Ilis blessedness,” says Spinoza, “ is not
the reward of his virtue, but his virtue itself. lie re-
joices therein, not beca\}se he has controlled his lusts ; con-
trariwise, because he rejoices therein, the lusts of the finite
have no power .over him.” “Thus appears how potent,
then, is the wise man, and how much he surpasses the igno-
rant man, who is driven only by his lusts. For the igno-
rant man is not only distracted in various ways by exter-
nal causes, without ever gaining true acquiescence of
mind, but moreover lives, as it were, unwitting of him-
self and of God and of things, and, as soon as he ceases
to suffer, ceases also to be. Whereas the wise man, in so
far as he is regarded as such, is scarcely at" all disturbed
in spirit, but being conscious of himself and of God and
of things, by a certain eternal necessity, never ceases to
be, but always possesses true acquiescence of his spirit.


THE PERIODS OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY. 67

If the way which I have pointed out as leading to this
result seems exceedingly hard, it may, nevertheless, be
discovered. Needs must it be hard since it is so seldom
found. How would it be possible if salvation were ready
to our hand, and could without great labor be found, that
it should be by almost all men neglected ? But sill things
excellent are as difficult as they are rare.’*

With these words closes the book of Spinoza’s expe-
rience.


LECTUEE m.


THE REDISCOVERY OF THE INNER LIFE: FROM SPINOZA
TO KANT.

In the lecture of to-day, as I must frankly assure you
at the outset, our path lies for the most part in far less
inspiring regions than those into which, at the last time,
Spinoza guided us. You are well acquainted with a fact
of life to which I may as well call your attention forthwith,
the fact, namely, that certain stages of growing intelligence,
and even of growing spiritual knowledge, are marked by
an inevitable, and, at first sight, lamentable decline, in
apparent depth and vitality of spiritual experience. The
greatest concerns of our lives are, in such stages of our
growth, somehow for a while hidden, even forgotten. We
become more knowing, more clever, more critical, more
wary, more skeptical, but we seemingly do not grow more
profound or more reverent. We find in the world much
that engages our curious attention ; we find little that is
sublime. Our world becomes clearer ; a brilliant, hard,
mid-morning light shines upon everything ; but this light
does not seem to us any longer divine. The deeper
beauty of the universe fades out; only facts and pro-
blems are left.

Such a stage in human experience is represented, in
great part, by the philosophical thinkers who flourish
between the time of Spinoza’s death, in 1677, and the
appearance of Kant’s chief philosophical work, The Cri-
tiaue of Pure Season,” in 1781. It is the period which


THE BEDISCOVERT OF THE INNER LIFE.


69


has been especially associated, in historical tradition, with
the eighteenth century, so that when one speaks of the
spirit of the eighteenth century, he is likely to be refer-
ing to this skeptical and critical mood, to this hard, mid-

oming light of the bare understanding, beneath which
most of these thinkers of our period saw all their world
lying. -When I undertake to describe such a time, I
therefore feel in its spirit a strong contrast to that curious
but profound sort of piety which we were describing in
the last lecture in the case of Spinoza. Spinoza, indeed,
was in respect of his piety a man of marked limitations.
His world had but one sublime feature in it, one element
of religious significance, namely, the perfection of the
divine substance. But then this one element was enough,
from his point of view, to insure an elevated and un-
troubled repose of faith and love, which justified us in
drawing a parallel between his religious consciousness and
that of the author of the “Imitation of Christ.’’ This
sort of piety almost disappears from the popular philos-
ophy of the early eighteenth century. What the people
of that time want is more light and fewer unproved as-
sumptions.

As against the earlier seventeenth -century thinkers,
who, as you remember, also alftiorred the occult, and
trusted in reason, the thinkers of this new age are char-
acterized by the fact that on the whole they have a great
and increasing suspicion of even that rigid mathematical
method of research itself upon which men like Spinoza
had relied. In other words, whereas the men of the
middle of the seventeenth century bad trusted to reason
alone, the men of the subsequent period began, first hesi-
tatingly, and then more and more seriously, to distrust
even human reason itself. After all, can you spin a
world, as Spinoza did, out of a few axioms ? Can you
permanently revere a divine order that is perhaps the
mere creature of the assumptions with which your system


70


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


happened to start? The men of the new age are not
ready to answer “ Yes ” to such questions. They must re-
flect, they must peer into reason itself. They must ask,
Whence arise these axioms, how come we by our knowledge
of what account are our mathematical demonstrations, ana
of what, after all, does our limited human nature permit
us to he sure ? Once started upon this career, the thought
of the time is driven more and more, as we have already
said, to the study of human nature, as opposed to the ex-
clusive study of the physical universe. The whole range
of human passion, so far as the eighteenth century knew
about it, is criticised, but for a good while in a cautious,
analytical, cruelly scrutinizing way, as if it were all some-
thing suspicious, misleading, superstitious. The coldness
of the seventeenth century is still, in the air ; but Spi-
noza’s sense of sublimity is gone. Spinoza himself, you
remember, had altogether rejected, as occult, everything
miraculous, marvelous, extra-natural. Not the thunder or
the earthquake or the fire could for him contain God ; God
was in the still small voice that the wise man alone heard.
Now the popular philosophy of the eighteenth century
more and more approached a position which unconsciously
agreed with Spinoza’s in a number of respects. It cor-
dially recognized, for instance, that the earthquake, say
the great Lisbon earthquake of 1758, was a fearful thing,
but that God was very certainly not in that earthquake.
It could readily make out the same thing concerning any
amount of thunder, fire, or wind that you might produce
for inspection. But it went one step further than Spi-
noza’s wise man, and was forced to observe, that, after con-
siderable scrutiny, it had as yet been able to detect in the
world of reason and experience no still, small voice what-
soever. That at least, as I say, was the outcome of a
considerable portion of the thought of the time. It was
indeed not the outcome of all the thinking of this age. In
Leibnitz, who was a ygunger contemporary of Spinoza, and


THE BEDISGOVERT OF THE INHEB LIFE. 71

who flourished in the closing decades of the seventeenth
century, and at the beginning of the new period, philo-
sophical theology found an expositor of the greatest specu-
^ lative ingenuity and of the most positive tendency. Later,
in the ever-fascinating Bishop Berkeley, not merely theo-
logical doctrine, but a profoimdly spiritual idealism got
voice. In Rousseau, a new era of sentimental piety found
its beginning, and all this movement led erelong to Kant
himself. But for the moment I am speaking of tenden-
cies in a most general way, and this negative, this cautious,
skeptical attitude, is the one most observable 'in the phi-
losophy of our period.

I.

Those of us who look to philosophy for positive expe-
riences, rather than for technical instruction, will at first
sight regard such a period as this with some natural
indifference. The skeptic is not always an interesting
person ; but then, you must remember, as skeptic he does n’t
want to be interesting. He only wishes to be honest.
He is meanwhile not only to be tolerated; he is also
indispensable. Philosophical thought that has never been
skeptical is sure not to be deep. The soul that never has
doubted does not know whether it believes ; and at ail
events the thinker who has not dwelt long in doubt has.no
rights to high rank as a reflective person. In fact, a study
of history shows that if there is anything that human
thought and cultivation have to be deeply thankful for, it
is an occasional but truly great and fearless age of doubt.
You may rightly say that doubt has no value in itself.
Its value is in what it leads to. But then consider what
ages of doubt have led to. Such an age in Greece pro-
duced that father of every humane sort of philosophizing,
Socrates. The same age nourished with doubts the di-
vine thought of Plato. Another and yet sterner age of
doubt brought about the beginnings of Christian thought,
prepared the Roman empire for the new faith, and saved


72


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


the world from being ruined by the multitudinous fanati*
cal rivals of Christianity. Yet a third great age of doubt
began, at the Renaissance, the history of modern literature,
and made the way plain for whatever was soundest about
the Reformation. And a fourth age of doubt, the one
under our consideration in this present lecture, proved
more fruitful for good to humanity than a half dozen
centuries of faith had done at another time. For, as we
shall see, this eighteenth-century doubting drove thinkers
from the study of nature to the study first of human
reason, then of human conscience, then of all the human
heart and soul, and meanwhile cleared the way for those
triumphs of the spirit over great evils which have taken
place from the moment of the French Revolution until
now. Despise not doubting ; it is often the best service ^
thinking men can render to their age. Condemn it not :
it is often the truest piety. And when I say this I do
not mean merely to repeat cant phrases. I speak with
reason. Doubt is never the proper end of thinking, but
it is a good beginning. The wealth of truth which our
life, our age, our civilization, our religion, our own hearts
may contain, is not quite our property until we have won
it. And we can win it only when we have first doubted
the superficial forms in which at the outset it presents
itself to our apprehension. Every true lover has in the
beginning of his love grave doubts of his beloved’s affection
for him. And such doubts often take on bitter and even
cynical forms in his soul in the various bad quarters of an
hour that fall to his lot. ' Doubt, however, is not the foe,
but the very inspirer of his love. It means that the be-
loved is yet to be won. It means that the simple warmth
of his aspiration is n’t enough, and that, if the beloved is
worth winning, she is worth wooing through doubt and
uncertainty for a good while. Moreover, it is not the
fashion of the beloved, in the typical case, to be especially
forward in quelling such doubts, by making clear her atti-


THE REDISCOVERY OF THE INNER LIFE. 78

tude too soon. If it were, love-making might be a simpler
affair, but would not be so significant an experience as it
is. Doubt is the cloud that is needed as a background for
love’s rainbow. Even so it is, however, in the world of
abstracter thought. The more serious faiths of humanity
can only be won, if at all, by virtue of much doubting.
The divine truth is essentially coy. You woo her, you
toil for her, you reflect upon her by night and by day, you
search through books, study nature, make experiments,
dissect brains, hold learned disputations, take counsel of
the wise ; in fine, you prepare your own ripest tlmught, and
lay it before your heavenly mistress when you have done
your best. Will she be pleased? Will she reward you
with a glance of approval? Will she say. Thou hast well
spoken concerning me ? Who can tell ? Her eyes have
their own beautiful fashion of looking far off when you
want them to be turned upon you ; and, after all, perhaps
she prefers other suitors for her favor. The knowledge
that she is of sufficiently exalted dignity to be indifferent
to you, if she chooses, is what constitutes the mood known
as philosophical skepticism. You see that, in sound-
hearted thinkers, it is like the true lover’s doubt whether
his unwon mistress regards him kindly or no. It is not,
then, a deadening and weakening mood ; it is the very soul
of philosophical earnestness.

Meanwhile, in describing the skepticism of our period
I am far from wishing to trouble you with its endlessly
varied technical subtleties. These lectures are throughout
selective, and they sacrifice numberless intrinsically im-
portant aspects of our various subjects, in order to be able
to seize upon a few significant features, and to hold these
up to your view. I cannot warn you too much that there
is no chance of completeness of treatment anywhere in the
course of our brief work together. I spared you, in the
last lecture, whole cargoes of problems which are consigned ^
to every special student of Spinoza. I shall omit in this


74


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


every mention of innumerable significant features in the
philosophy of our present period. All this is a matter
of course. I remind you of it only to excuse an immediate
and somewhat dry statement of the few features of this
eighteenth-century skepticism to which 1 intend to con-
fine myself in what follows.


II.

There are certain philosophic problems of which you are
sure, sooner or later, to have heard something in general
literature, and for which the time from Spinoza to Kant
is at least partially responsible. I want to set forth a
little of the growth of these problems, never forgetting, I
hope, that they interest us here in their human rather than
in their technical aspects, and that we are above all con-
cerned in them as leading to Kant himself, and to those
who came after him. And my selection is as follows : —

You have all heard about the controversy as to whether
man's knowledge of more significant truth is innate, or
whether it comes to him from without, through his senses ;
or, otherwise, as to whether the mind at birth is a
tabula rasa^ a blank white piece of innocent paper, upon
which experience writes whatever it will, or whether the
soul is endowed from the start witli certain inborn ration-
al possessions, — a divine law, for instance, written on the
tablets of the heart, a divine wisdom about number and
space, registered in some imperishable form in our very
structures. You may have met with more or less elabo-
rate arguments upon this topic. I do not know whether it
has ever had more than the interest of a curious problem
to many of us. I do know that in many styles of treat-
ment it must appear as a sort of hackneyed debating-club
question, an apparently excellent one of its sort, but a
rather dry bone of contention, after all.

But you now know that philosophic research is no affaii
of the debating clubs, but a struggle of humanity to make


THE REDISCOVERY OF THE INNER LIFE. 76

its own deepest interests articulate, and therefore you will
not expect me to deal with this question after the forensic
fashion. What I want to do is this : —

I want to suggest summarily the origin of the contro-
versy about the innate ideas, and to show you what inter-
est first led men to the question. Then, I want to indicate
the value of the controversy as bringing about that study
of man’s inner life which, at the close of the century,
bore fruit in the great Komantic movement itself. Fi-
nally, I want to narrate how the problems erelong took
form, what skeptical outcome the discussion, upon one
side, seemed to have, and what solution, what re-winning
of the great spiritual faiths of humanity, it suggested on
the other. In this way I shall try to prepare you for that
stupendous revolution of philosophic thought which is
associated with the name of Kant.

For the first, then, as to the origin of the controversy
about the innate ideas. I shall not go back farther in
the history of thought than to Descartes, 1596-1650, a
predecessor of Spinoza, and the man whose name usually
begins the lists of modern philosophers proper, as they are
set forth in the text-books of the history of philosophy.
Had I been engaged in technical teaching, it would have
been my duty, in the last lecture, to describe the highly
interesting relation in which Spinoza’s doctrine stands to
that of his predecessor. As it is, I have so far passed
Descartes over. At present I must mention, in a word,
one or two features of his doctrine. Descartes had
early become dissatisfied with the scholastic philosophy
which he bad learned at Jesuit hands, and decided to think
out a system for himself. He began his reasoning by a
formal philosophical doubt about everything that could
conceivably be doubted, and then proceeded to examine
whether any unassailable certainty was still left him.
He found such an absolutely unassailable assurance in his
swn existence as a thinking being, and accordingly began


76 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

his positive doctrine with the famous principle, Cogito^
ergo sum^ ” I think, and so I exist. ” He proceeded
from this beginning to prove the existence of God, and
then the existence of two so-called substances, mind and
matter, as comprising the whole world of which we mortals
know anything. The laws of matter he found to be those of
matheDatics, and of the elementary physics of his time.
Of mind he also studied the constitution as well as he
could, and the result appeared in several elaborate works.
Now the principle on which Descartes proceeded through-
out his investigations was this: ^^My own existence
is the standard assurance of my thought. 1 know
that J at least am. But surely, if, on examining some
principle, say an axiom in geometry, I perceive that it is
as plain to me, as clear, as distinct, as is my own existence,
then indeed it must be as certain a truth as my existence.”
This, I say, was his way of procedure, whenever he was
puzzled about a principle. Is it as clear to me as my own
existence ; or can I somehow make it as clear and dis-
tinct? Well, then, it is true. it less clear? Then I
must examine it still further, or lay it aside as doubtful.”
By this fashion of procedure, which Descartes regarded
as the typically rational one, he managed to collect after
a time a very goodly stock of sure and clear principles.
Others have n’t always found them all as clear and sure
as did Descartes, but that concerns us not now. Well,
Descartes had a name, or in fact a brace of names, for
these principles of his. He called them eternal truths,”
and he also called them ^^unate” ideas or truths. We
know them because it is of the nature of our reason to know
them. We know them whenever we come to look at them
squarely, whether we ever saw them in this light before or
not. That 2 + 2-4, that things equal to the same thing
are equal to each other, these are examples of such truths.
They are as clear to me as thaft 1 myself exist. They are
clear to me because my reason makes them so, and that is


THE BEDISCOVERT OF THE INNER LIFE. 7T

die sort of reason I have. They are innate in me. I
^on’t see them with my bodily eyes. I just know them, be-
cause I do know them, and I know them also to be eternal.

Innate truths then, for Descartes, are of this sort.
He is n’t so much interested in finding out how so many
truths could be innate in one poor little human soul all
at once, as he is interested in singling them out and writ-
ing down bookfuls of them. The seventeenth century,
you remember, was not much interested in man him-
self, but ^as very much interested in eternal truth.
Hence Descartes makes light of the problem how all this
thought-stuff could somehow be innate in a soul with-
out the poor soul’s ever even guessing the fact until it had
studied philosophy. Yet of course if one becomes strongly
interested in human nature for its own sake, this problem
which Descartes ignored must come to the front.

The true interest of this problem, then, lies in the fact
that by reflecting upon it philosophers have been led to
some of the deepest undertakings of modern thought.
For tlie moment it comes up as a question of mere idle
curiosity. As such, however, the question was rather
tauntingly suggested to Descartes himself by certain of his
opponents. “ How can so many ideas be innate ? ” they
said. “ Observe, children don’t know these truths of yours,
and could n’t even grasp them. Much less could infants.
And yet you call them innate.” Descartes, thus chal-
lenged, replied curtly, but not unskillfully. They may be
innate, he said (in substance), as predispositions, which in
infants have n’t yet grown to conscious rank. The thing
^ simple enough. In certain families, so Descartes fur-
ther explains (I do not quote his words but give their
sense), good-breeding and the gout are innate. Yet of
course, as he implies, the children of such families have
to be instructed in deportment, and the infants just learn-
ing to walk seem happil]^' quite free from gout. Even
so, geometiy is innate in us, but it does n’t come to our


78 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

consciousness without much trouble. With the taunting
questions put to Descartes, and his example about the
heredity of good-breeding and the gout, the question of
the innate ideas enters modem philosophy. It was later
to grow much more important.


III.

In Locke’s famous Essay on the Human Understand-
!ng,” published iii 1689-90, the investigation may be said to
have been fairly opened. Locke was bom in th9 same year
as Spinoza. Had he died when Spinoza died, the English
thinker would never have been heard of in the history of
thought. In Locke’s patient devotion to a detailed inves-
tigation, we find a quality that reminds us of the most
marked characteristic of another great Englishman, the
scientific hero of our own day, Darwin. Locke was early
busy with philosophy, natural science, and medioine.
Later, he was for a short time abroad, in diplomatic ser-
vice, and then lived long as the intimate friend of Lord
Anthony Ashley, afterwards Earl of Shaftesbury, whose
political fortunes he followed. His whole life was a min-
gling of study, private teaching, writing and practical poli-
tics. His character is thoroughly English. There is
that typical clearness in seizing and developing his own
chief ideas, and that manly, almost classically finished
stubbornness as against all foreign, mystical, and especially
Continental ideas, which usually mark the elder English
thinkers. Give Locke a profound problem like that of the
freedom of the will, and he flounders helplessly. Ask
him to look at things from a novel point of view, and he
cannot imagine what fancy you can be dreaming of. But
leave him to himself, and he shows you within his own
range a fine, sensible, wholesome man at work, a thorough
man, who has seen the world of business as well as the
world of study, and who believes in business-like meth-
ods in his philosophy. His style, to be sure, is endlessly


THE REDISGOVEBY OF THE INNER LIFE. 79

diffuse, yet without being precisely wearisome, because,
after all, it is itself the diffuseness of a man of business,
whose accounts cover many and various transactions, and
who has to set down all the items. Nobody can fail to
respect Locke, unless, to be sure, his work is employed as
a text-book for classes that are too immature to grapple
with him. It has too frequently been thus abused, to the
great injury of the excellent man’s popular fame.

Locke made, as everybody knows, short work of all in-
nate ideas. He found none. Infants, with their rattles,
show no sign of being aware that things which are equal
to the same things are equal to each other. Locke him-
self, to be sure, is a poor expert concerning infants, as is
evident from many things that he says about them, in the
course of his book, but as to this matter he is not only
confident but right. As for the hereditary predispositions,
similar to good-bi’eeding and tlie gout, Locke in one or
two passages recognizes that there may, indeed must be,
such things. But he does not see of what service they
could be in forming knowledge, were it not for our senses.

What interests us most in Locke, however, is not this
negative part of his argument, but bis general view of the
nature, powers and scope of human reason, a view which
introduces a whole century of research into man’s inner
life. In the preface to his Essay, Locke describes to
us the history of his book. “Were it fit,” he says, ad-
dressing the reader, “ to trouble thee with the history
of this essay, I should tell thee that five or six
friends meeting at my chamber, and discoursing on a
subject veiy remote from this, found themselves quickly
at a stand by the difficulties that rose on every side. Af-
ter we had awhile puzzled ourselves, without coming any
nearer a resolution of those doubts which perplexed us, it
came into my thoughts that we took a wrong course, and
that before we set ourselves upon inquiries of that nature,
it was necessary to examine our own abilities, and see


80


TH£ SPIBIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


what objects our understandings were, or were not, fitted
to deal with. This 1 proposed to the company, who all
readily assented ; and thereupon it was agreed that this
should be our first inquiry. Some hasty and undigested
thoughts on a subject I had never before considered, which
I set down against our next meeting, gave the first en-
trance into this discourse ; which, having been thus begun
by chance, was continued by entreaty ; written by incoher-
ent parcels ; and, after long intervals of neglect, resumed
again, as my humor or occasions permitted, and at last,
in a retirement, where an attendance on my health gave me
leisure, it was brought into that order thou now seest it.”

In this modest way Locke introduces a book whose
historical value lies precisely in this insistence upon the
importance of knowing our own understandings, as a pre-
liminary to every sort of research. And how great this
historical value of the book I Locke and his five or six
friends fall to discussing, in club fashion, certain unnamed
problems. They find themselves in a quandary. Locke
proposes that they go back on their own track a little and
study the structure and powers of the understanding itself.
He himself begins the analysis, the entreaty of his friends
leads him to continue the research. The result is a big
book, sensible, many-sided, infiuential. It arouses a great
controversy, and herefrom springs, first the pjiilosophic
movement from Locke through Leibnitz, through the won-
derful Berkeley, through the ingeniops, fearless, and
doubting Hume, to Kant himself, and European thought
is transformed. Meanwhile, from the same root grow
other inquiries into the mind of man. The great English
moralists of the eighteenth century, a stately row, Shaftes-
bury, Hutcheson, Butler, Adam Smith, and Hume once
more, set forth the mysteries of the moral consciousnesa
The general public is aroused. A subjective, a humane
mode of inquiry becomes everywhere prominent. Much,
of all this is cold and skeptical in tone. In France it gives


THIS REDISCOVERT OF THE INNER LIFE. 81

US the encyclopedists, such as Diderot. But the same^
movement also gives us Rousseau. The modem novel,
too, that great analyst of the mind and the heart of every
man, takes its rise. 1 think I am not wrong in attribut-
ing the novel largely to that interest in analysis for which
Locke stood. Yonder mere outer nature is no longer
everything. And erelong, lo! almost before they know
it, the nations of Europe themselves are once more
plunged into the very midst of the great problems of the
spirit. For at length the inquiry loses its negative and
skeptical air altogether. The world glows afresh. Pas-
sion, brought by all this out of its hiding-places, grows
hot ; men have once more found something to die for ; and
what they learn to die for in the revolutionary period is
the inner life. They die for the freedom of the subject ;
for the sacred rights of humanity ; for the destruction of
inhuman and despotic restraints. They make, indeed, vast
blunders in all this, behead an innocent queen, set up a new
despot merely because his rule is n’t traditional, die amid
the snows of Russia for a bare whim, in short sin atro-
ciously, but meanwhile they cleanse Europe of a whole
dead world of irrationalisms ; they glorify the human na-
ture that can endure and suffer so much for the sake of
coming to possess itself ; they create our modern world.
And all this, I say, because they had rediscovered the
inner life.

' Do I seem to ^exaggerate the significance of the mere
thinker and his work ? I assure you that I do not. My
idea of the mission of the philosopher is, I insist, a very
moderate one. As I have several times said, he does n’t
create the passions of men ; he makes no new ideals. His
only mission is to direct the attention of man to the pas-
sions and ideals which they already possess. He doubts,
analyzes, pries into this and that ; and men say, How dry,
how repellent, how unpractical, how remote from life.
But, after all, he is prying into the secret places of the


82


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


lightning of Jove; for these thoughts and passions upon
which he reflects move the world. He says to his time :
This and this hast thou, — this sense of the rights of man,
a sword of the spirit, fashioned to slay tyrants ; — this love
of liberty, an ideal banner bequeathed thee by a sacred
past to cherish, as the soldiers of old cherished the stand-
ard beneath which they conquered the world. Such
things he says always, to be sure, in his own technical
way, and for a ^ime nobody finds it out at all or even reads
his books. But at length discussion begins to spread, the
word of wisdom flies from one book to another, and finally
the people hear. They look at the sword and at the ban-
ner. No philosopher made these. They are simply hu-
manity’s own treasures. The philosopher had the sole
service of calling attention to them, because, in the course
of his critical research, he found them. But the redis-
covery, how great its significance ! I suppose that you
have frequently heard it said that the philosophers had
much to do with making the French Eevolution, and you
have wondered how this was. You may also have won-
dei'ed how this was consistent with our view that philoso-
phers are the mere critics of life. I show you the solution.
The critic creates nothing, he only points out. But his
pointing may show you powers that were indeed always
there, and that were even effective, but that, once afresh
seen, suggest to active passion a thousand devices whereby
the world is revolutionized. »

Wo return to Locke. By an inquiry of the sort which ho
has described to us, he had sought to comprehend the nature
and the limits of our understanding. He had, as we saw,
decided that innate ideas cannot do anything for know-
ledge. And the force of this notion of Locke’s really was
that, according to him, it is useless to assume, as the basis
of our human reason, anything occult, mysterious, opaque,
hidden away in the i*ecess6s of the mind. The real cause
of Locke’s hatred of innate ideas is his horror of anything.


THE BEDISOOVEBY OF THE INNEB LIFE. 88

mystical. If thought is not to be clear, what shall be clear ?
Hence, if you pretend to have any knowledge, you must
be prepared to tell where it comes from. It won’t do to
appeal, as Descartes did, to a certain impression of the
clearness and distinctness of your ideas. Their origin
will decide their value. And what is this origin ? Locke
puts the question plainly, at the beginning of the second
book of his Essay, and answers it in a general way.
I quote the whole passage : —

“ Let us, then, suppose the mind to be, as we say, white
paper, void of all characters, without any ideas ; how comes
it to be furnished ? Whence comes it by that vast store
which the busy and boundless fancy of man has painted
on it with an almost endless variety ? Whence has it all
the materials of reason and knowledge ? To this I answer,
in one word, From Experience ; in that all our knowledge is
founded, and from that it ultimately derives itself. Our ob-
servation, employed either about external sensible objects,
or about the internal operations of our minds, perceived
and reflected on by ourselves, is that which supplies our
understandings with all the materials of thinking. These
two are the fountains of knowledge from whence all the
ideas we have or can naturally have do spring.” “ First,”
he continues, our senses, conversant about particular sen-
sible objects, do convey into the mind several distinct per-
ceptions of things, according to those various ways wherein
those objects do«affect them ; and thus we come by those
ideas we have of yellow, white, heat, cold, soft, hard, bit-
ter, sweet, and all those which we call sensible qualities ;
which when I say that the senses convey into the mind,

I mean, that they from external objects convey into the
mind what produces there those perceptions. This great
source of most of the ideas we have, depending wholly
upon our senses, and derived by them to the understand-
ing, I call Sensation.

Secondly, the other fountain, from which experience


84


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


furnisheth the understanding with ideas, is the perception
of the operations of our mind within us, as it is employed
about the ideas it has got ; which operations, when the soul
comes to reflect on and consider, do furnish the under-
standing with another set of ideas, which could not be had
from things without ; and such aro perception, thinking,
doubting, believing, reasoning, knowing, willing, a all
the different actings of our own minds. ... This source
of ideas every man has wholly in himself ; and though it
be not sense, . . • yet it is very like it, and might properly
enough be called internal sense. But as I call the other
sensation, so I call this Reflection, the ideas it affords
being such only as the mind gets by reflecting on its own
operations within itself. . . . These two, I say, namely,
external material things, as the objects of sensation, and
the operations of our own minds within, as the objects of
reflection, are to me the only originals from whence all
our ideas take their beginnings.”

So much, then, for Locke’s notion of how we come by
knowledge. I Quote him at this length, because his view
was of such critical importance in what followed in all
European thought.

You will ask at once. What sort of a real world did
Locke manage to make out of this material of bare sensa-
tions and reflections? We see, touch, smell, taste this
our world, and then we reflectively observe of ourselves
that we are doubting, willing, hoping, loving, hating, think-
ing, and thus we get all our knowledge. That is all the
mind we have. That is the human understanding. Such
at least is Locke’s view. But what does it all come to?
Is the result a materialism pure and simple, or is it a skep-
ticism ? Not so. Locke was an Englishman ; he saw,
heard, smelt, tasted, what his fellow-countrymen also did ;
and he reflected upon all this after much their fashion.
His world, therefore, is the world of the liberal English
thinker of his day. He believes in matter and its laws,


THE REDISCOVEBT OF THE INNER LIFE. 85

in God also, and in revelation, in duly and in the human
rights of the British freeman, and in the Essay he tries
to show how just such things can be known to us through
bare seeing, hearing, tasting, and the rest, coupled with
reflection upon what we are doing. There is nothing
revolutionary about l40cke*s own view of his world, great
as was the revolution that he prepared. By touch we
learn that there are substances about us, solid, space-oc-
cupying, numerous, movable. By all our senses we learn
that these substances have many curious properties, how
or why brought about, we cannot discover. Sugar is
sweet ; gold is yellow ; various drugs have specific effects
in curing diseases ; water flows ; iron is rigid ; every sul>-
stance is as God wills it to be. These things are so,
because we find them so. Meanwhile, being reflective
Englishmen, we can’t help observing that all these things
require God to create them what they are, because, as
one sees, things always have adequate causes ; and our
minds, too, being realities, must have been made by a
thinker. Moreover, a fair study of the evidence of reve-
lation will convince any reasonable person of the essential
tru’ s the Christir religion, and that is enough.

ju ill not find tnis world of Locke an exciting one.
But reniemuv fter all, what it is that he has done for us.
He has tried hard io remove every mystery from the nature
of human reason. Because innate ideas, the eternal truths
of Descartes, were mysterious, he has thrown them over-
board. Experience it is that writes everything on the
blank tablet of the mind. But thus viewing things, Locke
has only given us a new mystery. Can experience, mere
smelling, tasting, seeing, together with bare reflection, do
all this for us, — give us God, religion, reality, our whole
English world ? Then surely what a marvelous treasure-
house is this experience itself I Surely ages will be needed
to comprehend it. Locke cannot have finished it off thus
in one essay.


86


THE SPIBIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


And indeed he has not done so. His book is the mere
beginning both of the psychology of experience, and of
discussions about the nature and limit of consciousness.
The truly important argument over Locke’s problems
was opened by Leibnitz, the great Continental thinker,
whose views I must entirely pass over, vastly important as
they are, and that the less unwillingly just now because
his answer to Locke, written about 1700, was not pub-
lished until n^any years after his own death. I must, how-
ever, ask you to examine the next step forward in English
philosophical reflection, the one taken by the admirable
and fascinating Berkeley.


IV.

The world that Locke found with his senses is at once
too poor and too much encumbered for Berkeley’s young
enthusiasm. Berkeley is a born child of Plato, a linbal
descendant of a race whose origin is never very far off,
and is divine. Men of Berkeley’s type are born to see
God face to fa|^ ; and when they see him, they do so
without fear, without mystical trembling, without being
driven to djirk and lofty speech. They take the whole
thing as a matter of course. They tell you of it frankly,
gently, simply, and with a beautiful childlike surimse
that your eyes are not always as open as their own.
Meanwhile, they are true philosophers, keen in diabetic,
skillful in the thrust and parry of debate, a little loqua-
cious, but never wearisome. Of the physical world they
know comparatively little, but what they know they love
very much. A very few lines of philosophical research
they pursue eagerly, minutely, fruitfully; concerning
others they can make nothing but the most superficial
remarks. They produce books young, and with marvel-
ous facility. They have a full-fledged system ready by the
time they are twenty-five. They will write an immortal
work, as it were, over night. They are, for the rest, through


THE REDISOOVEBT OF THE INKEB LIFE. 8T

and through poetical. Each one of their essays will be as
crisp and delicate as a good sonnet. Yet what they lack
is elaboration, wiliness, and architectural massiveness of
research. They take after Plato, their father, as to grace
and ingenuity. His life-long patience and mature pro-
ductiveness they neveF reach. The world finds them par-
adoxical; refutes them again and again with a certain
Philistine ferocity ; makes naught of them in hundreds of
learned volumes ; but returns ever afresh to the hopeless
task of keeping them permanently naught. In the heaven
of reflection, amongst the philosophical angels who con-
template the beatific vision of the divine essence, such
spirits occupy neither the place of the archangels, nor of
those who speed o’er land and sea, nor yet of those who
only stand and wait. Their office is a less serious one.
They cast glances now and then at this inspiring aspect
or at that of the divine essence, sing quite their own song
in its praise, find little in most of the other angels that can
entertain them, and spend their time for the most part in
gentle private musings, many of which (Jpr so Berkeley’s
own portrait suggests to me) they apparently find far too
pretty to be uttered at all. We admire them, we may even
love them ; yet no one would call them precisely heroes of
contemplation. They themselves shed no tears, but they
also begin no revolutions, are apostles of no world-wide
movements.

Berkeley’s grandly simple accomplishment, as you
know, lay in his observation that in the world of the senses,
in the world of experience, as Locke knew it, there was
properly no such thing as material substance discoverable
at all. The world of sense-experience, said Berkeley, is a
world of ideas. I have an idea, say of this fruit. It is a
complex idea. The fruit is round, soft, pleasant to the
taste, orange-colored, and the rest. But then, as you see,
all these things that I know about the fruit are just my
ideas. Were I in the dark, the fruit would have no color.


88 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

Do I refuse to bite it, the taste of it remains a bare possi«
bility, not a fact. And so as to all the other properties of
the fruit. All these exist for me in so far as 1 have ideas
of them. Have I no idea of a thing, then it exists not for
me. This is Berkeley’s fundamental thought, but he does
not leave it in such absolute and crude simplicity as this.

His deeper significance lies in the fact that he carries
out in a new field an analysis of our inner life, namely, of
a portion of the process of knowledge. His grandly sim-
ple idea, here applied, leads to very engaging results ; but
they are results which no other philosopher would be
likely to accept without at once carrying them further
than did Berkeley. The young student of Trinity College
early became fascinated with the problem of the theory of
vision. We seem to sec objects about us in a space of
three dimensions. These objects look solid, move about,
stand in space relations to one another. But now, afterUl,
how can we possibly see distance ? Distance runs directly
outward from my eyes ; my eyes are at the surface of my
body, and a distant object is not ; my eyes are affected
where they are, and, for the rest, not the distance of the
opposite wall as such affects me, but the wall in so far as
rays of light come from it. All this even Locke’s man
of plain sense has to admit. How, then, if distance it-
self is not one of my visual sensations, if distance is n’t
itself color or light, how can I still see distance? Fpr all
that 1 see is after all not even the object, but only the
color and light of the object. This is Berkeley’s pro-
blem about vision. His answer was early this : I don’t
really see distance. What I see is something about the
color or shape of the distant object, or better still about
the feelings that accompany in me the act of sight, —
something which is to me a sign of distance. A distant
orange is n’t as big as a near one. That is one sign of dis-
tance then, namely, the size for me of my idea of a patch
of color which I see when I look at the orange. Again,


THE BEDISCOVERT OF THE INNER LIFE.


89


distant objects, such as mountains, are known to be
distant because they look to mo blue. In short, to sum
up, my apparent seeing of distance is n’t any direct seeing
of distance at all. It is a reading of the language of
sight, as this is exhibited to my eyes by the colors and
forms of things. A certain look of things, a certain
group of signs, which I have learned, by long experience,
to interpret, tells me how far off these things about me
are. Distance isn't known directly. It is read as we
read a language, read by interpreting the signs of the
sense of sight. And as with distance, so with solidity. I
don’t really see things as solid. The solid things don’t
wander in through my eyes to my soul. But there are
signs of solidity about the look of the things, signs that
you learn to copy when you learn to draw in perspective,
and to imitate the relief of objects ; these signs are the
language of the sense of sight. You learn, when you
come to comprehend this language, that if a thing looks
in a certain way, has a certain relief of colors, a certain
perspective arrangement of its outlines, that then, I say,
it will feel solid if you go up to it and touch it. Infants
don’t know all this until they have learned to read the
language of vision. Hence they don’t see things as solid
for a good while, don’t judge distances accurately, have
no eye for a space of three dimensions.

Seeing, then, is reading, is interpreting a world-lan*
guage, is anticipating how things will feel to your touch
by virtue of the signs given by the color, light, relief, per-
spective, of things. Such is Berkeley’s view, and as far
as it goes, it is obviously true. But he is not content to
leave his thought here. He goes further. What is all
my life of experience, my seeing, feeling, touching, mov-
ing about, examining my world ? Is n’t it from first to
last a learning to read the language of things ? Is n’t it a
learning to aivticipate one thing by virtue of the signs
that are given of its presence by another ? Yes, all expert


90


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHT.


ence is after all learning to read. And this reading, what
is it? It is merely rightly and rationally putting together
the ideas which my world gives me. These ideas come in
certain orders, follow certain laws. I learn these laws,
and thus 1 read my world. I have one idea, say the glow
of a fire. It suggests to me another idea, namely, that in
case I go near the fire 1 shall feel warm. All experience,
then, is a learning how my ideas ought to go together ; it
is a learning that upon one idea another will follow under
certain circumstances. What, then, is this world of luy
experience ? Is it anything but the world of ideas and of
their laws ? What existence has my world for me apart
from my ideas of it? What existence can any world
have apart from the thought of some thinker for whom
it exists ? Whose language, then, am I reading in this
world before me ? Whose ideas are these that experience
impresses upon me? Are they not God’s ideas? Is it
not his language that I read in nature ? Is not all my
life a talking with God ?

‘‘ Some truths there are,” says Berkeley, “ so near and
obvious to the mind, that a man need only open his eyes
to see them. Such I take this important one to be, to
wit, that all the choir of heaven and furniture of the
earth, in a word, all those bodies which compose the
mighty frame of the world, have not any subsistence with-
out mind ; that their being is, to be perceived or known ;
that consequently so long as they are not actually per-
ceived by me, or do not exist in my mind, or that of any
other created spirit, they must either have no existence at
all, or else subsist in the mind of some eternal spirit.”

This is Berkeley’s interpretation and extension of
Locke’s thought. I don’t ask you to accept or to reject it,
I only ask you to see once more how it holds together. Let
us review it. My experience is a learning to read my
world. What is my world? Merely the sum total of
my ideas, of my thoughts, feelings, sights, sounds, colors,


THE REDISCOVERY OF THE INNER LIFE. 91

tastes. I read these when one of them becomes sign to
me of another, when the idea of a glow tells me of the yet
unfelt warmth that a fire will arouse in me if I approach
it, when the ideas of forms and shadows wairn mo how a
solid thing will feel if I touch it. My ideas and their
laws, this is all my reality. But then surely I am not the
only existence there is. No, indeed. The things about
me are indeed only my ideas ; but I am not the author
of these ideas. This language of experience, those signs
of the senses, which I decipher — I did not produce them.
Who writes, then, this language? Who forces on my
mind the succession of my ideas? Who spreads out
the scroll of those experiences before me which in their
totality constitute the choir of heaven and the furniture
of earth? Berkeley responds readily. The sources of
my ideas are two : my fellow-beings, who speak to me
with the natural voice, and God, who talks to me in the
language of the sense. “ When,’^ says Berkeley, “ I
deny sensible things an existence out of the mind, I do
not mean my mind In particular, but all minds. Now
it is plain they have an existence exterior to my mind,
since I find them by experience to be independent of
it. There is some other mind wherein they exist, dur-
ing the intervals between the time of my perceiving them,
as likewise they did before my birth, and would do after
my supposed annihilation. And as the same is true with
regard to all other finite created spirits, it necessarily fol-
lows, there is an omnipresent eternal mindy which
knows and comprehends all things, and exhibits them to
our view in such a manner, and according to such rules,
as He himself hath ordained, and are by us termed the.
laws of nature^'*

Here is the famous idealism of Berkeley. Never was
philosophical idealism more simply stated. Nowhere is
there a better introduction to a doctrine at once paradoxi-
cal and plausible, namely, the idealistic scheme of things,


92


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


than in Berkeley’s early essays. They are favorites —
these essays — of aU young students of philosophy. As
you read them, unprepared, you first say, How wild a
paradox I How absurdly opposed to common sense I
Then you read further and say, How plausible this Berke-
ley is I How charming his style I How clear he makes
his paradoxes I Perhaps, after all, they are n’t paradoxes,
but mere rewordings of what we all mean. He knows a
real world of facts, too. Nobody is surer of the truths
of experience, nobody is firmer in his convictions of an
outer reality, than Berkeley. Only this outer reality —
what is it but God directly talking to us, directly impress-
ing upon us these ideas of the choir of heaven and fur-
niture of earth ? ” In sense, in experience, we have God.
He is in matter. Matter, in fact, is a part of his own
self : it is his manifested will, his plan for our education,
his voice speaking to us, warning, instructing, guiding,
amusing, disciplining, blessing us, with a series of orderly
and significant experiences. Well, I say, as you read
further, the beauty of Berkeley’s statement impresses you,
you are half persuaded that you might come to believe
this ; and lo ! suddenly, as you read, you do believe it, if
only for an hour, and then, in a curious fashion, the
whole thing comes to look almost commonplace. It is so
obvious, you say, this notion that we only know our own
ideas, so obvious that it was hardly worth while to write
it down. After all, everybody believes that I As for the
notion of God talking to us, through all our senses, that
is very pretty and poetical, but is there anything very
novel about the notion ? It is the old design argument
over again.

So I say, your mood alters as you read Berkeley. The
value of his doctrine, for our present purposes, lies in its
place in this history of the rediscovery of the inner life
which wo are following in this lecture. Of the truth of
Berkeley’s doctrine I have just now nothing to say. I am


THE BEDISOOVEBY OF THE INKER LIFE.


98


simply Darrating to you Berkeley’s experience of spiritual
things. And his experience was this : that our conscious*
ness of outer reality is a more subtle and complex thing
than the previous age had suspected, so that the real world
must be very different from the assumed substantial and
mathematical world of the seventeenth century, and so that
our inner life of sense and of reason needs yet a new and
a deeper analysis. Everything in this whole period
makes, you see, for the study of this inner life. It is no
matter whether you are a philosopher, and write essays on
the “ Principles of Human Knowledge,” or whether you
are a heroine in an eighteenth-century novel, and write
sentimental letters to a friend ; you are part of the same
movement. The spirit is dissatisfied with the mathemati-
cal order, and feels friendless among the eternities of the
seventeenth-century thought. The spirit wants to be at
^ home with itself, well-friended in the comprehension of its
inner processes. It loves to ^e confidential in its heart
outpourings, keen in its analysis, humane in its attitude
towards life. And to be part of this new process is Berke-
ley’s significance.

V.

But now, if you are to enjoy the inner life, you must
bear also its burdens and its doubts. To become sure of
yourself, you must first doubt yourself. And this doubt,
this skepticism, which self-analysis always involves, who
could express it better than the great Scotchman, David
Hume ? Hume is, I think, next to Hobbes, the greatest
of British speculative thinkers, Berkeley occupying the
third place in order of rank. I cannot undertake to
describe to you in this place the real historical signifi-
cance of Hume, his subtlety, his fearlessness, his fine
analysis of certain of the deepest problems, his place as
the inspirer of Kant’s thought, his whole value as meta-
physical teacher of his time. What you will see in him
is merely the merciless skeptic, and, in this superficial


94


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


sketoh of the rediscovery of the inner consciousness, 1
don’t ask you to see more. Hume accepted Locke’s
belief that reason is merely the recorder of experience.
He carries but this view to its remotest consequences.
Our minds consist, as he says, of impressions and ideas.
By impressions he means the experiences of sense; by
ideas he means the remembered copies of these experi-
ences. You see, feel, smell, taste ; and you remember
having se^n, felt, tasted or smelt. That is all. You have
no other knowledge. Upon some of your ideas, namely
those of quantity and number, you can reason, and can
even discover novel and necessary truth about them.
This is owing to the peculiarity of these ideas and of the
impressions on which they Ire founded. For these ideas,
also, even all the subtleties of mathematical science, are
faded and blurred impressions of sense. And, as it
chances, on just these faded impressions you can reason. ^
But Berkeley was wrongs in thinking that you can by
searching find out God, or anything else supersensual.
Science concerns matters of fact, as the senses give them,
and ends with these.

With this general view in mind, let us examine, in
Hume’s fashion, certain of the most familiar conceptions
of human reason. Hume is afraid of nothing, not even
of the presumptions at the basis of physical science.
Matters of fact he respects, but not universal principles.
“There are,” says, Hume, “no ideas . . . more obscure
than those of power, force, or necessary connection.” Let
us look a little more closely at these ideas. Let us clear
them up if we can. How useful they seem. How much
we hear in exact science about something called the law
of causation, which says that there is a necessary connec-
tion between causes and effects, that given natural condi-
tions have a “power” to bring to pass certain results,
that the forces of nature mu%t work as they do. Well,
apply to such sublime and far-reaching ideas, — just such


THE BEDISOOVERT OF THE INNER LIFE. 96

9

ideas, you will remember, as seemed to Spinoza so signifi-
' cant, — npply to them Hume’s simple criterion. Ideas, in
order to have a good basis, must, Hume declares, stand
for matters of fact, given to us in the senses. It is
impossible for us to think of anything which we have not
antecedently felt^ either by our external or internal senses.”
“ By what invention, then,” says Hume, “ can we throw
light ” upon ideas that, being simple, still pretend to be
authoritative, *^and render them altogether precise and
determinate to our intellectual view ? ” Answer : “ Pro-

duce the impressions or original sentiments from which
the ideas are copied.” These impressions will admit of
no ambiguity.” So, then, let us produce the original im-
pression from which the idestof causation, of necessary
connection, or of power is derived. You say that in
nature there is and must be necessity * Very well, let us
, ask ourselves afresh the questions that we asked of Locke.
Did you ever see necessity? Did you ever hear or touch
causation ? Did you ever taste or smell necessary connec-
tion? Name us the original impression whence comes
your idea. “ When,” says Hume, “ we look about us
towards extern^ objects, and consider the operation of
causes, we are never able, in any single instance, to dis-
cover any power or necessary connection, any quality
which binds the effect to the cause, and renders the one
an infallible consequence of the other. We only find that
the one does actually in fact follow the other. The im-
pulse of one billiard ball is attended with motion in the
second. That is the whole that appears to the outward
senses.” In reality, there is no part of matter that does
ever by its sensible qualities discover any power or energy,
or give us ground to imagine that it could produce any-
thing,” until we have found out by experience what hap-
pens in consequence of its presence. Thus outer sense
gives us facts, but no necessary laws, no true causation,
no real connection of events.


96


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHT.


We must, then, get our idea of power, of necessary con-
nection, from within. And so, in fact, many have thought
that we do. If in outer nature I am only impressed by
matters of fact about billiard balls and other such things,
and if there I never learn of causation, do I not, per-
chance, directly feel my own true power, my own causal
efficacy, my own will, making acts result in a necessary
way from my purposes ? No, answers Hume. If I ex-
amine can fully I find that my own deeds also are merely
matters of fact, with nothing causally efficacious about my
own conscious nature to make them obviously necessary.
After all, is there any principle in nature more myste-
rious than the union of soul with body?’^ “Were we
empowered,” adds Hume, “%) remove mountains, or con-
trol the planets in their orbit, this extensive authority
would not be more extraordinary, or more beyond our
comprehension,” than is the bare matter of fact that we
now can control our bodies by our will. In inner expe-
rience, then, just as in outer, we get no direct impression
of how causes produce effects. We only see that things
do often happen in regular ways. In experience, then,
“ all events seem entirely loose and separate. One event
follows another; but we can never observe any tie be-
tween them. They seem conjoined^ but never connected.
But as we can have no idea of anything which never ap-
peared to our outward sense or inward sentiment, the
necessary conclusion, seem% to be, that we have no idea of
connection or power at all, and that these words are abso-
lutely without any meaning.” From this seeming conclu-
sion, Hume makes, indeed, an escape, but one that is, in
fact, not less skeptical than his result as first reached.
The true original of our idea of power, and so of causa*
tion, he says, is simply this, that “ after a repetition of
similar instances, the mind is carried, by habit, upon the
appearance of one event, to expect its usual attendant,
and to believe that it exist.” “The first time a


THE BEDISCOVERT OF THE INNER LIFE.


97


man saw the communication of motion by impulse, as by
the shock of the two billiard balls, he could not pronounce
that the one event was connected^ but only that it was
conjoined^ with the other. After he has observed several
instances of this nature, he then pronounces them to be
connected. What alteration has happened to give rise to
this new idea of connection ? Nothing but that now he
feels these two events to be connected in his imagination.”
Custom, then, mere habit of mind, is the origin of the idea
of causation. We see no necessity in the world. We
only feel it there, because that is our habit of mind, our
fashion of mentally regarding an often-repeated expe-
rience of simiLar successions.

The importance of all this skepticism lies, as you of
course see, in its removal from our fact-world of just the
principles that the seventeenth century had found so in-
spiring. ^^It is of the nature of reason,” Spinoza had
said, “ to regard things as necessary.” Upon that rock
he had built his faith. Ilis wisdom had reposed secure
in God, in whom were all things, just because God’s
nature was the highest form of necessity, the law of laws.
And now comes Hume, and calls this nature of reason ”
a mere feeling, founded on habit, a product of our imagi-
nation, no matter of fact at all. What becomes, then, of
Spinoza’s divine order? Has philosophy fallen by its
own hands ? Is the eternal in which we had trusted
really, after all, but the mass of the flying and discon-
nected impressions of sense ? All crumbles at the touch of
this criticism of Hume’s. All becomes but the aggregate
of the disconnected sense-impressions. Nay, if we And
the Holy Grail itself, it, too, will fade and crumble into
dust. Hume is aware of some such result. He skillfully
and playfully veils the extreme consequences at times by
the arts of his beautiful dialectic. But he none the less
rejoices in it, with all the fine joy of the merciless foe of
delusions : — matters of faci^ rdations of idecLS^ — these


98 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

are all that his doctrine leaves us. *^When,” he once
says, we run through libraries, persuaded of these prin-
ciples, what havoc must we make? If we take in our
hand any volume of divinity or school metaphysics, for
instance, let us ask, it contain any abstract reason-
ing concerning quantity or number ? No. Does it con-
tain any experimental reasoning concerning matter of
fact and existence ? No. Commit it then to the flames,
for it can contain nothing but sophistry and illusion.”


VI.

Hume represents thus, indeed, the extreme of purely
philosophical skepticism in the eighteenth century.
Others, to be sure, outside of the ranks of the philoso-
phers, went further in many ways, and were rebels or
scoffers in their own fashion, far more aggressive than his.
But Hume’s thought is in its result as fruitful as in its
content it is negative. The spirit, you see, has become
anxious to know its own nature. After all, can we live
by merely assuming the innate ideas? Can even Spi-
noza’s wisdom save us from doubt? And yet this doubt
does n’t mean mere waywardness. It means longing for
self-consciousness. And in the last third of the century
this longing took, as we shall next time learn, new and
positive forms. The inner life, to be sure, has appeared
so far as a very capricious thing, after all. Study it by
mere analysis of its experiences, as Hume did, and in this
its capriciousness it will seem to shrivel to nothing under
your hands. Where you expected it to be wealthiest, it
turns out to be poorest. It is mere sense, mere feeling,
mere sophistry. and illusion. But is this the end? No,
it is rather but the beginning of a new and a higher
philosophy. The spirit is more than mere experience.
Locke’s account of the inner life is only half the truth.
And what the other half is, Kant and his successors shall
teach us. The age of poetry and of history — of a new


THE REDISCOVERY OF THE INNE? LIFE. 99

natural science, also, yes, even this our own century —
shall take up afresh the task that Hume rejected as im-
possible. The revolutionary period shall first rediscover
passion, shall produce GoetWs Faust,” and shall regen-
erate Europe. Historical research, reviving, shall prove
to the spirit the significance of* his own earthly past.
Science, entering upon new realms, shall formulate the
idea of cosmical evolution. No longer Spinoza’s world,
but a cliangiug, a glowingly passionate and tragic world,
of moral endeavor, of strife, of growth, and of freedom,
shall be conceived by men ; and meanwhile, in Kant and
in his successors, as we shall find, a more fitting jphiloso-
phy will arise to formulate with all of Hume’s keen dia-
lectic, with all of Locke’s love of human nature, and still
with all of Spinoza’s reverence for an absolute rationality
in things, something of the significance of our modern
life.

Remember, however, finally, that if the skepticism of
the eighteenth century is to be gotten rid of, this will only
be by transcending it, living through and beyond it, not
by neglecting or by simply refuting it, from without. Phi-
losophical insight, however partial, is never to be refuted.
You can transcend it, you can make it part of a larger
life, but it always remains as such a^part. The genuine
spirit includes all that was true and earnest in the doubt-
ing spirit. The only way to get rid of a philosophic
doubt, in its discouraging aspect, is to see that, such as it
is, it already implies a larger truth. The great spirit
says to us, like Emerson’s Brahma,” —

“ Tliey reckon ill who leave me out ;

When me they fly, I am the wings ;

I am the doubter and the doubt.”

And this, namely, the inevitableness and the true spir-
ituality of genuine doubting, is the great lesson that the
eighteenth century, in its transition to Kant, teaches us.
It is a lesson well to be remembered in our own day,


100 THE S^IBIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

when, notwithstanding the vast accomplishments of recent
research, there is a sense in which we, too, live in a world
of doubt, but live there only that we may learn to con-
quer and possess it, all its doubts and its certainties, all
its truth. In doubt we come to see our illusion ; the
phantoms of the night of thought vanish; but the new
light comes. The old world dies, but only to rise again
to the immortality of a higher existence. The spirit de-
stroys its former creations, shatters its idols, and laments
their loss. But, as in Faust,” the chorus still sings : —

** Thou hast it destroyed.

The beautiful world,

With powerful fist :

In ruin ’t is hurled,

By the blow of a demigod shattered I
The scattered

Fragments into the Void we carry,

Deploring

The beauty perished beyond restoring.

Mightier

For the children of men,

Brightlier
Build it again,

In thine own bosom build it anew I
Bid- the new career
Commence,

With clearer sense.

And the new songs of cheer
Be sung thereto I ’’

Such a building anew of the lost unirerse in the bosom of
the human spirit, it was the mission of Kant to begin.


LECTUEE IV.


KANT.

We saw in the last lecture how the self-analysis of the
eighteenth century inevitably tended towards the redis-
covery of passion, and finally towards the great revolu-
tionary movement, in life and in literature, with which
the century closed. But we also found that the same
Lockean tendency was bound to produce a philosophical
skepticism whereof Iliime was our chief example. Hume
stated the essence of Locke’s theory with an almost brutal
simplicity of formulation. We know, he said, impressions,
which come to us through sense, and ideas, which are the
copies of impressions. About some ideas we can reason.
These form the subject-matter of our only demonstrative
science, mathematics. All our other science concerns
matters of fact, that is, recorded impressions of our expe-
rience, with such rational observations as we can make
upon them. Does the inner life pretend to more than
this, to more than a knowledge of impressions and ideas,
— then what is this pretense but sophistry and illusion ?
The inner life, under this merciless analysis, shrivels up,
as it were, into a mere series of chance experiences. The
sacred faiths of humanity, do they record seen and felt
matters of fact ? The moral law, is it more than a feeling
in the mind of the sympathetic subject ? Hume is indeed
merciless ; but his mercilessness is, after all, the clear in-
sight of a reflective man. Bare experience of the Lockean
sort does indeed contain no such supreme rationality as
earlier thinkers had found there. What Hume showed


102 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

was that unless there is more in experience than Locke’s
view permitted it to contain, the hope of any transcendent
knowledge or faith for humanity is indeed gone. That
Hume showed this is his great merit, for hereby he led
the way to Kant. .

I.

When I mention the name of Kant, who forms our
special topic to-day, I introduce to you one whose thought
arouses more suggestions in the mind of a 23hilosophical
student than cluster about any other modern thinker.
One despairs of telling you all or any great part of what
Kant has meant to one in the course of a number of years
of metaphysical study ; but let me still try to suggest a
little of Kant’s place in such a line of work. One hears
of Kant early in one’s life as a student of philosophy. He
is said to be hard, perhaps a little dangerous (a thing
which of course attracts one hugely !). He is said to be
also certainly typical of German speculation, and always
worthy of one’s efforts if one means to philosophize at all.
Perhaps one, therefore, first tries him in translation, with
a sense that, even if one’s German is not yet free, some-
thing must already be done to win him. The “ Critique
of Pure Reason,” how' attractive the name ! How wise
one will be after criticising the pure reason through the
reading of five or six hundred pages of close print 1
There is an old translation of Kant, in Bohn’s Library,
by a certain Meiklejohn. One begins with that. The
English is heavy, not to say shocking ; but the first effect
of the reading is soon a splendid sense of powder, a feeling
of the exhaustiveness of the treatment, of the skill and
subtlety and fearlessness of this Kant. What seems to
be a good deal of the book — not the chief part, indeed — ^
one can even fairly grasp at the first reading. In fact,
so persuasive, to certain minds, is the general external
appearance of Kant’s method of work, that there are stu*
dents who, on their first superficial acquaintance with


KANT.


108


him, really fancy that' they have actually comprehended
the whole thing at one stroke. I myself have heard this
feeling expressed by diligent young readers, who have
assured me, after their first trial of the Critique,” that,
as they supposed, it must be that they had somehow failed
to understand Kant, for whereas people said he was hard,
they themselves had n’t found anything very difficult in
the book at all. To their great alarm, as it were, they
had n’t even been puzzled. Yet when such persons come
to read Kant a second time, I fear that they usually find
themselves considerably puzzled ; or rather, I should say
that I hope so. Puzzle is a sensation that soon comes,
when one begins to examine Kant more cautiously and
worthily. The first superficial joy in his power, in his
skill, in his subtlety, in his fearlessness, fades away. One
sees his actual doctrine looming afar off, a mountain yet
to be climbed. On nearer approach, one finds the moun-
tain well wooded ; and the woods have thick underbrush.
The paths lose themselves in the dark valleys, leading
this way and that, with most contradictory windings.
Kant is a pedantic creature after all, one says. He loves
hard words. lie takes a mass of them, — as one of
his critics fiercely says, he takes a mass of Latin terms
ending in tiorij and translates them into so many equiva-
lent vernacular terms, ending in the German in heit and
kei.t^ and he calls this sort of thing philosophy I Getting
such things through the medium of an English transla-
tion does n’t improve them. One begins to anathematize
the poor translator, Meiklejohn, in fear lest one should
blaspheme instead the sacred name of the immortal Kant.
One finally concludes that this is a book full of great
insights and of noble passage;s, but that the real connec*
tions are n’t to be made out until one shall have fought
the good fight in German. And so one drops the subject
until one’s German shall be free.

That happy time comes. One has first read Schopem


104


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHT.


hauer, whose German, to use a comparison of Jean Paul
Richter’s, is as limpid as a mountain lake that lies be-
neath gloomy cliffs, under a clear and frosty sky. One
has even plunged down the tumultuous streams of Fichte’s
eloquence, where the frail hark of a student’s understand-
ing is indeed occasionally rather near to destruction, but
whence a man still usually escapes with his wits. Now it
is time to return to Kant. One hereupon falls upon the
Critique ” with new zest, and finds that, as reading goes
in a studious but rather busy and distracted life, one can
at length read the book through in about three years, and
can feel that thereafter he might do well to begin and read
it again. After doing so, one lays it aside for a spell,
and so returns afresh, from year to year, for a longer ox
shorter season, to the fascinating but baffling task. In
Germany, where there has been a revival of interest in
Kant, during the past twenty years, reading the “ Cri-
tique ” has come to take rank, so to speak, as one of the
liberal professions. There are learned men who, in all
appearance, do nothing else. The habit is dangerously
fascinating. The Kant devotee never knows when to
stop. When I studied in Germany as a young college
graduate, some fifteen years ago, it was my fortune to
meet one of the most learned and many-sided of the new
philosophical doctors of the day, who was just then pre-
paring for a docentship. He was a man who promised,
as one might say, almost everything ; who wrote and pub-
lished essays of remarkable breadth and skiD, and who
was especially noticeable for his wide range of work.
Some years later, it unhappily occurred to him to begin
printing a commentary on Kant’s “ Critique of Pure
Reason.” He planned the commentary for completion in
four volumes octavo. Of these four he published, not
long afterwards, the first, a volume of several hundred
large pages, wherein he deals — with Kant’s introduc-
tory chapter. Since then my former acquaintance is losfa


KANT.


105

The final volumes of the commentary have never ap-
peared, although he has now been at work upon them
more than ten years. How many volumes will really be
needed to complete the task, only the “ destroyer of de-
lights and terminator of felicities,” whom the Arabian
Nights’ tales always love to mention as they close, to wit,
Death himself, can ever determine. The thorough student
of Kant is, so to speak, a Tannhauser, close shut in his
Venusberg. You hunt for him fruitlesssly in all the outer
world. Worse than Tannhauser he is, for you can never
get him out. Pilgi'ims’ choruses chant, and waiting Eliza-
beths mourn for him, in vain. As for me, I, as you per-
ceive, am no reader of Kant, in the strict sense, at all. I
won a doctor’s degree, years since, in part by writing a
course of lectures upon the Critique.” I have since
come to see that those lectures were founded upon a seri-
ous, I might say an entire, misinterpretation of Kant’s
meaning. Since then I have repented, as you also ob-
serve, of this misinterpretation, and, as I might add, of
several others. I love still to lecture to my college classes
on Kant. I think that possibly I know a little about
him. But then, after all, Kant, you see, is Kant ; and
the Lord made him, and many other wondrous works be-
sides ; and it takes time to find such things out.

You will understand therefore, at once, that I can have
no intention of making clear, within the limits of a single
lecture, a doctrine so subtle and involved as this. But
then the justification of my undertaking in these lectures
is wholly that I attempt, not to describe the philosophers
and their opinions as the monuments of technical skill and
of exhaustive research which they are, but to set forth to
you something of the temperament which they embody.
Kant shall be for us a chai'acter in a story, an attitude
towards the spiritual concerns of humanity. As such
you want to know him ; as such only can 1 attempt here
to describe him.


106


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHT.


II.

The man Kant is an old subject for literary portraiture.
It is hard to say anything in the least new about him.
He was born in 1724, in the city of Konigsberg, in the
province of East Prussia, and never once in his life trav-
eled beyond that province. His family was poor; his
father was of Scotch descent, and was a saddler, and in
religion a pietist. Both Kant’s parents lived a narrow
and glowing religious life, cheerful, harmonious, and, in a
worldly sense, dispassionate. At sehool Kant attracted
such attention that a university course of study followed,
in Konigsberg, of course, and this led him to an academic
career. At the outset of his literary work Kant is a curi-
ous mixture of the pedant, the many-sided student, the
young man of literary skill, and the independent investi-
gator. His earliest essay was in philosophical physics,
and was in more senses than one a failure. In 1755, he
published, however, a remarkable paper on the “ General
Natural History and Theory of the Heavens,” wherein he
anticipated the essential features of the nebular hypothe-
sis which Laplace afterwards developed. Up to this
time he had been a private tutor. Thenceforth he lec-
tured as pri vat-docent at the university until his appoint-
ment as professor in 1770. Promotion, as one sees, was
thereabouts slow, and Kant was perhaps at first over-
looked by higher officials, whom he never sought to
please. During these earlier years he was a man of
considerable literary skill, but in philosophy was still
under the influence of the reigning dogmatic school.
The poet Herder, who heard him as* docent, speaks very
highly of his power in those days as a lecturer. Of Kant
in his young prime we have a portrait, showing him
at the age of forty-four. .More common is the portrait
taken much later in life. Both show us the spare, small,
insignificant-appearing man. He was of frail health, but


KANT.


107


seldom or never ill. His height was barely beyond five
feet; as he grew older he became more and more an
almost fleshless but very cheerful shadow of a man, all
mind and no body, genial, gossiping, a lover of a small
but very clever circle of friends, a great reader of books
of travel, a passionate student, strange to say, of the man-
ners and customs of various and distant lands and peoples,
topics upon which he loved to lecture. His bachelor life
grew, meanwhile, more and more methodical. As he grew
older, thought absorbed him more aud more. For more
than a decade, namely, from 1770 to 1781, he published
very little, and meditated solely his “ Critique of Pure
Reason,” gladly free, as he once says, from the obligation
of defending early and hastily written essays in philoso-
phy. Now he became indeed an original thinker. His
loneliness of thought grew almost oppressive. To his
friends he apparently said only a little of the new doc-
trine that was forming in his mind. His lectures became
less eloquent ; his inner life grew ever deeper, stiller, —
not melancholy, but hidden away, involved, problematic.
Henceforth, moreover, his style gravely suffers. The
genial soul shows itself again and again in the great
“ Critique,” in chance figures, in brilliant but too brief
passages. Yet on the whole Kant’s writing is henceforth
burdened, as it were, with the weight of his whole new
world. His sentences groan beneath their treasures. He
works beneath the earth, in the mines of humanity’s gold.^
Great thoughts glitter in the rich quartz of his medita-
tion, but only with toil and suffering is this gold to be
extracted. From the first issue of the Critique ” men

^ In a remarkable note, published in Benno Erdmann’s edition of
Slant’s Rejlexwnen (yoI. ii. p. 6), Kant himself says, of his own style,

£s sebeint zwar nichts geschmackswidriger zu sein als die Metaphy-
sik, aber die Zierrate die an der Schonheit gliluzen, lagen crstlioh in
dunkeln Griiften, wenigstens sab man sie zuerst durcb die flnstere
Werkstatt des Kilnstlers.”


108 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

complained of Kant’s obscurity ; years later Herder la<
mented bitterly the lost instructor of his youth, the man
whom he used to be able to comprehend, but of whom
now he could make almost nothing, and whose doctrine
he sternly opposed. The first impression that the great
“Critique” produced was of wonder and of a sort of
puzzled dread. Some said, “ This man has destroyed all
faith. He doubts everything. It is a dangerous book ;
it is terrible.” Others said, “This is Berkeley’s ideal-
ism over again.” Many said, “ Whatever it is, it is
quite unreadable.” But erelong the thought came home
to people that all this was not only novel, but vastly en-
lightening. The universities took up the book. The
great literary men read it. Schiller himself was in many
respects almost revolutionized by it, and by the Kantian
works that followed it. The age of the revolution was
ripe for it. Young men became fascinated by it, and
within twenty-five years the “ Critique ” had converted a
people decidedly unproductive in philosophy into the typi-
cally metaphysical nation of Europe, so that, as Jean
Paul said, while God had given to the French the land
and to the English the sea, he had granted to the Ger-
mans the empire of the air.

Meanwhile, Kant, gradually wasting away in body, ate
his one meal daily, walked over his regular path every
afternoon, lectured genially but intricately to his classes,
and wrote book after book until some years later than
1790. Old age was now approaching fast. This frail
body could not very well endure the coming enemy. Kant
grew less productive and more methodical. There is a
well-known passage by Heine, ^ wherein this daily life of
Kant is sketched : —

“ The life of Immanuel Kant,” says Heine, “ is hard to
describe ; he had indeed neither life nor history in the

^ Quoted, also, by Professor Edward Caird, in his Philoscphy qf
Immanuel Kant, 2d ed. vol. L p. 63.


EAKT.


109


proper sense of the words. He lived an abstract, me-
chanical, old-bachelor existence, in a quiet, remote street
of Konigsberg, an old city at the northeastern boundary
of Germany. I do not believe that the great cathedral-
clock of that city accomplished its day’s work in a less
passionate and more regular way than its countryman,
Immanuel Kant. Rising from bed, coffee-drinking, writ-
ing, lecturing, eating, walking, everything had its fixed
time; and the neighbors knew that it must be exactly
half past four when they saw Professor Kant, in his gray
coat, with his cane in his hand, step out of his house-door,
and move towards the little lime-tree avenue, which is
named, after him, the Philosopher’s Walk. Eight times
he walked up and down that walk at every season of the
year, and when the weather was bad, or the gray clouds
threatened rain, his servant, old Lampe, was seen anx-
iously following him with a large umbrella under his
arm, like an image of Providence.

“ Strange contrast between the outer life of the man
and his world-destroying thought. Of a truth, if the citi-
zens of Konigsberg had had any inkling of the meaning
of that thought, they would have shuddered before him
as before an executioner. But the good people saw no-
thing in him but a professor of philosophy, and when he
passed at the appointed hour, they gave him friendly
greetings — and set their watches.”


III.

To this characterization of Heine’s, which has become
almost classic, it is hard to add anything besides what
every reader of literary gossip luso knows, unless one
enters into details that would detain us here too long.
Still, we must go yet a little farther. This odd and
gentle little man was, as you already see, a singular com-
bination of the keen-witted analyst and the humane lover
of all things human. Give him an old problem, or a


110 TH£ SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

well-known abstract conception, such as the idea of wis-
dom or of justice, and he would quickly show you his
analytic skill by mentioning a long series of distinctions,
of aspects, of possible ways of defining or of stating the
thing, — so long a series, and often so dry, that you would
at first be likely to suspect him of genuine pedantry.
And yet this seeming pedant — what a lover he is of
books of travel, of descriptions of live men, and of con-
crete affairs I He has indeed never traveled beyond his
simple and quiet little province ; but yet, as we just saw,
he loves to lecture, and with a wide knowledge, too, upon
geography and upon anthropology. Physical science also,
after the fashions of his day, he knows very fairly. In
that early essay he has anticipated Laplace’s nebular
hypothesis. Moreover, he has published a long paper on
the sentiments of the sublime and beautiful. When he
speculates, he shows himself as many-sided as he is keen.
His systematic plans are vast. When, in his old age, he
has published half a dozen important and varied treatises
upon different and fundamental departments of philoso-
phy, he still laments the fragmentariness of his work, and
still promises himself a chance to complete his system by
one great book. Before he can do much upon this, old
age takes away first his noble powers of mind, and then
his life. This life itself had been as beautiful in its sim-
ple humanity as it had been rigid in its routine. Kant
was above all a good man, strictly honorable, unalterably
loyal to his tasks, j)leasant and even charming to his few
near friends, and in his fashion very deeply pious. As
for the form of his piety, you must know what that was
before you can be prepared for his reflective doctrines.

Some people, including, for instance, Heine himself,
have imagined that there were, in Kant’s religious life,
two or even three distinct periods, — an early period, say,
of faith; then a revolutionary and destructive period,
when, in a sort of secret bat none the less Titanic rebel-


KANT.


Ill


liousness, this terrible professor revolted against theology^
and wrote books that make an end once for all of every
positive religious belief ; then, finally, a third period of
cowardly, or at all events of weakly timid, withdrawal from
conflict, when Kant, the old man, fearing the government,
and perhaps taking compassion upon common folk, recon-
structed, in an inconsistent fashion, the beliefs that his
“Critique of Pure Keason ” had shattered, and so taught
God, freedom, and immortality, solely for the sake of his
own peace. Upon what facts this disgraceful myth about
Kant’s inconsistency in his old age was founded, I will
not pause to explain here. You will soon sec in what
sense his great “Critique” was destructive. You- will
also soon see in what sense his later writings were con-
structive as to religious faith. I mention, however, the
often-repeated tale just to warn you that it is a myth,
and that Kant’s attitude towards the affairs of the reli-
gious consciousness changed very little at any time, and
not at all after once the critical doctrine was in his hands.

But as to. the real form of His piety, it was never akin
to Spinoza’s mysticism ; it belonged rather to that other,
to that active form of the religious consciousness, of
which I spoke, by way of contrast, when I was describ-
ing Spinoza to you. And yet there was something so
simple and direct about Kant’s attitude towards divine
things that when he talks of God to you, you feel in as
direct a relation with one important fact of the eternal
world as, in Spinoza’s case, you felt in relation to another
fact. Spinoza says to you : Look upon the seeming chaos
of nature. For sense it is a disheartening whirlwind of
vain and fragmentary facts; yet for reason an infinite
law dwells in it. This law is supreme, all-compelling.
It is the law of the divine mind, which reveals one attri-
bute of God’s substance, and of which your mind is a
part. In the presence of this infinite majesty are you
every moment. Enter consciously into it, and dwell there,


112


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


and to you, as wise man, God’s infinite perfection will be
present as a religious consolation, and you will be unalter-
ably at peace. Of such mystical comfort Kant knows
nothing. He hates mysticism with a shrewd and sternly
analytical keenness of critical ill-will, suggestive, in his
case, of the attitude of the very deliberate and economical
old bachelor, who dreads nothing more than falling in
love, or than wasting his hoarded energies upon any
similar vain and expensive sentimentalities. Mysticism
and what he ./ould call lovers’ Narrheit arc, in Kant’s
simple and honest mind, closely associated and mercilessly
scorned. They are both called by him by his favorite
term of reproach. They are Schwarmerei^ vain and
vague enthusiasm, mere fancy, by gazing fed. Kant,
this genial and bloodless old hero of contemplation, wast-
ing away in his cheerful asceticism, reverences, as every-
body knows, duty and the stars, but has no time for ro-
mance. The God whom he worships is indeed stern and
majestic, cares not even to have you demonstrate his ex-
istence, and eludes Jbhe cleverness of your theoretic reason
as loftily as he rejects the loverlike importunities of your
weak and sentimental moments. He reveals himself,
indeed, but to your conscience.

Conscience, for the first, shows you the moral law, —
shows it as something overwhelmingly rational, absolute,
universal, indifferent to your private wishes, independent
of your present happiness, sublime as the heavens are,
but as directly known ta you as is the very existence of
your will and of your reason. Conscience shows you this
absolute law, and says sternly, unwaveringly, uncompro-
misingly, “ Do thy duty.” And because conscience shows
you this, it demands of you that you labor henceforth and
forever as if you were an instrument, a minister, of a
divine law that moves in all things. It orders you, then,
to live as if God were present here all about you in this
world of sense. He is not to be seen here, indeed, with


KANT.


118


the eye of sense. In vain, for the critical Kant of the
days after 1780, does even weak theoretic reason try to
prove to our poor wits that he is here. Sense and specu-
lation alike fail you. But none the less must you act as
if God were your constant and visible companion, as if
the moral law, which you must regard as his only direct
revelation, were spoken in your ear by him as by your
next friend at this moment. And to know that thus you
ought to act, that thus you ought to live, to wit, as if the
unsearchable God whom the heavens cannot contain were
as familiar to you as your daily walk, as visible to you as
the town-clock, — to know this is to do what Kant calls
postulating God’s existence. It isn’t sentirnentaL faith
that you have in God. You don’t believe in him because
you long to, or because life would be blank if you did n’t,
or because you fear the charge of atheism. You believe
in God in one sense and for one reason only, — because a
man sure of his duty is sure that the right ought to win,
that in the sense-world it does n’t win, and that in the
universe it can win only if God is ^t the helm, — God
as the absolute and all-powerful well-wisher of the whole
visible and invisible world-order. This notion of God’s
existence, a mere hypothesis to your theoretic speculation,
is for your active consciousness just in such sense a cer-
tainty as you propose to behave as if it were one.

For the rest, Kant, in his later years, has no hope of
even illustrating anything about God’s providence by
appealing, as so many do, to our experience of justice in
this world, or by any other theoretical means. Kant
is no optimist, just as he is no sentimentalist, about the
world of experience. The divine justice does n’t very ob-
viously show itself here below. Kant sees much evil all
about him ; condemns, in one passage, the people who find
our present life happy ; declares that not one of us would
willingly lead his own life over again, if he had the free
choice and were not bound by some sort of duty to do


114 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

SO ; in short, speaks almost cynically of those eaiiilily joys
whereof, with all his cheeriness and his open-heartedness,
he tasted so little. The few good things of life are such
things as healthy friendships and successful toils, the
sober routine of business, of conversation, and of think-
ing. And yet even these are all of them only relatively
good. The only absolutely good thing in our world is a
good wiU, in a being who does his duty. Thus, then, our
sense-world, if coldly cheerful for the brave and resolute,
is still no place of rewards ; nor does God’s benevolence
manifest itself except to the moral consciousness. But
indeed, in our conscience, despite all the mystery,
we know the mind of God. This is what he wants of us,
namely, our duty. And that he wants this, and will see
to the absolute success of the right, this is the whole con-
tent of our moral faith.

Such was Kant’s piety. It has been much misunder-
stood. hJspecially are people at fault in fancying it a late
thing in Kant’s life, a product of his old age. He ex-
presses substantially the same thoughts as early as 1766,
when he is still hoping for theoretical proofs of God’s
existence. Such proofs, he says, whether wc ever get
them or no, wc do not need. The moral consciousness
reveals God in its own way. Early, then, Kant had
reached his main assurance. Very late in his career he
declares, in one passage, that this assurance is no matter
of subtle philosophy at all. The progress of metaphy-
sics in theology is,” he observes, ‘‘ the easiest ” [and there-
fore the least] “ of all ” her achievements, and, “ although
concerned with the remote above sense, is not itself at all
recondite, but is as clear to common sense as to the phi-
losophers, so much so, in fact, that the thinkers have here
to find their way by the very light of common sense, lest
th^y be lost in the mazes of the recondite.”

Notice here, if you will, at once the novel aspect of
Kant’s insight, and at the same time the simplicity and


KANT.


116


familiarity of the thing. Novel is his insight into the
relations of religion and of reason, — novel, namely, just in
so far as it is a philosophical insight. The seventeenth
century had regarded God as first of all an object of
theory, as the demonstrable source and principle of the
visible world, and so as a being whose existence we hjid to
accept, as it were, submissively, helplessly, because of the
dogmas of reason. To this dogmatic faith in reason,
skepticism had later opposed its cruel objections. And
now comes Kant, whom a long experience of problems
makes skeptical above all men, cautious, critical, re-
signed to doubts, a hater of mystical faith, a destroyer of
dogmas; and yet he gives us back our faith, not. as a
dogma, but as an active postulate, as a free spiritual con-
struction, as a determination to live in the presence of the
unseen and eternal. New are some of his philosophic
doubts ; new in an uncommon sense will be his fashions
of theorizing in philosophy; old is his appeal to that
courage and that loyalty upon which our very civilization
is founded. For, I insist, this notion of Kant’s about the
spiritual world, this appeal, not to sentiment, but to con-
science as the warrant of faith, is it not indeed the very
soul of all instinctive civilization? Consider this same
fashion of looking not only at the problems about God, but
at the affairs of worldly experience. Consider the attitude
of a soldier going into battle against a foe whom he knows
to be nearly his match in force and arms. He possesses,
if he is a brave man, some sort of confidence that he will
win. Well, it is much like Kant's faith in God. In what
is this confidence founded ? In experience ? No, this bat-
tle has n’t yet been fought, so that experience is not his
guide as to this fight, and, as to the past, any old soldier
is likely to know from experience a good deal about
defeat, as well as about victory, perhaps even more of > lost
than of won battles. Does he know, then, that he will
win by any rational intuition ? Is it an innate idea in


116 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHT.

him that he is going to win ? No ; to say so would be
mere trifling. Neither intuition nor experience assures
him of victory. No merely sentimental faith is this his
assurance ; no datum is it of sense. His belief that he
will win is identical with his active, manly resolve that
he is minded to win, that his teeth are set to win, that
this sword is sharpened, that this bayonet has been
pointed, that this bullet will soon be winged, with the
determination of victory. Each army knows that, other
things equal, die force which is thus most minded to win
is the force destined to conquer, that here is a case where
faith can create its own object, that the unseen victory
will be fashioned precisely by and for the side which most
fully takes hold of that unseen, and which actively creates
what it believes in. Well, then, there is in active life
this way of vindicating your faith. It is by creating the
very idea of the world wherein your faith is to come true.
You all know, furthermore, to take an example from
everyday life, how it is largely our own choice whether
our lives, in certain aspects of them, say in their cares
and responsibilities, their routine and their disappoint-
ments, are tolerable or not. Evil besets us, pain op-
presses us, chagrin or calamity overwhelms us. We cry
out bitterly, “ Prove to me that such a life is good. Ex-
perience does n’t show it to be good. And as for faith,
as for intuitive trust that it is good, this 1 have lost. My
noble sentiments fade out; my natural love of life for-
sakes me. Is it all tolel*able ? Prove that to me.” The
answer of the active temperament, the answer which
seems so stem to us in our moments of weakness and
cowardice, so inspiring to us in our moments of spiritual
dignity and courage, is the answer : “ Your world is toler-
able, yes, is even glorious, if, and only if, you actively make
it. so. Its spirituality is your own creation, or else is
nothing. Awake, arise, be willing, endure, struggle, defy
evil, cleave to good, strive, be strenuous, be devoted, throw


KANT.


117

into the face of evil and depression your brave cry of ha-
tred and of resistance, and then this dark universe of des-
tiny will glow with a divine light. Then you will com-
mune with the etemaL For you have no relations with
the eternal world save such as you make for yourself.”
My illustrations are here inadequate to the full expression
of Kant’s notion of the postulate, but that is because of
the difference of the objects treated.

In describing thus the answer of spiritual courage to
our despair, I am, as you see, once more stating a moo(^
an attitude of life. You see all along the contrast
between this way of viewing the deepest truths and the
way which Spinoza suggested to us. I am not here, con-
cerned with the final rights of the controversy. I am
only trying to introduce you to Kant’s notion of our rela-
tion to spiritual truth ; and Kant’s piety, Kant’s attitude
towards religious problems, Kant’s notion of faith in God,
is in essence this heroic notion. He conceives here, as
later in the theoretical part of his philosopiiy, that truth,
so far as we mortals can know it, is neither from innate
ideas, nor from our experience. It comes to us because
we make it. This determination of ours it is that seizes
hold upon God, then, just as the courage of the manly soul
makes life good, introduces into life something that is
there only for the activity of the hero, finds God because
the soul has wrestled for his blessing, and then has found
after all that the wrestling is the blessing. God is with
us only because we choose to serve our ideal of him as if
he were present to our senses. His kingdom exists
because wo are resolved that, so far as in us lies, it shall
come. In this sign we conquer. This is the victory that
ovei*oometh the world, not our intuition, not our sentimen-
tal faith, but our live, our moral, our creative faith.

You see thus more fully how highly common-sense, is
this core of Kant’s doctrine. This is, if you will, the wis-
dom of modern practical men of high mind everywhere.


118 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

“ I don’t know much about God himself, or about the
world,” says such an one, “ but I can know something of
my own nature, and I propose to behi^le as if God were
now looking at me.” Well, Kant took this doctrine of
what one might call the higher common sense, and, as we
shall also see in his theoretical philosophy, he applied
it to everything from geometry to theology. So applied
the thing becomes vastly involved, prodigiously technical,
the work of a life-time. But the hearty and humane
J^aut stirred his age so profoundly because in his quiet
way he carried, deep in his pious soul, a doctrine of
life so simple, so stern, so heroic, and yet so universally
manly and sensible, that all modern men were touched by
it. This is, indeed, the wonder of Kant, that, born and
reared in the midst of pedantry, a more man of books, a
system-maker, a metaphysician, he should still express the
very heart of the higb-minded man of the world. “ I am
very ignorant of the nature of things,” — so far Kant and
the man of the world are together ; “ but I do know ray
duty, and I am determined to live as under God’s eye,” —
this is the other, the practically positive side of Kant’s
doctrine, and, as you see, once more the high-minded man
is with Kant. This doctrine, however, means, of course,
in the reflective thinker, far more in one sense than it
means in the man of the world. It leads him to an
exhaustive research into the foundations of human reason,
it means decades of philosopliical experience, of wander-
ing from hypothesis to hypothesis, of criticism, of resigna-
tion to the truth, combined with fearless constructive
research. And that, again, is why it finally takes in
Kant’s case so elaborate a form.

To this form itself we now proceed. If Kant’s reli-
gious consciousness underwent little change with years, his
theoretical opinions were subjected between 1755, when
he entered upon his docentship at the university, and
1781, when he published his Critique of Pure Reason,”


KANT.


119


to a course of discipline such as few men have ever borne
and lived. In n||tters of theory, Kant was, after all,
by nature a very conservative person. Some men are
born rebels, and some men have the reformer’s office
thrust upon them. Kant was of the latter class. He was
as rigidly economical of his faiths as he was of all his other
possessions. He never gave up an idea until his self-crit-
icism forced him to do so. Skeptical, I have called him,
above all men ; but his skepticism meant at the start mere
considerateness, mere thoroughness and honesty of refleo
tion. He had no wish to make his reflections negative.
If fortune forced negative results upon him, he could not
help that.^ Against change he, to be sure, never bUhdly
struggled, just as he never hastened towards the revolu-
tion that he was destined to bring to pass. Shall 1 weary
you too much if I sketch to you a little of Kant’s reflec-
tive fortunes?

He began, in his youth, where the traditional university
philosophy of his time had placed him, with the traditions
of the philosophy of the seventeenth century in his mind.
The world where he found himself was the world that
reason comprehends, where all is to be clear, distinct, log-
ical, formal. We know a real world of law, where God
reigns, and where everything is rational. The philoso-
pher is to make plain the logic of things. But alas for
the fixity of this formalism t Kant is unfortunately more
than a mere philosopher. He loves to study science and
man. And in the world of science there are so many sur-
prising things, so many strange facts, that logic can’t con-
struct, — yes, there are more things in heaven and earth
than are dreamt of in your philosophy. And not mere

^ See the valuable note, No, 3, in Benno Erdmann’s Rejlexumen
Kant's, Yol. ii. p. 4, where Kant states very finely his relations to
skepticism and to dogmatism. My own immediately following para*
graph is an effort to summarize the much discussed and rather ob«
scure period from 1755 to 1766.


120 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

magic, not only superstition shows you such things, as
they were shown to Hamlet. It is just jcience that proves
how, amidst all the longings of our reason for the clear
and distinct truth of nature, we are continually in the
presence of opaque and ultimate facts, — yes, even of prin-
ciples that our pure reason could n’t have predicted —
such principles, for instance, as the law of gravitation.
And as for man, how mysterious and often how illogical
is his wayward inner nature. Kant meditates upon these
things. Can logic, after all, give you a world ? As Kant
thus examines the littleness of our powers, he grows, as it
were, an ascetic in the enjoyment of his logic. He is n’t
so sure that you can spin the world out of reason. He
doubts whether the secret of things can ever be made
open to even the highest finite intelligence. Perhaps the
lesson of philosophy will prove to be resignation. At all
events the lesson of every failure of reflective thought is
sure to be caution.

So far Kant went in the first ten years of his univer-
sity life as docent. The results of his work were poor.
They almost discouraged him. Often he imagined him-
self on the very verge of discovering a great and new
method of thinking. As often he seemed to be disap-
pointed. “I have the fortune,” he says, in 1766, “to be
a lover of Metaphysics ; but my mistress has shown me
few favors so far.” In those days, and later, Kant as
a student had odd fashions of work. lie jotted down
numberless notes, chaotic-seeming dead leaves of fallen
reflection that lay, as it were, forgotten amidst the dark
forest of his secret thought. He cared little for such
notes ; he let the dead leaves moulder into the soil, if we
may say so, to fertilize it for the coming springtime ; and
now, indeed, it was the autumn of his silent meditations.
Since his death, Kant’s lovers have busily hunted for such
of the autumn leaves as did not moulder, and to-day there
are Kant archives in the Konigsberg library, and else-


KANT.


121


where, where such things are kept and prized. Singular
bits of paper they are, these notes! The poor and
thrifty Kant wasted nothing. Here, say, is an old invita-
tion to dinner, or to a visit at Herr So and So’s country-
house. Kant has refolded the letter, and has written, not
only on its back, but perchance all about and through its
text, such memoranda as that Mr. Charisius Stockheim has
paid his fees for the course this term, and that in a capil-
lary tube of such a diameter water rises so high. He
adds, perhaps, some quoted Latin verses, the title of a
book or two, and then a paragraph of metaphysics. Eeal-
ity can only be given to us through sensation, but per-
ception adds thereto the construction of the idea of quan-
tity ; then there are, moreover, just three functions of
apperception ; but the mind itself gives us the only idea of
what synthesis means. Thereupon, perhaps Kant jots
down a triangle or two, makes a computation, and lets his
note-making degenerate into illegible marks. What one
wonders at is the vast numbers of such scraps. Kant
never let a thought go by. The margins and interleav-
ings of his books, especially of his lecture text-books, were
also full of such things. So unwearied was Kant. The
years fly on and he notes and notes — so fruitlessly, one
would think I He is so faithful to his thoughts, and yet
so merciless, — so faithful, for they all go down ; so merci-
less, for he takes no pain to give them permanent form
or fair shape and organization. Later jottings seem to
have forgotten the earlier ones. The children of his re-
flection are never spared. He loves them not; he flies
from them to new thoughts. On and on his life of medita-
tion grows, so slowly, so patiently, once more just like the
forest. What is the meaning, what will be the outcome
of this endless bearing and casting down of thoughts ? ^

Yet there is indeed method in it all. About 1768, Kant

^ The illustrations of Kant’s notes above are brought together
from several places in Beicke’s Lose BlUUer aus Kanins Nachlass.


122 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

shows traces of a wholly new fashion of thinking. The
world undergoes a change for him, whose significance, at
first, he himself can hardly estimate. '^He observes, in a
fresh fashion, and with a novel accent, how all truth about
the physical world is dependent upon the truth concern*
ing time and space. I reword some of his thoughts abou1|
space in my own way. Whatever matter there were in
the outer world, there would in any case have to be space
to put the matter in, and so the laws of matter have to
conform to the laws of space. Nature must perforce obey
geometry ; else could she get no room for her things, and
even so with time. The laws of space come first in order.
The laws of physics come, as it were, logically later, and
must be congruent with the space laws. But space, on
the other hand, is not obliged to conform to the laws of
matter. Just as the principle that what is done can’t be
undone, even so the principle that a straight line is the
shortest distance between two points, or that you can’t
put the left glove on the right hand, illustrates formal
laws of the world, prior in nature to the laws of matter.
Moving bodies may fly as they will in accordance with
laws of physics. They cannot fly in accordance with any
possible law so as to move through the shortest distances
and yet not fly in straight lines. The matter* of your
hands may have what laws or nature it will ; nothing
could permit the left glove to go on to the right liand but
a change in the necessary laws of geometry. Geometrical
laws, then, like the laws of time, go together to make
nature possible. Know what space and time are, and you
will know something about the truths that condition the
world’s very existence.^

Well, then, what are space and time? About 1769, it

^ The importance here given to the well-known essay of 1768 is
.in agreement so far with Riehl’s view (fier PhUosophische Kriticismits,
Yol. i. p. 262). See also Caird, op. cit. vol. i. p. 164. From this
point on, I follow partly the views of Benno Erdmann.


KANT.


128


occurred to Kant to observe that both space and time are,
when regarded as real things, thoroughly and hopelessly
paradoxical, self-^ntradictory in their nature. Kant was
fond in those days ^ of setting over against one another
opposing assertions about fundamental truths, and giving
|a fair chance to both sides in the controversy. He elab-
orated this old method of research very carefully and in
an original fashion, and in consequence he called it by
special names of his own choosing. He used it to bring
out the paradoxical character that after all lies so deeply
imbedded in the very heart of all human thinking. Ap-
plying this fashion of analysis to space and time, Kant
found that, if you once regard them as realities, as facts
existent outside your own mind, you can make diametri-
cally opposed assertions about them, and yet prove both
of a pair of such assertions to be true. The result so far
is puzzling ; but look at it an instant. Of space you can
say that it is infinitely divisible, that is, that cut it up as
small as you like, the parts will still have size, and so can
be cut again, so that you could never reach the end of your
cutting. This you can say, and you can prove it too, iff
namely, space is a real thing that stays there to be cut,
apart from your ideas of it. Equally certain it is, how-
ever, in case space is real, and is made up of parts, that
then, if you let it in conception crumble away like a heap
of sand, to find what in the last analysis it is made of,
there must be found somewhere ultimate parts, real spaee-
atoms, which you could reach by this process of ideal
analysis, and which you could n’t divide. For if there is
a heap of manifold parts, like a heap of sand, and you
conceive it to fall into bits for the sake of analysis, then
surely where there are many units there must be units.
Therefore, if space is a reality, you can prove, thinks
£[ant, that it is infinitely divisible and that it is n’t infi-

^ See the introduction to fienno Erdmann’s Refleximm Ka$iVs ZM
KrUischen Philosophief vol. ii. p. xzzv.


124


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


nitely divisible. That seems absurd, but what does such
an absurd result prove ? It proves, so Kant holds, that
space is n’t real at all, but just an idea of yours, a uni-
versal but inner condition of your consciousness of outer
objects. This result is revolutionary for him. Space and
time, he had already said, are the conditions prior of aU^
physical nature. And now space and time can be thus
proved to be unreal outside of our minds. What follows ?
The whole of this seeming outer nature is no outer fact at
all. It is a mere phenomenon in us. That doctrine is
the first half of Kant’s critical philosophy.


IV.

In 1770, he stated this theory of the subjectivity of
time and space, as he called his notion, in a dissertation
that he wrote on his assumption of a professor’s chair at
Kouigsberg. In this dissertation he gives yet another
proof of his new doctrine. Space and time can’t be real,
Kant now says, for we know too much about them, know
them, not by bare observation, but with a mathematical
completeness such as we could n’t possess with regard to
outer facts, know more than we could have found out if
they existed really beyond ourselves. We know, for in-
stance, of time and space as they are for our minds, that
they are infinite wholes, prior to any of their own parts as
well as to the tilings that exist in them. Furthermore, as
you can easily see, space and time don’t seem to us to be
properties of things, as color and taste are ; nor yet are
they separate things of nature. Rather are they just con-
ditions of our sense-knowledge of things. So, then, they
can’t be real at all, except as facts of our consciousness.
Kant therefore calls space and time forms of perception,
or sense-forms. Our world seems to be in space and time
because it is our own nature to view it as spatial and tem-
poral. Space and time appear to us to belong outside
us, merely because they are conditions in us of our seeing


KANT.


126


and feeling things, forms of our sense. It is with them
as with colored spectacles. If one always wore green
goggles, all his world would seem green to him. Even
so, because jire always perceive under these forms of
sense, space and time, which are just our forms of per-
ceiving things, cannot but seem real to us. In fact they
^are n’t revelations of truth outside us at all. They are
our own fashions of receiving the things that we perceive.
It was largely in consequence of this doctrine, which I
state now, after all, in its outcome, rather than in its full
proof, that Kant later came to declare that the things
themselves outside of us, which arouse our sensations, the
things as they are in themselves, since they can’t be spa-
tial, nor temporal, are in fact utterly unknowable. No-
body can prove the least thing about what the real world
is. AV e know first of all only our own sense impressions,
which are whatever they happen to be. We know also
that there are things beyond us which we view through
our sense-forms. But what those things are, how should
we ever find out ? We are cut off from them by the illu-
sions of sense. We know our seeming world in space and
in time. It has law and order in it, such law and order
as science finds there. Astronomy is true for the seeming
world, although in the absolute world there is no space, ,
and although what the stars and the atoms are is unknow-
able. But thus, you see, we have found a limit to science.
It can never know things in themselves. And so Kant’s
critical doctrine ultimately came to be one of the neces-
sary limits of all theoretical thought.

That, at least, was the idea that Kant in his later
works reached. In 1770, he still hoped to find by some
device of logic a way to a knowledge of things in them-
selves beyond our private and human sense-forms of space
and time. But from this hopeful dogmatic slumber ”
(as he once calls it) Hume’s skepticism finally awoke him
in the years immediately following 1772.^

1 Of several hypotheses current in the literature of the topic I


126


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHT.


V.

Hume it was' who gave the final touch to Kant’s re-
flection by his stern assertion that in the^iworld of expe-
rience facts are only conjoined, and never connected. Im-
pressions we know, says Hume, and ideas we know ; but
who ever yet saw causation, or experienced necessity?
In the world of sense there are facts, but there are no
links. You see things happen ; you can’t see why they
must happen. This criticism of Hume’s deeply affected
Kant. Kant had already almost given up finding out the
nature of outer things by logic. He was ready very soon
to give it up altogether. lie was content with the narrow
limits of our sense-forms ; if only the seeming space-and-
time-world, the seeming world which science looks upon
and examines, could be shown to have order in it. The
astronomer does n’t care whether space and time are sense-
forms, or whether he knows or not the stars as they are in
themselves. What he wants to be sure of is that nature,
seeming or real, in show-space or in itself, has discover-
able law and order in it, uniformity, causal fixity, genuine
reasonableness, about it. Well, Kant wanted to make
out this thing, too. He thought it over in silence for some
years. The result of his reflection was expressed in the
great “ Critique.” Anfl that new result, the second and
greater half of his doctrine, was something like the follow-
ing:—

In so far as the world is seen by us in our sense-forms
of space and time, it is bound to appear to us as conform-
able to their laws. Nature, then, is forced to obey geome-
try, because nature, after aU, is just a show-nature, our

choose the most probable. Here as before I largely follow Benno
Erdmann. The awakening influence of Hume was formerly referred
to the years from 1762 to 1766. Professor Paulsen of Berlin first
called in question this view, and suggested 1769 as a more likely
date.


KANT.


127

own experience, and so conformable to our own funda-
mentally geometrical ways of viewing it. Well, even so,
when we think of natural events, there e.re certain con-
ditions goveri^ing our thinking process. And to these
conditions the products of our thought, the objects of our
experience, must needs conform. For the objects of
our experience aren’t the things in themselves, but are
just our thoughts. If our thought, as a process of com-
prehending our experience, is obliged to treat the facts
before it as conforming to rational laws, in order to think
of them at all, well, then, the facts of experience, being
once for all facts of inner life, will have to conform to
law, and that will be the end of it. To be sure, if we
knew by sight the things as they are in themselves, we
should indeed have to conform wholly to their ways ; and,
as Hume’s criticism implied, unless we then saw causa-
tion and necessary connection amongst the matters of
fact, we could n’t be sure of such connections at all. But,
you see, we don’t know by sight any things in themselves.
We see only the show-world in the sense-forms. Its mat-
ters of fact are then just our own matters of fact. In
knowing nature we are but learning to know ourselves.
If it is the fundamental fashion of our thinking to become
conscious of objects as orderly, then orderly they will be
for us. Then our world will ha^ in it not only conjunc-
tion, but connection of facts. Our understanding will
think the linkages into our show-world. The dutifully
bound seeming universe of our experience will obey the
law of the inner life, whose thought it is. This obedience
will control all things, however remote, in these phantom-
forms of space and time, — yes, as it were, will preserve
the stars from wrong, and the most ancient heavens
through this be fresh and strong. Is such a conception a
paradox ? Then look at it once more.^

1 The immediately following free paraphrase of one central
thought of the deduction ” is more fully discuBsed in Supplement


128 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

A siine man differs from a man with a maniacal flight
of ideas, or from a patient in delirium, most in this, that
the sane man, at every moment, looks, as it were, out of
this moment to his larger self, and links this moment with
the past and future, while the other’s soul, as Kant would
say (although he does not use this, my own illustration),
is filled with a Gevnihl von Erscheinungen^ with a mass
of flighty seemings. The sane man continually collects
himself j as we ordinarily express it, binds this to that,
and thereby^ — and this is Kant’s central thought, —
thereby sees links in his seeming outer world just be-
cause he does collect himself, just because it is of the
essence of his sanity to think connections there yonder in
his show-world. Kant has a technical name for what I
have just named sanity. He himself does not use the
latter word; he calls this process and condition of all
rational consciousness Transcendental Unity of appercep-^
tion. It depends upon and involves self-recognition ; but
self-recognition, if you look at it carefully, is indeed seen
to include the binding of fact to fact in your experience.
If I be f as I think I ftc, says the little old woman of
the song, then will my little dog know me. The poor
woman is striving, you remember, to recover the unity of
her apperception, of which a sad and recent incident has
deprived her. She sefiks it, and how? By striving to
link fact to fact in her sleepy experience. Well, even so,
Kant holds, that if I be I, as I think I be, then will the
phenomena of my seilse-world in a certain deeper just
sense know me, that is, recognize the authority of my
thought-forms, or categories. The little woman, then, had,
in her way, grasped the idea of that most puzzling part of
Kant’s Critique,” the so-called transcendental deduction
of the categories. For once more, if I am to be at this

B. The illustration of the “ Unity of Apperception ” by the idea of
" sanity ” is, I think, justified by many aspects of Kant’s phraseology,
remote as it is from his own wording.


KANT.


129


moment sane, then I must regard myself as much more
than this momentary self. 1 must communicate, as it
were, with my past and my future, which are n’t now here
at all. And in doing this, causation, and the other ideas
of connection in nature, are the tools of my understanding.
They give to my objects a communicable, a typical, a
universal character. By connecting facts in my mind, I
connect my mind in itself. This desk before me, to t^|^e
yet another example, this desk, as a fact in my sense form
of space and time, is the product of my natural sanity,
which simply makes coherent a mass of feelings, holds
together in some sort of unity what I see and touch.
In so far as 1 am a sensible person I say to myself, “‘All
these feelings of mine just at this point of space must
somehow belong together. Hereby only can I make an
object out of them, having a permanent type that I can
recognize again. This object must also somehow cohere
with what I have seen before, because I am one self, and
my experience must somehow hold together. Therefore
I say that the object has substantiality, that it persists in
time, that whenever it came into being something pro-
duced it as its cause, and so on.” Thus, you see, 1 bring
the table into my world, into the one coherent experience
which constitutes my larger self. To my larger self, to
my whole actual and possible collerent experience, always
i look up ; to this I make my active appeal. The moment
is my moment so far only as it conforms to the universal
and orderly types of my whole self-consciousness.

In large part, however, this process of constructively
making my world coherent, is, on its theoretical side
indeed unconscious, just as the inventions of an artistic
mind are often unconsciously made. There is in me a
blind application of my forms of thought, a reasonable
but not necessarily self-<3onscious defense of my sanity.
Kant calls this busy and half-blind application of the
forms of thought to the facts of sense, whereby we make


180


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


everything, from pictures in the firelight to the sublimest
constructions of science, whereby we get our great world
of tables and people and houses and suns and star-systems
and atoms and laws of nature, — he calls, I say, this busy
inner world-building power of our minds the ^^constructive
imagination.” It builds solely on the basis of oui expe-
rienced sensations ; it produces purely in the forms of
space and time; it has as theoretical power nothing to
say of God, nor yet of the moral law ; it builds our world
as a great genius makes a poem, how, he knows not ; it is
involuntary, hidden away in the mind, the servant of our
understanding, the minister of the forms of thought ; but
it gives us this bright and solid world that is all about us ;
and, in the way of theoretical knowledge, we have nothing
better than what it gives us. Without continual support
from sense, this poetical faculty of ours could do nothing.
As sensations, unformed, would be a mere flight of ideas,
unreal and insane, so these notions of the understanding,
causation, substantiality, and the rest, have no meaning
except as applied by our constructive imagination to ren-
dering coherent our world of sense. That is just why we
do not know at all that these forms of thought apply to
the things in themselves.

And it is thus that so much the more, when we come to
those other objects of pure and constructively voluntary
faith, namely, God and the rest, we have'a right to trust
“ the truths that never can be proved.” For by this theo-
retical doctrine we have shown that nothing hat the clear
and unmistakable demands of the moral law, which re-
quires of us a submission to an eternally significant order,
could ever by any possibility carry us beyond sense. We
have no theoretical power whereby we can escape from
the prison of the inner life, or from the purely phenome-
nal reality, the show-world, which our constructive imagi-
nation builds up. Theoretically speaking, our show-world
is only the poem which the inner life makes. Hence only


KANT.


181


our homage to the absolute imperative of our practical
reason, which categorically demands of us that we act as
if we were in an eternal world, — only this, and our free
choice to obey, can put us into relations with the uiikiiown
beyond sense. The theoretical view of things, this work
of art of the inner life, is morally insufficient. Hence we
have to postulate God beyond it. Such, then, in sum, is the
content of ray world. The understanding creates the laws
of phenomenal nature, creates them, indeed, not without
the most close and constant reference to the facts of sense,
creates them, in truth, merely by actively uniting together
these facts of sense, but still creates the whole organiza-
tion, the coherence, the unity, the sanity, of our world of
business, of society, and of science. The stars, too, just
because they are our stars, experienced by us, must be
orderly, as our understanding is orderly. That you and I
see the same world depends merely upon the fact that
we all work upon similar ideas of sense with similar
powers of understanding. We all have part, as it were,
in the one ideal self of humanity’s experience. For us all
alike this world is an inner creation. To state the case
finally, in a general formula: The unknown things in
themselves give us sense experiences. These we first per-
ceive in the forms of space and time, because that is our
way of perceiving. Then, beii)g coherent creatures, we
order this oitl* world of sense according to the laws of
causation and the other ‘‘ categories ” which are forms
of thought. Thus we all alike get a world, which, while
it is in all its sanity and order an inner world, is still for
each of us apparently an outer world, — a world of fact,
a world of life. The unity of our personality demands
the unity of our experience ; this demands that our show-
world of nature should conform to the laws of thought ;
and thus causality, necessity, and all the other categories
of the understanding are realized in the world through
our constructive imagination, which working in the ser-


132


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


vice of the understanding actively puts them into the
world.

VI.

By this marvelously subtle thought Kant at once de-
stroys and builds up. The world of Locke’s bare expe-
rience vanishes. The world of the Cartesian innate ideas
is nothing any more. Even for Spinoza’s eternal order,
as an outward fact, Kant’s theory has no place. He de-
votes long sections of the “ Critique ” to an elaborate
undermining '>f every form of speculative dogmatism. As
the freeman hates tyrants, so Kant hates submission to an
outward and absolute order invented by the pretensions
of a thought that would transcend our limited powers.
And yet he docs n’t assert all this for the mere sake of
destructive skepticism. One certainty remains to him
which is indeed absolute enough. It is that certainty of
the moral law, which in Kant’s system takes the place
that the adoration of the eternal order took in Spinoza’s
doctrine. To the moral law and its consequences, Kant
devoted three of the most important of his later works.
You know theoretically only that rigid order of the world
of show which is indeed enough for empirical science, but
which gives you no warrant to talk about things as they
are in themselves. But you do know one practical cer-
tainty which sends you far beyond sense. You know that
you ought to do right, and doing right for»Kant is some-
thing very simple, rigid, and absolute. There is no com-
promise in his case between the moral law and the desires
of sense. Inclination and duty are no friends for Kant.
To do right, thinks Kant, is to act at siny time as you
could wish that a whole world full of moral agents should
act, to act after a fashion worthy to bo made a public and
universal law of life. The moral law admits of no excep-
tions. It is reasonableness in action. Kant loves to
dwell on its simple and awful sublimity. Universality of
the method or principle of your conduct is its aim. Absa


KANT.


188

lute truthfulness, absolute respect for the rights and free-
dom of every one of your fellow-men, utter devotion to
the cause of higb-mindedness, of honesty, of justice, of
simplicity, of honor, — such is Kant’s ideal, and so far as
in him lay he was always true to ft. It is a stern and
rigid ideal, very rare in philosophy, and even infrequent
in the life of the world ; but it is Kant’s ideal. And now
he further says : In this show-world of your limitation and
ignorance, you are bound to behave thus reasonably and
sublimely, and there is necessarily associated with your be-
havior a determination to trust faithfully and absolutely
that the right, thus acted out, will triumph, and that
there is a God who will see that it triumphs. You are
moved so to trust in God, because that is simply the wise
and honorable thing to do. And this world of yours, as
one sees, is not a world of absolute insight, but first of
sane and active unification of your personal experience,
and then of honorable doing, a world whoso highest wis-
dom is the service of the ideal that reason conceives.

This hasty sketch lias now put before you, not Kant’s
whole doctrine, but something of iho fine and manly atti-
tude which, amidst all his subtlety and his skepticism, ho
always maintained. I know not how wearisome this sub-
tlety itself has been to you, even in my utterly fragmen-
tary suggestion of its quality. The professional student
often forgets how these things used to seem to him when
he began his work, and wonders now how such long pur-
suit of the inner life, even into the recesses of its dimmest
and most sacred temples of faith, may appear to those
who do not spend their lives in such wanderings. Well,
be that all what it may, my duty is done if I have sug-
gested to you anything of a doctrine which has created
the philosophy of the present century; and as for the
present obscurity of the whole to you, remember that all
the rest of these lectures will be of necessity, in one
aspect, an exposition of the consequences of this theory
of Kant, so tl^t we shall know it better hereafter.


134


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


What, then, is our outcome ? We have reached almost
the opposite pole of reflection from that which Spinoza’s
system occupied. Spinoza saw the substance with the eye
of an undoubtiug reason. He was sure, dogmatic, abso-
lute in his pretensions ; and being thus too sure of him-
self, he lost himself in contemplating the eternal. We
have seen how the study of the inner life drew men away
from this confidence of reason, even as far as the skepti-
cism of Hume. Now we liave seen how Kant, in the
midst of this wilderness of skepticism, built once more
the fair spiritual world. Strongly contrasted as are these
two systems, that of Spinoza and that of Kant, both
stand, I think, for moments, for eleiftnts, in the higher
thought of humanity. Whether any synthesis of the
two is possible, we have yet to see. Both arc for us,
thus far, experiences of humanity, stages of fortune
through which man’s spirit passes ; and as for Kant’s
stage, he shows, as you see, how, amidst the ruins of
sense and of doubt, the triumphant reason still builds its
world of law and of ideal truth, builds because it is
minded to do so, builds by virtue of its natural coherence
and its moral courage. Kant’s thought, then, is, in one
aspect, the thought which Tennyson has made so familiar
to our time : —

** O living will that shalt endiiro

When all that seems shall suffer shock,

Rise in the spiritual rock,

Flow thro’ our deeds and make them pure,

•

** That we may lift from out of dust
A voice as unto him that hears,

A cry above the conquer’d years
To one that with us works, and trust,

“ With faith that comes of self-control.

The truths that never can be proved
Until we close with all we loved,

And all we flow from, soul in soul.”


LECTURE V.


FICHTE.

Now that we have reached and passed for the first time
in our study the thinker upon whom, more than upon
any other centre, modern thought turns, as upon a fulcrum,
1 am tempted to pause, at the beginning of this lecture,
until I have suggdj|^d still more of what Kant means to
modern thought. It is not, I suppose, merely historical
sketches of the philosophers that you desire from me.
You want to get from these philosophers such help as this
brief study can suggest towards a comprehension of the
spiritual problems of our own day. So, after suggesting
at the last lecture what manner of man the historical
Kant was, and what was the essence of his doctrine, I
shall now try to draw afresh the moral from this part of
our story.

I.

The movement from Spinoza to Kant has taught us a
lesson which human thought everywhere has to learn,
namely, that deeper truth is too valuable to be won by
any short and easy process, and that spiritual history has
everywhere a decidedly tragic element. We begin with
our world simply, in a childlike faith that nature and God
are ours by right of our birth. Our first lesson is that
they are both of them at all events far deeper realities
than we had supposed. Nature for Spinoza, as for all
other great thinkers, is n’t the nature that you see with
your eyes. It is the nature that you think with your rea-
son ; and to think it with your reason you have to go be-
hind sense to the law, to the substance of things. Even


186 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

SO9 in your relations with God, you have, according to
Spinoza, to forsake the naive and joyous trust in life
through which you first see him. “ When,” says Spinoza,

I had learned that all the surroundings of life are vain
and futile,” — so his pilgrimage began. A long training,
he tells us, was needed ere ho became at home in those
solitudes where he ultimately found God. It was, he de-
clares, through a contempt for all the things which the
multitude seek ^hat he came to learn the true good, beyond
all that they seek, namely, the peace which the world can
neither give nor take away. Encouraging to us about
Spinoza was, then, that his tale ende^oyously, in a wis-
dom whereby he was exalted beyo* all the })hantom
world of sense ; but grave and stern about him was his
teaching that the way to this wisdom is so toilsome ; “ for
all things excellent,” he says, are as difficult as they are
rare.”

This lesson, that the true joy of the spirit is indeed
res severa^ a stern thing, is still further deepened in our
minds by the struggle of thought in the eighteenth cen-
tury. It was not the mere waywardness of the eighteenth-
century thinkers that forbade them to accept as final the
guidance of even the intuitive reason to which Spinoza
and his fellows had all trusted so implicitly. It was a
necessary progress in reflection that drove these men to
their scrutiny of the inner life, a scrutiny whose tragedy
we found exemplified by Hume’s lightly and cheerfully
spoken, but weighty ^nd gloomy words, “ sophistry and
illusion.” But this, at all events, still seems to me sure :
Whoever has not wandered that Via Dolorosa of the
eighteenth century’s doubt of both reason and sense
alike, will never be able to knock at the door at the end
of that way, the door which Kant first of all men found
opened to him. It has opened before us now in the last
discussion. We have entered, and what do we find? We
find, not what, in the childlike simplicity of our first love


FICHTE.


18T


of truth we should have desired, a God revealed direct to
sense, or a divine order manifest even to our intuitive
reason ; but something very different. We read, when we
enter the new door, as it were a mysterious writing, pre-
pared by unseen and unknown hands, a letter, left for our
guidance by a remote and even unknowable guide. The
letter contains only the moral law, and the word, Serve
the unseen God as if he were present with you.” That is
in the first place all. Upon this and this only, according
to Kant, our faith must build. For this, as the inner
voice now tells us, is the call that, with all our better na-
ture, we are henceforth minded to obey. Our will is the
solution. “WorW|butthe divine,” says the new philoso-
phy. “ Build anew the lost spiritual world, which skep-
ticism shattered ; ” such is the command of Kant’s prac-
tical reason. All this is unquestionably a hard doctrine.
It is not what we sought. We sought peace, and the phi-*
losopher has brought us not peace, but a sword. We
sought the joy of God’s presence, and Kant has sent us
to work out a divine mission in a wilderness far remote
from all absolute insight. And yet, stern as this doctrine
is, you must feel its courage and its wisdom. After all,
here is at least a part of the truth. Life is not an easy
thing ; the spiritual life is the hardest of all lives ; and of
all spiritual gifts, uext perhaps to charity itself, insight is
surely the most difficult to win. As long as these things
are so, Kant’s doctrine will retain its profound ethical and
religious significance. But, you will ask, is this, then, wis-
dom’s last word, “ der Weisheit letzter Schluss ? ” Well,
for my part I do not think so. I warn you indeed that
in philosophy, if you will go beyond Kant, you must
meet new dangers, and must attempt new and venture-
some wandering. But for my part I love to wander, far
and long, and I hold that there are indeed heights yet to
climb that cleave the heavens far above and beyond this
dwelling-place of Kant. If you will go with me, we will tiy


138 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

also these new adventures ; but meanwhile I want to point
out to you, ere we bid farewell to our greatest modem
thinker, how there are more senses than one in which
henceforth, wherever our feet carry us, his wisdom will go
with us and direct us. After all, the spiritual world that
Kant bade us build is the modern world ; and Kant is the
true hero of all modern thought. If in one sense it is
only by transcending him and even by forgetting some of
his limitations that we are to triumph, he is none the less
forever our guide. Kant is, if you like, the homely and
somewhat incongruous figure, a sort of John Brown of our
century of speculative warfare. Derided as a rebel and an
enemy of the faith by many of his own time, he dies be-
fore the modern conflict is fairly begun, but his sou! goes
marching on through the whole of it. Or to take another
more suggestive, but similarly inadequate comparison, he
resembles the hero of the Heroic Symphony, who is dead
and buried in the second movement, but who is none the
less spiritually and obviously present in the romantic and
fairy-like outburst of new life in the scherzo, and the joy-
ous apotheosis of the triumphant warriors that, in the
fourth movement, crowns the symphony. Both these fig-
ures, I grant you, are somewhat imperfect; but still, I
insist, in some such sense Kant will henceforth be our com-
panion, — the leader who inspires us while we no longer
see him at the head, the man whose precise system we no
longer hold, but who still is the creator of om* thought.

1 must indeed have failed entirely in my summary of
Kant’s own theoretical views, in the last lecture, if I did
not suggest to you how full Kant’s cautious and skeptical
doctrine is of motives that will lead us beyond him. Re-
member how, for the first, he declared the world of the
things in themselves to be wholly inaccessible to our intel-
lect, just because the world for our intellect is out own
world. The search for accessible truth, thinks Kant, is
then the search for one’s own personal larger self. Be<


FICHTE.


189


cause I am sane, because I have what Kant calls unity of
apperception in me, because I need an orderly conscious-
ness, therefore it is that the world of sense and of expe-
rience has an outwardly visible good order about it. My
understanding, working upon sense, gives laws to nature,
because if there were no such laws given by my under-
standing I should have no true inner experience at all.
The show world of experience is the poem of our construc-
tive imagination, the product, then, of our deepest nature,
of our largest selves. Moreover, even Kant, with all
his caution, has to speak' of that true self, to which you
and 1 alike appeal, whenever we discourse about the
things of space and time, as if it were something that we
all shared in, a certain universal self, whose offspring are
we all, with our flying moments of sense, our weak efforts
at truth, our study of experience, our common trust in
understanding. The world that we know is, according to
Kant, the world, not of dead outer things, but of human
thoughts ; and when we try to get at truth we are trying
to find how the world in space and time would seem to
the experience of a perfectly sane and rational and far-
seeing onlooker ; in other words, we are trying, all of us
alike, as we think, to find out the mind of the ideal man.
Well, I say, that is the essence of Kant’s thought, re-
stated in one word.

II.

And now for a very natural extension of this view. I
suggest this extension here first merely as a possible view,
then as the one that we shall find history developing. You
will think it at first fantastic, but I shall not tiy as yet to
defend or to attack it. I am so far only chronicler.

Grrant, if you will, the existence of such a universe as
Kant describes, a universe of numerous, free, but ignorant
moral agents, each naturally engaged in imaginatively
building up, with an unconscious but thoughtful art, an
inner personal world, in the sense-forms of space and


140 THE SPIRIT OP MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

time, and through numerous forms of thought, applied
to experience by their various constructive imaginations.
Each one of these moral agents is bound, by his manhood
and by his rationality, to serve an unseen and eternal
moral law, and to believe in a divine order that supports
this law. Such a universe as this of Kant, viewed as it
were from without, suggests irresistibly an interpretation
which at first sight may seem as romantic as indemonstra-
ble, but which is at all events not excluded by the facts.
Let us look at them dispassionately, — these moral agents,
blind to absolute truth, but each and all properly destined
to be willing servants of an unseen order ; world-creators,
meanwhile, each and all of them, but creators solely of
their inner worlds, communing somehow with one another,
by virtue of their common rationality, but cut off from
things in themselves. How does such a state of things
appear? Does it not suggest at once a plan of reality
which might not yet demonstrably, but just possibly, stand
for the true divine order itself ? Might not this whole
universe of the apparently separate and sense -encom-
passed creatures be an organized spiritual community ? —
where, like bees working each in his own part of the cell-
wax, but all combining to build the honey-laden comb,
tliese creatures, in the very isolation and darkness of each
life, labored together for the realization, — yes, I mean it
literally, — for the very expressing and constituting of
God’s life ; a divine life, I repeat, of infinite complexity,
whose purposes were so manifold that an endless number
of agents might be needed to embody them ; whose ideals
were so lofty that only such courage and fidelity and de-
votion as finite beings, in this ignorance and isolation,
would have opportunity to develop, could serve the stern
and noble ends of the divine decrees. Suppose, in a
word, that the infinite whole made up of these finite lives
were itself the divine life. From such a point of view,
which I now suggest only by way of a pure hypothesis.


FIOHTE.


141


could not this Kantian universe be both interpreted, and,
after a fashion, even justified ? To be sure, by such an
interpretation it would be indeed transformed. In my
opening lecture I ventured to suggest to you the doctrine
that the universe, despite its seemingly stubborn physical
fixity, is a live thing, an infinite spirit. According to
Kant, the world of the natural order, in space and in
time, cannot be thus alive, simply because, apart from our
sense and our constructive imagination, this natural order
has no existence. Spinoza’s substance, then, would be for
Kant a mere mirage ; but now, as you see, the true uni-
verse for Kant consists of perceiving moral agents, and of
the dim and shadowy things in themselves, and of what
the practical reason postulates ; and that is all. If this
be so, however, do we care much for those shadowy things
in themselves? Perhaps they are n’t worth knowing.
Perhaps they even do not exist at all. Our inner woHd
doesn’t contain them. They are no object of natural
science. You can’t weigh them or measure them, much
less see them. Perhaps they are, as Hume would say,
“ sophistry and illusion.” What, then, remains to us ?
Why, precisely this : the world of the natural order, which,
mirage though it be, is the very mirror of our sanity, and
is therefore useful enough; this, and the world of our
fellow-men, the world of practical and therefore of spirit-
ual relationships, the world of live beings, ignorant, but
rational like ourselves. With these we live, we act ; we
seek to realize through them the moral order ; we respect
their rights, we love them, we treat them as God’s chil-
dren. But see : perhaps, in dealing with them, we touch
the divine order itself. Perhaps, to use a more modern
phrase, God simply differentiates himself into the forms
of all these liv6 beings, who may be, for all we know, as
numerous, and as various in their degrees of loftiness, as
the stars and the atoms of physics. Perhaps in the very
depths of their finite ignorance he does n’t quite lose him*


142


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


self ; perhaps his transcendent wisdom consists simply in
knowing, in establishing, in harmonizing their relation-
ships, so that, as Schiller says, while no one of them is
his equal, his own endlessness foams up to him from out
this beaker of the infinite world of spirits.” Then, indeed,
their lonely heroism is his triumph ; their seeming isola-
tion is simply the manner in which he realizes, through
them, the organization of his own life ; their diversity and
ignorance are merely his way of expressing the unity in
vai'iety, the completeness in differentiation, of his own
manifold nature. If so, then God is n’t somewhere far off
there, outside the world, so that we feel in vain for him
amongst the dead and dismal things in themselves. God
is in you, just in so far as you are alive and hearty and
humane ; in your human relationships, just so far as they
are devoted, loyal, organic ; in your very ignorance, in so
far as it enables you to be heroic ; in your very finiteness,
in so far as it is a condition for your accomplishment of
a definite task. God, outside of such a world of finite
agents, would rejoice only in his empty infinity ; he would
be, as Schiller also said, in the poem from which I have
just quoted, — he would be “friendless,” he would “ suffer
lack.” To be the God in reality, he would have to enter
into finite form, and preserve his infinity merely through
the unity, the organization, the conscious spiritual form of
his universe of active creatures. We were wrong then,
when we sought him as it were afar off, in the mirage
of space and time, or even in the laws of outer nature as
Spinoza did. We were even wrong to say, as Kant said :
We never take hold of his real self, we only postulate
him. The fact is that, in our spiritual life, we already
possess him, are fiesh of his flesh, are one with him, just
in so far as we have vitality, courage, loyalty, wealth,
strength, sanity, of wiU and of understanding. We know
of him just so much as we are. And we are of him just
BO much as we are morally worthy to be.


FICHTE.


148


This is the interpretation which dawns upon ua when
we reflect awhile upon Kant’s universe. Mystery en-
shrouds his world. The curtain of sense is so thick I ”
Such darkness is for us beyond it! We know so little.
We have nothing left us but morality ; and that is just a
postulate. But no, is this so little, after all ? Suppose
that the curtain itself were the picture, that the dark mys-
tery lay simply in this, that we have refused to recognize
as divine so much of God’s own essence as we ourselves
possess, and have failed to see how our life, just in so far
as it is spiritual, is, not a postulating, but a realizing of
the divine life. Suppose all this to be no mere hypothe-
sis, but a certainty. Would it not transform our philo-
sophy? Well, I suggest here this transformation, because,
as an idea, it was precisely the transformation of the
Kantian doctrine which was the common undertaking of
the gi'cat post-Kantian German idealists, Fichte, Schel-
ling, and Hegel.

Philosophy is full of surprises. Just when you think
that the road is ended against a dark and impassable wall,
the door opens, as it opened to Kant. And just when
you think again that Kant’s discovery is the end, a new
life for the first time begins. This is the new life of
modern idealism. It accepts in one sense Kant’s result.
Yes, it goes further in negation than even he went. He
held fast by the things in themselves, whose existence he
acknowledged, although he could know nothing about
them. The later German idealists say frankly that they
care nothing for the things in themselves, and either
doubt or deny whether there are any such things at all.
Kant, however, paused at the threshold of the show-world.
Beyond, he said, dwells, as we must faithfully believe, a
God whom we serve, but who is forever the unknown God.
The later idealists say : Indeed, the deepest truth is the
truth of the manly will to act morally; but then this will
itself embodies in each of us a portion of the divine per


144 TH£ SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHT.

sonality. This is, so to speak, the real presence of God in
us, to wit, just as much of our own nature as is holy. Our
holiness, if we have any rag of holiness about us, much
more if we are filled with heroism and with reasonable
service, is, in its own inner quality, divine. As for God,
his life is just this eternal sacrifice of his infinity by
entering into the rational lives of a world of limited, but
moral beings. For in this sacrifice he wins himself. He
enjoys his pes^ce, not apart from the world,

** Where never creeps a cloud nor moves a wind,

Nor ever falls the least white star of snow
Nor ever lowest moan of thunder rolls,

Nor sound of human sorrow mounts.”

No, his peace is the peace of triumphing in the midst of
our world of agony and of passion, as the tragic poet
triumphs even while losing himself in the sufferings of his
own creations. God’s life is simply all life, and it is
not concealed, but revealed by our own lives. God lives
in every kindly friendship, in every noble deed, in every
well-ordered society, in every united people, in every
sound law, in every wise thought. He has no life beyond
such rationality. His personality Is just this, the com*
munion, the intercourse, the organization of all finite per-
sons. Here, you see, is in one sense indeed a new notion
of personality. A person beyond our whole world, even
of morality, was what we had hoped for. The new doc-
trine declares that the infinite one pervades the whole
finite world of spirits, and simply lives by constituting, by
unifying, and by enjoying, this very life of ours and of all
our brethren, the rational beings, wherever and whatever
they may be. Thus indeed we are limited, and may be
even transient embodiments of God’s life ; but we our-
selves, in so far as we make for unity and for righteous-
ness, are in nature one with him. New is the doctrine, I
say, namely, as a reflective speculation in modem thought.
But in one sense, as these idealists are never weary of


nCHTE.


145


pointing out, it is a very old doctrine ; it is the very core
of Christian faith. When Paul said to the faithful, Ye
are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God ; ” when
the fourth Gospel makes the Logos say, I am the vine,
ye are the branches;” when the whole doctrine of the
church rested upon the idea of a God revealed in the
flesh ; when even a simpler and more primitive Christian
tradition, that of the first synoptic Gospel, represents the
final judgment as dependent upon the principle, Inas-
much as ye did it unto the least of these, ye did it unto
me ; ” when, finally, the deep mysticism of the historical
church represented the faithful as actually feeding upon
God’s very essence and living thereby, — what doctrine
was this but the very teaching upon which rests the new
philosophy which now undertakes to transform Kant’s
dark world of faithful and isolated beings into the world
of God’s own realization and presence? These moral
agents of Kant’s world are not isolated, for, ignorant as
they are, they work together. And what better revelation
of a divine order than a world where spirits can com-
mune and can work together ?

Once more, as you see, the philosopher invents nothing ;
he only reflects. In reflection he has cast down the dog-
mas of a blind faith ; in reflection he builds anew their
rational and eternal significance. So, at least, these Ger-
man idealists hold. As for me, I am so far, as 1 just
observed, a mere chronicler. This doctrine, too, may be
an imperfect speculation. I am not now defending it,
but only expounding it. As expositor I present it now
before you. So far we find it as an hypothesis. It needs
proof. Perhaps it will need further alteration and adjust-
ment. At all events, here is for us a new experience in
philosophy, namely, the very essence of Christianity
bodied in a speculative theory.


146


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


ni.

Meanwhile, the form which this doctrine takes in Ger-
man thought is one dependent upon the special conditions
of a very charming and a very wayward age, the age of
German classical and romantic literature. Whether or
no you find this sort of speculation in itself satisfactory,
you will at all events be interested in watching with me,
during the rest of this lecture and during the next, some
of the more obvious and immediately human aspects of a
time so full of fire, of imagination, of productiveness, of
faults,^ of wanderings, and of glory. But let us proceed
at once to the man who first embodied this new idealistic
doctrine in a series of writings wherein the spontaneity,
the eloquence, the confidence, the complexity, and the
fragmentariness of the work done reflect very well the
character of this period; I refer to Fichte.

Johann Gottlieb Fichte is the first of the great succes<
sors of Kant. He was a man three years younger than
Schiller, thirteen years younger than Goethe, and thirty-
eight years younger than Kant himself. The story of his
life is one of ardor, poverty, high aims, brilliant literary
success, bitter conflicts, and an untimely death in his
* country's service. For at the close of his career, during
the great war of liberation, in 1813, he and his devoted
wife busied themselves in the encouragement of the war-
riors and in the care of the wounded. Fichte, as you see,
had just passed the age of fifty. His wife, while nursing
wounded soldiers, was stricken with typhus fever. She
recovered, but the contagion had already passed to Fichte,
to whom it proved fatal, in January, 1814. A nobler
death, in a more heroic time, was scarcely possible to a
professor of philosophy and a patriot. Fichte was spared
the pain of seeing the darker years of national stagnation
and of illiberalism in Germany, that followed the triumph
over Napoleon. And for the rest, his work was in one


FICHTE. 147

sense already done. He had influenced younger men who
by that time had already transcended him.

This work had been, however, manifold and exacting.
Fichte had a temperament at once logical and enthusiasm
tic. The struggle between a keen and subtle intellect and
a warm and imaginative emotional nature, had joined it-
self with outer hindrances to make his early years event-
ful and arduous. The son of a poor weaver, and one of a
large family of children, Fichte chanced to attract, while
yet a boy, the kindly attention of a nobleman, who
adopted him, showed him a little of the great world, and
then, suddenly dying, left him a penniless youth, only, the
more keenly ashamed, under such circumstances, of liis
poverty. At the university he supported himself by
private teaching, was more than once near to despair in
his neediness, and at length, after graduation, became a
Hofmeister in a Zurich family. While here, in 1788, he
met his future wife, a certain Johanna Rahn, a niece of
the poet Klopstock. They were soon betrothed, but were
too poor to marry until 1793.

Fichte’s since published love-letters to his betrothed are
described, by those who have read them through (I have
not), as somewhat pedantic — the natural product of a
mind conscientious, learned, but impulsive, and so far at
once flighty and even a little despondent. He is fond of
accusing himself of many faults, laments his restlessness
and unsteadiness of ideas and plans, knows no guiding
star but her love, and wonders what Providence can be
meaning with him. Meanwhile, during this period of his
betrothal, he changed his position often and traveled
much, looking for a permanent occupation, — a project-
maker and an unpromising wanderer. In philosophy he
was so far a sort of amateur Spinozist, and occupied a
position to which he later looked back as one of darkness
and of the gall of bitterness. Suddenly a change came.
It was 1790, and he. was now twenty-eight years old.


148 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

While in Leipzig he undertook to give a young man pri-
vate lessons in philosophy, and to that end took up for
the first time the study of Kant. Very soon he wrote
to Fraulein Kahn in an entirely new vein. It is a won-
derful philosophy, this of Kant, he asserts. It tames a
man’s wild imagination ; it gives one an indescribable
elevation above all earthly affairs.’’ “I have obtained
from it,” he continues, “ a nobler ideal. I don’t concern
myself so much now with outward things ; I am busied
within myself. Thence has come to me a peace that I
have never before known. In the midst of my perplexing
material situation, I have been enjoying the most blessed
days of my experience. I mean to devote to this philoso-
phy at least some years of my life. It is above all con-
ception a difficult doctrine, and it deserves to be made
easier. Its basis, to be sure, is a mass of head-splitting
speculations that have no immediate bearing on human
life, but the consequences are vastly important to an age
which, like ours, is morally corrupt to the very source ;
and one would deserve well of his time if he made these
consequences luminous to the world. Tell your dear
father that he and I used to err in our investigations
about the necessity of all man’s acts. ... I have found
out now that man’s wiU is free, and that not happiness,
but worthiness is the end of our being. And I ask your
pardon, too, that I used to teach you false doctrine about
these things. Henceforth believe your own feeling, even
if you can’t refute a sophist.”

One might wonder whether this confession to Johanna
Kahn, of the superlative blessedness of days passed out of
her company, and alone with the “ Critique of Pure Kea-
son,” might not have made her a trifle jealous of Kant ;
but in fact, as she was a person of both maturity and dis-,
eretion, being four years the senior of Fichte himself, she
wrote him that, since after all he appeared unable to earn
his living, and since her father’s means were now apparently


FICHTE.


149


sufficient, he might return to Zurich and marry her, and
then devote himself to philosophy at his leisure. A curi-
ous wavering followed in the mind and conduct of Kant's
new disciple. He wrote to his brother that Fraulein
Bahn was indeed the noblest soul in the world, but that
for one thing he himself was a wanderer, an independent
creature, and that for the rest something new had just
come into his life, which seemed to drive him out to con-
quer the whole world afresh. Marriage would clip a
man’s wings, would imprison him yon ler in Switzerland,
would perhaps hinder his philosophizing in this wondrous
and novel way. He felt restless : he was even often .dis-
posed to flee altogether and never write to her again.

To Johanna herseM, Fichte’s letters expressed of course
nothing of these rebellious sentiments, and I mention
them only to suggest a little of the ferment which in this
needy young tutor’s soul was then under way. He
must do everything, — teach Johanna the new insight,
marry, cease this wavering that had made him like a
wave of the sea ; and yet, he must also convert the whole
world to the Kantian doctrine, in all its spirituality and
earnestness ; he must save his countrymen in this time of
revolution and of corruption ; he must wander, work,
think incessantly. One has here, you see, something of
the typical erudite German of the story-books, crude and
elevated in one — lover, world-stormer, sentimentalist, and
cynic, all at the same time. For Fichte, too, was occasion-
ally a bit of a cynic. “ When I met Johanna,” he once
writes to his brother, my heart was empty. I just let
her love me. I didn’t care much about it.” “Dear
one,” he writes to her in all sincerity, at about the sape
time, *^take me with all my faults. What a creature I am!
Men have attributed to me fixity of character, but I have
always been merely the creature of circumstances. You
have the stronger soul. Give fixity to my waverings.” ^

1 The present sketch is dependent largely upon that of Julian


160 THE SPIRIT OF HODERN PHILOSOPHY,

In this state of mind Fichte journeyed, in the way of
business, to accept a tutor’s position at Warsaw. He
failed there to give satisfaction, because his French pro-
nunciation was poor, and on his way back he called upon
Khnt at Konigsberg, in July, 1791. The aged, prudent,
and, as you will remember, highly economical philosopher
regarded this reverent, fiery, but obviously impecunious
young disciple with a certain suspicion, and received his
confidences coolly. The rebuff only heated Fichte the
more. He tarried in Konigsberg two months, in order
during that time to write, for presentation to Kant, a work
on religious philosophy, which, once finished, proved to be
so thoroughly in Kant’s spirit that, when in the spring of
the next year the book was published anonymously, it was
very generally hailed by Kant’s admirers as a new pro-
duction of the master’s own genius. Kant himself had to
correct this misapprehension, and in doing so named, and
now with warm praise, the real author. Thus at one
stroke, as it were, Fichte’s career was made. He had won
the great philosopher’s approval and the ear of the public
at the same time. Within another year he returned to
Zurich. lie was at length famous, and, as his beloved
was now, by chance, even more obviously in comfortable
circumstances than she had been at the time when she
wrote the aforementioned highly practical letter, there
was nothing further to hinder his marriage, which took
place in October, 1793, and remained to the end a very
happy one. In 1794 came the call to the University of
Jena, which was then at the centre of the mental life of
Germany.

rv.

Fichte’s career has thus been suggested to you through
a sketch of its first important crisis. There is the same
interesting union of the great, the ardent, the thoughtful,

Schmidt, as given in the fifth edition of his Geschichte d. deutichen
Literatur seit Lessing's Tod^ vol. i. p. 347 sqq.


FICHTE.


161


and, if one wants to be frank, of the petty also, in the
rest of his life. Accused of atheism in 1799, the heroic,
but lamentably indiscreet man replied to an unjust charge
in so violent and unhappy a fashion as to make him
thenceforth impossible at Jena, so that even the chief
patron of liberal culture and free thought in Germany,
Goethe’s own duke at Weimar, had regretfully, and by
Goethe’s personal advice, to dismiss him from his chair.
Then followed, however, the Berlin career, with its noble
ending. Later years, indeed, in some respects mellowed
Fichte ; but to the end he was always a fighter, and a
man of books as well, with all the faults of both these
species, with a temperament whose lofty heroism and true
piety could not save it from an appearance of polemical
narrowness and furious self-assertion whenever he was in
an actual conflict with any man or party. In argument
Fichte is, so to speak, all temperament. Ilis dialectic is
indeed keen, his analysis is deep and searching, his sense
of the unity of all science is profoundly rational; but
deeper than all is the strong sense of his own personality,
the love of making articulate his own character, which led
him to say with truth, but with a peculiar and individual
strength of accent : “ What system of philosophy you
hold depends wholly upon what manner of man you are.”
Hence, in all his lengthy and frequently very technical
writings, he after all never merely argues ; he appeals to
more than your understanding ; he appeals to your honor,
to your dignity of soul, to agree with his system. He
would not merely convince you; he would convert you
from an eiTor which, as he feels, shows in you a defect of
character. Goethe used to say that, by way of amuse-
ment, he occasionally read Fichte, “ just to let myself be
abused by him for a little while.” Meanwhile, Fichte
abused frankly his own early blindness, before Kant came
into his soul, with all the ardor of the ransomed convert.
What Kant had ransomed him from was Spinozism, and


152 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

the dread bondage of the outer world. What Fichte con*
ceived himself to have learned from Kant was therefore
this : The rational subject builds its own worlds and the
dead external world is naught What Fichte added to
Kant, as he went on, was however somewhat elaborate,
and constitutes, along with the strictly Kantian elements,
his own system, which is almost universally but rather
inaptly named “ Subjective idealism.”

Let me state it, too, first in rough outline, then a little
more systematically. As everybody knows, Fichte ac-
cepted Kant’s result in so far as Kant said that space and
time are facts only for our consciousness, and that we
can’t know any things in themselves beyond us. Only
Fichte went further. He denied that there can exist any
things in themselves beyond consciousness at all. The
world that we spiritual beings know, however hard and
fast it may seem, however helplessly we ourselves may
individually be subjected to its facts, is still, in the last
analysis, there only in so far as we recognize it as there
for us. The world, then, is the world that the self makes.
So Fichte’s chief principles are these: (1) All philosophy
has its source in one primal truth, namely, the truth that
living and voluntary selves freely choose to assert them-
selves, and so to build up their whole organized world ;
(2) The moral law is, in consequence of this, really prior
to all other knowledge, and conditions all that we theo-
retically know. For as you see, knowing a world is for
Fichte making a world, consciously recognizing the truth,
acting then in this way or in that. But the law of action,
the moral law, thus becomes for Fichte the basis of all
theoretical knowing ; (8} The apparently fatal outer
world about us is simply, in Fichte’s bold and stirringly
fantastic words, the stuff, the material (the opportun-
ity), for our duty, made manifest to our senses Q das ver*
sinnlichte Material unserer PJlicht ’)/’ Beyond all this,
however, in the fourth place, Fichte went later, when he


FICHTE.


158


developed more clearly a doctrine obviously latent and
implied in his earlier works, namely, the doctrine that
the universe of the self-asserting and world - creating
selves, each of whom sees about him in daily life simply
the very stuff and fibre of his moral law made manifest
to his senses as an opportunity for his moral work, —
that this universe of selves, I say, constitutes the life and
embodiment of the one true and infinite Reason, God’s
will, which, itself supreme and far above the level of our
finite personality, uses even our conscious lives and wills
as part of its own life. This doctrine Fichte himself, in
one of his later works The Way to the Blessed Life
identifies with the teaching* of the fourth Gospel. 'Ac-
cording to this view, you see, God, in so far as he reveals
himself, is indeed the vine, and we, in so far as we truly
live, are the sap-laden and fruitful branches. The only
real world is the world of conscious activity, and so of
spiritual relationships, of society, of serious business, of
friendship, of love, of law, of national existence, — in a
word, of work ; as for matter, that is the mere show stuff
that is needed to embody, to express, to give form, sta-
bility, outline, as it were, to our moral work.

I may put Fichte’s theory of the external world in yet
another fashiop, thus: In company with another spirit,
so Fichte thinks, I can only work in case he and I have
a sense world in common. Hence our common devotion,
our social enthusiasm, our duty, requires of us all that
we try to embody our ideals in ttie same sense forms. If
we succeed, we all see the same bouses and sti'eets, the
same people moving, the same flags waving. Seeing thus
in common, we can work in common. If we did not find
out how to work in common, we should express the vague-
ness of our immoral isolation in the separateness of our
various sense worlds ; in other words, we should dream or
be delirious. I dream when I am not at work. When I
am strenuously active I am awake ; and therefore, in so far


154 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHIU^PI(Y«

as I am effectively righteous, 1 see the
fellow-workers see. Matter is thus the mere
our common tasks. Each one of us croates it for ldms4^
We create together and in agreement, in so far as W6
want to toil for a common purpose. And the rationaliiy
of the divine plan secures to us a power thus to create
and to work together. Meanwhile, good and bad men|
noble and base men, strong and weak men, really do not
see precisely tbe same sense world. The seeming outer
world for any man actually varies with his moral percep-
tions. The sense world is saner and more orderly for
the cultivated man than for the savage, for the good
man than for the man abi^orbed in the pleasure of the
moment, for the wise man than for the fool. And thus
the doctrine conforms, thinks Fichte, to the actual facts.
** The necessity,” says the philosopher, “ with which the
belief in the reality of phenomena forces itself upon us
is a moral necessity, the only one that is possible for a
moral being ; herein our duty reveals itself.” And thus
we have, in the barest outline, the famous “ subjective
idealism ” of Fichte. One might better call it ‘‘ ethical
idealism” in its extremest expression. So much, then,
for my first rough summary. And now what shall wo say
of this sort of idealism ? ^

A bold, yes, an extravagant doctrine! you will say.
Kant’s things in themselves have gone out of this world
of Fichte. Yet somehow we at first scarcely miss them.
Kant, to be sure, felt qufte out of place in Fichte’s fantas-
tic universe, and publicly expressed his repentance, ere ho
died, that he had ever encouraged this young disciple so
freely. “ Save me from my friends,” cried Kant, very
sincerely, in a printed note of explanation. The transfor-
mation lay of course in Fichte’s determination not merely
to do away with Kant’s things in themselves, but to see
at once into the very heart of the moral order, whose
' supremacy Kant had only postulated. If you now ask


FI6HT£.


156


me, however, whether, as modem idealist, I myself accept
Fichte’s statement as the final truth of the doctrine, I
respond of course at once that I do not. This is n’t the
idealism that has, as idealism ought to have, a deep and
genuine respect for the natural order and for experience.
Fichte’s easy disposal of the whole external and natural
order is, indeed, not only bold, but quite unwarranted
The modern student of nervous physiology, of the facts
of evolution, and of the interdependence of the physical
and moral worlds generally, is not likely to find Fichte’s
ethical idealism” anywhere near to the last word.
More philosophical surprises await us hereafter ; upon
newer insights the thought of to-day is based ; and in
some, not in all respects, the whole later German ideal-
istic movement, which Fichte began, represents to my
mind, as you will later see, a circuit to one side of the
main stream of modern thought. Only, as we shall learn,
from this circuit thought returns enriched. This expe-
rience also will have its part in the outcome ; and he who
has not once fairly viewed Fichte’s universe will see less*
than he ought to see in the universe of to-day.

As an experience, then, as one more of the many ways
of looking at truth, I want you to consider this doctrine.
Think of Fichte, when you read or hear of him, as one
embodiment only of that beautiful, that profoundly wise
and instructive, waywardness of German thought and
sentiment, which we all know so well to-day in song, in
story, and in the drama, as well As in the other arts. It
is this same waywardness that has given us Faust,” and
Heine’s “Buch der Lieder;” that instantaneously trans-
forms the whole universe for us in any song of Schubert’s
or of Schumann’s; th^t builds worlds and casts them
down in fiery despair in a Wagnerian trilogy. In pre-
sence of this waywardness, not, indeed, of tlie Germany
of Bismarck and of the two Williams, but of the now
almost dead romantic Germany, whose empire, as Jean


156


THE SPIBIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


Paul said, was of the air, — in presence of this wayward-
ness, the world is once for all plastic, changeable ; a world
of divine or of diabolical ideas, but of ideas that are not
so much eternal as capricious. Fichte makes this ideal
world a moral one. Others, as we shall see, will find
this universe of the selves a universe of romance, of senti-
mentality, of anything but hard fact. Yet think not that
this capricious world utterly lacks truth. The real world,
too, once for aM fiows ; flows and changes throughout its
whole existence, as Heraclitus long ago said ; and pre-
serves, too, its sacred and permanent logos just by chan-
ging. , Well, it is the ofiice of the wayward to note the
various aspects of just this change, this plasticity, this
seemingly hopeless variety, under which the eternal truth
presents itself to us. In the world of the wayward, no-
thing seems fast. View follows view, romantic theory
chases romantic theory, until we begin to fear that no-
thing is true, and that here, even as in Hume's skeptical
world also, if we find the Holy Grail itself, “ it, too, will
' fade, and crumble into dust.’’ But, if we watch patiently,
we shall see that, from this very wealth of forms, the true
form which is present through all the changes will in
some fashion ultimately come to light. Fichte’s moral
universe, where matter is only our duty made manifest
to our senses, and the universe of the romantic school,
where all is sentiment, are, after all, fragments of the true
faith. That thought is the thread which is to guide us
through the labyrinth. The truth is the whole. Even
the fantastic has its part therein*


V.

But let us look a second time and more closely at
Fichte’s view. The only perfectly clear thing, he says,
at the outset of philosophy, is that there is a self. Any
self will of course do, but some self one must start with,
namely, of course, his own. Now a self asserts, I am.*'


FICHTE.


.167

It also equally asserts, Something exists beside me;
there is a not-self.” If you don’t believe that this is
always asserted, Fichte invites you to try it and see.^
Well, here forthwith is a puzzle. I assert that I exist;
and then I assert that something exists beside 'me. Now
I can of course know myself, it would seem, but how can
I get outside myself to see what is not myself? How
come I to guess at the existence of something other than
1 am ? Fichte’s solution is simple. I dovUt guess at it ;
nor is it a fact forced upon me from without, in any fash-
ion. My true self freely chooses to recognize the exist-
ence of something beside myself as a fact. To be sure, I,
in my private, empirical, momentary capacity, seem not
to choose, but helplessly to Jlnd this outer existence.
Reyally, however, it is my own, my deeper self, whose
choice is at each moment shown to me. But, then, ob-
serve, unless I thus chose to recognize something beyond
myself, I should have nothing to do, I should have no-
thing to resist, to fight, to win, to love, — in short, to act
upon, in any way. The deepest truth, then, is a prac-
tical truth. I need something not myself, in order to be
active, that is, in order to exist. My very existence is
practical; it is self-assertion. I exist, so to speak, by
hurling the fact of my existence at another than myself.
I limit myself thus, by a foreign somewhat, opaque, ex-
ternal, my own opposite ; but my limitation is the free
choice of my true self. By thus limiting myself I give
myself something to do, and thus win my own very exist-
ence. Yet this opposition, upon which my life is based,
is an opposition within my deepest nature. I have a
foreign world as the theatre of my activity ; I exist only
to conquer and win that apparently foreign world to my-

^ Cf. the noteworthy passag^e in the Orundlage of 1794, Fichte’s
Werke, vol. i. p. 253 : Dass es ein solohes Setzen gebe [namely, of
the Nichtdcfi] kann jeder nur duroh seine eigene Erfahmng sioh dar-
thun.”


158


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


self ; I must come to possess it; I must prove that it is
mine. In the process of thus asserting a foreign worlds
and then actively identifying it as not foreign and exter-
nal, but as our own, our life itself consists. This is what
is meant by work, by love, by duty.

But this process, thinks Fichte, is essentially an endless
one. The more of a self I am, the more of a world out-
side me I need, to develop and to express my energies.
A busy man needs, and therefore posits, a world full of
the objects of his business. Without this asserted world
of objects, he, as busy man, would cease to exist ; he
would, so to speak, retire from business ; he and his busy
world would stagnate together. This, then, is Fichte’s
central thought : Your outer world, your not-sclf, is just
as large as your own spiritual activity makes it. Fichte
tries to show in detail how the various forms of our rec-
ognition of outer reality, such as perception, imagination,
space, time, causality, and the rest, arise. Into such de-
tails I have no time to follow him ; but the essence of his
doctrine consists in identifying Kant’s theoretical and
practical reason, and in saying that all our assertion of
a world beyond, of a world of things and of people,
merely expresses, in practical form, our assertion of our
own wealthy and varied determination to be busy with
things and with people. Thus, then, each of us builds
his own world. He builds it in part unconsciously ; and
therefore he seems to his ordinary thought not to have
built it at all, but merely to find it. Each of us sees, at
any moment, not only the world that we are now making
by this act, but the world that we have made by all our
past acts. And hence our whole life is thus consolidated
before our eyes ; our world is the world of our conscious
and unconscious deeds. Thus we often regard it as our
fate, and talk of an external substance, as Spinoza did.
In this we are wrong. No activity, no world ; no self, no
not>self; no self-assertion, no facts to assert ourselves
upon. So, at least, Fichte teaches.


FICHTE.


159


But, you will say, is not the outcome of all this a sort
of solitary self-existence, where each one of us is shut up
to his own life ? Has the spiritual world no absolute
reality ? Is it, too, the mere dream of our activity ? No,
thinks Fichte, not so ; and here comes a part of his doc-
trine that was to himself the hardest part. He never
made it perfectly clear, although he tried again and again.
To you I can only suggest it. When we reflect upon our
inner activity we find it, after all, not an individual self-
will, but a deep longing for universal life. The true self,
therefore (and so far the thing is indeed clear enough),
the true self is n’t the private person, the individual called
Johann Gottlieb Fichte, the impecunious tutor, the' waver-
ing lover of Johanna Kahn, the professor in Jena, falsely
accused of atheism. This true self, thinks Fichte, is some-
thing infinite. It needs a whole endless world of life to
express itself in. Its moral law could n’t be expressed in
full on any one planet. Johann Gottlieb may be one of
its prophets ; but the heavens could not contain its glory
and its eternal business. No one of us ever finally gets
at the true Reason which is the whole of him. Each one
of us is a partial embodiment, an instrument of the moral
law, and our very consciousness tells us that this law is
the expression of an infinite world life. The true self
is the will, which is everywhere present in things. This
will is, indeed, the vine, whereof our wills are the branches.
Fichte has innumerable ways of trying to tell finally and
clearly the story of what the infinite will is and does. It
is eternally asserting itself afresh, through countless finite
wills. Each one of these finite wills, as moral agent,
builds its sense world, and finds, in this sense world, the
manifestations of other agents. For all the agents, as
ministers of the divine, work together. The moral con-
sciousness says to each, If I am real, so also are these.
Work with them ; respect their rights ; honor their free-
dom ; join with them to build a higher and freer world


160


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


than any of us now see.” In this organization of life,
even here on earth, in this kindliness, this honorable con-
duct, this social unity, which constitutes our better life,
something of the divine will is thus realized. But the
problem of its complete realization is an endless one.
Nowhere, in all the infinity of countless worlds of moral
struggle, can the divine will be fully realized. As I my-
self seek to assert myself all my life long, but never suc-
ceed fully ill my task, am always struggling with obsta-
cles, casting aside all that I have won, in order to pursue
new triumphs, even so the divine will is restless through
all its worlds, and pulses from self to self, from attainment
to attainment, in an everlasting search for a complete
self-realization. The true God is, therefore, as Fichte
holds, existent in our universe as the pulse of its moral
order, as the life of lives, the eternal spiritual self-creator,
whose work is never done, who rests never, and who is no
one individual being anywhere, but who is the live and
organic unity of all beings. Even herein, however, thinks
Fichte, he finds his highest peace, that in endless toil he
shall reassert himself, and shall win the world which is
his embodiment.

VI.

The completest popular statement possible of Fichte’s
system is given in his own words in his book on the “ Vo-
cation of Man.” This work was first published in 1800,
shortly after Fichte left Jena, and was no doubt meant to
justify him, in the eyes of the general public, against the
charge of atheism. The argument of the work falls into
three parts, denominated respectively, “ Doubt,” “ Know-
ledge,” and “Faith.” Under the first head Fichte de-
scribes the views and problems of his own pre-Kantian
period. Under the second head he sets forth the revolu-
tion produced in bis thought by the influence of E^ant.
In the third part be explains the conceptions of the moral
order and of the infinite will. The style is eloquent, tire*


FICHTE.


161


less, too full of explanation and of illustrations ; the work
as a whole is profound and inspiring. Let us hear yet a
word of Fichte’s own from this book, in a fine passage
where he appeals direct to this infinite itself. Supreme
and living will,” he says, whom no name names, to thee
may I lift up my soul, for thou and I are not parted.
Thy voice sounds in me, and mine again iu thee ; and all
my thoughts, if only they be true, are thought in thee.
I comprehend thee not, yet in thee I comprehend myself
and the world. . . . Best fitted to know thee is childlike
and submissive simplicity. ... I know not what thou art
for thyself, . . . and after thousand lives lived through,
my spirit will comprehend thee as little as now, in this
house of clay. For what I have once won to my compre-
hension becomes even thereby finite. • . • Nay, I wish
not to know of thee what thou art in thyself. I know
thy bearings on my life. . . . Thou producest in me
the knowledge of my duty. . . . Thou knowest what I
think and will ; . . . thou choosest that my free obedience
shall be effective to aU eternity ; . . . thou doest, for thy
will is itself Deed. Thou livest and art, for thou dost
know, will, and do, and art ever present to my insight ;
but what thou art I shall never wholly know through all
the eternities.”

This, you see, is Fichte’s theism. The essence of it is,
with all the analogies between the two, something very
different from Kant’s postulating of a God beyond the
world of sense. The fact is that, for Fichte, my own
vocation is the central fact of consciousness. But what
my * vocation is, is a matter for deeper consideration.
And, if I duly consider my vocation, I find that there is
a measureless strength of restless will about me, which
demands an infinity of time in which to work out my
vocation, and an infinite business to meet, with its magni-
tude, the endlessly significant office that 1 choose for my-
self. Plainly, then, I, the true self, am not the mere self


162 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

of the world of sense, the self who eats and talks, and has
this name. It might be truer to say that I, the real, the
deeper, the relatively impersonal, or, rather, if you. like,
the genuinely and essentially personal self, need, and so
express myself in, the world of social business. All we
human selves are thus one true organic self, in so far as
we work together. And this organic self we all of us ex-
perience just in so far as we do toil together. But not
even this larger self of society can fully express the voca-
tion which constitutes me in my true, in my deeper per-
sonality. No, my true vocation is endless, is eternal. By
it I am linked, not through a mere postulate, but through
all my deeper self-consciousness, to the very essence of the
divine personality. When I reflect upon this truth, lo I
my earthly existence, in its darkness and limitations, van-
ishes from before my eyes. With you I stand in presence
of the divinest of mysteries, the communion of 'all the
spirits in the one self whose free act is the very heart’s
blood of our spiritual being. Nay, must it not, then,
thinks Fichte, must not this be true of us ? We are dead,
and our life is bid in God. He is the only self. Hia
will is the only will ; his self-assertion lives in our every
deed and love ; his restlessness trembles in every throb of
our hearts ; his joy thrills in every triumph of our cour-
age.

Well, in this thought, thus eloquently suggested by the
restless and unsatisfying Fichte, you have the beginnings
of the post-Kantian . German idealism. The question,
“ Who is the true self ? ” thus becomes central in thought.
Kant had really made it so, when he made all reasonable
experience a continual appeal of my momentary to my
larger self. Fichte merely universalizes the problem.
The world is the poem thus dreamed out by the inner life.
Who, then, is the dreamer ? That is the question of the
romantic period of German speculation. If you ren^em-
ber this as the central problem in all that is to follow in


nCHTE.


168


the two succeeding lectures, you will have iu hand the
thread that will guide us through this labyrinth of Ger>
man speculation. Do not tremble, I beg you, before the
mysterious seeming of the region into which we enter.
The thread, firmly held, will soon lead us back again to
the study of the natural order, back again to the king-
dom of modem science, to the region where the facts are
indeed stubborn, but where the deepest problems, as the
idealists will meanwhile have taught ns, must needs be
spiritual. To teach, indeed, just this lesson, the spiritu-
ality of the stubborn world of outer fact, was the trae
mission of these idealists, who so often despised facts.


LECTURE VI.


THE ROMANTIC SCHOOL IN PHILOSOPHY.

FichtE) as we have seen, had begun by setting aside
Kant's things in themselves. What, after all, thinks he,
is the use of even meutioning such mysteries as the dead
things in themselves, whereof you only declare that they
are unknowable ? What if they are said to exist ? Un-
less we can know them, they are to us as good as nouglit.
But now, for others besides Fichte, Kant’s things in them-
selves used at that time to be objects of no little sport, —
sport which took, of course, a rather heavy and German
form, but which was very well warranted by the situation.
The things in themselves of Elant’s theoretical philosophy,
the sources of all our experience, but themselves never
experienced, were too dim and distant to seem to a
further reflection anything but chimeras. An epigram,
usually attributed to Schiller, compared them to useless
household furniture, once the pride of that very form of
metaphysic which Kant’s Critique ” had undertaken to
slay. For this old metaphysio had pretended to know
them. Now that the pretentious doctrine is dead, what
is the use of the abandoned furniture ?

** Da die Metapliysik vor Kurzem unbeerbt abging
Werden die Dinge an sich morgen 9ub hasta verkauft.” ^

But the house of our philosophy thus once emptied of
cumbersome furniture, Fichte had found himself able to
^ That is, freely translated : —

** Notice : The late metaphysio is dead without heirs, and to-morrow
All the things in themselves shall under the hammer be sold.”


THE ROMANTIC SCHOOL IN PHILOSOPHY.


166


fill it in his own fashion with the rarest treasures of truth.
The real thing in itself, according to Fichte, is the active
I, the Ego, the subject of self-consciousness. This each
of us knows in his own person. To watch the activity of
this great source of our being, to sound the depths of its
endless nature, is to come to the true knowledge of God
and of things which Spinoza already demanded for the
wise man, and which Kant sought in vain in the external
world. We and our world exist together. Our world is
the expression of our character. As a man thinketh, so
is he ; but with equal truth, according to Fichte, as a
man is, so thinks he. He sees himself in all he sees.
And this self that a man *sees crystallized in* all his
world of sense, of society, and of philosophy, is simply his
own fashion of conduct, his busy world-building tempera-
ment. At the outset of life each personal self says, “ I
must exist, 1 will exist.” But no one can exist unless he
is ready to act. My life, my existence, is in work. I
toil for self-consciousness, and without toil no conscious-
ness. But once more, also, I can only work if 1 have a
task, something foreign to me, a not-self to influence and
finally to conquer. Therefore it is, thinks Fichte, that
I stand from the beginning in the presence of a world
which seems external. My deeper self unconsciously pro-
duces this foreign world, and then bids me win my place
therein. The material things yonder are therefore just
the products of my unconscious activity. Their office it
is to give me something to do ; they are the outer embodi-
ment of my duty ; they are my moral law made manifest
to sense. You and I see the same world about us merely
because we, as moral beings, need and choose common
tasks. And, in a deeper sense, the reason why you and
I see the same world is that we are actually fragmentary
manifestations of one infinite self, whose ultimate nature
we can never fathom, but whose world is through and
through a world of common tasks, — a world of a moral
order, whereof we are all instruments.


166


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


I.

In the present lecture we have to follow the further
story of German idealism as exemplified in the views and
experiences of a number of persons who, for lack of a
better name, are usually classed together as constituting
the German Komantic School. The peculiar character of
our undertaking in this course bids us attend as much as
possible to the relations between philosophy and life.
Where, as in the case of the German romantic school, a
groiij) of writers tried to embody a philosophy in a liter-
ary movement, and to translate their own lives directly
into philosophy, such a phenomenon cannot but be of
great service to our purpose. And therefore I shall spend
time upon matter that will indeed lack tlie technicality
inseparable from even the most general account of Kant’s
philosophy, but that will still have its bearing on our gen-
eral task. In fact, my discussion will for the time leave
the field of technical philosophy almost altogether, and
for the rest of this lecture I shall speak of thoughts that
will have their more metaphysical bearings shown only in
later lectures.

I mentioned in the last lecture how Fichte’s philosophy
is an example of that beautiful waywardness which is
everywhere characteristic of the Germany of the classical*
and romantic periods. For the rest, to particularize con-
cerning this waywardness as it shows itself in Fichte, he
is, after all, a very arbitrary thinker. Ilis system has
vast gaps in it. You in vain seek to get from Fichte, for
instance, any precise deduction of hoiG the world of our
senses, down to its very details, is an embodiment of the
moial law. We, in this age, whose world is so full of
material facts, whose science has delved so deeply into
physical nature, whose industrial art is so multiform in
its inventions, whose whole view of man makes him so
dependent for his health, his fortune, and his very reason,


THE ROMANTIC SCHOOL IN PHILOSOPHY. 167

upon physiological conditions, feel at once the great gulf
that divides Fichte’s ethical idealism from the world of
the natural order. We honor the stern enthusiasm of
this idealist, but we find in his system the record of a dis-
tinctly individual experience. That he has a hold upon
a veiy genuine truth we ought to recognize ; but we can-
not read his fearless and often intolerant essays without
becoming aware that it has not pleased God to create any
perfectly orthodox Fichtean, save Fichte himself. Many
of us will no doubt call ourselves, with Fichte, ethical
idealists, since we indeed hold that the world is through
and through a moral order ; but his way of showing how
it is a moral order will not. content us. I, the* active
being, shall create this sense-world of mine unconsciously,
for the sake of having my task, the material of my duty,
made manifest to my senses. Very good, but why, then,
do I create a world that has a belt of asteroids in it be-
tween the orbits of Mai;s and Jupiter? What portion of
my personal and private duty do the comets, or the jelly-
fishes, or the volcanoes, or the mosquitoes, make manifest
to my senses ? What part has the Silurian period in the
scheme of my moral order? And of what ethical value
to me are the properties of the roots of algebraic equa-
tions, or the asymptotes of an hyperbola? In the world
of this moral order, you see, there is a great deal that will
not easily submit to my ethical interpretation. But if we
say, with Fichte, that the real world is after all not the
world of just my private and individual moral order, but
the world of God’s infinite ethical activity, so much the
more is it incumbent upon us to be industrious in our
efforts to comprehend the spirituality of the truths of na-
ture by means of formulas that are more submissive to
facts, more widely sensitive to the varied aspects of real-
ity, less impatient of mystery, than were Fichte’s impetu-
ous undertakings. If God’s world is through and through
moral, it is also through and through complicated, pro-
found and physical.


168


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY,


Well, the story of the romantic school is the story of
the enlargement of Fichte’s onesidedness through the ap-
pearance, in the first place, of other not less arbitrary
doctrines, which sought to interpret the whole world in
terms of our spiritual interests, but which expressed other
interests than those that he made central. And, for the
rest, this story is also the tale of the gradual fixing of all
such waywardness into the directions that have proved so
fruitful in the recent decades of modem research. We
are too frequently disposed to fancy that the philosophy
of the period of Fichte, Schelling, and Hegel is something
very remote from the philosophy of our own day. That
philosophy, we say, was above all just wayward, fantastic,
regardless of the limits of human knowledge, indifferent
to science, unwisely imaginative. Nowadays we have
changed all that, have abandoned romantic wanderings,
have come to respect the facts of science, and to let the
mysteries alone. But such a view of our relations to the
age of the romantic school is not precisely historical ; and
wherein it is not precisely historical I want to make plain
to you. ^Deeper than the contrast between that age and
ours is, as we shall soon see, the relationship between the
two. Our age, as we shall learn, contains merely what
was implicit in the very waywardness of that revolution-
ary period. Their youthful enthusiasms, at first vague,
wandering, conflicting, took form at length through
growth, and produced, in their maturity, our modern doc-
trine of evolution, our modem efforts to bring into close
relation the natural and the spiritual, our whole modem
many-sidedness of interest and experience. The romantic
period was the time of bloom and of flowers. Our period,
if you will, is, in its matter-of-fact and apparently prosaic
realism, the time of the ripened seeds, a time which the
warm-hearted usually scorn as a bleak and autumnal pe-
riod of dry seed-pods and chilly night airs. But the wise
love such ages of ripening and of harvest ; for they know


t

THE ROMANTIC SCHOOL IN PHILOSOPHY. 169

lihat a richer ^wth is erelong to spring from all these
' barren -seeming seed -kernels of truth. But such meta-
phors apart, what I want to insist upon is the essential
unity of recent philosophy amidst all its transformations.
Properly viewed, the lesson of the most fantastic specula-
tions of the later German metaphysic is precisely the les-
son which the thought of to-day is trying to express and
to utilize. To understand the meaning of contemporary
thought, say concerning evolution, apart from a compre-
hension of the period from Kant to Hegel, is therefore,
indeed, like trying to appreciate the mature and prosaic,
but successful man, without some reference to the splendid
dreams of his youth. We have never wholly broken with
the romantic period. We have only grown older, and pos-
sibly a little more saddened ; but those earlier ideals live
still in our breasts, only I should be glad if we were bet-
ter aware of the fact than sometimes we are.

Our immediate task in the coming lectures is thus two-
fold. We want first to show how the romantic school, far
outdoing the waywardness of Fichte, supplemented his
one-sided interpretation of things by other, eqmdly ideal-
istic and much more fantastic, interpretations of reality.
And, secondly, we want to show how our own more realis-
tic age expresses, after all, not so much an abandonment of
the true spirit of this idealistic period, as a fixation and a
maturing of some of its deepest interests.

And now, as to the romantic school itself, what, first of
all, is the meaning of the word ?

II.

German literature, in its great modern outgrowth, be-
gan, as you know, with Lessing^s early works, just after
the middle of the eighteenth century, and ended with
the death of its last prominent representative, Heine, in
1866. But the principal productions of this century of
literary activity belong to a very much briefer period.


170


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHT.


Lessing was a sort of forerunner of the classical aga
Long as was Goethe’s literary life, his best years are those
between 1770 and Schiller’s death in 1805. And to the
credit of these thirty -five years may be reckoned much
the larger half of the literary and a decidedly large frac-
tion of the philosophical work of the whole great century
of German mental life. Not only was this most produc-
tive period decidedlj* brief, but the geographical limita-
tions of the intenser literary interest, at any rate, in view
of the fact that Germany had no natural literary capi-
tal, are decidedly noteworthy. Two circles, the court at
Weimar and the university a few miles distant at Jena,
were, between 1775 and 1805, far and away the chief in-
fluences in German literature and philosophy. At Wei-
mar, Goethe and Schiller were for a time together. In
Jena, Schiller himself taught for some years, while Fichte,
Schelling, and Hegel all began their academic activity
there. After 1800, indeed, Berlin became a centre sec-
ond in importance only to Weimar, while the university
at Jena sadly declined. But not until still later was in-
tellectiijll activity of high rank observable all over Ger-
many from Berlin to Heidelberg, and from Munich to the
Rhine. However, as the streams spread they lost their
swiftness, and erelong, for the intense life of the great
years, there was substituted more and more of that fruit-
ful but quiet industry of minute German scholarship, to
which we all owe so much.

The years from 1770 to 1805, and the circles of Wei-
mar, of Jena, and, in a less degree, of Berlin, are there-
fore central in importance in the history of German
thought. But now, as must be pointed out, even here
there are to be specially mentioned, as of most critical sig-
nificance, ten years out of these thirty-five. They were
the flower of the flower for German life. These were the
^t ten years of Schiller’s career, when his friendship
with Goethe was most intimate, and when also, in addition


THE ROMANTIC SCHOOL IN PHILOSOPHY. 171

to the great classical poets, a new generation of ambitious
young men began to appear upon the scene. You must
remember that, in 1800, Goethe was fifty-one and Schiller
forty-one years old ; and at such an age men who have
become early famous are certain to find themselves sur-
rounded by circles of eager and often envious youth,
whose hearts have been set on fire by the example of the
elder geniuses, and who themselves are minded to do even
better than their betters. So it was with Goethe and
Schiller. The young generation already swarmed all
about them in Jena and in Weimar. It was a matter of
course, in that day and region, that if you were young,
and were anybody at all, you were a genius. TJie only
question was what sort of a genius, in your lordly spiri-
tual freedom, you had chosen to be. Four sorts of
geniuses were especially popular, and all four sorts were
as plenty as blackberries. There was the romancer of
genius, who was plotting to outdo Wilhelm Meister.
There was the dramatist of genius, who was disposed to
banish Schiller’s plays into oblivion, so soon as he himself
had learned his trade. There was the critic hi genius,
who had grasped the meaning and lesson of the literature
of the ages, and who was especially fond of contrasting
the Greek tragedy with Shakespeare, and of laying down
poetical laws for all future time. And finally there was
the philosopher of genius, whose business it was first of all
to transcend Kant, and secondly to transcend everybody
else. Best indeed was your lot in case you chose to
exemplify in your person all four sorts of genius at once,
as, for instance, the young Friedrich Schlegel for a while
delighted to do. Your inner experiences were then sim-
ply inimitable. In brief, “ Bliss was it in that dawn to
be alive, but to be young was very heaven.”

We may smile a little at all this ferment of ambitious
hopes, but we can never be too grateful for what
brief period accomplished for us. It gave us philosof


172 THE SPIBIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

cal ideas that, fragmentary though they were^ will never
be forgotten, and it produced some enduring poetry and
romance, in addition to what Goethe and Schiller wrote,
and of no small merit at that. Now from these circles of
the younger geniuses, one especially stands out in inter-
esting prominence. It is the circle which delighted to
call itself the Romantic School. From its often crude
efforts sprang a movement, the romantic movement in a
wider sense, which lasted far on into our own century.
It is this romantic movement in the wider sense that has
proved the most characteristic outcome of modern German
life as it was before 1848. To the romantic movement
must be credited the whole wealth of German tales and
songs that we love best after the greatest works of Goethe
and of Schiller. The same general movement had its
part in nourishing and in inspiring the music of modern
Germany from Beethoven to Wagner, In brief, without
this movement, German thought and German emotion
would have no such meaning as they have for us to-day.

But in the narrower sense, the name Romantic School
was originally applied only to the little company of young
men, all born somewhere between 1765 and 1775, of
whom the most prominent were the two Schlegels, Augus-
tus and his brother Friedrich, Ludwig Tieck, romancer
and dramatist, Novalis (whose real name . was Friedrich
V. Hardenberg), the philosopher Schelling, and the theo-
logian Schleiermacher. The Schlegels were the critics of
the school, and were also men of considerable metaphysi-
cal interest. Novalis, who died very young, touches, in
his fragmentary remains, upon all the characteristic inter-
ests of the romanticists ; he is philosophical, poetical, crit-
ical; but he is everywhere and always the born dreamer.
Schelling was intimately associated in a personal sense
with all his fellow romanticists. If his intense meta-
l^sical tastes kept him from attempting very seriously
dramas or romances, his early speculations bear


THE BOMANTIG SCHOOL IN PHU.OSOPHY. 178

everywhere the mark of his friendships; they are the
work of a restless end artistic soul, who loved the universe
with a sort of tender passion, and whose philosophy is,
even in its most technical subtleties, as much the confes-
sion of a fiery heart as it is the outcome of a brilliant
imagination and a wonderfully skillful wit. I have pre-
ferred rather to discuss the philosophy of the romantic
school under this name than to confine my title or my
survey to Schelling, the representative philosopher of the
little group, because it is here the movement that ex-
presses itself in the man, not the man who masters the
movement. Schelling was himself, always, even as phi-
losopher, a creature of the moment. His moments 'were
indeed often very great ones and might need each a whole
volume to express itself. But Schelling is not, like Kant,
a systematic and long - plotting thinker; nor yet, like
Fichte, a man who, after many adventures, is completely
overwhelmed and thenceforth possessed by a single idea.
No, Schelling possesses directly the wavering passion of
his romantic friends. His kaleidoscopic philosophy,
which changed form with each new essay that he pub-
lished, was like their whole scheme of life and of art.
Trust your genius ; follow your noble heart ; change your
doctrine whenever your heart changes, and change your
heart often. Such is the practical creed of the romanti-
cists. The world, you see, is after all the world of the
inner life. Kant cut us off from things in themselves ;
Fichte showed us that it is the I, the self, that makes the
world. Let us accept this lesson. The world is essen-
tially what men of genius make it. Let us be men of
genius, and make what we choose. We shall then be as
gods, knowing good and evil.

Herein, as you see, lies at once the great difference be-
tween the romantic school and Fichte. Fichte had said :
The world is the world as self-consciousness builds it^
but the essence of self-consciousness is the moral wiU, the


174


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


will to aot dutifully, steadfastly, nobly, divinely; and
therefore the world is duty solidified to our senses. The
romantic spirit says from the very start: The world is
indeed the world as self-consciousness builds it ; but the
true self is the self that men of genius, poets, construc-
tive artists know ; hence the real world is such as to sat-
isfy the demands of the man of genius, the artist. Emo-
tion, heai’t-experience, longings, divinations of the soul,
are the best instruments for the philosopher. Dream out
your world. It is after all but a dream of the inner life,
this vast universe about us. The noblest dreamer will be
the man to understand it the best.

The distinguishing, features of this group of young men
were then, to sum up, so far, these: they proposed in
common to create a new literary movement ; and whilst
they were rather speculative metaphysicians than true
poets, they were nevertheless rather romancers than
soberly constructive philosophers. They therefore suggest
rather than complete. Their lesson is of more impor-
tance to us than are their systems. At the start, that is,
in the years about 1795, they were under the influence of
Fichte, but his ethical idealism soon grew too stern for
them. They interpreted the world rather in terms of sen-
timent and of bold divination than in terms of the moral
law. For the rest, external nature interested them, even
in their most idealistic moods, more than it had interested
Fichte. Of course, the external world is for them too
only mind solidified, only a mass of ideas seen from with-
out. But they are dissatisfied with Fichte's moral law as
a full account of the essence of this outer mirage of our
senses. Art, they hold, is as suggestive as morality for
the speculative thinker. Nature is therefore a work of
unconscious art, a form which the gi'eat Genius of the
world gives to his experiences. God is an artist, a poet,
,who pours out the wealth of his beautiful life in all the
world of sense. Of this God, we too are embodiments;


THE BOMAMTIC SCHOOL JS PHIL080PHT. 176
•

only we are not blind, as his other works are. We are
conscious, and therefore it is that we see in sense-form, in
nature, our own ideals crystallized. The more inner
experiences we ourselves have, the more feelings, longings,
ideas we possess, the more means we shall therefore have
of interpreting nature. It is in vain, think these men,
that you gather and heap up natural facts, if you have no
heart. Only a poet can understand nature, for the true
laws of nature are through and through analogous to the
laws of the heart. If (so the romanticists would say), if
we have ever been in love, then and then only we know
why the plants grow towards the sunlight, or the, free-
swinging needles turn to the pole, or why the planets are
loyal to the sun. If we are artistically complete in our
inner natures, then we comprehend why the crystals love
their regular forms. To understand the difference be-
tween organic and inorganic matter, you have again to
study first your own inner consciousness, and to examine
its various stages, as they lead up from disorganized sen-
sations to clear and organic reason. For the forms of
matter in the outer world are symbolic, are precisely ana-
logous, stage for stage, to these processes of the inner life.
In brief, to study nature is to sympathize with nature, to
trace the likenesses between the inner life and the mag-
nets, the crystals, the solar systems, the living creatures,
of the physical world. It is the part of genius to feel
such sympathies with things ; it is the part of philosophy
to record your sympathies. Artists are often unconscious
philosophers, but great philosophers, from this romantic
point of view, are never more than consummate artists.
Feeling is an indispensable guide to reason. We should
never know God did we not share his nature in our ^mo-
tions. He is only the many-sided and infinite genius.
We appreciate him because we young romanticists are
geniuses ourselves.


176


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHT.


ni.

Such philosophy as this was, of course, capable of innn*
merable forms. Let us illustrate more in detail from the
work of particular men : Best do they comprehend truth,
declares in substance the young Friedrich Schlegel, best
do they comprehend truth who have experienced the most
moods. The truly philosophical attitude towards life and
reality is therefore one of a sort of courageous fickle-
ness. Schlegel himself called it the romantic irony, and
endeavored to found a system upon it. This is his rather
grotesque attempt to revive the Socratic method and doc-
trine. * Socrates had founded his whole life as a conversa-
tional teacher, who never preached but always asked
questions, upon a sort of ironical confession that he was
not wise. “ This,” he used to affirm, “ is my only wis-
dom, to know that I am an utterly ignorant man.” Well,
somewhat so, but still with a difference, thinks Schlegel,
the romantic genius confesses that marvelous as is his
present divination of the truth of things, it is, after all, a
quick divination, so to speak, which will away again ere-
long, and will give place to some other theory, equally
creditable to its clever possessor, equally true, but also
equally fickle and therefore false. ^‘The deepest truth
known to ,me is that erelong my present truth will
change : ” such, thinks Schlegel, is true wisdom. For
the world, as you see, is the world for the self, for the
inner life, for the heart. And the heart is so strong and
lively a thing that it will change frequently. “The
world exists for me ; and to-morrow I propose to make a
new world : ” such is SchlegeFs early interpretation of
the essence of Fichte’s view. But alas, Fichte’s ethical
ides&ism, with the moral law left out, is too grotesque in
its mutilation to become a coherent doctrine. Friedrich
Schlegel gave up this fickleness in later years, went over
to the Catholic church, and devoted himself otherwise to


THE tKOMAKTIG SCHOOL IN PHILOSOPHY. 177

Oriental studies, wherein he well earned a high and hon-
orable rank. His stupendous poetical genius somehow
never came to flower, much less to fruit, and remained
therefore a secret close locked in his bosom. He assures
us that he possessed it, and no doubt he knew, for in
those days, as you are aware, the inner life knew every-
thing.

Novalis, our second illustration, is a more interesting
character. His was a profound and noble nature, but
fate forbade him to reach maturity. To his beautiful and
baffling fragments the sensitive reader returns ever and
anon afresh, perplexed, disappointed, and yet always de-
lighted. Novalis never lived to finish anything.' ’ Ilis
philosophical fragments are after aU, however, the best
brief compend you could find of the essence of the roman-
tic philosophy, in all its spiritual depth and in all its
waywardness. For Friedrich Schlegel, in his metaphysi-
cal capacity, as you have just seen, I cannot feel any
serious respect. He was wayward and he was not deep.
But Npvalis every one who knows him truly must thor-
oughly love. His childlike straightforwardness, his amia-
ble plasticity, not to say innocent fickleness of character,
his real strength of ideals withal, his sensitiveness to
truth, even his very incapacity (so characteristic of his
school) to do more than turn chance jewels of trutli over
and over. and hold them up to the light — all these things
fascinate us. He is not exactly a great thinker, but of
his kind he is so charming. Novalis, or Friedrich von
Hardenberg, was bom in 1772, the second child of a large
and very affectionate family. His childhood was sickly,
and until, he was nine years old, while he was the object
of the kindest care, his mind seemed in no wise extraor-
dinary. Then suddenly, after an acute affectieft, his
health bettered, and he appeared to wake, as if from
sleep,” as his biographer says. He, was now a quick-
witted, studious and imaginative boy, a great inventor


178 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHT.

and narrator of fantastic fairy tales, tender-hearted, genial,
a lover of mystery. From 1790 to 1793 he attended sev-
eral universities, was then nearly attracted into a soldier’s
life by the excitement of the revolutionary period, but
was erelong led into the hardly less exciting hopes and
struggles of the new literary and philosophical movement,
through an acquaintance with Friedrich Schlegel and
with Fichte himself, who was then at the height of his
earlier professional successes. In Amstadt, in Thurin-
gia, where Novalis went to learn a more practical profes-
sion, in government service, he met and loved a very
young girl, Sophie von Kiihn. Her eyes suggested to
him the famous hlaue JBlume^ which in his romance,
“ Heinrich v. Ofterdingen,” he afterwards made the sym-
bol of the romantic ideal itself, the mysterious wonder of
magic that his hero sees in dream and thenceforth seeks.
Readers of Heine’s book on the Romantic School will
remember this Blue Flower. Sophie was not yet four-
teen when Friedrich v. Hardenberg was betrothed to her.
They were never married ; and three years later she died,
after a long illness, constantly watched to the end by her
devoted lover, to whom by this time the worship of his
love had become a religion. Her death was the turning-
point of his brief career. His mourning for her took a
form worthy of a romantic philosopher. He dated a new
sacred era from the day of her death, and kept a diary
in accordance with his thus established chronology. The
diary, which is unfortunately some.what brief, is devoted
to meditations intended to prepare him to meet her in
the life beyond. And as for this meeting, he decides to
bring it about in a way which shall express and conform
his ardent faith in Fichtean principles. Fichte, namely,
has said that our will is the master of the universe.
Well, to be sure, suicide, in the ordinary sense, is not the
philosopher’s way to the other world ; but may not one by
sheer force of will so purify himself as to become spirit-


THE ROMANTIC SCHOOL IN PHILOSOPHY. 179

ually fit to live in the higher life, and thereupon, not in*
deed by any mere fading away, but by one supreme JEnt*
achlusSf one resolution, made for and by his deeper self,
simply transfer himself, in a single glorious moment, to
the realm of free spirits? Friedrich persuades himself
that this is possible, and decides to give himself just one
year to prepare his soul for the final act of faith. He
will not go to her in weakness, nor through the door of
illness or of violence. In the full glow of health, in the
ecstasy of a pure love, he will make himself ready, and
fchen ho will pass over in one instant to Sophie^s side.
You may be reminded here of the lover in a song which
Schubert’s music has rendered so familiar and tear-com-
pelling. 1 mean the little romanza called Rosamunde ; ”
save, indeed, that das Ende vom Lied^ in case of Novalis,
is somewhat different. During this time of mourning he
planned his wonderful Hymns to the Night, very brief
and mystical rhapsodies in Ossianic prose, interspersed
with verse. His diary, however, soon complains that it is
a little hard to be quite healthy and still to remain wholly
unworldly. One has so many temptations to forgetful-
ness of lofty ideals. One is, after all, but twenty-six;
one loves discussion, friends, philosophy ; one plainly has
even a good appetite ; and alas ! this world is so fair,
this age in which one lives is so inspiring ! Nay, one is
not yet quite worthy of the world of free spirits, nor of
Sophie. So the days go by ; and when the year of the
preparation for the great ErUschluss is done, not Novalis,
but Sophie has passed — this time not merely into the
world of spirits, but even into the realm of the pure Pla-
tonic Ideas themselves. Novalis still worships her glori-
fied essence, but as for his noble Fichtean self, it continues
to surround itself with the sense-facts of the terrestrial
order, and now perceives its duty made manifest to its
eyes in the person of one Julie Charpentier; for to her
Novalis is by this time betrothed after the fashion of the
visible world.


180 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

I assure you that I do not repeat this very well-known
and even rather famous stoiy here either in any spirit of
scoffing, or for the sake of a digression. I can far better
suggest the inner sense and the essence of this whole ro-
niantic idealism, in all its beauty and its waywardness,
by such a tale as this of the love of Novalis than by a
much longer homily. Here, you see, is the romantic in-
terpretation of Fichte’s doctrine. You see the spirituality,
the tenderness, the perfectly honest sentiment of it all ;
and you alio see the essential fickleness, the inevitable
arbitrariness, of an idealism that has not yet found any
truly objective standards. In a less gentle soul than No-
valis this arbitrariness would become cynical. Such noble
sentiments have, you see, their even ghastly dangers. Is
it feeling that guides you in your interpretation of the
world ? Are your ideas simply plastic ? Do you make
your world solely through your own mind? Alas! as
Hegel afterwards said, feeling is the mere soil of the
forest of life ; and from the same soil the noblest tree or
the hatefulest weed may spring. Suppose the resolution
of Novalis had been by chance not only less fickle, but
also less noble ; might not his subjective idealism have
justified equally well a fierce rebellion against all that
humanity justly holds dearest, instead of a mere indiffer-
ence to what common sense calls obvious ? In the later
history of the romantic movement the fickleness of way-
ward idealism did indeed work itself out to the extreme
of its painful dialecties, and if you want to know the re-
sults, Amadeus Hoffmann’s tales of horror, or our own
Edgar Poe’s gloom, will tell you enough of the story to
let you see one of its endings. The Nihilism and the
Pessimism of more decent days will give you another out-
come of that arbitrary idealism which knows no law.
And the lightning of Heine’s scorn will show you yet
further glimpses of the same lurid world in a fashion that
will leave you undecided whether to laugh or to weepb


THE ROMANTIC SCHOOL IN PHILOSOPHY. 181

And yet, all this must not discourage true idealism, and
does not discourage it. What I mean is just what I have
already repeatedly pointed out : That as arbitrariness in
our interpretation of things is the curse of immature ideal-
ism, mature idealism will certainly find out how to return
to an order as fixed and as supreme as was Spinoza’s sub-
stance.

IV.

Schelling, finally, the prince of the romanticists, is an
interesting example of a growth of spirit whereby a great
thinker was indeed led from Fichte back to Spinoza.
Only to the end, while Schelling became the firmest of
believers in a supreme and substantial order of things,
which impresses itself upon our reason from above, and
which we are all forced to obey and to accept, his method
remains wayward, imaginative, and, with all his genius,
immature. His Spinozism is such as Spinoza could never
have pretended to comprehend ; his idealism early became
such as to excite first the suspicion, and finally the vio-
lent condemnation of Fichte ; and his whole work is such
as only a great genius could have begun, and only a
romanticist could have left in the chaos wherein, after
a very long life, he finally left it.

Even our brief glance at Schelling’s character must
take into account the remarkable woman whose counsel
and affection made a great part of his most productive
years possible. I doubt whether Schelling, even as phi-
losopher, can be well understood apart from Caroline.
She herself was the idol of the whole romantic circle.
Her maiden name was Michaelis ; she was twelve years
the senior of Schelling. When Schelling first met her,
himself then early in his twenties, she was already married
a second time, and to Augustus Schlegel. Her daughter
by her first marriage, Auguste Bohmer, died in 1800,
aged seventeen. As Schlegel, during the closing years of
the century, lived in Berlin, and CaroliLic in Jena, their


182


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


marriage, although friendly, was not precisely the first
interest of either member of the wedded pair. The ro-
mantic school, with philosophical consistency, believed in
applying their principle of waywardness to marriage also,
and approved of elective affinities ; and accordingly, abso-
lutely without an unkind word, the marriage of the Schle-
gels was ultimately dissolved by means of a decree of the
obliging Duke at Weimar, and Schelling married Caro-
line in 1803, after several years of friendship and corre-
spondence. Schelling and Caroline remained on the best
terms with Augustus Schlegel until Caroline’s death in
1809.

Caroline’s letters to Schelling, between 1799 and 1803,
are certainly much more than interesting. The wonderful
charm of this herrliche Frau is once for all an irresisti-
ble sensation as you read her intimate self-confessions.
She is a marvelous compound of the pathetic, the roguish,
the wise, the gay, the deeply sad, and the singularly
thoughtful. She has seen, felt, suffered, struggled ; and
she has conquered. She loves power intensely, is a very
good hater, and yet, she has also a childlike and playfid
gentleness that fairly disarms you. When she is deep in
trouble, a light or perhaps a bitter laugh is never far
away, wherewith she wins again her composure. She is,
in her romantic fashion, as high-minded as she is abso-
lutely fearless, — a sort of Penthesilea, only vastly more
tender, and with the heart of a bereaved mother, as well
as with the temper of ai;rained warrior. To her husband
Schlegel, in Berlin, she writes meanwhile as straightfor-
wardly and lengthily as you please ; only to him she has
more to say about literary matters. Philosophy she
thought of often, and with just the easy swift insight
into subtleties which must have enlightened the young
Schelling more than once. Only system-making she re-
garded with indifference. Hence it was, in part, for her
admiration that Schelling must have thought out his


THE ROMANTIC SCHOOL IN PHILOSOPHY.


188


subtle, but unsystematic fragments of philosophic creation.
They frequently discussed such matters together. Once
in conversation, as she writes in 1801 to her husband
Schlegel, she and Schelling fell to inventing an appro-
priate motto in verse for Fichte (the “ Sun-clear,” as she
calls him, after the title of one of his essays, the Sun
clear Exposition of the Essence of Becent Philosophy ”),
whose solemn and devout appeals to his readers to be
honorable men for once, and agree with him, were then
growing rather wearisome. They hit upon Hamlet’s —

** Doubt that the stars are fire,

Doubt that the planets move.”

That had an idealistic sound, and seemed to begin a fit-
ting motto for Fichte. They took these lines, of coiu*se,
in the current German translation, and then Caroline’s
wit wrought out this as the whole motto : —

** Zwcifle an der Sonne Klarheit,

Zweide an der Sterne Licht,

Leser, nur an meiner Wahrheit
Uiid an deiner Dummheit nicht.”

I venture, with hesitation, to imitate Caroline in Eng-
lish, but at a long distance, thus : —

** Doubt that the stars are fire.

Doubt all the things of sense,

But, reader, doubt not I am wise,

And thy poor wits are dense.”

But Caroline had not only the power to criticise Fichte
in this fashion ; she knew also how to write an excellent
contrast between Fichte’s genius and Schelling’s, as fol-
lows, in a letter to her young friend himself, who did not
marry her until two years later : “ It is growing more and
more needful now that you produce something eternal,
without making so much ado about it. Surely, ihy dear-
est friend, you are n’t asking my opinion about Fichte’s
power, although you seem to come near it. I have always
felt that, with all his incomparable skill in thinking, he


184 THE SPIBIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

has his limits ; only, as I have thought, the reason is that
he fails of the divine instinct that you possess ; and if
you have broken through his charmed circle, then I feel
as if it was not so much because you are a philosopher,
but because you have poetry in you, while he has none.
I suppose 1 use the word ‘ philosopher ’ wrongly. If I do,
laugh at me. But it is poetical inspiration that has led
you to production, as it is simply sharpness of seeing that
has led him to consciousness. He has the bright light,
but you ha/e the glowing fire; his gift can illuminate,
only yours can produce. There, have n’t I put that right
neatly ? As if one should see an immeasurable landscape
through a keyhole.”

You will now indeed be anxious to learn something of
how Schelling had broken through Fichte’s charmed cir-
cle. Well, his most technical thought will be mentioned
next time, when I compare him with Hegel, in whose
company he worked for a brief, but important period.
For this most significant deed of Schelling’s can only be
understood in his relations with Hegel. Of Schelling, the
poetical friend of Caroline, and the brilliant young crea-
tor of the so-called NaturphilosopJiie^ I have yet to say
a word to-day. The most fruitful problem of Fichte’s
system was, of course, the problem of the relation of my
conscious self to my deeper self, of my private thought
to the universal and divine thought, whereof I am the
transient expression. Now, it early occurred to Schelling
that Fichte hkd not made all that he could of this rela^
tion between the humanly conscious and the divine Ego.
My external world, says Fichte, is the product of my own
unconscious act; and this act, unconscious to me, is
ultimately an expression of God’s eternal activity itself.
Well, then, is not the true idealism this? The outer
world of sense has no existence except as a manifestation
of the spirit. And there is but one spirit, after all ; but
this spirit extends far beyond my little self. He is the


THE BOMANTIG «CHOOL IN PHILOSOPHY.


185


spirit of nature. You cannot comprehend him if you
look only within. In you he is indeed the same that he
is yonder in nature, only in nature his will is writ large,
in dead and in living forces, in gravitation, in magnetism,
in electricity, in vitality. Study these things, not as if
they were ever utterly dead things in themselves, but as
being other expressions of precisely the same life that is
writ fine in your consciousness. Thus, by reversing, as
it were, the Fichtean telescope, you see the human sub-
ject indeed as the central being of the human world, only
in himself he now appears less imposing. Turning, how-
ever, the right end of the glass towards nature, you see
therein the life of humanity typified, symbolized, crystal-
lized, as it were ; for spirit comes to itself in man only
because it has first expressed itself in nature, and is now
striving in us to become conscious of its own work. Thus
viewed, man is indeed simply an evolution from nature ;
and Schelling indeed holds that a theory of the evolution
of consciousness is needed as a complement to Fichte’s
theory^ “In autumn, 1798, I entered upon my lectures
at Jena,” says Schelling himself, in one of his autobio-
graphical statements, full of the thought that the way
from nature to spirit must be as possible as the reverse
way, upon which Fichte had entered.” Here, then, is
Schelling’s epoch-making idea, and you will see hereafter
that it is the idea which modern philosophic thought will
henceforth be seeking to define. To complete the under-
taking of idealism, you need a theory of the facts of
nature, so interpreted as to be in harmony with the view
that only ideas are the realities, and yet so adapted to
experience as to free. your idealism from the arbitrariness
of the inner life of mere finite selves. Can we, then,
prove that the very spirit whose life our own conscious*
ness expresses is already present outside and beyond us,
weaving the web of the external world, giving it sub-
stance, and yet preserving its ideality and its harmony


186


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


with our inner life ? If we can, then, our doctrine will
become what is technically called objective idealism.
The outer world is, then, God’s thought shown to our
eyes ; the inner world is God’s thought become conscious
of itself. This doctrine was the centre of Schelling’s
Naturphilosophie. Unfortunately he was no man to
prove such a theory. lie* could only suggest, develop
imaginatively, and in later essays treat with a marvelous,
but fragmentary technical skill. As poet, he indeed
broke through Fichte’s charmed circle ; but as poet, he
never stated the essence of his Naturphilosophie more
clearly or more boldly than he did in a poetic fragment
written under the eyes of Caroline, and meant largely for
her approval. Of this production he himself never pub-
lished more than a brief portion ; in later years it has
been printed from his papers. I refer to his whimsically
so-called Epikurisch Glauhenshehenntniss Heinz Wider-
porstens^ Epicurean Confession of Faith of Hans Bris-
tleback.”

In this thoroughly wayward sketch in verse, Schelling
assumes a grotesque name and character, in order to give
himself greater freedom to express the heart of his
Naturphilosophie in the boldest and most pantheistic
terms. The meter is borrowed from the well-known re-
vival, in Goethe’s “ Faust,” pf the old Khittelvers^ or
free rhyme of early German poetry. Schelling’s hero,
in whose character he speaks, is supposed to be trying to
play the irreligious materialist, whom the priests have
been driving to despair, and w'ho at last rebels. Nature
is his reUgion, he says. He loves good cheer and fair
faces, and he hates superstition. Is n’t this world of the
senses after all the genuine thing ? Heinz grows fairly
rollicking in his materialistic and epicurean speeches.
Suddenly, without warning, he assumes another tone,
From beneath the mask of the epicurean, the voice of the
romantic mystic squnds. Why^ then, is this world of*


THE BOMANTIO SCHOOL IN PHILOSOPHY. 187

the senses the world for the truly wise man ? Because it
is but the embodiment of one eternal and divine spirit.
Then follows a Schellingian sketch of a process of evo-
lution which, proceeding through the animals, culminates
in us. The world of nature is thus full of the struggle
of the great spirit to win his own higher life. The end
and crown of this whole process is man. In him, blind
nature gets a voice ; in him the spirit comes to himself.
And all the universe is one glorious life, in whose con-
templation the mystic soul rejoices.

Let me give you, as a close, my own hasty rendering of
some of Schelling’s curious lines, with a certain effort to
preserve the unequal metre and even the very unequal
worth of the original. The Knittelvers^ at its noblest, is
only a sort of glorified doggerel, and is never easy to man-
age in translation ; but I must suggest to you a little of
the romantic intoxication of this sort of pantheism, so
characteristic of one great tendency in German thought.

After his introductory denunciation of priestcraft, asce-
ticism, and superstition, the gay Heinz is made to run on
thus, speaking of course in character : —

“ Therefore religion I forsake,

All superstitious ties 1 break,

No church will I visit to hear them preach,

1 have done with all that the parsons teach.

And yet there is one faith that masters my will.

Glows in my verse, and inspires me still,

Daily my heart with deliglit doth thrill,^

Eternally showing
New form ; till I knowing,

This faith so clear,

This light so near,

This poem undying,

Must witness its truth beyond denying ;

So that 1 can nothing hold nor conceive
Save what it counsels me to believe ;

Nor aught as certain or right maintain.

Save w^t it reveals to my eyes so plain.


188 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHT.


Thus, then, in my heart am 1 freed from fear,
Sound in body and soul stand here.

And may, instead of posture and prayer.

Instead of losing my way in the air.

Hero on the earth, in her blue eyes see
The deepest depths that exist for me.

Nay, and why should I in the world suffer dread,
I, who know the world from the foot to the head ?
’T is a tamo creature, is it not ?

When has it ever its bonds forgot ?

Yields to the yoke of all-ruling law,

Crouches at my feet in awe.

Within it a giant spirit doth dream,

But his soul is a frozen lava stream ; ^

From his narrow house he cannot away.

Nor his iron chains escape for a day.

Yet often he flutters his wings in his sleep.
Mightily stirs in his dungeon-keep,

Travails in dead and in living things
To know his will and to free his wings.^

Ills power, that fills the veins with ore.

And renews in the spring the buds once more.
Labors unceasing in darkness and night.

In all nature’s nooks and crannies for light.

Fears no pang in its fierce desire

To live and to conquer and win its way higher.

Organs and members it fashions anew.

Lengthens or shortens, makes many or few,

And wrestles and writhes in its search till it find
The form that is worthiest of its mind.

Struggling thus on life intent,

Against a cruel environment.

It triumphs at last, in one narrow space.

And comes to itself in a dwarfish race.

That, fair of form, of stature erect,

Stands on earth as the giant’s elect,

^ Steckt zwar ein Riesengeist darinnen,

1st aber versteinert mit seinen Sinnen.”

^ In todten und lebendig^n Dingen

Thut nach Bewusstseyn mEchtig ringen.”


THE ROMANTIC SCHOOL IN PHILOSOPHY.


189


Is called in .our speech £he son of man.

Outcome and crown of the spirit’s plan.

From iron slumber, from dreaming* set free,

!Now marvels the spirit who he may be.

Looks on himself with wondering gaze.

Measures his limbs in dim amaze.

Longs in terror once more to be hid
In nature’s slumber, of sentience rid.

But nay, his freedom is won for aye.

No more in nature’s peace may he lie ;

In the vast dark world that is all bis own, .

Ho wanders his life’s narrow path alone.

Yes, ho even fears, in bis visions dim,

That the giant himself may be wroth with him.

And like Saturn of old, in godlike scorn.

Devour his children scarcely born ;

Know not that he liimself is the Sprite

That longingly toiled in the world’s dark night ;

Peoples the void with the ghosts of his fear.

Yet could he say, the Giant’s peer : —

I am the God who nature’s bosom fills,

I am the life that in her heart’s blood thrills.^

From the first quiver of her mystic power.

Until of life there came that primal hour.

When force new form and body power assumed.

And flowers the beauty showed that lay entombed, wl-
Yes, now, wherever light, as dawn begins,

A new created world from chaos wins, —

And in the thousand eyes that, from the sky.

Show night and day the heavenly mystery, — >
Onwards, to where, in thought’s eternal truth
Nature’s deep self rewords itself in truth, —

There stirs one might, one pnlsc-beat all sufficing.

All power retaining, aye, — and sacrificing.”

^ ** Ich bin der Gott der sio^m Bnsen tragt,

Der Geist der sich in allem bewegt.”


LECTURE VIL


HEGEL.

CoNCEKNiNG Hegel, who forms our special topic in this
lecture, it is extraordinarily difficult to get or to give any
general impressions Ithat will not be seriously misleading.
I undertake my task, therefore, with a very strong impres-
sion of its importance and its difficulty. The outcome of
what we have thus far discussed in these lectures is briefly
this : Modern thought began with an endeavor to find a
true and rational doctrine about the real outer universe,
and to state this doctnne in clear and even mathematical
form. The rediscoveiy of the importance of the inner
life led, however, during the eighteenth century, to a
skeptical scrutiny of the powers of the human reason it-
self, and the magnificent systems of earlier thinkers ap-
peared, when examined in the light of such scrutiny,
dogmatic and uncertain. Thought endeavored, neverthe-
less, to re-win its great assurances in a new form. Truth^^
said Idealism, is essentially an affair of the inner life.
The world of truth is the world as it would appear to a
complete and fully self.- conscious self. The outer uni-
verse is only a show world. Its reality is only practical.
It is essentially a mirage of the inner life. The real
universe is the universe of the spirit. Our deepest rela*
tion is not to the natural order at all, but to the one true
sdf, namely, God’s own life.

Such, as we found, was the position reached alike by
Fichte and the romanticists. But in their further thought
they diverged. For Fichte, the centre of the universe, as


HEQEL*


191


his idealism conceives it, is the moral law. The infinite
self longs for rational and active self-possession. Hence
it differentiates itself into numerous forms, as the vine
grows out into its own branches. These branchings of
the one great vine of the spirit form our finite and essen-
tially incomplete selves.

But for the romanticists, as we found, the centre of the
world is not so much the moral law as the interest which
every spirit has in a certain divine wealth of emotion and
of experience. The world is the world of ideas ; things
exist because spirits experience them ; and spirits experi-
ence because, as parts of the divinely complete life, it is
their interest to be as manifold and wealthy in their self-
realization as possible.

I.

Before we now pass directly to Hegel it is necessary
to say yet a word of the more technical speculations of
Schelling, of whom, in his character as romanticist, we
heard something in the last lecture. Schelling’s develop-
ment, qs you already know, was very rapid ; his writings
were early voluminous. He was a man of mark and a
professor at Jena by the time he had reached his twenty-
third year. His systematic views during his youthful pe-
riod seemed to his readers to alter with a dangerously
magical ease and swiftness of transformation. He him-
self meanwhile denied, during the years up to 1809, that
there was so far any significant change from the essential
doctrines of his early works. He had added, he said, to
what he at first taught. More tnith had come to him ;
not a contradiction of former insight. But readers found
it suspicious that each new book of Schelling’s seemed to
supersede all his previous efforts. In 1797, he published
his “Ideas towards a Philosophy of Nature.” During
the next three years appeared his “ System of Transcen-
dental Idedism ” and his “ First Sketch of a System of
the Philosophy of Nature.” These two latter works were


192 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHT.

to be a first statement, so their author declared, of the
two great and seemingly opposed aspects of philosophy.
The outer world was to be shown as after all the mani«
festation of spirit ; the inner world of the self was to be
exhibited as inevitably expressing itself in relation to an
outer, a natural order. The fundamental thought of the
whole doctrine was in substance this : Fichte had declared
that it is the self-assertion of the absolute self, the free
choice of the true Ego, that is the source of all truth.
When I as knower recognize a truth, that is because I as
doer have first made this truth. This view Schelling also
accepts. But now, as one sees, a conscious self is at once
the doer of its present act, and the contemplator of the
results of its past acts. As I look out on the world of
nature, I see crystallized before me the expression of what
my true and absolute self has ^already been doing. The
same activity that this present consciousness exemplifies
for me has been there from eternity, and nature is the
concrete embodiment to the onlooker of the results of his
own eternal deeds. Nature then is not merely, as Fichte
had said, my duty made manifest to my senses ; it is also
my timelessly past spiritual life, — not of course my finite
or individual and private past life, but the li’fe of my
deeper self, of the one and absolute divine spirit. This
autobiography of spirit, manifest to our eyes, is then the
natural order. On the other hand, the inner life as such
is capable of a philosophical treatment ; for this is, as it
were, not the record of the spirit’s past, but the fullness
of the spirit’s conscious actuality. We have thus a two-
fold philosophy to be wrought out, and Schelling in 1799
and 1800 publishes his two sketches as Ihough in topic,
if not in execution, they completely covered the ground.
But in 1801 appeared a new treatise, called by Schelling
simply ‘‘ Exposition of my System* of Philosophy,” and
here the doctrine seems to take a new form, which readers
could only with great difficulty reconcile’ with n^hat had


HEOEr««


19a


gone before. As during the winter of 1800-1801 Schel-
ling expounded this system in lectures, before publishing
the treatise, hearers asserted, as Schelling himself says,
tliat he had wholly changed his doctrine. On the con-
trary, says Schelling, in his preface to the new book, this
is the system that I have held all along, and have merely
been keeping to myself so far, because it was too deep a
thing to expound before the time came. The system in
question was called by its author the Identitats System.
Deeper than both nature and spirit is now something that
ScheUing calls by various mysterious names, the “ Abso-
lute,” the “ Identity,” the ‘‘ Indifference of Subject and
Object,” the “ Unity of Nature and Spirit.” It is a curi-
ous metaphysical product, this new principle. It resem-
bles Spinoza’s Substance ; it pretends to be loftier than
Fichte’s Divine Self. It is something even dimmer and
vaguer than the Giant Spirit of Nature, of whom Schel-
ling’s verses told us in the last lecture. Hegel, a few
years later, rudely called this Sehellingian Identity,”
this “ Absolute,” in whose indescribable nature all truth
was to be somehow hidden, the infinite night in which
all cows are black.” Its nature was the kind of thing
you think of when you think of nothing in particular.
YeJ this nature of the absolute was to be the deepest of
all truth, deeper than the self, deeper than outer nature,
deeper than anything ever before known in philosophy.

I am not minded to trouble you here with a fuller ac-
count of Schelling’s Identitdts- System^ whose exposition,
as it chances, is really very deep and suggestive, with
all its vagueness. The thought that there must after all
be some scM of synthesis possible of Kant and Spi-
noza, was indeed an important thought. And historically
the Identitdts- System has a very significant relation to
Hegel’s thinking. • For Schelling wrote this new treatise
under the direct influence of his intercourse with Hegel,
who had then appeared at Jena, where Schelling was


194


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


teaching. What Hegel maintained, and early impressed
upon Schelling, was that an end must be put, if possible,
to the romantic vagueness of all this dreaming about the
relations of the individual and the absolute self, and about
the conceptions of the finite and the infinite in general.
What philosophy needed was a more exact analysis and
proof of the assertion that the individual consciousness
and the outer order, the finite self and the infinite self,
the world of the moment and the world of the universal,
are linked in close spiritual ties. Philosophy must be-
come a system, or else remain naught. This thought
Schelling found present in Hegel’s mind, and so Schelling
for the moment forced his poetical speculations to assume
a Spinozistic garb. Largely ineffective, however, Schel-
ling’s best efforts remained thenceforth. We shall do
well, therefore, to turn at once to the more successful sys-
tematizer of the idealistic scheme, namely, Hegel.


ii.

With the idealists of the romantic school Hegel had,
indeed, many things in common, but he differed from
tliem profoundly in temperament. They had reached
their absolute self by various mystical or otherwise too
facile methods, which we need not further expound.
Hegel hated easy roads in philosophy, and abhorred mys-
ticism. He therefore, at first, in his private studies, had
clung closely to Kant’s original mode of dealing with the
problems of the new philosophy until he had found his
own fashion of reflection. To understand what this fash-
ion was we must turn to the man himself.

Yet, as I now come to speak of Hegel’s %3mperament,
I must at once point out that of all first-class thinkers he
is, indeed, personally, one of the least imposing in charac-
ter and life.^ Kant was a man whose intellectual might

^ The expert reader will easily detect the influence of Haym and
of Dr. Hutchinson Stirling’s estimates of Hegel’s personality in what


HEGEL.


195


and heroic moral elevation stood in a contrast to the
weakness of his bodily presence, which, after all, had
something of the sublime about it. Spinoza’s lonely,
almost princely, haughtiness of intellect joins with his
religious mysticism to give his form grace, and his very
isolation nobility. But Hegel is in no wise either graceful
or heroic in bearing. His dignity is solely the dignity of
his work. Apart from his achievement, and his tempera-
ment as making it possible, there is extremely little of
mark in the man. The wonder of him lies in his profes-
sional, not in his human aspect. Pie was a keen-witted
Suabian, a born scholar, a successful teacher, self-pos-
sessed, decidedly crafty, merciless to his enemies, quarrel-
some on occasion after the rather crude fashion ^of the
German scholar, sedate and methodical in the rest of his
official life ; a rather sharp disciplinarian when he had to
deal with young people or with subordinates ; a trifle ser-
vile when ho had to deal with ofiicial or with social supe-
riors. From his biographer, liosenkranz, we learn of him
in many private capacities ; he interests us in hardly any
of them. He was no patriot, like Fichte ; no romantic
dreamer, like Novalis; no poetic seer of splendid meta-
physical visions, like Schelling. His career is absolutely
devoid of romance. We even have one or two of his love-
letters. They are awkward and dreary beyond measure.
His inner life either had no crises, or concealed them
obstinately. In his dealings with his friends, as, for
instance, with Schelling, he was wily and masterful, using
men for his advantage so long as he needed them, and
turning upon them without scruple when they could no
longer serve Uts ends. His life, in its official character,
was indeed blameless. He was a fa.ithful servant of his

follows. The reader who desires a more eulogistic account will find
such, and from a high authority too, in Professor Edward Caird's
discussion of Hegel in the volume on that thinker in Blackwood’s
Philosophical Classics.


196 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

various successive masters, and unquestionably he reaped
his worldly reward. His students flattered him, and
therefore he treated them well; but towards opponents
he showed scant courtesy. To the end he remains a self-
seeking, determined, laborious, critical, unaffectionate
man, faithful to his office and to his household, loyal to
his employers, cruel to his foes. In controversy he spared
not persons any more than doctrines. His style in his pub-
lished books is not without its deep ingenuity and its mar-
velous accuracy, but otherwise is notoriously one of the
most barbarous, technical, and obscure in the whole his-
tory of philosophy. If his lectures are more easy-flowing
and genial, they are in the end, and as a whole, htirdly
more comprehensible. He does little to attract his reader,
and everything to make the road long and painful to the
student. All this is not awkwardness ; it is deliberate
choice. He is proud of his barbarism. And yet — here
is the miracle — this unattractive and unheroic person
is one of the most noteworthy of all the chosen instru-
ments through which, in our times, the spirit has spoken.
It is not ours to compi*ehend this wind that bloweth
where it listeth. W e have only to hear the sound thereof.

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel was born in August,
1770, at Stuttgart. His family was of a representative
Suabian type ; his own early surroundings were favorable
to an industrious, but highly pedantic sort of learning.
At the gymnasium in Stuttgart, which he attended from
his seventh year, he Was an extraordinarily, but, on the
whole, a very healthily studious boy. From his fifteenth
until well on in his seventeenth year, we find him keeping
a diary, from which Eosenkranz has publiisAied large frag-
ments. It is in strong contrast to the sentimental diaries
that the characteristic youth of genius, in those days,
might be expected to keep. In fact there was no promise
of genius, so far, in the young Hegel. His diary runs on
much after this fashion: Tuesday, June 28 (1785), 1


HEGEL.


197


observed to-day what different impressions the same thing
can make on different people. ... I was eating cherries
with excellent appetite, and having a very good time, . . .
when somebody else, older than I, to be sure, looked on
with indifference, and said that in youth one thinks that
one cannot possibly pass a cherry-woman without having
one’s mouth water for the cherries (as we Suabians say),
whereas, in more advanced years one can let a whole
spring pass without feeling an equal longing* for such
things. Whereupon I thought out the following princi-
ple, a rather painful one for me, but still a very profound
one^namely, that in youth • . . one can’t eat as much as
one wants, while in age one does n’t want to eat as much
as one can.”

Such was the philosopher Hegel, at fifteen years of age.
His diary never records a genuine event. Nothing seems
to have happened to this young devourer of cherries and
learning, except such marvels as that one day at church
he learned the date of the Augsburg Confession ; or that,
during a walk, one of his teachers told him how every
good thing has its bad side ; and again, during another
walk, tried to explain to him why July and August are
hotter than J une. Of such matters the diary is full, —
never does one learn of an inner experience of any signifi-
cance. Aspirations are banished. The boy is pedantic
enough, not to say out and out a prig ; but this at aii^r
rate appears as the distinctive feature of his tempera-
ment : he is thoroughly objective. He wants to know life
as it is in itself, not as it is for him ; he desires the true
principles of things, not his private and sentimental inter-
pretation of them. Meanwhile, he is at once well in-
structed in religious faith, and given so far to the then
popular and rather shallow rationalism which loved to
make very easy work of the mysterious of every kind and
grade. He devotes some space to the explanation of
ghost stories. He even records, meanwhile, occasional


198


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHT.


bits of dry Suabian humor, such as later, in a much
improved form, found place in his academic lectures, and
were so characteristic of his style, not to say of his system.
The boyish form of this interest in the grotesque may be
thus exemplified: January 3, 1787. — Total eclipse of
the moon ; instruments prepared at the gymnasium, where
some gathered to see, but the sky was too cloudy. So
the rector “ told us the following : As a boy he himself
had once gone out with other boys, at night, on the pre-
tence of star-gazing. In reality they had only wandered
about. The police found them, and were going to take
them into custody ; but the gymnasium boys said,
‘We’re out star-gazing.’ ‘Nay,’ responded the p^ice,
‘but you boys ought to go to bed at night,. and do your
star-gazing in the day-time I ’ ” I note this trifle because,
after all, it means more than one would think. Here and
at other places in the young Hegel’s record appear
glimpses of a certain deep delight in the paradoxical, a
delight which, at times merely dry and humorous, at
times keenly intellectual, would mean little in another
temperament, but which is, after all, the determining ten-
dency of Hegel’s mind.

In fact, if one has eyes to see it, the Hegelian tempera-
ment, although not at all the Hegelian depth, is, even as
early as this, almost completely indicated. Of the later
philosophical genius, as I have said, there is so far no
promise ; but the general attitude which this genius was
to render so significant is already taken by the boy Hegel.
The traits present are, for the first an enormous intellec-
tual acquisitiveness, which finds eveiy sort of learning,
but above all every sort of literary and humane learning,
extremely interesting. The pedantry which oppresses the
German gymnasiast of that day is relieved, meanwhile, by
this dry and sarcastic Suabian humor, which notes the
oddities and stupidities of human nature with a keen
appreciation. The humor involves a love of the gro*


HEGEL,


199


tesque, of the paradoxical, of the eternally self-contradic-
tory in human life. The mature Hegel was to discover
the deeper meaning of such paradoxes ; for the (ime being
he simply notes them. For the rest, there is one trait
already manifest which is also of no small significance in
Hegel’s life-work. This is a certain observant sensitive-
ness to all manner of conscious processes in other people,
joined with a singularly cool and impersonal aptitude for
criticising these processes. Here, indeed, is a feature
about Hegel which later, in his mature wisdom, assumed a
very prominent place, and which always makes him, even
apart^from his style, very hard for some people to com-
prehend. We are used in literature to the man who sym-
pathizes personally with the passions of his fellows, and
who thus knows their hearts because of the warmth of his
own heart. We know also something of the tragically
cynical type of man, who, like Swift, not because he is
insensitive, but because he is embittered, sees, or chooses
to describe in passion, only its follies. We have all about
us, moreover, the simply unfeeling, to whom passion is an
impenetrable mystery, because they are naturally blind to
its depth and value. But Hegel’s type is one of the rar-
est, the one, namely, whose representative man will, so to
speak, tell you in a few pretematurally accurate, though
perhaps highly technical words, all that ever you did, who
will seem to sound your heart very much as a skillful^
specialist in nervous diseases would sound the mysterious
and secret depths of a morbid patient’s consciousness ; but
who, all the while, is apparently himself as free from deep
personal experiences of an emotional type as the physician
is free from his patient’s morbid and nervous web-spin-
ning. Hegel has this quasi-professional type of sensitive-
ness about his whole bearing towards life. Nobody
keener or more delicately alive and watchful than he to
comprehend, but also nobody more merciless to dissect,
the wisest and the tenderest passions of the heart. And


200


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHT.


yet, it is not all mercilessness in his case. When he has
analyzed, he does not condemn after the cynic’s fashion.
After th^ dissection comes reconstruction. He singles
out what he takes to be the truly humane in passion, he
describes the artistic or the religious interests of man, ^ he
pictures the more admirable forms of self-consciousness ;
and now, indeed, his speech may assume at moments a
religious, even a mystical tone. He praises, he depicts
approvingly, he admires the absolute worth of these
things. You feel that at last you have found his heart
also in a glow. But no ; this, too, is an illusion. A word
erelong undeceives you as to his personal attitude. He
is only engaged in his trade as shrewd professor ; he is
only telling you the true and objective value of things ;
he is not making any serious expression of his own piety
or wealth of concern. He is still the critic. Ills admira-
tion was the approval of the onlooker. In his private
person he remains what he was before, untouched by the
glow of heart of the very seraphs themselves.

In the year 1788, Hegel entered the university of his
province at Tubingen. Here he studied until 1793, being
somewhat interrupted in his academic work by ill health.
His principal study was theology. A certificate given him
at the conclusion of his course declared that he was a man
of some gifts and industry, but that he had paid no seri-
ous attention to philosophy. His reading, however, had
been very varied. In addition to theology, he had shown
a great fondness for the Greek tragedians. His most in-
timate student friends of note had been the young poet
Hblderlin and Schelling himself. Nobody had yet de-
tected any element of greatness in Hegel. The friend-
ship with Schelling was now continued in the form of a
correspondence, which lasted while Hegel, as an obscure
family tutor, passed the years from 1793 to 1796' in Swit-
zerland, and then, in a similar capacity, worked in Frank-
fort-on-the-Main until the end of 1800, when, through


HEQEL.


201

Scbelling’s assistance, be found an opportunity to enter
upon an academic career at the University of Jena. Dur-
ing all these years Hegel matured slowly, and printed
nothing. The letters to Schelling are throughout written
in a flattering and receptive tone. Philosophy becomes
more prominent in Hegel’s thought and correspondence
as time goes on. To Schelling he appeals as to the
elect leader of the newest evolution in thought. From
the Kantian philosophy, he says, a great, new creative
movement is to grow, and the central idea of this new
movement will be the doctrine of the absolute and infinite
self, whose constructive processes shall explain the funda-
mental laws of the world. This notion Hegel expresses
already in 1795, when he is but twenty-five and Schelling
is but twenty years old. But as to the development of
the new system in his own mind he gives little or no hint
until 1800, just before joining Schelling at Jena. Then,
as he confesses to his friend, the ideal of my youth has
had to take a reflective form, and has become a system ;
and I now am asking how I can return to life and set
about influencing men.” He had actually, by this time,
written an outline of his future doctrine, which was al-
reddy in all its essentials fully defined. On his first ap-
pearance at Jena, however, he was content to appear as a
co-worker and even as in part an expositor of Schelling,
and probably he purposely exaggerated the agreement
between his friend and himself so long as he found Schel-
ling’s reputation and assistance a valuable introduction to
the learned world, in which the youthful romanticist was
already a great figure, while Hegel himself was so far
unknown. In 1801, Hegel began his lectures as PrivaU
Docent at the university. In 1803, Schelling left the
univei*sity, and Hegel, now dependent upon himself, ere*
long made no secret of the fact that he had his own rela-
tively independent philosophy, and that he could find as
yet nothing definite and final about bis friend’s writuigs.


202


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


His own first great book, the Phanomenologie des
Geistes,” finished at about the time of the battle of Jena,
and published early in 1807, completed his separation
from Schelling, whose romantic vagueness he unmerci-
fully ridiculed, without naming Schelling himself, in the
long preface with which the book opened. In a letter to
Schelling accompanying a copy of the “ Phanomenologie,”
Hegel indeed explained that his ridicule must be under-
stood as directed against the misuse which the former’s
followers were making of the romantic method in philoso-
phy ; but the language of the preface was unmistakable.
Schelling replied curtly, and the correspondence ended.
After the period of confusion which followed the battle of
Jena, Hegel, who had been temporarily forced to abandon
the scholastic life, found a place as gymnasium director at
Niirnberg, where he married in 1811. In 1816, he was
called to a professorship of philosophy at Heidelberg.
He had already published his “ Logic.” In 1818, he was
called to Berlin, and here rapidly rose to the highest
academic success. He had a great following, came into
especial court favor, reached an almost despotic position
in the world of German philosophic thought, and died of
cholera, at the very height of his fame, in November,
1831.

If we now undertake in a few words to characterize
Hegel’s doctrine, we must first of all cut loose almost
entirely from that traditional description of his system
which has been repeated in the text-books until almost
everybody has forgotten what it means, and has therefore
come to accept it as true. We must furthermore limit
our attention to Hegel’s theory of the nature of self-con-
sciousness, laying aside all detailed study of the rest of
his elaborate system. And finally we must be rude to our
thinker, as he was to every one else ; we must take what
we regard as his “secret” (to borrow Dr. Stirling’s
word) out of the peculiar language in which Hegel chose


HEGEL.


208


to express it, and out of the systematic tomb where he
would have insisted upon burying it. So treated, Hegel’s
doctrine will appear as an analysis of the fundamental
paradox of our consciousness.

In terms of this paradox he will tiy to define, first the
relation of the finite and the infinite self, then the relation
between mind and reality.


III.

The world of our daily life, Kant had said, has good
order and connection in it, not because the absolute order
of external things in themselves is known to us, but (as
I have reworded Kant} because we are sane, because our
understanding, then, has its own coherence, and must see
its experience in the light of this coherence. Idealism
has already drawn the obvious conclusion from all this.
If this be so, if it is our understanding that actually
creates the order of nature for us, then the problem,
“ How shall I comprehend my world? ” becomes no more
or less than the problem, ^^How shall I understand my-
self ? ” We have already suggested into what romantic
extravagances the effort to know exhaustively the inner
life had by this time led. Some profound, but still vague
relation was felt to exist between my own self and an in-
finite self. To this vague relation, which Fichte conceived
in purely ethical terms, and which the romanticists tried
to grasp in numerous arbitrary and fantastic ways, phi-
losophy was accustomed to appeal. My real self is
deeper than my conscious self, and this real self is bound-
less, far spreading, romantic, divine. Only poets and
other geniuses can dream of it justly. But nobody can
tell squarely and simply, mit diirren Worten^ just what
he means by it. Now Hegel, as a maliciously cool-headed
and sternly unromantic Suabian, did indeed himself be-
lieve in the infinite self, but be regarded aU this vague-
ness of the romanticists with contempt, and even with a


204


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


certain rude mirtli. He appreciated all its enthusiasm in
his own external way, of course ; he could even talk after
that dreamy fashion himself, and once, not to the credit of
his wisdom, perhaps not quite to the credit of his honesty,
he did so, in an early essay, published, as we must note,
while he was still Schelling’s academic nursling at Jena.
But ho despised vagueness, and when the time came he
said so. Yet still for him the great question of philoso-
phy lay just where the romanticists had found it, yes, just
where Kaiit himself had left it. My conscious and pres-
ent self is n’t the whole of me. I am constantly appeal-
ing to my own past, to my own future self, and to my
deeper self, also, as it now is. Whatever 1 affirm, or
doubt, or deny, 1 am always searching my own mind for
proof, for support, for guidance. Such searching consti-
tutes in one sense all my active mental life. All philoso-
phy then turns, as Kant had shown, upon understanding
who and what I am, and who my deeper self is. Hegel
recognizes this ; but he will not dream about it. He
undertakes an analysis, therefore, which we must here re-
word in our own fashion, and for the most part with our
own illustrations.^

Examine yourself at any instant: “I,” you say,
“ know just now this that is now present to me, this feel-
ing, this sound, this thought. Of past and future, of re-
mote things, of other people, 1 can conjecture this or that,
but just now and here.I know whatever iff here and now
for me.” Yes, indeed, but what is here and now for mo?
See, even as I try to tell^ the here and now have flown,
I know this note of music that sounds, this wave that
breaks on the beach. No, not so, even as I try to tell
what I now know, the note has sounded and ceased, the
wave is broken and another wave curves onward to its fall.

I cannot say, ‘‘ I know.” I must always say, “ I just

^ What immediately follows is of coarse suggested by the opening
of the argument in the Phdnomenologie.


HEGEL.


206


knew.” But what was it I just knew ? Is it already past
and gone ? Then how can 1 now be knowing it at all ?
One sees this endless paradox of consciousness, this eter-
nal flight of myself from myself. After all, do I really
ever know any one abiding or even momentarily finished
and clearly present thing ? No, indeed. I am eternally
changing my mind. All that I know, then, is not any
present moment, but the moment that is just past, and tlie
change from that moment to this. My momentary self,
then, has knowledge in so far as it knows, recognizes,
accepts, another self, the self of the moment just past.
And again, my momentary self is known to the self of
the next succeeding moment, and so on in eternal and
fatal flight. All this is an old paradox. The poets
make a great deal of it. You can illustrate endlessly its
various forms and shadings. Tliat I don’t know my
present mind, but can only review my past mind is
the reason, for instance, why I never precisely know
that 1 am happy at the very instant when 1 am happy.
After a merry evening I can think it all over, and say,
“ Yes, I have been happy. It all was good.” Only then,
mark yon, the happiness is over. But still, you may say,
I know that the memory of my past happiness is itself a
happy thing. No, not even this do I now directly know.
If I reflect on my memory of past joy, I see once more,
but in a second reflective memory, that my previous mem-
ory of joy was itself joyous. But, as you see, I get each
new joy as my own in knowledge only when it has fled in
being. It is my memory, that but a moment since or a
while since I was joyful, that constitutes my knowledge
of my joy. This is a somewhat sad paradox. I feel my
best joys just when I know them least, namely, in my
least reflective moments. To know that I enjoy is to re-
flect, and to reflect is to remember a joy past. But
surely, then, one may say, when I suffer I can know that
1 am miserable. Yes, but once more only reflectively.


206


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


Each pang is past when I come to know that it was just
now mine. “ That is over,” I say, “ what next? ” And it
is this horror of the “ what next? ” this looking for my sor-
row elsewhere than in the present, namely, in the dreaded
and on-coming fatal future, that constitutes the deepest
pang of loneliness, of defeat, of shame, or of bereave-
ment. My illustrations are still my own, not Hegers.^
The result of all this possibly too elaborate web-spin-
ning of ours is not far to seek. W4 wanted to know who
any one of us at any moment is ; and the answer to the
question is : Each one of us is what some other moment
of his life reflectively finds him to be. It is a mysterious
and puzzling fact, but it is true. No one of us knows
what he now is ; he can only know what he was. Each
one of us, however, is now only what hereafter he shall
find himself to be. This is the deepest paradox of the
inner life. We get self-possession, self-apprehension,
self-knowledge, only through endlessly fleeing from our-
selves, and then turning back to look at what we were.^
But this paradox relates not merely to moments. It re-
lates to all life. Youth does not know its own deep mind.
Mature life or old age reflectively discovers a part of
what youth meant, and sorrows now that the meaning is
known only when the game is ended. All feeling, all
character, all thought, all life, exists for us only in so far
as it can be reflected upon, viewed from without, seen at

^ Hegel’s illustrations ate more commonly from more highly re-
flective stages of consciousness. Yet the key to the “ movement ”
of the whole ** Logic ” lies in just this fashion of viewing the facts
of life and thought.

* Cf. Logikf vol. i. IWerke, vol. iii.), pp. 99, 114, 152, 283, and 285,
for a series of expressions, in highly abstract form, of the nature of
this process as manifested in case of various logical constnictions and
categories. The commonest technical name for the process is Nega-
tion der Negation (1. c. p. 99), explained further on page 114. On page
152 the verb zurilckkehren is employed to name the same act ; so

p.288.


HEGEL.


207


a distance, acknowledged by another than itself, reworded
in terms of fresh experience. Stand still where you are,
stand alone, isolate your life, and forthwith you are no-
thing. Enter into relations, exist for the reflective thought
of yourself, or of other people, criticise yourself and be
criticised, observe yourself and be observed, exist, and at
the same time look upon yourself and be looked upon from
without, and then indeed you are somebody, — a self with
a consistency and a Vitality, a being with a genuine life.^
In short, then, take me moment by moment, or take
me in the whole of niy life, and this comes out as the
paradox of my existence, namely, I know myself only in
so far as I am known or may be known by another than
my present or momentary self. Leave me alone to the
self-consciousness of this moment, and I shrivel up into a
mere atom, an unknowable feeling, a nothing. My exis-
tence is in a sort of conscious publicity of my inner life.^
Let me draw at once an analogy between this fact of
the inner life and the well-known fact of social life to
which J just made reference. This analogy evidently
struck Hegel with a great deal of force, as he often refers
to it. We are all aware, if we have ever tried it, how
empty and ghostly is a life lived for a long while in abso-
lute solitude. Free me from my fellows, let me alone to
work out the salvation of my own glorious self, and surely
(so I may fancy) I shall now for the fii-st time show who
I am. No, not so ; on the contrary I merely dhow in such
a case who 1 am not. I am no longer friend, brother,
companion, co-worker, servant, citizen, father, son ; I ex-
ist for nobody; and erelong, perhaps to my surprise,
generally to my horror, I discover Ithat I am nobody.
The one thing means the other. In the dungeon of my

^ The Kampf des Anerkennens of the PMnomenologie,

3 Brief general descriptions of the process and paradox of self-
oonscionsness as such are : Phdnomenologief p. 125 ; Logik, Werke^ voL
iii. p. 66, and vol. v. p. 13 ; Eneyktopodie^ Werke, vol. vi, pp. 47, 91.


208


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


isolated self-consciousness I rot away unheeded and terror-
stricken. Idiocy is before me, and my true self is far be-
hind, in those bright and bitter days when I worked and
suffered with my fellows. My freedom from others is my
doom, the most insufferable form of bondage. Could I
speak to a living soul I If any one knew of me, looked
at me, thought of me, yes, hated me even, how blessed
would be the deliverance ! Now note the analogy here
between the inner life in each of fis and the social life
that each of us leads. Within myself the rule holds that
I live consciously only in so far as I am known and re-
flected upon by my subsequent life. Beyond what is
called my private self, however, a similar rule holds. I
exist in a vital and humane sense only in relation to my
friends, my social business, my family, my fellow-workers,
my world of other selves. This is the rule of mental life.
We are accustomed to speak of consciousness as if it were
.wholly an inner affair, which each one has at each mo-
ment solely in and by himself. But, after all, what con-
sciousness do we then refer to ? What is love but the
consciousness that somebody is there who either loves me
(and then I rejoice) or does not (and then I am gloomy
or jealous) ? What is self-respect but a conscious appeal
to others to respect my right or my worth ? And if you
talk of one’s secret heart, what is it but just that inner
brooding in one’s own conscious life which so much the
more illustrates, as we say, the very impossibility of know-
ing myself except by looking back on my past self. See^
then, it makes no difference how you look at me, you find
the same thing. All consdousnesa is an appeal to other
conscious7iess,^ TRiat is the essence of it. The inner life
is, as Hegel would love to e;q)ress it, ebensosehr an outer
life. Spirituality is just intercourse, communion of spir-
its. This is the essential publicity of consciousness,
whereby all the secrets of our hearts are known.^

^ Ph&noTnenologie, p. 136.

> The word ** pablicity ’* is a very fair representative of AllgeiMxiu


HEGEL.


209


Here, then, Hegel has come upon the track of a pro-
cess in consciousness whereby my private self and that
deeper self of the romanticists maybe somewhat more
definitely connected. Let us state this process a little
abstractedly. A conscious being is to think, or to feel, or
to do something. Very well, then, he must surely think
or do this, one would say, in some one moment. So be it ;
but as a conscious being he is also to know that he thinks
or does this. To this end, however, he must exist in
more than one moment. He must first act, and then live
to know that he has acted. The self that acts is one, the
self that knows of the act is another. Here, then, there
are at least two moments, already two selves. We see at
once how the same process could be indefinitely repeated.
In order to know myself at all, I must thus live out an in-
definitely numerous series of acts and moments. I must
become many selves and live in their union and coherence.
But still more. Suppose that what our self-conscious be-
ing has to do is to prove a proposition in geometry. As
he proves, he appeals to somebody, his other self, so to
speak, to observe that his proof is sound. Or again, sup-
pose that what he does is to love, to hate, to beseech, to
pity, to appeal for pity, to feel proud, to despise, to exhort,
to feel charitable, to long for sympathv, to converse, to do,
in short, any of the social acts that ii.ake up, when taken
all together, the whole of our innermost self-conscious-
ness. All these acts, we see, involve at least the appeal
to many selves, to society, to other spirits. We have no
life alone. There is no merely inner self. There is the
world of selves. We live in our coherence with other
people, in our relationships. To suin it all up : From
first to last the law of conscious existence is this paradox-

hdt as applied to self-coDSciousness by Hegel in the highly important
§ 436 of the EncyklopUdie^ Werhe^ vol. vii. 2, p. 283. Here already
appears the nature of the true Universal of Hegel’s system. Organic
interrelationship of individuals is the condition even of their relativelv
independent selfhood.


210 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

ical but real self-differentiation, whereby I, the so-called
inner self, am through and through one of ^ many selves,
so that my inner self is already an outer, a revealed, an
expressed self. The only mind then is the world of many
related minds. It is of the essence of consciousness to
find its inner reality by losing itself in outer, but spiritual
relationships. Who am I then at this moment? I am
just this knot of relationships to other moments and to
other people. Do I converse busily and with absorption ?
Then I am but just now this centre of the total conscious-
ness of all those who are absorbed in this conversation.
And so always it is of the essence of spirit to differen-
tiate itself into many spirits, and to liVe in their relation-
ships, to be one by virtue solely of their coherence.

The foregoing illustrations of Hegel’s paradox, some of
which in these latter paragraphs have been his own, have
not begun to suggest how manifold are, according to him,
^its manifestations. So paradoxical and so true does it
seem to him, however, that he looks for further analogies
of the same process in other regions of ' our conscious life.
What we have found is that if I am to be I, ‘‘as I think
I be,” I must be more than merely I. I become myself
by forsaking my isolation and by entering into commu-
nity. My self-possession is always and everywhere self-
surrender to my relationships. But now is not this para-
dox of the spirit applicable still further in life ? Does n’t
a similar law hold of all that we do in yet a deeper sense?
If you want to win any end, not merely the end of know-
ing yourself, but say the end of becoming holy, is n’t it
true that, curiously enough, you in vain strive to become
holy if you merely strive for holiness ? J ust pure holi-
ness, what would it be ?. To have never a worldly thought,
to be peaceful, calm, untroubled, absolutely pure in spirit,
without one blot or blemish, — that would indeed be noble,
would it? But consider, if one were thus quite unworldly
just because one had never an unworldly thought, whsrf


HEGEL.


211

would that be but simple impassivity, innocence, pure
emptiness? innocent little cherub, that, just born
into a pure light, had never even heard that there was a
world at all, he would indeed in this sense be unworldly.
But is such holiness the triumphant holiness of those that
really excel in strength ? Of course if I had never even
heal'd of the world, 1 should not be a lover of the world.
But that would be because of my ignorance. And all
sorts of things can be alike ignorant, — cherubs, young
tigers, infant Napoleons, or Judases. Yes, the very
demons of the pit might liave begun by being ignorant of
the universe. If so, they would have been so far holy.
But, after all, is such holiness worth much as holiness ? It
is indeed worth a good deal as innocence, just to be
looked at. A young tiger or a baby Napoleon fast asleep,
or a new created demon that had not yet grown beyond
the cherub stage — we should all like to look at such
pretty creatures. But such holiness is no ideal for us
n^oral agents. Here we are with the world in our hands,
beset already with temptation and with all the pangs of
our finitude. For us holiness means, not the abolition
of worldlinessf not innocence, not turning away from the
world, but the victory that overcometh the world, the
struggle, the courage, the vigor, the endurance, the hot
fight with sin, the facing of the demon, the power to have
him there in us and to hold him by the throat, the living
and ghastly presence of the enemy, and the triumphant
wrestling with him and keeping him forever a panting,
furious, immortal thrall and bondman. That is all the
holiness we can hope for. Yes, this is the only true holi-
ness. Such triumph alone does the supreme spirit know,
who is tempted in all points li|^e as we are, yet without
sin. Holiness, you see, exists by virtue of its opposite.
Holiness is a consciousness of sin with a consciousness of
the victory over sin. Only the tempted are holy,’ and
they only when they win against temptation.


212


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


All this I set down here, not merely because I believe
it, although indeed I do, but because Hege^s cool diag-
nosis of life loves to mark just such symptoms as this.
“ Die Tugend,” says he in one passage of his “ Logie,”
“ die Tugend ist der hbchste, vollendete Kampf.” ^ Holi-
ness, then, is the very height of the struggle with evil.
It is a paradox, all this. And it is the same paradox of
consciousness over again. You want the consciousness of
virtue ; you win it, not by innocence, but through its own
very opposite, namely, through meeting the enemy, endur-
ing and overcoming. Consciousness here once more, as
before, differentiates itself into various, into contrasted,
forms and lives in their relationships, their conflicts, their
contradictions, and in the triumph over these. As the
warrior rejoices in the foeman worthy of his steel, and
rejoices in him just because he wants to overcome and to
slay him ; as courage exists by the triumph over terror,
and as there is no courage in a world where there is
nothing terrible; as strength consists in the mastery of
obstacles ; as even love is proved only through suffering,
grows deep only when sorrow was with it, becomes often
the tenderer because it is wounded by misunderstanding ;
BO, in short, everywhere in conscious life, consciousness
is a union, an organization, of conflicting aims, purposes,
thoughts, stirrings. And just this, according to Hegel, is
the very perfection of consciousness. There is nothing
simple in it, nothing unmittelhar^ nothing there till you
win it, nothing consciously known or possessed till you
prove it by conflict with its opposite, till you develop its
inner contradictions and triumph over them. This is the
fatal law of life. This is the pulse of the spiritual world.

For see, once more : «our illustrations have run from
highest to lowest in life. Everywhere, from the most

^ Werke^ vol. iv., p. 63. The spirit of the foregoing exposition of
the essence of holiness is found expressed in many places, especially
in the ReligwnsphiloBophie,


HEGEL.


213


trivial games, where the players are always risking loss
in order to epjoy triumph, from the lowest crudities of
savage existence, where the warriors prove their heroism
by lacerating their own flesh, up to the highest conflicts
and triumphs of the spirit, the law holds good. Spiritu-
ality lives by self-differentiation into mutually opposing
forces, and by victory in and over these oppositions.
This law it is that Hegel singles out and makes the basis
of his system. This is the logic of passion which he so
skillfully diagnoses, and so untiringly and even mercilessly
applies to all life. He gives his law various very techni-
cal names. He calls it the law of the universal Negati--
vital of self-conscious life ; and Negativitat means siniply
this principle of self-differentiation, by which, in order
to possess any form of life, virtue, or courage, or wisdom,
or self-consciousness, you play, as it were, the game of
consciousness, set over against yourself your opponent, —
the wicked impulse that your goodness holds by the
throat, the cowardice that your courage conquers, the
problem that your wisdom solves, — and then live by
winning your game against this opponent. Having found
this law, Hege} undertakes, by a sort of exhaustive induc-
tion, to apply it to the explanation of every conscious rela-
tion, and to construct, in terms of this principle of the
self-differentiation of spirit, the whole mass of our rational
relations to one another, to the world, and to God. His
principle is, in another foim, this : that the deeper self
which the romanticists sought is to be found and defined
only by spiritual struggle, toil, conflict ; by setting over
against our private selves the world of our tasks, of our
relationships, and by developing, defining, and mastering
these tasks and relationships untjl we shall find, through
the very stress and vastness and necessity and spirituality
of the conflict, that we are in God’s own infinite world of
spiritual warfare and of absolute restless self-conscious-
ness. The more of a self I am, the more contradictions


214 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

there are in my nature and the completer my conquest
over these contradictions. The absolute self with which I
am seeking to raise my soul, and which erelong ! find to be
a genuine self, yes, the only self, exists by the very might
of its control over all these contradictions, whose infinite
variety furnishes the very heart and content of its life.

Hegel, as we see, makes his Absolute, the Load, most
decidedly a man of war. Consciousness is paradoxical,
restless, struggling. Weak souls get weary of the fight,
and give up trying to get wisdom, skill, virtue, because all
these are won only in presence of the enemy. But the ab-
solute self is simply the absolutely strong spirit who bears
the contradictions of life, and wins the eternal victory.

Yet one may say, if this is Hegel’s principle, it amounts
simply to showing us how conflict and active mastery con-
tinually enlarge our finite selves. Does it enable us to
prove that anywhere in the world there is this absolute self
which embraces and wins all the conflicts ? Hegel tells
us how the individual self is related to the deeper self,
how the inner life finds itself through its own realization
in the contradictions of the outer life. But does he any-
where show that (jod exists ?

To show this is precisely his object. I am not here
judging how well he succeeds. The deepest presupposi-
tion, he thinks, of all this paradoxical conscious life of
ours is the existence of the absolute self, which exists, to
bo sure, not apart from the world, but in this whole organ-
ized human warfare of ours. Only Hegel is not at all
content to state this presupposition mystically. He de-
sires to use his secret, — his formula for the very essence
of consciousness, his fundamental law of rationality, to
unlock problem after problem until he reaches the idea of
the absolute self. Of the systematic fashion in which he
attacked this task in his Logic,” in his Encyclopaedia,”
and in his various courses of lectures, I can give no very
satisfying notion. To my mind, however, he did his work


HEGEL.


215


best of all in his deepest and most difficult book, the Phe-
nomenoJogy of Spirit.” Here hto seeks to show how, in
case you start just witi^ yourself alone, and ask who you
are and what you know, you are led on, step by step,
through a process of active self-enlargement that cannot
stop short of the recognition of the Absolute Spirit himself
as the yery heart and soul of your own life. This process
consists everywhere in a repetition of the fundamental
paradox of consciousness : In order to realize what I am I
must, as I find, become more than I am or than I know
myself to be. I must enlarge myself, conceive myself as
in external relationships, go beyond my private self, pre-
suppose the social life, enter into conflict, and, winning
the conflict, come nearer to realizing my unity with my
deeper self. But the real understanding of this process
only comes, according to Hegel, when you observe that
in trying thus to enlarge yourself for the very purpose
of self-comprehension you repeat ideally the evolution of
human civilization in your own person. This process of
self-enlargement is the process which is writ large in the
history’of mankind. The “ Phenomenology ” is thus a sort
of freely told philosophy of history. It begins with the
Spirit on a crude and sensual stage ; it follows his para-
doxes, his social enlargement, his perplexities, his rebel-
lions, his skepticism, all his wanderings, until he learns,
through toils and anguish and courage, such as represent
the whole travail of humanity, that he is, after all, in his
very essence the absolute and divine spirit himself, who is
present already on the savage stage in the very brutalities
of master and slave ; who comes to a higher life in the
family ; who seeks freedom again and again in romantic
sentimentality or in stoical independence; who learns,
however, always afresh that in such freedom there is no
truth ; who returns, therefore, willingly to the bondage of
good citizenship and of social morality ; and who, finally,
in the religious consciousness, comes to an appreciation of


216


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


the lesson that he has learned through this whole self-
enlarging process of civilization, — the lesson, namely,
that all consciousness is a manifeSbatioii of the one law of
spiritual life, and so, finally, of the one Eternal Spirit.
The Absolute of HegeFs “ Phenomenology ” is no absolute
on parade, so to speak, — no God that hides himself be-
hind clouds and darkness, nor yet a Supreme Bejiig who
keeps himself carefully clean and untroubled in the re-
cesses of an inaccessible infinity. No, Hegel’s Absolute
is, 1 repeat, a man of war. The dust and the blood of
ages of humanity’s spiritual life are upon him ; he comes
before us pierced and wounded, but triumphant, — the
God wdio has conquered contradictions, and who is simply
the total spiritual consciousness that expresses, embraces,
unifies, and enjoys the whole wealth of our human loyalty,
endurance, and passion.


rv.

But still you may ask, Does all this yet give us the con-
ditions of a genuine philosophical system ? Does it ex-
plain outer nature and physical causation ? does it explain
perception and knowledge ? does it tell us the true nature
of things ? In brief, as you see, all this doctrine of He-
gel’s seems essentially ethical, practical, an exposition of
spirituality, — not a theoretical account of nature. Well,
Hegel believes himself to be in possession of devices
whereby he can make his essentially practical categories
of a deep theoretical significance. Consider, namdy,
those problems of the external world, of space and time,
of cause and effect, of law and phenomena, of substance
and show, of nature and of man, which previous philoso-
phy has been treating. How do these problems arise,
and what is their universal character ? Are n’t they
always problems about some paradoxical opposition that
seems to exist in the nature of reality, and that baffles
the human understanding just because both the opposed


HEGEL.


217


terms, say, for instance, knowing subject and known
object ; or true reality a^d seaming reality ; or things in
themselves and phenomena ; or finite and infinite, — just
because, I s^y, both these opposed terms in each pair
seem to be separate, sundered, mutually irreducible, in-
accessible each to other, while yet hath, the opposed things
nevertheless continually force tliemselves upon us, and
demand of us an explanation. Philosophy is a nest of
such problems. They vex men endlessly ; they gave
Kant his troublesome pairs of contradictory assertions
about space and time ; they gave Fichte the puzzle about
self and not-self; they gave Hume the problem about
facts and laws, about expc^rience that could never find
necessity, and necessity that continually pretended to
inflict itself upon experience. A lc|gical system of such ’
problems and of their solutions would be a complete
theoretical philosophy, an account of the absolute, such as
Schelling had dreamed of. Well, in our formula of the
universal Negativitdt of the spiritual life, haven’t we
found precisely the formula that would both state and
solves such puzzles as these? Spirit it is that makes
the world. That, you remember, is, since Kant, presup-
position of this whole age. The spirit, then, because of
its JSfegatwitdt^ will everywhere differentiate itself, and
therefore, throughout all its universe, from the atoms to
the archangels, will create seeming oppositions, will bur-
den itself with a wealth of magnificent paradoxes; and
will do this equally and obstinately in the world of theory,
as well as in the world of practice. If, therefore, we
have the key to the process whereby the spirit wins unity
in the midst of its own oppositions, then the puzzle of
Hume and the problems of Kant, the conflicts of empiri-
cal research and of a priori speculation, — yes, all the
puzzles that the history of philosophy shows us, can be
stated and solved ; for they will all be cases of the same
fundamental paradox of self-consciousness. The talisman


218 . THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

of the logic of passion will cause to open the doors of the
richest treasure-houses of theoretical research. It is with
this notion in mind that Hegel, influenced by Schelling’s
example, even as Schelling had been by his own, sets out
to expound, not merely the history of the human or even
of the absolute spirit, but the nature and the solution of
every philosophical problem concerning the absolute as
the history of philosophy has presented such problems
to us, wheth'^r in the fundamental questions of logic, or
in the inquiries of the philosophy of nature. 1 need not
say that this stupendous undertaking was but indifferently
executed.

It is just this undertaking, however, that gives the He-
gelian system its peculiarly technical and abstruse for-
mulation.

The system itself is set forth in three divisions ; the
“ Logic,” the “ Philosophy of Nature,” and the “ Philoso-
phy of Spirit.” The “ logic ” is an exposition, in the most
orderly and technical form, of the fundamental thoughts,
or “categories,” which are to be found, exemplified in
all the facts of this our world of the self. As for these
categories themselves, the history of philosophy furnishes
them to Hegel. They are such fundamental ideas as
those of Being and Something ; of Many and One ; of
Quality, and Quantity, and Relation ; of Essence and
Phenomenon ; of Form and Matter ; of Inner and Outer ;
of Law and SubstaiM3e ; of Subject and Object ; of
Thought and the Absolute. You can’t get on in phi-
losophy without using such conceptions. They are the
coinage of the spiritual realm. If you try to set forth
truth you must employ them ; if you want to understand
truth, you must comprehend them. And now compre-
hension of these categories is n’t to be got by merely de-
fining them in abstract fashion, as Euclid defines a circle,
or Spinoza his substance. Definition, simple, positive,
hard and fast as it is, never tells the whole truth about


HEGEL.


219


a conception ; for every fundamental conception is leally
to be comprehended only by viewing it in the true and yet
paradoxical relation to its own opposite, that, as a product
of self-consciousness, this conception must have. We have
already seen how virtue and vice, present consciousness
and past consciousness, individual consciousness and social
consciousness, inner life and outer life, are indefinable, in-
comprehensible, save by virtue of an insight into just
that wondrous union of conflicting tendencies whereby
each of the opposed conceptions gets its meaning for us.
It is the flow, the change, the conflict of thought that the
philosopher has to follow. In vain, for instance, do you
try to define substance after Spinoza’s fashion as a merely
eternal, fixed, congealed, and immobile truth. The sub-
stance of thU world, of this universe of the self, must
be a truth that lives in the very stream and struggle of
finite and seeming existence. The true substance of the
world is n’t hidden, but revealed by the passionate change
and ebb and flow of the phenomena ; for the true sub-
stance is the self, the subject ; and he preserves himself
by living, for he is the living God. As such, philoso])hy
has to show him. Therefore you can’t abstractly define
his nature, apart from finite things and relations. You
must concretely realize, even in j^oiir notion of substance,
the organic unity in endless differentiation of which his
universe is the embodiment. Even so it is with other
categories. You comprehend them by virtue of their
paradoxes. The “ Logic ” undertakes to be an exhaustive
analysis of such paradoxes of the fundamental concepl-
tions.

The method of the “Logic,” then, is what Hegel calls
the dialectical method. It is the method of what we have
called the logic of passion, applied to the most theoreti-
cal and seemingly least passionate of human conceptions.
Take any notion you please. Hegel at once sees in that
notion the traces of the 8elf‘<2onacious strife whereof it is


220


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


the offspring, or, if you like, the crystallized embodiment.
Is it quantity that you are talking about ? Then you at
once observe that there are two ways of looking at quan«
tity. One, to which we get used in elementary arithmetic,
regards quantity as what we call ‘‘ discrete,” that is, as
made up of separate units. The other way, to which we
get used in geometry and physics, regards quantity as
continuous. The one fashion counts by units, the other
measures by standards. Now in the ordinary view, this
difference in the methods of viewing quantity is thought
to correspond to an existent difference in the sorts of
quantity that the world contains. There are discrete
quantities and there are continuous quantities. But, for
Hegel, the notion of quantity, as it truly exists, is a notion
that is the product of self-consciousness, and not a mere
datum of sense. As such a product of self-conscious-
ness, true quantity proves to be, so he holds, at once both
continuous and discrete, just as virtue proved to be der
hochste Kampf^ and so to involve both good and evil.
Quantity is a mathematical thing, a seemingly cold and
lifeless category, while virtue is obviously a creature of
holy passion. But none the less is the paradox of self-
consciousness present in the idea of quantity, just as in
practical life. Discrete quantity consists of the scj^arate
and un jointed units. Continuous quantity resists and
even defies description in terms of disjunct ultimate
units, as, for instance,^ a line refuses to be made up of
points. Yet, as Hegel thinks himself able to show, each
of these sorts of quantity is such that when you try to
think out its nature, it afflicts itself, so to speak, with the
characteristics of the other, takes them on,^ as llegel loves

^ A sug^gestion of Hegel’s technical use of an ihm or an ihr, Cf.
Logik^ Werke, vol. iii. p. 221 : ‘^In gewohnlichen Vorstellungen von
coiitiniiirlicher und discreter Grosse wird es iibersehen, dass jede
dieser Grossen beide Momente, sowohl die Continuit&t als die Discre-
tion, an ihr hat.”


HEGEL.


221


to say, in all such cases, just as the good thII takes on to
itself the evil impulse, in order that it may live by over-
coming evil. How Hegel tries to show this in case of
quantity I have indeed no time to expound.

By means of this dialectical method Hegel seeks, more-
over, not only to show each logical category as in itself
an organism of opposed and yet mutually complementary
elements, but also to show all these fundamental notions
as forming one system, wherein the most apparently
diverse and disparate ideas are actually interrelated as
parts of the one highest and inclusive category, the divine
/(fee, or total thought of the world, whose full realization
is the absolute self in its spiritual wholeness. The abso-
lute Idee is the notion of the complete self, regarded just
as a logical category. As true self, it appears to us later,
in the philosophy of spirit. In the ‘‘ Logic ” it is only this
thought of the total nature of things as being in the
Hegelian sense self-determined* This thought contains
all the subordinate categories as organic parts of the
total, and as parts whose organic relation is precisely
such as this dialectical, this paradoxical nature of self-con
sciousness demands. What the citizens are to the state,
such are the individual categories of thought to the abso-
lute logical Idee, In themselves they are endlessly con-
flicting, and they are yet complementary to one another.
In their totality they form but one highest category, the
category of the organic unity of all thoughts in one. The
Idee is also called by Hegel an objectiver Begriff^ the
real law of laws, the thought of the organic relation of all
things and thoughts in one universal order.

One may thus obviously define the Logic as an effort
to set forth all fundamental human thoughts as forming an
organic system. This character of the Logic ” the most
superficial* reader at once sees.- What is missed by the
superficial reader of the Logic ” is an insight into whati
1 Logikf Werke^ vol. v. p. 230.


222 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

according to HegeFs notion, constitutes organic unity, into
what is the linkage that ties together the members of his
kind of organism. This linkage, as we now sufficiently
know, is the one that the nature of self-consciousness alone
explains. It is therefore through and through a linkage
of opposing and complementary members by reason of
their very oppositions. This is the source of the perplex-
ing analysis of contradictions whereof the “ Logic ” is full.
The success or failure of the “ Logic therefore depends
upon its author’s right to read the processes of the higher
practical spirituality into the products of purely theoreti-
cal thinking. Here is the crux of the system.

One fundamental consideration remains to be mentioned
as characterizing the Logic.” Old-fashioned logic called
itself formal. It discussed categories and methods of
thinking, but it did not undertake to construct concrete
truths. Its forms of thought were never real things for
it. But Hegel’s categories are, of course, more than this.
The laws of thought are n’t mere abstractions ; they are
the soul of things. In the “ Logic ” one is constructing
the very essence of the world-self.

Now, Hegel further expressed this aspect of the matter
by his remarkable doctrine about the relation between
Begriffc^ or universal notions, and the individual facts
that fall under these notions. There is an old contro-
versy as to whether individual things, or the classes that
correspond to general conceptions, are the deepest real-
ities in the world. Science, as Aristotle said, is always of
the general. When we think, we always think of classes,
of categories, in brief, of universals. But, on the other
hand, the facts of the world always appear to our senses
to be individual. Man, as a mere abstraction, doesn’t
exist ; individual men do. Here is one of the most per-
plexing of the paradoxes of common sense : The business
of science, namely, is with truth, and truth is always uni-
versal, is known to us as the notion of things, the law of


HEGEL.


228

tibings, the essence of the world. And, on the other hand,
science is to be true of facts, and yet the facts, at all
events as sense views them, are n’t universal, but are just
the individual facts. This opposition between the form
of science, which is universality, and the matter of sci-
ence, which is individual fact, gave much trouble already
to Aristotle,^ into whose system it introduced a funda-
mental contradiction. Hegel was well aware of this con-
tradiction between the Aristotelian ideal of universal
knowledge, and the actual theory of the relation of uni-
versale and individuals, as Aristotle developed it in his
logical treatises.^ But this ancient paradox, which had
given ground for one of the most famous of the contro-
versies of the philosophy of the Middle Ages, was pre-
cisely the hind of paradox, that Hegel’s method was pecu-
liarly apt to characterize and deal with. In attempting
his own solution of the problem he was therefore fully
conscious of its difficulty, and of the relative novelty of
his own theory. “ The universal in its true and inclusive
sense is jsl thought,” he once says,® ‘‘ that it has cost thou-
sands of years to bring to human consciousness, and that
received its full recognition only through the aid of Chris-
tianity. The Greeks knew neither God nor man in their
true universality.” The philosophical formulation of this
thought is of course, according to Hegel, later than its
concrete realization ; yes, this philosophical formulation
of the “inclusive” nature of the. universal is to be one of
Hegel’s own peculiar contributions to philosophical theoiy.

^ See Zeller’s Philosophie der Grkchen, part II. section 2, pp. 304-
313 (3d edition), for a technical exposition of the resulting diffi-
culties.

^ Compare the two accounts of Aristotle’s method of work in
Hegel’s own lectures on the History of Philosophy, Werke, toI. xiv.
pp. 279, 282. See, also, the characterization of Aristotle’s Logic, id.,
p. 368.

* In a lecture, as reported by one of his students, Werke, voL vL
p. 321*


224 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

Tbe true universal, namely, or as Hegel calls it, tbe Be*
gnff^ whose highest expression is to be the absolute Idee^
is the organic union of the universal truth and the indi-
vidual facts, an union determined by the principle that
every truth is a truth constructed by the thought of the
world-self, and that as such it will exemplify just that
multiplicity of individual facts in the all-embracing and
so universal unity of self-consciousness, which we have
now so fully exemplified. The tme universal of the whole
world is, then, the divine Idee^ or “ all-enfolding ” nature
of things, the true genus within which all individual facts
fall. This universal is no abstraction at all, but a per-
fectly concrete whole, since the facts are, one and all, not
mere examples of it, but are embraced in it, are brought
forth by it as its mom'ents, and exist only in relation to
one another and to it. It is the vine; they, the indi-
viduals, are the branches. It is in nature the self. They
are the individual thoughts, aspects, finite expressions, em-
bodiments of the self. ^^All reality^^^ says Hegel, in one
striking passage, is the Idee. • . . The individual being
is some aspect ( Sene') of the Idee. As such it tlierefore
needs other realities [beside it], which seem as if they
also existed all by themselves ; yet only in them together
and in their relationship is the universal realized. The
individual by itself does not embody its universal^'* ^
Thus the paradox of the relation of universal and indi-
vidual is to be solved in a manner peculiarly character-
istic of the whole system. The true law is to be the
organic total of the facts that fall under it. The true
general class, the actual object of science, is not an ab-
stract something exemplified by the individuals, nor yet
an essence that is to be found in each individual. There
is no such thing for Hegel as a merely individual object
of thought existent all alone for itself. The total world
of the interrelated individuals is all that exists. The uni*

^ Werke, voL vi. p. 385.


HEGEIto


versal is therefore realized in this totality of individual
life. For the nature of the universal is t|fe nature of the
self, and the self is a world of organicwy interrelated
.selves, moments of the infinite organism, phases of itS'
infinity.^

One could not mention a formula more characteristic
of the Hegelian doctrine' than this account of what Hegel
calls the “concrete universal,” which constructs, brings
forth, in the endless play and toil of rationality, its own

differences,” the individuals of the world of experience.
It is this which for him explains how in the church or in
the state we, the individuals, find ourselves “members
one of another.” It is this that shows us the whole world
as an organism. Wherever this sort of universality is not
found, 'as is the case in the world of uncomprehended
sense-facts, where, for instance, only men as individuals
seem to exist, and man appears to us as a dead abstrac-
tion, we are not dealing with the world of truth. The
first sign that we are dealing with the truth itself is our
success, in discovering an organic connection amongst
things. For organism is selfhood or personality viewed
in its outward manifestation. There is, then, for Hegel a
lower form of thinking that reaches only a Verstandee-
Allgemeinheit. Such thinking finds itself in the presence
of individual facts, and regards the universal either as a
bare abstraction, or else as present only in each individual
as its inner and separate nature. For such thinking the
only concrete truth is the world of individual things as
such. But the deeper insight into the world is revealed

^ Heg^el’s first published exemplification of this doctrine was in
the before-mentioned theory of the All^enrnnhtit des BewwistseinSf as
expounded iu the Phdnomenologie. In the Loffik the doctrine receives
a most intricate and elaborate exposition. It is in later writings made
the basis for Hegel’s doctrine of the state and of the religious con-
sciousness, although it was almost certainly reached, in the first place,
through an examination of just these instances. For further citations
see Appendix C.


226 THE SPIRIT OF MQDBBN PHILOSOPHY.

to US through a reflection upon the nature of self-con-
sciousness, wherein the universal, or self, is the organic
total of the fa6ts of consciousness, which exist not save; as
related to one another, and to this universal. The true
Universal of Hegel’s theory is, then, what ouf own Shelley
so well described when he told us in the Prometheus ”
of the

** One undivided Soul of many a soul
Whose nature is its own divine control,

Where all things flow to all, as rivers to the sea.” ^

Of the philosophy of nature (Hegel’s most unfinished
and weakest undertaking), and of the philosophy of spirit
(whereof the foregoing has already contained a sugges-
tion), it is not our office here to treat. These matters be-
long in their fullness to technical expositions, upon whose
province I have now doubtless too much trespassed.

And herewith I must close this account. It will, per-
haps, be already obvious to you all that there is a great
deal in this Hegelian analysis of self-consciousness that
seems to me of permanent and obvious value. As to the
finality of the philosophical doctrine -as a whole, that is
another matter not here to be discussed. Still, I may,
perhaps, do well, in closing, to suggest this one thought :
People usually call Hegel a Cold-hearted system-maker,
who reduced all our emotions to purely abstract logical
terms, and conceived his absolute solely as an incarnation
of dead thought. I, on the contrary, call him one who
knew marvelously well, with all bis coldness, the secret
of human passion, and who, therefore, described, as few
others have done, the paradoxes, the problems, and the
glories of the spiritual life. His great philosophical and
systematic error lay, not in introducing logic into passion,

^ The Hegelian theory of universal^ is well sketched in Principal
Caird’s Philosophy of Rdigion, pp. 229-232. See, also, p. 241, where
Principal Caird illustrates the true universal by the example of a
family with many members.


BEGEL*


227


bat in oonoeiving the logic of passion as the only logic ;
so that yon in vain endeavor to get satisfaction from
Hegel’s treatment of outer nature, of science, of mathe-
matics, or ^f any coldly theoretical topic. About aU these
things he is immensely suggestive, but never final. His
system, as system, has crumbled, but his vital comprehen-
sion of our life remains forever.


LECTURE Vm.


SCHOFENHAUEB.

I NEED hardly remark in the presence of this audience
that the name of Schopenhauer is better known to most
general readers, in our day, than is that of any other mod*
ern Continental metaphysician, except Kant. The reputed
heretic has in this held the reward of his dangerous repu*
tation, and I scarcely know whether to fear or to rejoice,
as I how approach the treatment of so noteworthy and
significant a man, at the position in which Schopenhauer’s
fame puts his expositor. In one respect, of course, my
task is rendered easier by all this popular repute of my
hero. Of his doctrine most of us have heard a good deal,
and many of us may have followed to a considerable ex-
tent his reasoning ; at all events we* have become ac-
quainted, at least by hearsay, with the fact that his out-
come was something called Pessimism. And thus, in
dealing with him, I am not voyaging with you in seas un-
known to all but the technical students of philosophy, as
was last time the case, when I told you of Hegel. On the
other hand, the kind of reputation that his writings have
very naturally won is decidedly against me when 1 under-
take to treat him with genuinely philosophical fairness. It
is so much easier to be edifying than to face with courage
certain serious and decidedly tragic realities ! Let me be
frank with yon, then, at the outset about my difficulty. It
is, plainly stated, simply this; You have heard that
Schopenhauer is a pessimist. You, meanwhile, are surely
for the most part no pessimists. Therefore, as we ap-
proach Schopenhauer, you want me, in your secret hearts,


SCHOPENHAUER.


229


if not in your expressed wishes, to refute Schopenhauer.
Now refutation is, as. I have already tried to maintain, a
thing of only very moderate service in the study of phi-
losophy. ^e may refute a great thinker’s accidental mis-
judgments ; we can seldom refute his deeper insights.
And as I must forthwith assure you,. and shall very soon
jshow you, Schopenhauer’s pessimism is actually expres-
sive of a very deep insight into life. This insight is in-
deed not a final one. We must transcend it. But surely
you would justly discover me in a very unphilosophical, and
in fact very unworthily self-contradictory, attitude if now,
after all these successive efforts to show you a continuity
and a common body of truth in the modern philosophers,
I should suddenly, at this point of my discourse, assume
the airs of a champion of the faith against the infidels,
and should fall to hewing and hacking at Schopenhauer
with genuinely crusading zeaf. In fact it is not my call-
ing to hIo anything of the sort. I always admire the cru-
saders, but my admiration is due rather to their enthusi-
asm than to their philosophical many-sidedness ; rather to
the vitality of their faith than to the universality of their
comprehension. I fear that if I should try to join my-
self unto them they would not accept mo without reserve.
I cannot therefore treat Schopenhauer as a crusader would
treat him. He is to me a philosopher of considerable
dignity, whom we could ill spare from the roll of modem
thinkers ; whom I do not by any means follow as disciple,
but to whom I owe, in common with other philosophical
students, a great deal, for his skillful analysis and for his
fearlessly clear assertion of his own significant tempera-
ment.

I.

But as to pessimism itself, Schopenhauer’s famous doc-
trine, as to this terrible view that life is through and
through tragic and evil, what is my attitude towards that?
I must, you will probably say, either accept it, and then


280


THE SPIRIT OF MODERK PHILOSOPHY.


must avow it in manly fashion^ or 1 must reject it. And
if I reject it, then 1 am bound to i^fute it. My answer
to the question is not far to seek. As an actual fact I
do accept, and avow with perfect freedom, what to many
gentle minds seems, as 1 am aware, a pessimistic view of
life ; namely, precisely the view that at the last time we
found Ilcgel maintaining and expanding into his marvel-
ously ingenious and technical doctrine of what he called
Negativitcit as the very essence of the passionate spirit-
ual existence. The spiritual life is n’t a gentle or an
easy thing. It is indeed through and through and forever
paradoxical, earnest, enduring, toilsome ; yes, if you like,
painfully tragic. Whoever hopes to find it anything else,
either now or in some far-off heaven, hopes unquestionably
in vain. If that is pessimism, — and in one sense, namely,
in the sense in which many tender but thoughtless souls
have used the phrase, it is pessimism, being opposed to
the gentle and optimistic hopes of such, — then I am now,
and always shall be, in that very sense no optimist, but a
maintainer of the sterner view that life is forever tragic.
In so far as Schopenhauer has sought to make this plain,
I follow him unhesitatingly, and honor him for his merci-
lessness. Why I do so I shall try to make plain before
this lecture is done. In so far, however, as Schopenhauer
held that the tragedy of life disheartens every spirit that
has once come to know the truth, I as plainly and abso-
lutely reject so much of his outcome. The world is, on the
whole, very nearly as tragic as Schopenhauer represents
it to be. Only spirituality consists in' being heroic enough
to accept the tragedy of existence, and to glory in the
strength wherewith it is given to the true lords of life to
conquer this tragedy, and to make their world after all
divine. The way to meet Schopenhauer’s pessimism is,
not to refute its assertions, but to. grapple practically with
its truths. And if you do so, you will find as the real
heart and significance of Schopenhauer’s own gloomy


SCHOPENHAU£B.


281


thought, a vital, yes, even a religious assurance, which
will make you thank God, that, as we tried to suggest by
a phrase quoted in an earlier lecture, the very ice and
.cold, the very frost and snow, of philosophy praise and
magnify him forever. In short, my attitude towards pes-
simism is one that, some years ago, in an article written
for a Harvard College journal, I tried to express in words
suggested by the then current accusation that too many
Harvard students of ability were accustomed to pose as
pessimists. * If I quote now my former words, it is only
because Ithe right bearing towards such matters seems to
me so simple that when I try to express it, I am troubled
with a poverty of phrases, and have to fall back on oft
repeated formulae, for which perhaps some defiant inter:
jection, hurled into the face of our common enemy, namely,
the inner spiritual sluggishness wherewith a man is so
easily beset, would be the best embodiment. But, at all
events, these were my poor words : —

“One hears nowadays, very often, of youthful pessi-
mism, prevalent, for instance, among certain clever college
students. When I hear of these things, I do not always
regret them. On the contrary, I think that the best man
is the one who can see the truth of pessimism, can ab-
sorb and transcend that truth, and can be nevertheless an
optimist, not by virtue of his failure to recognize the evil
of life, but by virtue of his readiness to take part in the
struggle against this evil. Therefore, I am often glad
when I hear of this spread of pessimistic ideas among
studious but undeveloped youth. For, I say to myself, if
these men are brave men, their sense of the evil that bin-
ders our human life will some day arouse them to fight this
evil in dead earnest, while if they are not brave men, opti*
mism can be of no service to cowards. But in any case I
like to suggest to such brave and pessimistic youth where
the solution of their problem must lie. It surely cannot
lie in any romantic dream of a pure and innocent world,


282 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

far off somewhere, in the future,, in heaven or in the isles
of the blessed. These things are not for us. We are bom
for the world of manly business, and if we are worthy of
our destiny, we may possibly have some good part in the
wars of the Lord. For nothing better have we any right
to hope, and for an honest man that is enough.”

If tliese words which I have quoted seem to you rather
unfeeling in their hardness, I beseech you to wait until I
am done, not merely with to-day’s exposition of Schopen-
hauer, but with my whole course, before you judge them.
As for living up to this obvious, but tremendously difficult
kind of courage, of course you will not need to hear me
say that a student of philosophy finds that quite as hard
a task as do any of his neighbors. I am only stating the
doctrine. A coward is not an admirable person, but it
is only too easy to be one.

Thus, then, forsaking for the moment my position jis
chronicler, I try to tell you, in this wholly unoriginal fash-
ion, what, to be sure, has always been the creed of brave
men ever since our remote ancestors, or their cousins,
struggled with the climate of the glacial period. And
having thus freed my mind and defined my attitude to-
wards pessimism, I can venture to assume once more the
position of the historical student, and to set forth some-
thing of Schopenhauer’s contribution to the great philo-
sophic task of modem humanity.


n.

The general character and worth of this contribution 1
must first describe, and in doing so I shall follow in the
main the view of a recent German writer on the history of
philosophy, namely. Professor Windelband, to whose well-
known book, Die Geschichte der neueren Philosophic, ”
these lectures have owed throughout not a little. Modern
idealism, as it developed since Kant, was from the first an
effort Uy discover the rationality of our world through an


SCHOPENHAUEB.


238


analysis of the nature of consciousness. Such analysis
was the problem that Kant bequeathed to his successors.
For Kant showed that we know the world , only in terms
of consciousness and its laws, so that the understanding
is the creator of the show nature that stands before our
senses. Fichte tried to solve this Kantian problem by
proving that it is the moral law which is the very heart
and essence of our consciousness, so that our seemingly
outer world is there as a means whereby we can do our
work and win our deeper self. The romanticists, how-
ever, felt that consciousness was no more exhaustively
expressed by the moral will than by any other humane in-
terest of the self. Thus, there entered into philosophy a
reign of caprice, to which even Hegel did not put an end.
Once understand the nature of this caprice, and you will
see the place which Schopenhauer’s system is to hold in
the development of doctrine.

Were it not, says all idealism, were it not that I am
just such a conscious being as I am, my world would be
a wholly different one from the world that I see. To
know the real nature of ray world I must therefore un-
derstand my own deeper self. Is there anything fixed,
stable, necessary, about my nature? If so, then I am
necessarily forced to exist in just this sort of world. But
if I am essentially of no one fixed and necessary nature,
then at any moment my whole world might alter. The
ordinary realism of common sense does n’t fear this,
does n’t feel the necessity of an ultimate appeal to any-
thing stable or fixed about me as the real source of truth,
because ordinary realism holds that the truth is there
beyond me, as something knowable to all people of good
intelligence, in the hard and fast matter of the world of
sense. There is the moon yonder. For ordinary realism,
the moon is as permanent as nature makes it, and stays
there whether any one knows it or not. Hence, in order
to ask whether there is anything stable about the world,


284 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

^ordinary Tealism has to put no questions to the inner life.
But the very essence of idealism it is to say, My moon,
the moon that I see and talk about, the moon of my own
world of outer show and of empirical knowledge, is just
one of my ideas. Y<m see the same moon only in so far
as in your world, in your inner life, there is a fact truly
corresponding to what I call the moon in my inner life.
Therefore, if you and I are to continue to see the same
moon, that must be because both of us have some common
and necessary deeper nature, a true and abiding oneness
of spirit, that forces us to agree in this respect as to our
inner life. Hence, not the abiding matter of the moon,
as something that should stay there when you and I had
both departed, but some common law that holds for your
spirit as for mine, is the basis for the seeming perma-
nence and common outer reality of the moon for us.
The moon has the same sort of objective existence that,
for instance, at this moment, my lecture has. The lec-
ture exists as thought in me, and as experience in you.
But because of a certain community of our thoughts, we
all of us have the same lecture more or less present to us.
We all of us, moreover, regard the lecture as an outer
reality, and we therefore seem to be as much in presence
of an objective fact as if the lecture were made of real
atoms, instead of ideas. Or again, for the idealistic view,
the existence of the events in matter, or of any other ex-
ternal events, resembles the existence at any instant of the
price of a stock in the stock-market, or the credit of a great
firm in the commercial world. A consensus of the thoughts
of the buyer and sellers exists at any moment, which, how-
ever well founded, or again however arbitrary and chan-
ging this consensus may be, is expressed for the instant as
if it were a hard and fast material thing in a genuinely
outer world. In fact, prices and credits are ideas, and
exist in the show-world of market values and of commer-
cial securities, being but the projections of the various


SCHOPENHAUER. 286

ideas of people as these at any moment agree to express
themselves. Even so, then, just as this leotui'e is at this
instant a fact because our minds agree in making it so,
and just as the price of the stock, or the credit of the
great firm, is an often irresistible fact, to which the indi-
vidual dealer must yield in so far as his own financial
might is n’t equal to altering it, even so the moon yonder
is likewise for us all an outer fact, because we are forced
to agree in regarding it as outer. But our agreement
itself is a fact of the deeper life of our common selfhood.

Such common ideas being, then, the idealist’s true
world, his problem it is to determine whether there is any
deeper and impersonally human necessity which guaran-
tees that our ideas nihall thus in any wise agree. This
necessity must be sought, if at all, in our own hidden na-
ture. Constructive idealists have always sought it in that
common band of rationality which, as they conceive, so
links us all together that we are organically related parts
or moments of one deeper self. This self, which shall ex-
press itself in you, in me, in everybody, is to link your
experience to mine in such fashion that we shall see
related outer worlds. Because this self in you constructs
a show-space in three dimensions, and does a similar thing
for me, therefore we alike look out into the depths of
space, where the same stars seem to glitter for us all.
Uiiily, fixity, assurance, we get, if we get such prizes at
all, only by virtue of that rational and spiritual unity that
is beneath our lives. Can the philosopher find the true
heart and essence of this our common selfhood ? If he
can, then idealism becomes a system. We are, then, all in
one world of truth. The outer world is indeed show, but
no illusion ; and our life has an organic fixity, a lawful
completeness about it, such as every philosophy, longs for.

But now, unfortunately, when idealists set about dedo*
cing this unity and consistency of the spiritual world from
some deep inner principle, their reflection always leaves us


2S6 THE SPIBIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHT.

in one g^at respect dissatisfied. We very certainly,
namely, can never deduce from the idea of our common
spirituality the idea of any particular sense thing, such as
the moon. Or, to repeat one of my former illustrations,
idealists can’t tell us why we are spiritually or rationally
bound all alike to perceive a starry world, wherein there
shall be a belt of telescopic asteroids between the orbits of
Mars and Jupiter. Such facts idealists get, like their
neighbors, from daily experience or from science. Ideal*
ists may say in general, as Fichte said, that the moral law
needs a world of outer experience as the material for its
embodiment. They cannot show why just this material
is needed. There remains, then, an element of brute fact,
a residuum, if you choose, of spiritual caprice, in their
world of the all-embracing self. Perhaps we have, as
they say, the one deeper self in common, perhaps this
deeper self has rational grounds for building in us all
alike just this world of sense, of moons, of asteroids, of
comets, of jelly-fish, and of all the rest, only there is still,
from our finite point of view, a vast element of at least
apparent caprice about the entire universe of the spirit as
thus built. And all idealists have to recognize this fact
of the seeming capriciousness of the external order. The
universal reason builds the world, says idealism ; but then
does not the universal reason seem to build many irra-
tional facts into its world ? You see then the diflSculty.
Our common spiritual nature is to guarantee the truth of
our common experience. Unless this nature has some
hard and fast necessity in it, of which we can form an
adequate conception, there is no satisfaction in our philo-
sophy. But when we try to develop this idea of the uni-
versal necessity of the world of our common selfhood, we
come once, more against an element of the most stubborn
caprice. Idealism seems to be an insight as suggestive
and inspiring as it is limited. The nature of this divine
self has something seemingly irrational about it. Our


SCHOPENHAUER.


287


attempted account of the world in terms of the universal
reason therefore remains so far a mere programme, a pos-
tulate, almost a dogma. And yet dogmas were just what
our philosophy had all along been trying to reduce and to
rationalize.

In view of this common perplexity of all the idealistic
systems, there were certain to arise, upon the Iiistorica]
basis of the Kantian theory, philosophies that not only
accepted the perplexity, but that magnified it, that re-
ferred it to the very nature of the quasi-mental reality
behind the world of sense, and that declared : Deeper
than reason, in this world of the ideal existence, is the
caprice which once for all expresses itself in the wealth
of nature's facts.” Of such systems Schopenhauer's phi-
losophy is the classic representative. Not that Schopen-
hauer was in this general tendency alone. Windclband
very properly classes under the same head Schelling’s
later theologico-philosophical speculations (not studied in
these lectures) along with two or three other doctrines.
Windelband calls them all by the common name Irratio-
nalismus. A doctrine of this sort, upon a Kantian basis,
must run somewhat as follows: The world as we see it
exists only in our ideas. We all have a common outer
show-world because we all possess a common deeper
nature, wherein we are one. You are essentially the
same ultimate being that I am. Otherwise we should not
have in common this outer projected world of seeming
sea waves, star clusters, and city streets. For, as ideas,
those things have no outer basis. As common to us all,
they must have a deep inner basis. Yet this their basis
can't be an3'thing ultimately and universally rational.
For in so far as we actually have reason in common,
we think necessary, clearly coherent, exactly interrelated
groups of ideas, such, for instance, as the multiplication
table. But about the star clusters and the sea waves
there is no such ultimate rational unity and coherency.


288 TH£ SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

Natural laws only bind such things together, in the fash-
ion that Kant so prettily explained, in case the pheno-
mena to be bound together are once for all there. Why,
given sea waves and star clusters and city streets, we
should be bound to think them as in some sort of inter-
connecti 9 n, Kant has told us. Only no such laws of
nature can explain why there should be the phenomena
there that are thus t6 conform to law. This is capricious.
This is due to our common but irrational nature. The
world of the crue idealism is n’t so much the world of the
rational and divine self, as it is the world of the deep
unreason that lies at the very basis of all of our natures,
of all our common selfhood. Why should there be any
world at all for us? Is n’t it just because we are all actu-
aUy minded to see one ? And is n’t this being minded to
see a world as ultimately and brutally unreasonable a
fact as you could name ? Let us find for this fact, then, a
name not so exalted as Fichte’s high-sounding speech
would love. Let us call this ultimate nature of ours,
which forces us all alike to see a world of phenomena in
the show forms of space and time, simply our own deep
common Will. Let us drop the divine name for it. Will,
merely as such, is n’t precisely a rational thing ; it ’s
capricious. It wills because it does will ; and if it wills
in us all to be of such nature as to see just these stars and
houses, then see them we most, and there is the end of it.

Thus stated, you have an irrationalism on an idealistic
basis, a doctrine that may be summed up in three propo-
sitions ; —

1. The world has existence only as we see it.

2. What facts we are to see can only be learned from
experience, and cannot be found a priori through any
absurd transcendental deductions of the so-called essence
of any absolute spirit.

3. The deepest ground, however, for all these seen
facts, and for the community of our various visible worlds,


SCHOPENHAUER.


239


is the common and single World-Will, which, expressed in
all of us equally, forces us to see alike, but does so simply
because this is . the particular caprice that it happens to
have, so that it embodies itself for us and in us as just
this show-world, rather than any other, because such is its
fashion of willing.

The obvious value of such a theory is that it is at once
idealistic in its analysis of the presuppositions of life, just
to the direct and irresistible reality of the facts of experi-
ence, and disposed, after all, to go deeper than experience
in its search for the ultimate truth of the world. Final it
certainly is not in this form. But it has an obvious
advantage over the sort of caprice that, as we saw, was
characteristic of the philosophy of the romantic school.
Their caprice was the fickleness of private and individual
choice. For them you can change, as it were, at any
moment of time, your show-world. For them the man of
genius makes whatever world he chooses. But for this
theory of Schopenhauer’s there is but one caprice, and
that is -the caprice of the World-Will itself, which once for
all has hit upon this particular world of facts in time and
in space. For us, in our individual capacity, there is no
further caprice. We are in presence of this world now,
because we ourselves are embodiments of the world-will.
We cannot help the fact any longer. Experience is expe-
rience ; fact is fact ; the show is going on for us all alike ;
the world-will has chosen ; but it has not chosen at any
point in time. Hence in the world, as it is in time, there
is no further caprice, only fact. Time itself is indeed not
any ultimate reality. Time belongs to the show-world,
and is there like any other fact or form of things, because
the world-will fancies such a form for the things of sense.
But just for this very reason, we, as individuals, are just
where we are, and the realities of sense and of science,
although susceptible of so deep and mysterious an inter-
pretation as this, are as inevitable and as objective for us


240


THE SPIBIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


as ever the most naive and unreflectively superficial real-
ism made them. As against such realism our doctrine
possesses depth, philosophical keenness of analysis, ideal-
istic insight. As against the romantic idealism, our doc-
trine has the advantage of objectivity and fixity. Just
because our common temporal existence is part of the
caprice of the World^Will, this temporal existence itself
has for us individuals reality and fixity.

So much for the theoretical side of our author’s doc-
trine. On the practical side, in respect, namely, of his
pessimism, we shall find Schopenhauer in a very interest-
ing historical relation to Hegel. In fact, as we shall
learn, our author’s pessimism is but another aspect of the
same insight into the paradoxical logic of passion which
we have discovered at the heart of Hegel’s doctrine. It
is true that Schopenhauer's World- Will, this blind power
that, according to him, embodies itself in our universe,
appears in his account, at first, as something that might
be said to possess passion without logic. Yet this first
view of the World-Will soon turns out to be inadequate.
The very caprice of the terrible principle is seen, as we go
on, to involve a sort of secondary rationality, a logic, fatal
and gloomy, as well as deeply paradoxical, but still none
the less truly rational for all that. Schopenhauer’s world
is, in fact, tragic in much the same sense as Hegel’s.
Only, for Schopenhauer the tragedy is hopeless, blind,
undivine ; while for Hegel it is the divine tragedy of the
much-tried Logos, whose joy is above all the sorrows of
his world. Were this difference between these two think-
ers merely one of personal and speculative opinion^ it
might have littte significance. But since it involves, as
we shall find, one of the most truly vital problems of our
modern life, one which meets us at every step in our liter-
ature and ill our ethical controversies, we shall find it well
worth our while to study the contrast more closely. First,
then, here, let us see something of the man Schopenhauer,
and afterwards we may estimate the doctrine.


8CH0PENHAUEB.


241


in.

Arthur Schopenhauer, born in 1788, was probably
descended, on the father’s side, from a Dutch family.
He was the son of a wealthy merchant of Danzig. His
mother, the once noted Johanna Schopenhauer, brilliant
novelist, and in her later years apibitious hostess in the
literary circles at Weimar, had married, as she very
frankly tells us, not from love, but for position. On both
sides, Schopenhauer’s ancestry was somewhat burdened, as
we should say, in respect of nerves, although this fact is
decidedly more marked on the father’s side. The philo-
sopher’s paternal grandmother was declared insane during
the latter years of her life ; and of his uncles, on the
same side, one was idiotic, and one was given to excesses
of the neurotic type. Schopenhauer’s father, a busy and
uncommonly intelligent man, many-sided and successful,
still suffered, towards the last, from the family trouble.
He showed at fifty-eight years of age occasional but acute
symptoms of an excited form of derangement, lost, mean-
while, his memory for well-known persons, and very soon
died under mysterious circiunstances that strongly indicated
an insane suicide. Johanna herself war) indeed personally
quite free from noteworthy nervous defect, unless heart-
lessness be reckoned as such. The philosopher himself,
as is well known, lived in excellent general health until
past seventy, dying in 1860, of a cause having no appar-
ent relation to nervous difficulties. Still, especially in
youth, he was vexed by his hereditary burden enough to
enable us without question to associate his pessimism in
some measure with his temperament. Several neuras-
thenic symptoms are reported, showing themselves in spo-
radic but decided forms, — night-terrors, of a known
pathological type ; causeless depressions ; a persistent dread
of possible misfortunes; a complaining and frequently
unbearable ill humor, with attendant crises of violent tern*


242 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

per. A troublesome and slowly growing deafness, similar
to one manifest in his father, is referred to the same
cause. Against these stood always a very fine general
constitution and a rather over-anxiously guarded fashion
of life. The question suggested by aU these facts, — the
well-known question whether Schopenhauer’s pessimism
was mainly due to mere morbidness of temperament, was
in short mere Stimmimgspessimismus^ — is not so easy to
‘ decide as some of his critics fancy. In fact, the man was
unquestionably incapable of a permanently cheerful view
of life, — was a born outcast, doomed to hide and to
be lonely. Unquestionably, moreover, he was given to
pettiness in the minor relations of life, was vain, uncom-
panionable, and bitter. But then, many clever men have
had all these burdens to bear, without bein^able to see
the tragedy of life as wisely and deeply as Schopenhauer
saw it. He would have said of his own unhappy temper
very m*uch what he once said of the crimes of Napoleon’s
career, namely, that there are conditions which make
manifest the latent evil of human selfishness, the dangers
of the restless will tliat is in us all alike, better than do
other conditions, but which do not therefore create their
latent evil. It will not do in any case to state the case
against Schopenhauer’s pessimism in such shallow fashion
as to make it appear that, whilst all pessimism is mere
pettiness, all optimism is prima fade noble-mindedness.
Optimists also can be selfish and even intolerable. In
fine, then, I am disposed tb say, as a matter of mere his-
torical judgment, that Schopenhauer’s nervous burdens
unquestionably opened his eyes to the particular aspect of
life which he found so tragic, but that meanwhile the fact
of such burdens is of positively no service to us in form-
ing our estimate of the ultimate significance of our philo-
sopher’s insight, — an insight which, for my part, I find
as deep as it was partial.

The Italian psychologist Lombroso, in his well-known


SCHOPENHAUER.


248


work on the relations of genius and insanity, makes use
of course of Schopenhauer in his catalogue of pathological
geniuses. The only value which such observations have,
in the present chaotic condition of our knowledge upon the
subject, is to remind us that we cannot dispose of a man’s
intellectual rank, or of his doctrine, by merely observing
that he was weighted with morbid tendencies of mind.
Genius has often, although by no means always, a back-
ground of a pathological sort ; while, on the other hand,
the nervously burdened, whether geniuses or not, actually
do a great part of the world’s work and of the world’s
thinking, and may be all the wiser by reason of the depth
of their nervous experiences. Specially interesting, how-
ever, in Schopenhauer’s case, is the relation of contrast
between the . peevishness of his private temper and the
self-controlled calm and clearness of his literary style.
To such a man intellectual work is a blessed relief from
the storms of trivial but violent emotion. Ilis reflective
thought stands off, as it were, on one side, and surveys
with a melancholy freedom his daily life of care and of
bondage. His thinking rejoices in the wondrous craft
whereby it has outwitted passion. His reflection, there-
fore, throughout, is a negative self-criticism, a sort of
refhictio ad ahaiirdum of the tempestuous natural man.
It does not embody the peevishness of this natural man,
but rather scorns the vanity of his unwisdom. As Scho-
penhauer himself says : Since all grief, because it is a
mortifleation, a call to resignation, has in it the possi-
bility of rendering one holy, therefore it is that great
sorrow, deep pangs, arouse in us a certain reverence for
the sufferer ; but the sufferer becomes wholly venerable
only when, seeing his whole life as one chain of sorrow,
he yet does not dwell on the enchainment of circum-
stances that brought grief to just ^his life ; . . . for then
he wou^ still be longing for life, only under other condi-
tions. But he is truly venerable only when his look is


244 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

turned from the petty to the universal ; when he becomes,
as it were, a genius in respect of ethical insight ; when
he sees a thousand cases in one, so that life seen as one
whole . . . moves him to resignation. ... A very noble
character,” continues Schopenhauer, we always conceive
with a certain tinge of melancholy in it, — a melancholy
that is anything but a continual peevishness in view of
the daily vexations of life (for such peevishness is an
ignoble trait and arouses suspicions of maliciousness),
but rather a melancholy that conies from an insight into
the vanity of all joys, and the sorrowfulness of all living,
not alone of one’s own fortune.” Thus, as we see, Scho-
penhauer’s philosophy is not founded upon any summing
up of the malicious judgments of his natural peevishness,
but is an expression of a calm and relatively external
survey and confession of his temperament in its whole-
ness. This it is that is expressed in the lucidity of his
style, and that gives permanent value to his insight. The
strong opposition between will and contemplation is one
of the chief features of his doctrine.

As for this style in itself, it suggested Jean Paul’s
famous characterization of the first edition of Sciiopen-
hauer’s ‘‘Welt als Wille und Vorstellung ” : “A book of
philosophical genius, bold, many-sided, full of skill and
depth, — but of a depth often hopeless and bottomless,
akin to that melancholy lake in Norway, in whose deep
waters, beneath the steep rock-walls, one never sees the
sun, but only the stars reflected ; and no bird and no wave
ever flies over its surface.” Just this calm of Schopen-
hauer’s intellect is the characteristic thing about his writ-
ing ; and no one who knows the highly intellectual and
reflective type of the nervously burdened genius will fail
to comprehend the meaning of the contrast between the
man’s peevishness, which tortured him, and his thinking,
wherein he found rest. More cheerful spirits may think
and will in the same moment, may reflect with vigorous


SGHOPENHAUEB.


246


vitality and work with keen reflection. But for men of
Schopenhauer’s type there is a profound contrast between
their contemplative and their passionate life, precisely the
same contrast that the ascetic mystics, with whom, once
more, like Spinoza, Schopenhauer as . philosopher haU
many things in common, have always loved to dwell upon
and to exaggerate. Do you give yourself over to passion ?
Then, as they will have it, you may be clover, well in-
formed, ingenious ; in short, as aU the ascetic mystics
would say, you may be as wily as you are worldly ; but
through it all you will be essentially ignorant, thought-
less, irrational. Do you attain the true enlightenment,
even for a moment ? Then you stand aside from passion ;
its whirlwind goes by, and you remain undisturbed ; your
thought, to use an old comparison that was a favorite of
Schopenhauer’s, pierces through passion as the sunlight
through the wind. You see it all, but it moves you not.

Such mysticism is essentially pessimistic ; we find it so
even in Spinoza, or in the “ Imitation of Christ ; ” only,
in the Imitation,” contemplation has the glory of God
to turn to above and beyond the storm of sense and of
vanity. A formula for Schopenhauer is that his pessi-
mism is simply the doctrine of the Imitation ” with the
glory of God omitted ; but as the glory of God in the
latter book is described in purely abstract, mystical, and
essentially unreal terms, one may see at once that the road
from the mediaeval mystic to Schopenhauer’s outcome is
not so l^ng as some people imagine. “I saw in my
dream,” says Bunyan, at the end of his “ Pilgrim’s Pro-
gress,” when the angels carry off poor Ignorance to the
pit, — “I saw in my dream that there was a way to
the bottomless pit from the very gate of Heaven, as well
as from the City of Destruction.” Now, Schopenhauer’s
mission it was to explore this highly interesting way with
considerable speculative skill. The mystic who forsakes
the world because of its vanity finds his comfort in a


246 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHT.

dream of something called the divine perfection, — some-
thing pure, abstract, extra-mundane. He comes on that
which is,” and catches, like Tennyson in the famous
night vision on the lawn, in the In Memoriam,” the
deep pulsation of the world.” Only by and by morning
comes. Your mystic must awake ; his vision must van-
ish, stricken through with doubt.” Tennyson seems to
have endured the waking better than others. But, gener-
ally speaking, the pessimist of Schopenhauer’s type is
simply the mystic of the type of the ‘‘ Imitation,” at the
moment when he has awakened from the false glory of
this religious intoxication.

The events of our hero’s life may be briefly disposed of.
His father took or ^sent him on long travels during his
early youth, made him well acquainted with both French
and English, and insisted that he should in due time
learn the mercantile business, and train himself to be a
busy, intelligent, and many-sided man of the world.
Scholarship and the university formed no part in the
father’s plans. The boy spent also considerable time on
his father’s country estate, loved nature, but was always
a lonely child. As youth waxed, moodiness tormented
him ; he already showed also the metaphysical turn. His
father’s death, in 1805, left him free to follow his own
plans. He forsook the hated counting-house, where he
had already set about his work, and began to study for
the university ; making rapid progress in Latin, quarrel-
ling with his elders, and writing rhetorically gloomy let-
ters to his mother, who had now entered on her Weimar
career. The son’s native pessimism was still far, *bf
course, from the later philosophical formulation, but he
already perceived that one great evil about the world is
its endless change, which dooms all ideal interests and
moods to alteration and defeat. Everything,” he writes
to his mother, is washed away in time’s stream. The
minutes, the numberless atoms of pettiness into which


SCHOP£NHAU£B.


247


every deed is dissolved, are the worms that gnaw at
everything great and noble, to destroy it.” His mother
found this sort of thing rather tedious, and especially in-
consistent with her son’s social success as an occasional
inmate of her house at Weimar. There already a most
, brilliant company often gathered, Goethe at the head. A
youth of twenty or thereabouts could not add grace to
such a scene so long as he could talk of nothing but time
and worms. She wrote him plainly, being a woman as
clear-headed as she was charming : “ When you get older,
dear Arthur, and see things more clearly, perhaps we
shall agree better. Till then let us see that our thousand
little quarrels shall not hunt love out of our hearts. 'To
that end we must keep well apart. You have your lodg*-
ings ; as for .my house, whenever you come you are a
guest, well received, of course, only you must n’t interfere.
1‘ can’t bear objections. Days when I receive, you may
take supper with me, if you ’ll only be so good as to re-
frain from your painful disputations, which make me
angry, too, and from all your lamentations over the stupid
world and the sorrows of mankind ; for all that always
gives me a bad night and horrid dreams, and 1 do so like
a sound sleep.”

In 1809, Schopenhauer began his university studies at
Gottingen, devoted himself to Kant and Plato, and rap-
idly acquired the type of erudition which he kept to the
end, an erudition vast rather than technical, the learning
of one who *saw swiftly rather than studied exhaustively,
remembered rather than systematized, enjoyed manifold
labors rather than professional completeness. He was
always a marvelous reader, of wide literary sympathies,
especially fond of the satirists, the mystics, and the keen
' observers of all ages. For the processes of the exact
sciences he had a poor comprehension ; for natural phe-
nomena of a suggestive sort his eye was always very wide
open ; he longed to catch the restless World-Will in the


248 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

very act of its struggle and sorrow. He loved books
of travel, energetic stories, strongly written historical
sketches, tragic as well as satirical dramas, and books of
well-described natural history. In nature itself, he was
very fond of observing flowers, while, after his fashion,
he loved animals passionately. They show the will naked,
in all its naive cruelty, guilt, and innocence.

Edifying literature of all but the purely mystical type,
most systematic schemes of constructive thought, all
merely sentimental poetry, and above all such moralizing
poetry as Schiller’s “ Don Carlos,” he in general bitterly
despised. These things seemed to him to hover above
life. He wanted to contemplate the longing of life in
itself. His critical and historical judgments are deep and
yet wayward. He is once more on the lookout for types,
not for connections ; .he had, for so learned a man, a poor
eye for detecting unscholarly and fantastic theories, and
frequently accepts such when they relate to topics beyond
his immediate control. His literary sense was after all
his best safeguard in scholarship. Here his flne contem-
plative intellect guided him. He could not make a bad
blunder as to a purely linguistic question ; but where his
taste and instinct for the immediate inner life of things
and of people were unable to guide him, he wandered too
often in the dark. On all matters of learning his judg-
ment remains, therefore, largely that of the sensitive man
of the world. His sense of humor was of the keenest.
The will is once for all as comic in its irratidVialities as it
is deep in its unrest. A distinguishing feature of his style
is due to this wide reading, namely, his skill in metaphor
and in other forms of comparison. In this respect he
rivals those wonderful masters of comparisoi), the Hindoo
metaphysicians, whom he knew through translations, and «
admired much. One further trait may yet be mentioned
as pervading his study and his whole view of life. He
was an intense admirer of the English temperament, just


SGHOPENHAUBB.


249


as he was an intense hater of many English institutions.
Not, of course, the English Philistine, but the English
man of the world, attracted him, by that clear-headedness
and that freedom from systematic delusions which are so
characteristic of the stock. To sum all up in a word, the
maxim of his whole life as a learner was, See and record
the vital struggles and longings of the will wherever they
appear.

• Such scholarship as this was ill-fitted to prepare Scho«
penhauer for an academic life. In 1813, he printed his
dissertation for the doctor’s degree, on the Fourfold
Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason.” It is his
most technical book, with least of his genius in it. • In
1818 was published the first edition of his “Welt als
Wille und Vorstellung.” In 1820, he entered on his work
as Privat-Docent at the university of Berlin, apd imme-
diately made a sufficiently complete academic failure to
discourage him from any serious effort to continue. Em-
bittered by the indifference with which both his books
and his attempts as a teacher were received^ he gradually
acquired that intense hatred of all professors of philoso-
phy, and of the whole post-Kantian speculative movement
in Germany, w'hich he expressed more than once in a
furious form, and which wholly misled him as to his own
historical relations. After 1831, he retired to Frankfort-
on-the-Main, and lived upon his little fortune until the
close of his life. How he came slowly to be publicly
known, in spite of the indifference with which academic
circles treated him ; how in old age there gathered round
him a little circle of well-received flatterers ; how young
Russians used to come and stare at the wise man ; how he
loved the attentions of all such people, and better still the
more intelligent understanding of two or three faithful
disciples, but best of all his dinner and his dog ; how he
died at last suddenly, when he was quite alone, — are not
all these things written in the books of modern literary


250


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


gossip ? I need not dwell upon them further ; nor need
I repeat how Schopenhauer had only to die to acquire
general fame, until now his name is everywhere a symbol
for all that is most dark and deep and sad and dangerous
about the philosophy of our time. Of the pettier inci*
dents of his life, of his quarrels, of his one or two out-
bursts of temper which led to public scandals, of his other
eccentricities numberless, I have no time to speak further.


IV.

Schopenhauer’s principal work, “Die Welt als Wille
und Vorstellung,” is in form the most artistic philosophi-
cal treatise in existence, if one excepts the best of PLato’s
“ Dialogues.” In its first edition it was divided into four
books ; a later edition added in a second volume com-
ments upon all four. Of these books, the first summa-
rizes the Kantian basis of Schopenhauer’s own doctrine.
The world is, first of all, for each and for all of us, just
our Vorstelhing^ our Idea. It is there because and while
we see it ; it consists in its detail of facts of experience.
These, however, are, for our consciousness, always inter-
preted facts, seen in the sense forms of space and of time,
and within these forms, perceived through and by virtue
of our universal form of comprehension, namel}’’, the prin-
ciple of causation. When I experience anything, I in-
evitably seek for a cause in space and in time for this
experience. When I find such a cause, I localize the
experience as an event manifesting some change in some-
thing there in space and in time; but these forms of
space and of time, as well as this principle of causation,
are all alike simply formal ideas in me. Kant’s great
service lay, in fact, in his proving the subjectivity, the
purely mental nature, of such forms. The space and time
worlds, with all that they contain, exist accordingly for the
knowing subject. No subject without an object, and no
object without a subject. I know in so far as there is a


SCHOPENHAUEB.


251


world to know ; and the world yonder eusts in bo far as
I know it. In vain, moreover, would one seek for any
thing in itself really outside of me as the cause of my
experiences. For cause is just an idea of mine, useful
and valid for the events of the show world, but wholly
inapplicable to anything else. Within experience the law
of causation is absolute, because such is my fashion of
thinking experience and of perceiving the localized
things of sense. But beyond experience what validity,
what application, can one give to the principle of causa-
tion ? None. There is no cause to be sought beyond my
own true nature for my own experiences.

But what is this my nature ? The second book answers
the question. My nature, you must observe, is something
very wealthy. It does not indeed cause my experiences, in
any proper sense ; for cause means only an event that in
time or in space brings another event to pass ; and there
is nothing that, in time or in space, brings to pass my own
deepest, timeless, and spaceless nature. As phenomenon
in time, my body may move or die, as other events deter-
mine ; but my deepest nature is so superior to space and
time that, as wo have just shown, space and time are in
fact in me^ in so far as they are my forms of seeing and
of knowing. Therefore my true nature neither causes,
nor is caused ; but, as one now sees, it in truth is, com-
prises, embodies itself in, all my world of phenomena.
Hence you see how wealthy my true nature must be in its
implications. Yes, in a deeper sense, you also, in so far
as you truly exist, must have the same deepest nature
that I have. Only in space and in time do we seem to be
separate beings. Space and time form, as Schopenhauer
says, the dividing principle of things. In an illusory
way they seem to distinguish us all from one another ;
but abstract space and time, with all their manifold and
illusory distinctions of places and moments, and the real
world collapses into one immanent nature of things.


252 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

Since my own deepest nature is beneath and behind the
time form of the apparent world, it follows that, in an
essential and deep sense, I am one with all that ever has
been or that ever will be, either millions of ages ago
or millions of ages to come. And as for space, there is
no star so remote but that the same essential nature of
things which is manifest in that star is also manifest
in my own body. Space and time are, as the Hindoos
declared, the veil of Maya or Illusion, wherewith the hid-^
den unity oi things is covered, so that, through such illu-
sion, the world appears manifold, although it is but one.

To answer, therefore, the question. What is the nature
of things? I have only to find what, apart from my
senses and my thought, is my own deepest essence. And
of this 1 have a direct, an indescribable, but an unques-
tionable awareness. My whole inner life is, namely, essen-
tially my will. I long, I desire, I move, I act, I feel, I
strive, I lament, I assert myself. The common name for
all this is my will. By will, of course, Schopenhauer does
not merely mean the highest form of my conscious choice,
as some people do. He means simply the active nature
of me, the wanting, longing, self-asserting part. This, in
truth, as even the romantic idealists felt, lies deeper than
my intellect, is at the basis of all my seeing and knowing.
Why do I see and acknowlkige the world in space and
in time ? Why do I believe in matter, or recognize the
existence of my fellow-men, or exercise my reason ? Is
not all this just my actual fashion of beliavor? In vain,
however, do I seek, as the idealists of Fichte’s type often
pretended to seek, for an ultimate reason why I should
have this fashion of behavior. That is a mere fact.
Deeper than reason is the inexplicable caprice of the
inner life. We want to exist; we long to know; we
make our world because we are just striving to come into
being. Our whole life is as ultimate and inexplicable an
activity as are our particular fashions of loving and of


SCHOPENHAUER.


258


hating. I am ; this is the nature of me, — to strive, to
long, to will ; and I cannot rest in this striving. My life
is a longing to be somewhere else in life than here, where
1 am.

Here, then, is the solution of our mystery in so far as
it can have a solution. The world is the Will. In time
and space I see only the behavior of phenomena. I never
get at things in themselves; but I, in my timeless and
l^spaceless inner nature, in the very heart, in the very germ,
of my being, am not a mere outward succession of phe-
nomena, I am a Will, — a will which is not there for the
sake of something else, but which exists solely because it
desires to exist. Here is the true thing in itself. ' The
whole world, owing to the utter illusoriness of time and
space, has collapsed into one single and ultimate nature
of things. This nature, immediately experienced in the
inner life, is the Will. This Will, then, is that which is so
wealthy that the whole show world is needed to express
its caprice. Look, then, on the whole world in its infinite
complication of living creatures and of material processes.
These, indeed, are remote enough from your body. Seen
in space and time, you are a mere fragment in the endless
world of phenomena, a mere drop in the ocean, a link in
an endless chain. But look at the whole world otherwise.
In its inmost life and truth it must be one, for space and
time are the mere forms in which the one interest of the
observer is pleased to express itself. Look upon all
things, then, and it can be said of you as, once more, the
Hindoos loved to say, ‘‘The life of all these things, —
That art Thou^

Schopenhauer himself was fond of quoting this well-
known phrase of the Hindoo philosophy as expressing the
kernel of his own doctrine. New about his philosophy was,
he felt, the synthesis that he* had made of Kant’s thought
and the Hindoo insight; but with this insight itself he
essentially agreed. “The inmost life of things is one.


254


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


and that life art thouJ^ This sentence expresses to his
mind the substance of the true thought about the world.
Let us, then, quote a paragraph or two from one of the
Hindoo philosophic classics called the “ Upanishads,”
much read and loved by Schopenhauer, to illustrate his
view. In the passage in question a « teacher is repre-
sented as in conversation with his pupil, who is also his
son. “ ‘ Bring me,’ says the father, ‘ a fruit of yonder
tree.’ ‘Here it is, O Venerable One.’ ‘Cut it open.«
‘It is done.’ ‘What seest thou therein?’ ‘I see, O
Venerable One, very little seeds.’ ‘ Cut one of them
open.’ ‘ It is done, Venerable One.’ ‘ What seest thou
therein?’ ‘ Nothing, Venerable One.’ Then spake he:

‘ Tliat fine thing which thou seest not, my well beloved,
from that fine thing (that life) is, in truth, this mighty
tree grown. Believe me, my well beloved, tvhat this fine
. (substance) is, of whose essence is all the world, that is
the Keality, that is the Soul, — ITiat art Thou^ O (3ve-
taketu.’ ”

“ ‘ This bit of salt, lay it in the (vessel of) water, and
come again to-morrow to me.’ This did he. Then spake
(the teacher) : ‘ Bring me that salt which yesterday even
thou didst lay in the water.’ He sought it and found it
not, for it was melted. ‘Taste the water here. How
tastes it ? ’ ‘ Salt,’ ‘ Taste it there. How tastes it ? ’

‘ Salt.’ ‘ Leave the vessel and sit at my feet.’ So did
he, and sai(i, ‘ (The salt) is still there.’ Then spake the
teacher: ‘Verily, so seest thou the truly Existent not in
bodies, yet is it truly therein. What this fine substance
is of whose essence is all the world, that is the Reality,
that is the Soul, — That art Thou^ O Cvetaketu.’ ”

“‘Just as, O my well beloved, a man whom they have
led away out of the land of the Gandharis with eyes blind-
folded, and have loosed him in the wilderness, — just as
he wanders eastwards or westwards, southwards or north-
wards, because he has been led hither blindfolded and


SCHOPENHAUER.


256


loosed blindfolded, but after some one has taken off the
blind from his eyes, and has said, “ Yonder lies the land
of the Gandharis : yonder go,” he, asking the way in vil-
lage after village, instructed and understanding, comes
home at last to the Gandharis, — even so, too, is tlie man
who here in the \forld has found a teacher ; for he knows
“ to this (world) I belong only until I am delivered ; then
shall I come to my home.” Wliat this fine (substance)
•is, of whose essence is all the world, that is the Reality,
that is the Soul, — lliat art Thou^ O Cvetaketu.’ ”

Here, one sees, is the Hindoo way of getting at the
substance. It is also Schopenhauer’s way. Look for the
substance within, in your own nature. You will not see
it without. It is the life of your own life, the soul of
your dwn soul. When you find it, you will come home
from the confusing world of sense-things to the heart and
essence of the world, to the reality. That art Thou.

Since for Schopenhauer this soul of your soul Is the
capricious Inner will, there is no reason to speak of it as
God or as Spirit ; for these words imply rationality and
conscious intelligence. And intelligence, whose presence
in the world is merely one of the caprices of this will it-
self, finds itself always in sharp contrast to the will, which
it can contemplate, but which it can never explain. How-
ever, of contemplation there are various stages, deter-
mined in us phenomenal individuals by the various sizes
and powers of our purely phenomenal brains. Why any
intelligence exists at all, and why it is phenomenally as-
sociated with a brain, nobody can explain. The will thus
likes to express itself. That is the whole story. How-
ever, once given the expression, this intelligence reaches
its highest perfection in that power to contemplate the
whole world of the will with a certain supreme and lofty
calm, which, combined with an accurate insight into the
truth of the will, is characteristic of the temperament of
the productive artist. Art is, namely, the embodiment of


256


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


the essence of the will as the contemplative intelligence
sees it. And to art Schopenhauer devotes his third book.
The will has certain ultimate fashions of expressing itself,
certain stages of self-objectification, as Schopenhauer, calls
them. These, in so far as contemplation can seize them,
are the ultimate types, the Platonic ideas, of things, all
endlessly exemplified in space and time by individual ob-
jects, but, as types, eternal, time-transcending, immortal.
They are the ultimate embodiments of passion, the eternal
forms of longing that exist in our world. Art grasps
these types and exhibits them. Architecture, for in-
stance, portrays the blind nature-forces, or longings, of
weight and resistance. Art is, then, the universal appre-
ciation of the essence of the will from the point of view
of a contemplative onlooker. Art is, therefore, disinter-
ested, embodying passion, but itself not the victim of pas-
sion. Of all the arts, according to Schopenhauer, Music
most universally and many-sidedly portrays the very es-
sence of the will, the very soul of passion, the very heart
of this capricious, world-making, and incomprehensible
inner nature of ours. Hence music is in some respects
Schopenhauer’s favorite art. Music shows us just what
the will is, — eternally moving, striving, changing, flying,
struggling, wandering, returning to itself, and then begin-
ning afresh, — all with no deeper purpose than just life
in all its endlessness, motion, onward-flying, conflict, full-
ness of power, even though that shall mean fullness of
sorrow and anguish. Music never rests, never is content ;
repeats its conflicts and wanderings over and over ; leads
them up, indeed, to mighty climaxes, but is great and
strong never by virtue of abstract ideas, but only by the
might of the will that it embodies. Listen to these cries
and strivings, to this infinite wealth of flowing passion,
to this infinite restlessness, and then reflect, — That art
Thou; just that unreposing vigor, longing, majesty, and—
caprice.


SGHOP£NHAU£B.


267


Of all Schopenhauer’s theories, except his pessimism
itself, this theory of art has become the most widely known
and influential. As he stated it, it was, indeed, evidently
the notion, not of the systematic student of any art, but
of the observant amateur of genius and sensibility. It
lacks the professional tone altogether. Its iUiistrations
are chosen whimsically from all sorts of directions. The
opposition between will and contemplation reaches for the
first time its height at this point in the system. On one
side, the world of passion, throbbing, sorrowing, longing,
hoping, toiling, above all, forever fleeing from the mo-
ment, whatever it be ; on the other side, the majesty of
artistic contemplation, looking in sacred calm upoil all
this world, seeing all things, but itself unmoved. Plainly,
in this contemplative intellect the will has capriciously
created for itself a dangerous enemy, who will discover its
deep irrationality.

This enemy is none other than t^t Wagnerian Briin-
hilde, who is destined to see, through and through, the
vanity of the world of the will, and who, not indeed with-
out the connivance of the high gods of the will them-
selves, is minded to destroy the whole vain show in one final
act of resignation. There arise from time to time in the
world, thinks Schopenhauer, holy men, full of sympathy
and pity for all their kind, full of a sense of the unity of
all life, and of the vanity of this our common and endless
paradox of the finite world. These men are called, in the
speech of all the religions, saints. Whatever their land
or creed, their thought is the same. Not the particular
griefs of life, not the pangs of cold and hunger and of
disease, not the horrors of the baseness that runs riot in
humanity, — not these things do they weigh in the balance
with any sort of precision or particularity, although these
things, too, they see and pity. No, the source of all these
griefs, the will itself, its paradox, its contradictory long-
ing to be forever longing, its irrational striving to be for*


258


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


ever as one that sufEers lack, — this they condemn, com-
passionate, and — resign. They do not strive or cry.
They simply forsake the wilL Life, they say, must be
evil, for life is desire, and desire is essentially tragic, since
it flees endlessly and restlessly from all that it has ; makes
perfection impossible by always despising whatever it hap-
pens to possess, and by longing for more ; lives in an eter-
nal wilderness of its own creation ; is tossed fitfully in
the waves of its own dark ocean of passion ; knows no
peace ; fiiK^.s in itself no outcome, — nothing that can
finish the longing and the strife.

And this hopelessly struggling desire, — so the saints
teach to each one of us in our blindness, — That art Thou.
The saints pity us all. Their very existence is compas-
sion. They absent them from felicity awhile, that they
may teach us the way of peace. And tliis way is what ?
Suicide? No, indeed. Schopenhauer quite consistently
condemns suicide. The suicide desires bliss, and flees only
from circumstance. ^ He wiUs life. lie hates only this
life which he happens to have. No, this is not what the
saints teach. One and all they counsel, as the path of
perfection, the hard and steep road of Resignation. That
alone leads to blessedness, to escape from the world.
Deny the will to live. Forsake the power that builds the
world. Deny the flesh. While you live be pitiful, mer-
ciful, kindly, dispassionate, resisting no evil, turning away
from all good fortune, thinking of all things as of vanity
and illusion. The whole world, after all, is an evil dream.
Deny the will that dreams, and the vision is ended. As
for the result, “ we confess freely,” says Schopenhauer,
in the famous concluding words of the fourth book of
his first volume, “ what remains, after the entire annul-
ling of the will, is, for all those who are yet full of the
will, indeed nothing. But, on the other hand, for those
in whom the will has turned again, and has denied itself,
this our own so very real world, with all her suns and
Milky Ways, is — Nothing.”


SCHOPENHAUEB. 259

V.

The estimate of the doctrine which we now have before
,us will be greatly aided if we bear in mind the nature
of its historic genesis. The problem bequeathed by Kant
to his successors was, as we have seen throughout both
this and the preceding discussion, the problem of the re-
lation of the empirical self of each moment to the total
or universal self. This problem exists alike for Hegel
and for Schopenhauer. Hegel undertakes to solve it by
examining the process of self-consciousness. This pro-
cess, developed according to his peculiar and paradoxical
logic, which we have ventured to call the Logic of Pas-
sion, shows him that in the last analysis there is and can
be but one self, the absolute spirit, the triumphant solver
of paradoxes. Sure of his process, Hegel despises every
such mystical and immediate seizing of the Universal as
had been characteristic of the rqpianticists. With just
these romanticists, however, Schopenhauer has in common
the immediate intuition whereby he seizes, not so much
the universal self as, in his opinion, the universal and
irrational essence or nature that is at the heart of each
finite self, and of all things, namely, the Will. Yet when
he describes this will, after his intuition has come to
grasp it, he finds in it just the paradox that Hegel had
logically developed. For Hegel, self-consciousness is, as
even Fichte already had taught, essentially the longing to
be more of a self than you are. Just so, for Schopen-
hauer, if you exist you will, and if you will j^ou are striv-
ing to escape from your present nature. It is of the es-
sence of will to be always desiring a change. If the Will
makes a world, the 'Will as such will be sure, then, thinks
Schopenhauer, to be endlessly dissatisfied with its world.
For, once more, when you will, the very essence of such
will is discontentment with what is yours now. I no
longer make that an object of desire which 1 already


260


THE SPIRIT OF


PHILOSOPHY-


possess. I will what I have not yet, but hope to get, as
a poor man wills wealth, but a rich man more wealth. I
will the future, the distant, the unpossessed, the victory
that I have not yet won, the defeat of the enemy who still
faces me in arms, the cessation of the tedium or of the
pain that besets me. Do 1 attain my desire, my will
ceases, or, which is the same thing, turns elsewhere for
food. Curiously enough, this, which is precisely the
thought that led Hegel to the conception of the absolutely
active and triumphant spirit, appears to Schopenhauer
the proof of the totally evil nature of things. Striving
might be bearable were there a highest good, to which, by
willing, I could attain, and if, when I once attained that
good, I could rest. But if will makes the world and is
the whole life and essence of it, then there is nothing in
the world deeper than the longing, the unrest, which is the
very heart of all willing. Does n’t this unrest seem tragic ?
Is there to be no end of longing in the world? If not,
how can mere striving, mere willing, come to seem beara-
ble ? Here is the question which leads Schopenhauer to
his pessimism. Precisely the same problem made Hegel,
with all Ins appreciation of the tragedy of life, an optimist.
Hegel’s -^solute, namely, is dissatisfied everywhere in his
finite world, but is triumphantly content with the whole of
it, just because his wealth is complete.

An historical lecture like the present one has not to de-
cide between the metaphysical claims and rights of the
Schopenhauerian immediate intuition of the Universal
and the Hegelian logic. As theories of the absolute,
these two doctrines represent conflicting philosophical in-
terests whose discussion would belong elsewhere. Our
present concern is the more directly hliman one. Of the
two attitudes towards the great spiritual interests of man
which these systems embody, which is the deeper? To
be sure, even this question cannot be answered without
making a confession of philosophical faith, but that 1
must here do in merely dogmatic form.


SCl^PENHAUEB. 261

For my part, I deeply respect both doctrines. Both
are essentially modern views of life, modem in their uni-
versality of expression, in their keen diagnosis of human
nature, in their merciless criticism of our consciousness,
in their thorough familiarity with the waywardness of
the inner life. The century of nerves and of spiritual
sorrows has philosoj^hized with characteristic ingenuity in
the petrous of these thinkers, — the one the inexorable
and fairly Mephistophelian critic of the- paradoxes of
passion, the other the nervous invalid of brilliant insight.
We are here speaking only of this one side of their doc-
trines, namely, their diagnosis of the heart and of the
issues of life. Plow much of the truth there is in both,
every knowing man ought to see. Capricious is the will
of man, thinks Schopenhauer, and therefore endlessly
paradoxical and irrational. Paradoxical is the very con-
sciousness, and therefore the very reason, of man, finds
Hegel ; and therefore, where there is this paradox, there
is not unreason, but the manifestation of a part of the
true spiritual life, — a life which could not be spiritual
were it not full of conflict. Ilegel thus absorbs, as it
were, the pessimism of Schopenhauer; while|^chopen-
hauer illustrates the paradox of Hegel.

But if both doctrines stand as significant expressions
of the modem spirit, a glance at our more recent literar
ture — at the despairing resignation of Tolstoi, with its
flavor of mysticism, and at the triumphant joy in the para-
doxes of passion which Browning kept to the end —
will show us how far our romancers and poets still are
from having made an end of the inquiry as to which doc-
trine is the right one. My own notion about the matter,
such as it is, would indeed need for its full development
the context of just such a philosophical argument as I
have declined to introduce at the present stage of this
course. As constructive idealist, regarding the absolute
as indeed a spirit, I am in sympathy with HegeFs sense


262


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


of the triumphant rationality that reigns above all the
conflicts of the spiritual world. But as to Schopenhauer’s
own account of life, I find indeed that his pessimism is
usually wholly misunderstood and unappreciated, as well
by those who pretend to accept as well by those who con-
demn it. What people fail to comprehend concerning
these deep and partial insights which are so characteristic
of gi eat philosophers is tiiat the proper way to treat them
is neither to scorn nor to bow down, but to experience,
and then to get our freedom in presence of all such in-
sights even by the very wealth of our experience. We
are often so slavish in our relations with doctrines of this
kind ! Are they expressed in traditional, in essentially
clerical language, as in the “ Imitation ” or in some other
devotional book, then the form deceives us often into ac-
cepting mystical resignation as if it were the whole of
spirituality, instead of bearing, as it does bear, much the
same relation to the better life that sculptured marble
bears to breathing flesh. But if it is a Schopenhauer, a
notorious heretic, who uses much the same speech, then
we can find no refuge save in hating him and his gloom.
In fact, ^ssiraism, in its deeper sense, is merely an ideal
and abstract expression of one very deep and sacred ele-
ment of the total religious consciousness of humanity.
In fact, finite life is tragic, very nearly as much so as
Schopenhauer represented, and tragic for the very reason
that Schopenhauer and all the counselors of resignation
are never weary of expressing, in so far, namely, as it is at
once deep and restless. This is its paradox, that it is
always unfinished, that it never attains, that it throbs as
the heart does, and ends one pulsation only to begin an-
other. This is what Hegel saw. This is what all the
great poets depict, from Homer’s wanderings of the much
tossed and tried Odysseus down to “ In Memoriam ” of
Tennyson, or the “ Dramatic Lyrics ” of Browning. Not
only is this so, but it must be so. The only refuge from


SCHOPfiKBAUEB.


268


Bpiritual restlessness is spiritual sluggishness ; and that, as
everybody is aware, is as tedious a thing as it is insipid.
For the individual the lesson of this tragedy is always
hard; and he learns it first in a religious form in the
mood of pure resignation. I cannot be happy ; I must
resign happiness.” This is what all the Imitations and the
Schopenhauers are forever and very justly teaching to the
indivicUial. Schopenhauer’s special reason for this view
is, however, the deep and philosophical one that at the
heart of the world tliere seems to be an element of ca-
pricious conflict. That fact was what drove him to reject
the World Spirit of the constructive idealists, and to speak
only of a World- Will. But is this the whole story ? No ;
if we ever get our spiritual freedom, we shall, I tliink,
not neglecting this caprice which Schopenhauer found
at the heart of things, still see that the world is divine
and spiritual, not so much in spite of this capriciousness,
as just because of it. Caprice is n’t Jill of reason ; but
reason needs facts and passions to conquer and to ration-
alize, in order to become triumphantly rational. The
spirit exists by accepting and by triumphing over the
tragedy of the world. Restlessness, longing, grief, —
these are evils, fatal evils, and they are everywhere in the
w'orld ; but the spirit must be strong enough to endure
them. In this strength is the solution. And, after all,
it is just endurance that is the essence of spirituality.
Resignation, then, is indeed part of the truth, — resigna-
tion, that is, of any hope of a final and private happiness.
We resign in order to be ready to endure. But courage
is the rest of the truth, — a hearty defiance of the whole
hateful pang and agony of the will, a binding of the
strong man by being stronger than he, a making of life
once for all our divine game, where the passions are the
mere chessmen that we move in carrying out our plan,
and where the plan is a spiritual victory over Satan. Let
us thank Schopenhauer, then, for at least this, that in his


264 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

pessimism he gives us an universal expression for the
whole negative side of life. If you will lefc me speak of
private experience, I myself have often found it deeply
comforting, in the most bitter moments, to have dis-
counted, so to speak, all the petty tragedies of experience,
all my own weakness and caprice and foolishness and
ill fortune, by one such absolute formula for evil as Scho-
penhauer’s doctrine gives me. It is the fate of life to
b^ restless, capricious, and therefore tragic. Happiness
comes, indeed, but by all sorts of accidents ; and it flies as
it comes. One thing only that is greater than this fate
endures in us if we are wise of heart ; and this one thing
endures forever in the heart of the great World-Spirit of
whose wisdom ours is but a fragmentary reflection. This
one thing, as I hold, is the eternal resolution that if the
world will be tragic, it »hall still, in Satan’s despite, be
spiritual. And this resolution is, I think, the very essence
of the Spirit’s own eternal joy.


LECTURE IX.


THE RISE OP THE DOCTRINE OP EVOLUTION.*

Idealism, in several of its most significant phases, has
been described in the lectures on the movement from
Kant to Hegel. In this lecture I have to discuss another
phase of what I have several times called the return to
the outer order. In looking back for a moment at certain
of the suggestions of the last lecture, I shall not ask you
to dwell any more upon Schopenhauer’s pessimism. Of
that topic we have had doubtless enough for the present.
Coming as we do to a more cheerful chapter of modern
philosophy, wo want only to remind ourselves, at the out-
set, of another element in Schopenhauer’s thought, and
one which will be of importance for the work that we now
have in hand.

Schopenhauer, as you may remember, while he was in
his own way an idealist on a Kantian basis, was not, on
the whole, what one would call, somewhat technically, a
constructive idealist. That is, while he was very positive
in saying that the world which we see and feel is just the
world of our ideas, and nothing else, he did not follow out
the plan of Fichte or of the romanticists by trying to show
constructively what sort of a world we are all rationally
bound to see. On the contrary, as Schopenhauer holds,
the world that we see is at once the world of the self, of
the inner life, and is also the world of that capricious
wiU which is the very heart of the inner life. You can-
not deduce a priori anything about the sorts of reality
which this world must express and contain. You cannot
say, with Fichte, that it must be the world of the moral


266 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

law, ' da8 •oersinnlichte Material unserer PJlicht You
cannot say, with Schelling, that it must be the world
which expresses in symbolic form the life of a rational
and gigantic World-Spirit. You must take the world as
you find it. You may be sure indeed of its unity, yet
this assurance rests only upon your power to prove that
all diversity is due to our sense-forms of time and space,
and is therefore illusory. But the longing and struggling
will cannot be described apart from experience. The
philosopher must become a naturalist. He must look
upon the world as the spectator looks on during a tragedy
which he knows beforehand to be full of action and of
suffering, but which he must watch before he can know
the plot.

It is this thought of Schopenhauer’s that brings him
very near to the position of most students of modern sci-
ence. Schopenhauer marks then, in the history of
thought, the transition from the romantic idealism to the
modern realism, the return to the natural order. He is
indeed an idealist of a Kantian type. He is philosopher
in his sense of the unity of things, in his assurance that
aU phenomenal plurality is a mere illusion, in his reitera-
tion of the Hindoo That art Tliou^ and in his Kantian
idealism itself. But as to the individual facts o^ the
world, he is proud to be a naturalist, who studies men
and beasts and art and flowers, merely to find out what
the Will is doing.

I.

What I now want you to feel is that all this was in so
far a natural and a healthy turn for the idealistic philo-
sophy to take. Philosophy had begun, in modern times,
with the external order and with dogmatic assertions
about it. Growing doubtful and self-critical, it had next
fallen to scrutinizing the inner life. Becoming bold and
clear as to both its powers and its limitations it had later
said, with Kant : Things in themselves, indeed, are n’t


THE RISE OP THE DOCTRINE OF EVOLUTION. 26 ?


for me ; but as for the order and unity of phenomena]
nature, that is mine, and is even of my own creating."’
Waxing, however, afresh, still bolder, thought had next
asserted ; “ Not only the order of nature, but the very
content of nature is spiritual, and is even the creation of
the very spirit whom my life embodies in finite form.’’

I therefore,” it continued, have a right to seize hold
upon and to master the very deepest mysteries of this
whole spiritual creation. There shall be no limits to my
ventures, and no things in themselves shall stand between
me and the rational construction of reality at which I
aim.” But here, indeed, the idealist had been doomed to
fresh disappointment. That the world is the world of the
absolute spirit he could make indeed plausible, — how
plausible we ourselves have hardly had time in our brief
survey to see. That, deeper than your conscious nature
or than mine, there is a truth at the heart of the inner
life of which wc as finite spirits are embodiments, all this
the idealist could try to explain by showing how the com-
munity pf our sense-worlds, our own human power to act
*in practical and rational concert, and all the other presup*
positions of our spiritual existence, lead us to postulate
that the whole environment of our inner life is spiritual,
that there is but one self, and that this self is God. But,
after all, even granting the force of these considerations,
one difficulty remained which the idealists could not con-
quer. Whatever your formula for the postulated spiritual
world, whether it were Fichte’s moral law or the various
wayward theories of the romanticists, an element of stub-
born caprice remained. From the constructions of your
ideal philosophy to the empirical facts of outer nature
remained a long and hopelessly tangled way. The world
might be thus rational, but it was evident that the abso-
lute spirit must be thinking of many things that you, in
your finite weakness, could not well presume to construct
a prioTu


268


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


In view of all this, thought, as we now see, must be
content to take one more step, not, as many superficial
students of modern thought have supposed, the step oi
repenting once for all of the whole undertaking of the
idealistic period, but rather the step of returning, enriched
by the experience and the depth of insight which this
period had produced, to the cautious scrutiny and rational
interpretation of the external order itself. The first
charge of idealism upon the fortress of the spiritual mys-
teries of the world was indeed in one sense a failure.
Constructive idealism meant, as the romanticists showed,
no small danger of arbitrary speculative guesses, of way-
wardness, and of dreaming. If Hegel sought to put an
end to all this capriciousness by his marvelously skillful
construction of the es.sence of the absolute spirit in terms
of a formula derived from the study of the inner life, still,
as we saw, this formula also was quite inadequate to the
expression of the facts of outer nature. Hegel made a
skillful diagnosis of the logic of passion. He pointed out
how spirituality means conflict. He tried to show how
this conflict proceeds from lower to higher stages, and
how, in its evolution, all the forms of spirituality which
human civilization in its growth exemplifies are necessa-
rily produced. In this way Hegel built up, after his own
fashion, an inadequate but profoundly suggestive philoso-
phy of history, as well as a sort of rational eonstrucition of
the whole content of human, social, and political life. In
other words, Hegel tried to show how, on a Kantian basis,
the world of human passion can be explained, and how
we can escape from what we called the prison of the inner
life, and prove ourselves to be in the world of the infinite
spirit. Every step of HegfeFs investigation was indeed
open to some question, but in his own proper field he
discovered what might be said to offer very high hopes to
the rational idealist. But not even Hegel could reaUy get
into the charmed circle of the empirical sciences, and corn


THE BISE OF THE DOCTBINE OF EVOLUTION. 269


struct the facts of nature upon the postulates of idealism.
He attempted this after a certain limited fashion, as
Schelling had attempted it ; but he failed. Both his pre-
tensions in this regard and the nature of his failure have
indeed been distorted and misrepresented by unjust oppo-
nents ; but in any case there remains the fact that, as I
just said, the first onslaught of idealism upon the central
mysteries of reality failed; and it became necessary to
consider what next to do.

How’ simple, then, under these circumstances, for ideal-
ists, or for men who had been trained in the idealistic
school, but who saw this incompleteness of constructive
idealism, — how simple for them now to say : “ That the
world is spiritual, that the inner life is in fact at the heart
of it, seems, after Kant, clear. But equally clear it is
that, at the depth of this nature which the inner life thus
reveals to us, there are spiritual mysteries which for us,
in our present ignorance, are so far unfathomable. Doubt-
less these mysteries are n’t unfathomable in thpmselves ;
doubtless the one spirit whose life embodies itself in all
our inner natures knows what he means, and has some
sort of interpretation for even the apparently most capri-
cious of his truths. But as for us, in our conscious na-
ture, we only know that we, just now, are forced to see
this sense- world and to work in it. Let us then turn for
the solution of our mysteries back again to the long and
painful road of experience. Why we are bound by our
inner nature to see this world of sense-facts we can surely
never say, until we shall have first learned empirically
what sense-facts we are bound to see. This, however,
only science can teach us.”

We return to the natural order, as you see, in company
with such thinkers, but by no means as if, in returning,
we left our idealism behind us. We return, but, once
more, not to that outer order which we left for the paths
of speculation in the seventeenth century. The empirical


270


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


sciences, which, in their own way and largely apart from
any but indirect speculative influences, have been develop-
ing ever since the seventeenth century, which have been
extending their field, elaborating their theories, tilling
their vast and fruitful fields, will indeed no doubt at first
misinterpret our return. Their servants, full of the learn-
ing and the successes of two centuries of inductive re-
search, will scornfully say : “ See these idealists ! They
long tried to call the world their dream, and to construct
it a priori. But they gi’cw hungry in their wilderness,
feeding the swine of strange masters, and longing for the
very husks of speculative guess-work and delusion. Now
they come back like prodigals, hoping that experience, our
master, will have facts enough and to spare for them. In
truth, had tliey remained at home, their reflective clever-
ness might have been of much use to science. But they
took the portion of intelligence that belonged to them,
and went away; and here they come now, in all the rags
of their poor systems.” So, perhaps, the scoffers will
insist. But this sort of scorn will not impose upon us.
We know that we were not prodigals, but rather spies,
sent to spy out the land of promise, and what we bring
back with us are great clusters of grapes as specimens of
the wealth of a land of milk and honey beyond the Jordan
of mystery. That land is still uiiconquered. We return
to tlie friendly camp in the wilderness of this world, and
we ask its followers to «arise and go with us, that we may
yet enter into that land,, and possess it.

But, figures aside, our undertaking as we return to the
study of the njitural order is simply this : the mystery of
the world is for us through and through an ideal, a spir-
itual mystery. This great order is once for all divine.
And thus much our idealism has taught us. namely, (1)
by showing us that, except for the world of ideas, except
for the phenomena that appear as outer to beings with
minds, or that have their place in the inner life of such


THE RISE OF THE DOCTRINE OF EVOLUTION. 271

beings, there is no reality at all ; (2) by showing us, as
Kant has shown, that there can be no rational order in
nature unless the thought of some rational being intro-
duces such order, and (3) by leading us to postulate, as
all the post-Kantian constructive idealists have postulated,
that beneath the nature of our conscious self, which finds
itself forced to recognize this or that as outer, there must
lie a complete, an infinite Self, which somehow, whether
by a divine caprice or by a divine rationality, or by both
combined, is actually and of its own nature not outwardly
forced, but inwardly minded, to express itself in this
whole vast world of ours. If, with all this at heart, we
return to the outer order, it is because we desire our ideal-
ism to remain no longer barren, abstract, afraid of ex-
perience, capricious, wayward, sentimental, or fantastic.
We want our idealism to do a manly work. We want it
to enter upon its true task, not of dreaming of a possible
perfection, but of transforming, of enlivening, of> spirit-
ualizing, the concrete life of humanity. Idealism on one
side, dreaming its splendid dreams ; science on the other
side, condemned to an irrational and Philistine enmity to
the spiritual, — what spectacle could be more unworthy of
humanity ! In fact, nobody has ever really desired such
a situation. In its most fantastic moments idealism, un-
less it were perchance the romantic irony of some young
Friedrich Schlegel, has been sincerely anxious to embody
experience, and to get at the truth of life. Science, on
the other hand, in the person and work of any earnest
and sensible investigator, however narrow his specialty,
however unspiritual seemed his facts, has been through
and through spiritual in its inmost conception of reality.
Divorced from speculation, as it has usually chosen to be,
during the latter half of the eighteenth century and the
first decades of the nineteenth century, it still has never
lost sight of its task, namely, to elaborate the facts of
experience in such wise as to find and to make apparent


272


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHaOSOPHY.


in them the laws, the essential truths, the ideas of things*
When in Laplace’s Celestial Mechanics,’' and in La-
grange’s completion of the system of the whole mechani-
cal science of his day, a vast multitude of the most con-
fusing natural phenomena were reduced to expressions of
a very few ultimate and rigid thoughts, what was this but
an embodiment of the search for rationality in nature ?
And all modern science up to the moment of which we
are now speaking has been one vast and toilsome poem of
rationality, f ^^'agmentary indeed, but even in its fragments
how beautiful !

The business of speculation is then already outlined.
What science seeks is essentially what we are seeking, —
to catch the rhythm and the very pulse-beat of the reason
that is and must be, amidst all the caprice of nature, yes,
even because of this wealth of caprice in nature, at the
very heart of the world. We return to the world of sci-
ence, then, to enrich its postulates by our idealistic inter-
pretation, and to enrich our own too abstract fashion of
conceiving the rationality of things through the wealth of
nature’s facts.

Thus, as you see, I am now trying, still, of course, in
my attitude as mere chronicler, to express the spirit in
which, in the early decades of this century, many men of
considerable speculative training set about their work in
various departments of empirical research. They were
idealists at heart ; they became scientific specialists by
profession. Of course^ such is the narrowness of human
nature, that only with great difficulty could such persons
keep at once the purity of their idealistic faith and the
exactness of their powers of empirical observation, equally
well in sight as they toiled. Some of them, especially in
Germany, remained for a long time the prey of various
forms of systematic delusion, and warped their observa-
tions in order to illustrate their voluminous speculations.
Still more of them, however, in turning their attention to


THE BISE OP THE DOCTBINE OP EVOLUTION. 273


exact scholarship, or to physical science, sought as much
as possible to lay aside whatever speculative concern they
had ever possessed. But still, after all, say what one will,
one cannot fairly examine the thinking of this our cen-
tury without seeing that during its whole course empiri-
cal research and the truly philosophical spirit have been
bound in a close marriage tie compared to which all previ-
ous unions of speculation and of experience have been but
the most passing moods of mutual admiration.

The most noteworthy offspring and illustration of this
marriage tie has been the vast industry that has gathered
about what we now call the idea of evolution, as a law, or
t rather, a group of laws, of nature.


II.

The philosophy of evolution was, in fact, to be my spe-
cial topic to-day, and doubtless I have spent too long a
time in approaching this topic itself. But so much I
have gained if I have now prepared the way for a brief
preliminary statement of the nature of the process whereby
this philosophy arose in modern thinking. The way was
this : Idealism having proved as unable to construct the
visible world upon any a priori rational scheme, as it was
successful in laying the foundation for the spiritual phi-
losophy of the future, the problem that the earlier ideal-
ists had left to their successors was now : To comprehend
the world of experience in terms of the fundamental
idealistic postulates. In a search for the solution of this
problem, thought was led to the rational study of human
history. Surely if the great Spirit is anywhere to be
manifest to us, then it should be in the growth of human-
ity. To see this growth as a spiritual process became,
therefore, an object of serious concern. Of course here,
as everywhere else in science, some of the first efforts were
bold and crude enough, but they were suggestive. They
led in time to that vast undertaking known as modem


274


THE SPIUIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


historical research, a sort of study that, strange as it may
seem to say so, is not yet a century old. For, as we shall
see, what used to be called historical research was some-
thing that in former centuries embodied a spirit very dif-
ferent from what we now know as the historical spirit.
But the interest thus aroused spread to other branches of
science. Natural history, which formerly had been, not-
withstanding its name, a merely descriptive science, began
to be pursued upon a deeper plan ; it became truly his-
torical, examined into the genesis of organic forms, and,
in the field of geological study, set about the study of
the succession of organic forms upon the earth’s surface.
The field thus entered upon proved unexpectedly fruitful. <
The century became the typical century of the histori-
cal theory of creation. In previous periods of modern
thought, thinkers had deliberately neglected the history
of things. Nature, not as it grows, but as it eternally is,
was that which constituted the outer order known to the
seventeenth century. Events had little concern to a doc-
trine like Spinoza’s. Newton’s conception of physical,
science was founded, indeed, upon the observation of the
actual events of nature ; but these events were to be ex-
plained, if possible, by eternal laws like gravitation, and
history was to be absorbed in mechanism. When the
eighteenth century turned its eyes towards the inner life,
it still studied an ideally permanent thing called human
nature, which savage life illustrated in its primitive inno-
cence, civilized life in its artificial disguises, but which
nothing in heaven or earth, except the will of its creator,
could essentially change. But for our nineteenth century
it is just the change, the flow, the growth of things, that
is the most interesting feature of the universe. Old-
fashioned science used to go about classifying things.
There wero live things and dead things; of live things
there were classes, orders, families, genera, species, — all
permanent facts of nature. As for man, he had one chaiv


THE RISE OF THE DOCTRINE OF EVOLUTION. 275


acteristic type of inner life, that was in all ages and sta-
tions essentially the same, — in the king and in the peas-
ant, in the master and in the slave, in the man of the
city and in the savage. The glory of science lay just in
its power to perceive this essence of the eternally human
everywhere in man’s life. The dignity of human nature,
too, lay in just this its permanence. Because of such per-
manence one could prove all men to be naturally equal,
and our own Declaration of Independence is thus founded
upon speculative principles that, as they are there stated,
have been rendered meaningless by the modern doctrine
of evolution. Valuable, indeed, was all this unhistorical
% analysis of the world and of man, valuable as a prepara-
tion for the coming insight ; but how iin vital, how unspir-
itual, how crude seems to us now all that eighteenth-cen-
tury conception of the mathematically permanent, the
essentially unprogressive and stagnant human nature, in
the empty dignity of its inborn rights, when compared
with our modern conception of the growing, struggling,
historically continuous humanity, whose rights are nothing
until it wins them in the tragic process of civilization,
whose dignity is the dignity attained as the prize of un-
told ages of suffering, whose institutions embody thou-
sands of years of ardor and of hard thinking, whose treas-
ures even of emotion are the bequest of a sacred antiquity
of self-conquest ! Not inalienable, but hard won and pain-
fully kept are the true rights of man. Not a special crea-
tion, but a living organism is our nature ; an organism
not permanent in its structure, but the outcome of labor ;
an organism with a long embryonic development, capable
of degeneration as well as of growth, and needing there-
fore our constant care lest it lose all the spirituality and
all the rights that it has thus far acquired.

Thus, I say, the historical conception of the world, and
above all, of the world of human nature, has appeared in
our modern life. I am now to trace more precisely the


276


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


growth and the consequences of this doctrine of evolution.
As in the case of the study of Schopenhauer, at the last
time, my task is at once aided and hindered by the popu-
lar reputation of my topic. Many of the things that one
can most easily say about evolution are nowadays almost
too familiar, having been discussed even in the newspa-
pers until we are weary of them. On the other hand, a
deeper insight into the true problems suggested by evolu-
tion is rather the more difficult on account of this famil-
iarity; for the aspect of a deep subject which we most
need to reflect upon is never the one which purely popu-
lar discussion is likely to favor. My difficulty is, there-
fore, in part like the difficulty of one writing an essay »
upon Hamlet’s Soliloquy, or on the Beatitudes. The
words are so familiar that the meaning comes to seem
remote. Even so here ; the word “ evolution ” occurs on
very many modern title-pages, until one too easily forms
a habit of shutting any new book in which he chances to
encounter a term thus often repeated, but seldom appre-
ciated.

The modern historical spirit assumed a definite fom
not far from the time of the battle of Waterloo. The
two events were, in fact, not at all disconnected. In Ger-
many, the romantic school proper had by this time fallen
into a decline. The romantic movement, in a wider sense,
was, however, still flourishing, and, in fact the new histor-
ical movement was a direct outgrowth of this romantic
interest in life. As for the mechanism of the process,
that is very obvious, but as it is not so frequently de-
scribed to our public as it has been to the Gorman public,

I must dwell for a moment on the main aspects of the in-
tellectual situation In Germany in the first decade of the
century. Germany itself, as you know, was at this time
a land trodden under the invader’s foot, corrupted by the
invader’s appeals to the avarice of its minor princes, and
left, in general, in a hopeless political situation, which,


THE RISE OP^HE DOCTRINE OF EVOLUTION. 277

strangely enough, aroused no strong lamentations in the
minds of the nation’s own best men. Hegel, for example,
warmly admired for a time Napoleon, whom he saw in
person about the time of the battle of Jena, and whom he
then looked upon wonderingly as upon a sort of Wdir
geiat zu Pferde^ as the philosopher in effect expressed
himself. This political indifference, this free intellectual
curiosity, which marveled at the changes of the age and
felt no patriotic longings, was typical of the mood of all
Germany’s intellectual class from Goethe down. Thought
was, after all, free ; one had the empire of the air and the
recesses of the heart to one’s self, and one let contempo-
rary history go its course as it would. Meanwhile, how-
ever, this idealism without concrete and visible ideals was,
as we have seen, not only a capricious but a dangerous
thing. The representative younger poets of the time
reveled, as we know, in emotion and in mystery. The
whole romantic movement might be defined as a con-
sciously wayward and, before it was done, a fairly morbid
reflection upon the heart of man viewed merely as the
heu^t. You felt, you experienced, you sang, you grew
constantly ro ’’e sentimental, you gloried in the wealth of
your feelings, you wept in public with your numberless
lyrics, and then you fe^'- and experienced and sang again
with endless ardor and garrulity. If you studied nature,
you loved above all things mere mysteries, divining rods,
magic, the night-side of nature generally. But, of course,
in all this there had ‘■o be, after all, something objective
as a foundation. Ev^n feelings and mysteries must look
for facts to support them, and, greatly to our advantage,
the romanticists early turned their attention to certain
records of humanity’s past experience which had been,
until very recently, almost wholly neglected by modem
students. Such records were of various classes, but had
in common this, that they all alike stood for ancient, or
else for very remote experiences, the product either of


i78 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN pAlOSOPHY.

quite mysterious or of little understood times and peoi
pies. The favorite sources of such records were the
Orient and the Middle Ages. One could not have named
two regions of learned research that were more remote
from the customary thought of the middle of the eigh-
teenth century than medimval and Oriental civilization ;
one could not name any two branches of study that
appealed more to the distinctively romantic spirit than
did these. The Middle Ages, at any rate as men then
conceived tnem, were of course the typical period of ro-
mance. Then emotion had possessed every possible object
wherein to revel, — mysteries, magic, unknown countries,
crusades, knightly ideals, fairy tales, religious ardor, free-
dom of artistic forms, adventures, castles, saints, and the
Holy Koman Empire. Now that all these things had per-
ished, what better could romantic poets and readers do
than recall the long-past glories, and revive the buried
emotions. As for the Orient, what wisdom might lie
treasured there was still only faintly to be conjectured.
The prosaic Englishmen indeed, having conquered India.^
had fallen to making learned researches into the litera-
ture, the thought, and the laws of their new subjects,
mainly with a view to the practical business of govern-
ment. These researches had begun to become known on
the Continent. Sacred books, some of them philosophical,
had been translated. Meanwhile Mohammedan civiliza-
tion also, from Persian and Arabic sources, was finding
its way to the renewed attention of European scholars.
No amateur esoteric Buddhist of our own day has felt a
deeper curiosity about what this Oriental wisdom might
mean, or has labored harder to find out, than did numerous
scholarly youth of this romantic period. Poets imitated
Oriental forms ; Hindu pantheism, or Persian Sufism, was
clothed in melodious verse by such voluminous singers as
Riickert; men like the Schlegels forgot the romantic
irony, to learn Sanskrit ; a Wilhelm von Humboldt exr


THE BISE OF^HE DOCTRINE OF EVOLUTION. 279

pounded the Bhagavat-gita. Thus began the scholarship
that has produced the science of modern comparative phi-
lology, and our whole knowledge of the true life of the
far East.

Now the thing to note, for our purpose, in all this new
study, is, that its motive was at first mainly romantic, but
that its outcome was very significantly scientific. The
scholars of the two previous centuries had been linguists,
with a great love, in many cases, of the aesthetic aspects
of scholarship, but with little sense for what we now
think to be the truly human element in the study of the
languages and literatures of the world. It was the ro-
mantic love of passion, of mystery, and emotion, that now
set the heart’s blood of scholarship fairly bounding in the
veins of the new learning. Sanskrit, Arabic, Persian, the
tongues of Europe in the Middle Ages, the old chroni-
clers, the poems of the mediaeval Empire, — why, all
such things, if the eighteenth-century scholar had even
deigned to think of them with respect at all, would have
seemed to him but a series of crabbed linguistic puzzles,
not worthy for an instant of comparison with the problems
of classical philology. But the romantic movement
changed all that. The very spirit that in Great Britain
expressed itself in Scott’s romances, once wedded to the
minuteness of German scholarship, was destined to trans-
form the whole study of history.

For see, it was history that the romanticists thus found
themselves erelong devotedly studying. Men who had
set out to be merely fantastic dreamers perceived that the
far-off humanity of Asia or of mediasval Europe, had
dreamed better than they themselves could ever hope to
dream. As they studied the records of this humanity,
the dead past became once more alive. It was the pres«
ent that now seemed, in its swift changes and in its un-
steady ideals, the unessential expression of the spirit of
humanity. Above all, men felt how those far-off times had


280 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

possessed, iu their more permanent institutions, a trea-
sure which the nineteenth century was daily risking,
if not losing, in the shifting conflicts of the Napoleonic
period. And thus the institutions of humanity, whose
study has become so characteristic of our whole modern
movement, first came into the foreground of attention.
Laws, customs, religions, began to show a human worth
which students had, up to that time, persistently ignored.

In the keen interest that now quickly grew and con-
creted itself, nothing was too insignificant to deserve ob-
servation, if it illustrated the passions or the deeper faiths
of men. Fairy tales, preserved in the mouths of the coun-
try people, ballads, rural superstitions, seemed interesting
to the wisest thinkers. Even the rude dialects of the
illiterate began to acquire dignity. Tlie human was not
of necessity the cultivated. The human was the wide-
spread or the ancient in speech or in behavior. It was
the deep, the emotional, the thing much loved by many
men, the poetical, the organic, the vital, in civilization.
Scholars looked for it not in modern books, but in the
lore of forgotten ages, or heard it from the mouths of the
very peasantry of their own time. The brothers Grimm
began to collect their German popular tales. Poets were
proud to imitate the ballads of the people.

Nor did classical philology itself j*emain uninfluenced
by the romantic movement. On the contrary, this move-
ment transformed its very ideals and methods. It was
no longer to favor mere linguistic skill, nor to cultivate
taste by analyzing the finest models of ancient literary
art. It was rather t# comprehend the inner life of an-
tiquity, to set forth the nature of Greek and Roman
institutions, beliefs, and conduct, to show what relation
that civilization had to our own, to make linguistic s^dy
a handmaid of truly humane scholarship, to treat the
classical history, not as a mere collection of examples for
moral or for literary edification, but as an evolution. For,


THE BISE OF THE OOOTBINB OF EVOLUTIOM. 281

already, as you see, the idea of what we call evolution was
dawning on the minds of the scholars of that day. Far
off indeed was our modern theory, with all its world-em*
bracing inductions; but the spirit which it was to em-
body was born of the very dreams of the romantic period.
Herein lies the continuity of thought which connects us,
in all the so-called realism of our prosaic modern research,
with the dreamers who dreamed, with the fantastic poets
who failed, in the first decades of our century.

III.

But I have already somewhat anticipated. I said a
moment since that the battle of Waterloo was not discon-
nected with the first bloom of the new historical study.
The connection is not far to seek. Before 1815 the help-
lessness of Germany, bleeding and corrupted, left for tho
intellectual leaders of the people no resource equal to
their dreams and their abstract idealism. The end of the
Napoleonic episode brought room on earth for tho feet of
those who had long been traversing the empire of the
air. The romanticists, however, did not on that account
forsake contemplation. They only found themselves more
disposed to scholarship, and less given to fantasy. I called
tlie return to the natural order, a little while since, a re-
turn to the wilderness of this present world. Of course,
I might reverse the Scripture metaphor and, appealing
now to the book of Revelation, say that, as Satan lay
bound in St. Helena, the church of the spirit could return
from the wilderness into which it had fied ; and that it
swiftly did so. The scholarly mo^ves that we have just
been analyzing produced hereupon, in^ quick succession,
a long series of epoch-marking historical books. More-
over, there, was yet another reason why the political
changes of the time were favorable to historical study.
When great events are "past, and a passionate episode of
our lives is completed, we are easily disposed to the writ-


282 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

ing of chronicles. After one’s fii'st love affair, one keeps
a diary for a season, or perhaps begins an autobiography,
with special reference to the story of one’s mightier pas-
sions. The doctrine of evolution took its rise in such an
effort of humanity to write its own autobiography, after
a terrible experience of being in love with what it had
believed to be liberty, and of being jilted by what proved
to be despotism. Thus all things worked together to the
same end. It id surprising to look over the list of these
great book., each one of which marks an era in modem
investigation, and so many of which belong to the years
between 1815 and 1835. The list shows a constant wid-
ening and deepening of the historical interest. General
literature, Koman law, mediseval traditions and institu-
tions, classical philology. Oriental literature, compara-
tive philology, and at last Christian theology itself, are
assailed after the historical fashion, and one research
leads to another. The two Humboldts, the Schlegels, the
Grimms, Niebuhr, Boechh, Ranke, were all in the front
rank of the students of the day, and a list, if complete,
would name works by all of them, and by numerous other
scarcely less important scholars. Curious was the fate
that drove every scholarly specialty to become more and
more historical. A book like Strauss’s “ Life of Jesus ”
might be in itself so novel in its methods, so tentative and
imperfect in its hypotheses, that its own author would en-
tirely change erelong his opinion about some of his own
most noteworthy contentions. Yet the storm of contro-
versy that it aroused would drive friend and foe to his-
torical researches of a new sort ; and the whole of mod-
ern Christology, orthemox as well as unorthodox, has been
profoundly modified by the indirect effect of Strauss’s
bold and suggestive investigation.

As for the outcome of all this ferment, it was inevita-
bly the conception of the higher' human life as one vast
and connected growth from lower to nobler conditions,


THE RISE OF THE DOOTBINE OF EVOLUTION. 283


with episodes, indeed, of stagnation and degeneracy, and
with vast outlying regions of almost changeless barbaric
or imperfectly civilized mankind, but with a meaning,
after all, about even the saddest of its phenomena, such
as the moralizing historians of former generations had
never understood. This meaning lay in the physical de-
pendence of man, for his whole civilization and culture,
upon the former generations of men. After a fashion
people had, of course, always recognized such dependence.
But how deep and how concrete the new history found
the dependence to be! Our language, our institutions,
our beliefs, our ideals, whatever in short, is mightiest and
dearest in aU our world, all this together is a slow and
hard-won growth, nobody’s arbitrary invention, no gift
from above, no outcome of a social compact, no immedi-
ate expression of reason, but the slowly formed concre-
tion of ages of blind effort, unconscious, but wise in its
unconsciousness, often selfish, but humane even in its self-
ishness. The ideals win the battle of life by the secret
connivance, as it were, of numberless seemingly un-ideal
forces. 'Clims^e, hunger, commerce, authority, supersti-
tion, war, cruelty, toil, greed, compromise, tradition, con-
servatism, loyalty, sloth, — all these cooperate, through
countless ages, with a hundred other discernible tenden-
cies, to build up civilization. And civilization itself is,
in consequence, a much deeper thing than appears on the
surface of our consciousness. Instinct has a larger share
in it than reasoning. Faith counts for more in it than
insight. It embodies in concrete form that deeper self
that the idealists loved to talk abou^. Your deeper self is
plainly a sort of abstract and epitome of the whole high
tory of humanity. A new and wiser fonn of the doc-
trine of metempsychosis occurs to you. The humanity
that toiled an(l bled and worshiped of old has trans-
mitted to you, in your language and institutions, in the
ancient lore that your fathers teach you, in your preju*


284 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

diceS) in your faults, in your conscience, in your religion,
the very soul of its agony and of its glory. You can
read in history your personal instincts written in the lan-
guage of evolution. You can watch the human spirit in
its growth with a deeper sense of the “ That, art Thou ”
than you had ever before possessed. The metaphors of
your heathen ancestors are crystallized in every word that
you utter. The very horrors of their superstitions* are
the true though humble origin of your loftiest and most
sacred de ’^otions. Humanity never really forsakes its
past. The days of mankind are bound each to each in
mutual piety.

All these ideas have now, to be sure, become, by dint
of much repetition, too commonplace. It is well for us to
remember that the most cultivated thinkers of the last cen-
tury scarcely in any measure possessed them. The unity
of humanity, as the last century conceived it, was, I repeat,
an abstract unity, a dead and permanent thing. All men
had erect stature, language, reason, and the power to
laugh. As some men stood straighter than others, so some
men had more wit, and of such were the enlightened souls
of that century. That was to their own ^iruls the whole
story of the unity of human life, and as for the growth of
institutions, and all the agony of the winning of our life
by the men of old, — the eighteenth century, at least until
its very last decades, thanked God that it knew too much
of wisdom to worry itself about any of the men of old ex-
cept the wise ones, such as Cicero, or the elegant ones,
such as Horace. Superstition you outgrew, the customs
of your ancestors you prudently forgot, and of history you
remembered only what it would be pleasing to narrate on
a social occasion. Hence, as we see, our modern common-
place is after all something of a novelty, even a paradox.

I have dwelt so long upon this transformation of our
notion of human history, because people too frequently
regard the doctrine of evolution as having for the first


THE RISE OF THE DOCTRINE OF EVOLUTION. 285

time flashed upon the world after the appearance of Dar-
win’s “ Origin of Species.” Nobody can value more than I
do the significance for the general student of the splendid
achievement of Darwin ; but it was a splendid achieve-
ment for humanity at large because the age was ripe for
the extension of the historical conception far beyond the
boundaries of humanity proper. And, once more, the
age was thus ripe because by this time scholarship had
brought into existence this very conception of histoiy
itself in the modern sense of the word. If you can con-
ceive Darwin’s knowledge of natural history, his investi-
gations, and his marvelous induction that led to the
principle of natural selection, with all its consequences,
if, I say, you can conceive all this transferred to the last
century, some properly informed naturalists might, no
doubt, have been convinced ; but the world at large could
have found no place for the doctrine. It would have been
to them only one oddity the more in nature, or rather in
speculation. They would have called it Darwin’s paradox,
and would have banished it into the realm of curiosities.
It was coming igxto an historical age that made Darwin’s
book so great a prize, and the idea of natural selection so
deeply suggestive to philosophy.

And now, having spent so much time in laying our
foundation, we can swiftly suggest in a few words the
climax of the doctrine of evolution which the natural
sciences have at last made possible. Germany began the
historical movement. It was left for England to com-
plete the ascendency of the new thought. It is matter of
popular knowledge that geology, in its modern form, is
largely due to the British mind. Lyell’s researches sub-
stituted for the catastrophes which the earlier geologists
conceived relatively uniform natural processes, whereby,
as they worked through long ages, the earth’s crust had
been slowly modified. On the basis of this uniformi-
tarian geology, a doctrine of the transformation of species


286


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


began to look more reasonable. Such a doctrine, indeed, as
a mere speculation, is one of the oldest guesses of infant
science, and even the Darwinian notion of natural selection
had been first formulated in Greek speculation by Em-
pedocles, before the time of Socrates. But such guesses,
however finely a Schelling might write out their substance
in poetical form, as we found him doing awhile since,
could never mean much for science until modern geology
had made probable that the earth’s crust itself has a gen-
uine history, wherein there is more of unity than of catas-
trophic change. But herewith came very quickly the time
when natural history as a whole could assume the truly
historical shape. Von Baer’s embryological researches,
and the classifications and embryological studies of Agas-
siz, showed that wonderful parallelism between the growth
of the individual life and the relation of each animal form
to its neighbors and predecessors on the earth, which soon
came to have so deep a scientific meaning. The appear-
ance of Darwin’s “ Origin of Species ” in 1869, however,
brought to a focus all these tendencies of modern re-
search. With the one exception of Newtop’s “ Principia,”
no single book of empirical science has even been of more
importance to philosophy than this work of Darwin’s.
And you know now wherein the importance lay. The
world was longing for an historical view of phenomena.
The historical interest was already excited to the keenest
pitch. Human civilization was already conceived as an
evolution. The earth’s crust was already known to em-
body a history whose gaps, still, even at this present
moment, very large, were already, in 1859, sufficiently
reduced to make probable the notion that a continuous
series of physical process, without violent convulsions,
had produced the whole succession of geological strata.
The old nebular hypothesis of Kant and La Place sug-
gested that the whole growth of our solar system to its
present form had been part of the very process that has


THE RISE OF THE DOCTRINE OF EVOLUTION. 287

ended in our own geological history. Only the boundary
line between species and species, only the difficulty of con-
ceiving in scientific terms the growth of animal forms
without the interference anywhere of special creations,
only this, which was, of course, most felt in case of the
distinction between man and the animals, remained as an
apparently impassable obstacle in the way of the triumph
of the historical movement. Darwin’s book removed this
last great obstacle. In the working of natural selection
he found an agency sufficient to explain, in part, if not in
the main, the transformation of species. And there could
be no question, after his researches, that natural selection
is a nera causa^ that is, is actually at work in the organic
world. Moreover, he showed, in his first and in his later
works, that the whole mass of evidence foi the transfor-
mation of species and the animal origin of man is far
greater than the evidence that natural selection itself is
the only natural agency at work. In fact, since Darwin,
while naturalists differ endlessly as to the degree to which
natural .selection is responsible for the transformation of
species, further investigation has put it farther and farther
beyond question that, once granting the postulates of em-
pirical science, the doctrine of the transformation of spe-
cies, and of the animal origin of man, is simply beyond
question. All modern naturalists of note are in this sense
followers of Darwin, not that they all hold his views about
natural selection, but that they all teach the doctrine of
transformation.

But our interest is just now much less in this bit of
empirical science as such than in the philosophical views
to which it has led men.


IV.

The doctrine of evolution had its rise, as we have now
seen, in a twofold interest. This interest was first an
historical one, the offspring of the idealistic interest in the


288 THE SPIBIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

meaning of things, the product of an age for which the
processes of the world were primarily spiritual processes,
or were to be interpreted in the light and by the analogy
of such processes. But, on the other side, this interest was
a strongly empirical one, the offspring of a dread of the
extravagances of the idealistic period, the product of a
hard-learned lesson in caution, the embodiment of an un-
willingness to mistake fantasy for truth. On the one side,
then, the doctrine of evolution is to be sharply distin-
guished from the naturalism of the seventeenth century.
Unlike that naturalism our modern doctrine is primarily
disposed^ not merely to explain, but to estimate nature.
It tries to find growth in the world as well as mechanism,
progress as well as law, ideally interesting products as
well as absolutely rigid processes. But, on the other
hand, the same doctrine has become more and more dis-
posed, as time has gone on, to suppress, or at all events to
subordinate its own original idealism ; for it is a doctrine
about experience, a theory founded on observation ; and
mere experience as such does n’t show us ideal forces at
work in nature, only facts that we, as observers, are able
to interpret, if we like, in terms of ideals. Without in-
terest in the historical aspect of things, without, then, an
essentially idealistic concern for what the events of the
world mean^ for what story they seem to embody, we
should never have come upon this notion of evolution at
all. But without a patient devotion to facts, and a rigid
self-control as to our romantic interpretations, we should
never have done the work necessary to verify the notion.
There remains, then, something conflicting, something in-
herently self-contradictory in the views nowadays current
as to the nature of the process of evolution itself. This
inner conflict of' modern thought furnishes one of the
most characteristic problems of to-day. It is the problem
of the so-called Philosophy of Evolution. The empirical
generalization that the whole life of our planet is in all


THE RISE OF THE DOCTRINE OF EVOLUTION. 289

probability one continuous process, free from unintelli-
gible or magical breaks and interferences, is one great
outcome of modern research, — an outcome inconceivable
except on the basis of numerous presuppositions which
philosophy must analyze, but for all that an outcome tliat
appeals for proof to the facts of experience, rather than
to the romantic intuitions of the age of Schelling. But
the interpretation of this generalization, — the inner sense
of it, — what of that ? Have we hereby banislied ideals
from the world ? have we really restored the faith in the
rigid outer order of Spinoza? or have we not rather, for
the first time, got a true empirical verification of the pre-
sence of the great active Spirit in his world ? Is it the
continuity, the physical necessity, the unalterably fatal
law of the process that our science is beginning to make
clear ? or is it rather the immanence in nature of ideal
powers, of significant tendencies, that from the beginning
so moulded the atoms, so predetermined the laws of their
mechanism, so endowed them with swift flight and with
close affinity, that the outcome of ages of their motion
has been spiritual, — is it this that we are now discover-
ing by our experience? Here the thought of our day
pauses, hesitant ; here the spirit in which the whole labor
of the century was begun stands in conflict with the
spirit of positive and empirical science that the century
has developed as it has proceeded.

But whatever is to be the outcome of this conflict, let
me point out to you that at all events those who are now-
adays accustomed to speak of a Philosophy of Evolution,
ought to have no doubt as to what their expression, if it
is to mean anything, must mean. A doctrine of evolu-
tion may be, like Darwin’s doctrine of natural selection,
a purely empirical theory, a generalization from facts
with a use of the postulates of science, and nothing more.
How nature came by this seemingly ideal character of
her processes, such an empirical doctrine need not try to


290


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


explain. But a philosophy of evolution, if there is ever
to be one, mi^t face just that ultimate question. Has the
world a meaning? and, as a philosophy of a true evolve
tion^ must answer that question in the affirmative ; for a
philosophy, or at all events an affirmative, a positive phi
losophy, is, as we have seen all along, an effort to express,
and by criticism to establish, the presuppositions of the
age which it reflects upon. Now the presumption of an
historical age is that there is a history embodied in the
known world, and a philosophy of evolution must be an
effort to give voice to this presupposition. If there is
anything true in a philosophy of evolution, then there is
something more than mere physical causation, mere mech-
anism in the world ; for how there can be history in the
world, no causal explanation, no appeal to mechanism as
such, can ever directly express. In so far as you find
mechanism only in the world, you find neither growth nor
decay ; you find no story at all. The return to the outer
order in our century has therefore ill its presupposition
not been a return to the old outer order of the seventeenth
century. It has been a return to a world pervaded, as it
were, with the spirit of idealism. If there is not merely
a group of sciences having a fictitiously historical interest,
but a true evolution, then there are ideal interests ex-
pressed in this outer order of nature, spiritual passions
(to borrow Schelling’s romantic expression) frozen into
this lava stream of nature’s mechanism. Those who have
believed that the spirit of the age of evolution removed
ideals, removed teleology from the world, have, then,
failed to see that the presupposition of our historical age,
ever since Rousseau and the romantic period, has been
that history is worth studying for its own sake, and that
therefore ideals are responsible for nature’s mechanism.

But just herein, you see, lies once more the deepest
problem of recent philosophy. The seventeenth century,
before doubt and idealism came, used to say : We know


THE RISE OF THE DOCTRINE OF EVOLUTION. 291

that there are rigid and necessary laws of nature’s mecha-
nism ; and as all is necessary, therefore the historical is
insignificant. The world of to-day is the world of eter-
nity.” But our age, returning to a seemingly rigid outer
order, returns with idealism in its reflective thought, with
spiritual passion as its deepest presupposition, and insists
that, whatever nature’s mechanism, there is still no know-
ledge so profound as the knowledge of the history of
things. Yet how can this insistence be defended ? The
doctrine of evolution, I assert, is in heart and essence the
child of the romantic movement itself. Can the child,
inheriting its mother’s depth and longing for wisdom,
defe^d this inheritance in this vast outer universe of rigid
order and absolute law ? That is the true problem of the
philosophy of evolution. I know many who regret the ten-
dency in our day to apply the doctrine of the transforma-
tion of species to humanity, who fear the apparently
materialistic results of the discovery that the human mind
has grown. For my part there lies in all this discovery
of our day the deeply impqptant presupposition that the
transition from animal to man is in fact really an evolu-
tion, that is, a real history, a process having significance.
If this is in truth the real interpretation of nature, then
the romantic philosophy has not dreamed in vain, and the
outer order of nature will embody once more the life of a
divine Self.

V.

Yet wo must not too much anticipate later results.
Presuppositions are not yet the philosophy which is to
establish them ; passions are not yet proofs. Let me try,
as I close, to suggest something of those attitudes towards
the problems of our day which are now best known and
most characteristic. Thus I shall be able to conclude our
historical sketch, and to pass to the second and more posi-
tive part of our survey of modern problems.

Towards the vast world of science with the endless mul-


292 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

titude of its facts, collected as they have been under the
influence of the spirit that I have been describing in the
present lecture, it is possible to take the attitude of de-
claring that, whatever interest led to their collection, the
facts are now so numerous and complex as to exclude
henceforth and forever any attempts at a philosophy.
The fantastic failures of the idealistic age may be looked
upon as illustrating the weakness of human powers. A
modest sense of the puzzling mystery of things may re-
gard as final in Kant’s doctrine only its confession of
ignorance ; and may find in the later systems only ro-
mances. The business of to-day, one may declare, is with
science^ with the world of experience, with the facts.
The world in its wholeness is too much for us. The out-
come of philosophy has been the one lesson of the need of
recognizing our limitations.

This result of the return to the outer order is nowadays
natural and familiar enough. In so far as it expresses a
mere private and personal unwillingness on the part of
many people to undertake th^ philosophical task, I respect
this spirit, and urge no argument against those who hap-
pen to be possessed by it. Eeflection is not a man’s
whole business. Our modern world is indeed vast. There
is a great diversity of gifts amongst us. Many of us are
better men without philosophy. Let such as are so cling
to experience. 1 will not molest them. These lectures
are not addressed to them.

I object to this way of looking at the modern situation
of human thought only when those who assume it declare
that the history of thought teaches this sort of resigna-
tion, or that the problems and results of modem science
demand it of us in any novel or peculiar sense. On the
contrary, if ever there was an age that demanded not res-
ignation, but industry in philosophy, it is our own. The
incomplete results of the previous periods of thought, the
wondrous suggestiveness of Kant, the marvelous analyses


THE BISE OF THE DOOTBINE OF EVOLUTION. 298


of solf-consciousness, and of its relation to truth, whereof
the idealistic age is fuU, this new problem suggested by
the doctrine of evolution, — are not all these things a
challenge to our time, a challenge such as previous ages
have never heard ? What our age is challenged to do is,
not to invent some revolutionary novelty in philosophy,
but to organize the outcome of earlier reflection. Organ-
ization — it is the one greatest idea of our time. Synthe-
sis — it is the one undertaking of our century. Do you
find a mass of fragmentary little states, spiritually related
by tongue and literature, sundered by bitter fortune, —
then by blood and iron you make them into one empire.
Is your republic endangered by local jealousies and ^pri-
vate interests, — then at the cost of years of warfare you
force these factions to know their own brotherhood. Is
society imperiled by too much individualism, — then your
leaders become filled with t!ie spirit of social organization.
Everywhere the same spirit is abroad. Shall thought
remain untouched by it? Shall reflection, frightened by
the diversity of opinions, ref pe to attempt their synthesis ?
For what is needed, I repeat, is not some new gospel,
preached by an angel from heaven, but a synthesis of the
truth that we now have ready at hand. Schopenhauer
and Hegel, Spinoza and Kant, mechanism and teleology,
nature and evolution, experience and reason, — these are
all, not mere names for warring tendencies, whose conflict
proves that all things are and must remain a mystery to
us men; these stand rather for embodiments now of
this, now of that deeper truth. Their existence is, I re-
peat, a challenge to us, not to see how much they differ,
but how well they belong together. No other age ever
had so rich a suggestion of such a synthesis of truth.
Can we afford to neglect our opportunity ?

It is n’t despair, then, that the complexity of modem
thought teaches us. It is rather the wondrous beauty of
the philosipphieal problem of the age that is shown us by


294


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


this very complexity. Nor is the return to the outer order
necessarily a forsaking of philosophic theory for experi-
ence. No, experience itself is meaningless without pre-
suppositions. Every one has an unconscious philosophy.
Every one has beliefs about the world as world, and in its
wholeness. One may neglect or even hate a conscious
philosophy. Nobody is without the faith that it would
need a whole philosophy to make articulate. The ques-
tion, What is experience ? was Kant*s own question ; and
to that question the whole idealistic age was a fragmen-
tary answer. In vain, then, do you say : I, for my part,
hold fast by experience, and forsake theory. There is in
truth no experience without theory, and philosophy is
simply theory brought to consciousness of itself.


VI.

But now, if, still following the history of current ten-
dencies, one passes to a mention of those thinkers who,
recognizing the true situation of modern thought, and not
abhorring reflection, have undertaken this great synthetic
task of philosophy itself, and have done so from the mod-
ern point of view, you will at once think, especially in
connection with the doctrine of evolution, of the name of
Mr. Herbert Spencer. You will ask of me, at this point,
some suggestion of the relation of this noteworthy thinker
to the movement whose growth I have been following.
The barest suggestion, indeed, is all that I can make.
Mr. S'pencer will be to me here an illustration of one way
of meeting the modern situation as it has now been
described. Mr. Spencer, as everybody who knows any-
thing of his career is aware, did not wait for the appear-
ance of Darwin’s “ Origin of Species ” before seizing
upon the idea of his general Formula of Evolution.”
The thought that the processes of nature are historical,
that the very mechanism of the physical world is such as
is bound to show to the onlooking spectator the spectacle


THE RISE OF THE DOCTRINE OF EVOLUTION. 295,

of a rhythmic alternation of growth and decay, and that
in this rhythmic alternation all the various histories of the
solar system, of the earth’s crust, and of the life of the
animals and of men, are contained, — this thought came
early to the mind of this singularly patient and many-
sided student of science and of politics. During the fifties
he thought out the main outlines of his future system of
synthetic philosophy, published the first edition of his
“Psychology,” and embodied in periodical essays his
notion of “ Progress, its Law and Cause,” as well as the
application of this notion to several important problems of
natural history, of social science, and of the history of hu-
manity. Early in the sixties his system began to appear ;
but it was not until after 1870 that he won the general
recognition which has made him, in this country, in the
eyes of so many, the one true prophet of the philosophy
of evolution, and that has given him a worthy name and
influence througliout the realm of European scientific in-
quiry. To-day his system is still unfinished. A world
of new investigations, which he follows industriously but
without noteworthy change of his opinions, has grown up
about him, inviting him to eternally new labors, but
always only confirming in his mind his own convictions.
He undertook long since the task of a Titan. He has
pursued this task for full thirty years with the patience
of an enthusiast. The skillful devotion of the man is
unquestionable. His value as an awakener and organizer
of research is vast. What can we say of his place in the
history of philosophy ?

Mr. Spencer stands in a singular position, whether you
regard him as an Englishman or as a philosopher. Eng-
lishman he is, but how unlike Locke or Berkeley, with
their classical limitations of outlook and of inquiry, with
their doubtful attitude towards researches that lay beyond
the circle of their immediate interests, with their unwill-
ingness to apply philosophy to more than a few problems.


296


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


Mr. Spencer in his position amongst English thinkers is
BO far more like Hobbes. The whole range of problems
seems to concern him. He attempts fearlessly the most
stupendous of tasks. He would unify science. His pro'
vince is the world of experience in its entirety. He is
fond of mentioning in the same sentence or paragraph
nebulae and starfishes, savages and molecules, the laws of
motion and the institutions of Europe. Nor is this wide
range chosen by him because of mere waywardness, or
from the mere love of variety in illustration. He men-
tions all these things because he seems to himself to have
a formula for them. Unlike Hobbes he is, on the other
hand, in his fondness for the letter of this formula itself, in
his fearlessness about the use of highly abstract phrases,
in his endless repetitions and illustrations of a few princi-
pal aspects of his fundamental thought. All this, I say,
this combination of universality of purpose with abstract-
ness of expression, is an un-English trait in Mr. Spencer,
It allies him so far with Hegel, and with the other inven-
tors of world-embracing formulas. An Englishman who
writes on philosophy usually loves the Socratic fashion of
posing as a plain man of simple undertakings and of
obvious ideas. Mr. Spencer speaks rather as one having
authority. If you criticise him, he replies that you have
failed to comprehend the subtlety and the many-sidedness
of his thought. He does not reply as Socrates or as
Berkeley would have done, that it is the critic who is U>o
subtle and artificial to grasp the concrete ideas of a plain
man. On the contrary, Mr. Spencer, more after the
fashion of Hegel, knows that his formula is only for
trained minds, like his own, for men who, like himself,
have lived long amidst deep contemplations, and who are
accustomed to world-compelling synthetic thought. In
this synthetic character of bis thought, again, that seems
to give him a place amongst the characteristic thinkers of
this our third period of modern philosophy. As we have


THE RISE OF THE DOOTBINfi OF EVOLUTION. 297

now repeatedly seen, the great business of modem thought
is the discovery of the unity of apparently diverse lines of
investigation, the reconciliation of seemingly hopeless con-
tradictions, the unification of the world which anarchical
passion and analytic refiection have conspired to rend
asunder. And Mr. Spencer undertakes everywhere to be
a reconciler, an unifier, one who harmonizes through syn-
thesis, and who brings to light oppositions only to enrich
thought by suggesting their organic unity. Science and
religion, empiricism and rationalism, Locke and Elant,
egoism and altruism, mechanism and evolution, nature
and history, — such are some of the seemingly opposing
forces tliat he would critically reunite, even in the act of
dweUing upon their warfare, llis world, too, is rent by
great conflicts ; but its unity is to be more than its con-
flicts. Mr. Spencer’s great popular reputation is largely
due to this organizing spirit that everywhere shows itself
in his writings. That, again, is why young men love him
so intensely. And tlieir love is so far well suggested by
his imposing dignity of enterprise. Ilis categories, mean-
while, look so much more empirical and concrete than
Hegel’s, or than those of other similar philosophic unifiers.
The redistribution of matter and motion is so much more
scientific-sounding a phrase for the description of the pro-
cess of nature than is Hegel’s notion of the absolute. The
passage from the indefinite and homogeneous to the defi-
nite and heterogeneous, which Mr. Spencer makes the
type of all cosmical evolution, is so much more readily
conceivable than is Hegel’s Negativitdt. But one thus
indeed forgets, as one reads, that over every statement of
Mr. Spencer’s about the outer world broods that dim and
shadowy Unknowable of his, whose mystery gives to every
assertion about the unity of its own processes an air of
doubt and of uuintelligibility. In the same breath Mr.
Spencer, in fact, seems to assure you that he knows all and
nothing about this unity of scientific truth. The real outer


298 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHT.

world is according to him this Unknowable itself. The
Absolute is an impenetrable mystery. Consciousness can;
not transcend its own boundaries. The limitation of know-
ledge is thus for Mr. Spencer the tragic defeat of the high-
est purpose of knowledge. Human thought will never
reach its real goal, and that, not because human thought is
merely unfinished, but because genuine knowledge of outer
truth is ill its very essence inconceivable, contradictory,
hopeless. Yet all the while Mr. Spencer has that univer-
sal formula, n'^mely, his law of evolution. And this for-
mula shall be true, and true about objective nature, about a
real world, about something that does transcend conscious-
ness. Idealistic constructions of the absolute shall be
impossible, just because the absolute is unknowable.
But unification of science, an empirical construction of an
universally valid and objective law, shall be possible,
cdthough the outer truth is essentially unknowable.

This well-known paradox of Mr. Spencer’s is extremely
characteristic of the halting attitude of much contempo-
rary thought. As for the Unknowable itself, we shall
have something to say of it hereafter, in the second part
of our course. For the present one may note, as an
historical fact, that both doubters and mystery-mongers
(of whom our time is full) often take an almost equal
delight in Mr. Spencer’s theory of the Unknowable : the
one class because they perceive that he, too, doubts, the
other class because they find in Mr. Spencer’s vague
speech, as to this matter, words that arouse their most
religiously unutterable longings and croonings. Kant’s
things in themselves were, indeed, somewhat similar to
this Unknowable ; yet they wore at least sharply distin-
guished from the knowable phenomena. All that Kant
ever pretended, even provisionally or partially, to “ unify ”
was the world of the inner life. But in Mr. Spencer’s
doctrine it is our knowledge of the outer world which is
to be unified ; ” and yet this outer, as such, cannot truly


THE BISE OF THE DOCTRINE OF EVOLUTION. 299

be known save as to the bare fact of its existence. The
union of knowable and unknowable in Mr. Spencer’s sys-
tem is thus a painfully corrupt one. Reconciled ” they
are in the system much as science and religion are recon-
ciled at the outset of the First Principles.” In case of
most of Mr. Spencer’s ^^reconciliations,” the opposing
interests are, in fact, first more or less developed, and then
deliberately ignored. The reconciled terms and interests
enter into the reconciling formula, much as the dead in
Job’s lamentation enter Sheol, and find peace: ‘‘The
small and the great are there, and the servant is free
from his master.” “The prisoners rest together, they
hear not the voice of the oppressor.” “ The wicked cease
from troubling and the weary are at rest.” So, I say, are
the great interests of humanity, the great problems of
philosophy, the concerns of science, and the passions of
religion, at rest in the dim recesses of the Spencerian
formulas.

One of the most noteworthy and valuable features of
Mr. Spencer’s thought, meanwhile, in its influence upon
our age, is seen in the curious fact of the actual fruitful-
.ness for modern discussion of some of his very vaguest
formulas. Mr. Spencer lives in a time when no accent of
the Holy Ghost fails to reach the ear of some breathless
listener. So hungry is this our modern world for truth
that the least hint suggests to it a feast of insight. And
that is why Mr. Spencer’s comprehensive syntheses have
been so significant for many minds, and, despite their
vagueness, will have a part in the outcome of human phi-
losophy. The whole doctrine of Mr. Spencer remains, to
my mind, a vast programme of a philosophy of evolution.
The author’s idea, namely, to give a general account of
the nature of the historical process as such, is a great
idea. I do not find in his actual formula anything at all
successful or satisfying. The processes of differentiation
and of integration, which he tries to describe and unite in


800


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


this formula, are ill universalized through his famous defi*-
nition of evolution. Not all historical processes are de-
scribed by even these abstract terms. Still less are all
the processes that his formula includes historical in their
nature. But still the thought of the whole, which is the
thought that the world of natural mechanism must be
^shown to be also, in another aspect of its nature, histori-
cal, is a deep and thoroughly modern thought, and that
is the thought which 1 believe to be the outcome of the
whole work of the century.


VII.

Outside of the circle of the special teachings of Mr.
Spencer we find, meanwhile, a group of doctrines which
make a more or less serious effort at being philosophical,
and which retain of idealism only a few fragmentary ele-
ments. But these doctrines are withal so significant of
our age and of its problems, that I should do ill, even in
this fragmentary sketch, if I wholly failed to characterize
them. I allude to the doctrines best known by the very
general epithet, Monistic. In them the idealistic tradi-
tion still lives, but in an unconscious fashion. The coy
doctrine of the world as spirit, pursued too hotly by
former lovers, has been metamorphosed, and now survives
in a sort of Daphne-like slumber, under such names as
the Mind -Stuff theory, or the doctrine of the Double
Aspect. Keaders of modem discussion are not imfa-
miliar with such statements as that the doctrine of evolu-
tion has taught us the “ Oneness of all Existence ; ” this
oneness meaning that the world is somehow made of one
stuff, and that this stuff is at once essentially physical
and essentially mental in its qualities. Schopenhauer,
whose real system was at heart a much more subtle and
profound doctrine than much of this modern monism,
used phrases that already suggest its formulas. The will,
he used to say, is just nature’s physical causation seen


THE BISE OF THE DOCTRINE OF EVOLUTION. 801

from within ; ” while the laws of nature are the will seen
from without.” Using this phrase, and avoiding Scho-
penhauer’s own systematic context for the phrase, many
recent thinkers have sought to reconcile science and phi-
losophy after much the following fashion : —

Nature, they say, shows us material processes, subject
to fixed law. Matter is known to be real, for experience
tells us so. The idealistic views of post-Kantian thought
are mere romances. Kant’s own subjectivism was unsci-
entific. The real world first appears as the physical world,
full of matter in motion. But now what is this matter
in motion ? Experience makes clear tliat in certain very
highly complex organisms, and, in particular, in the nerve-
centres of these organisms, certain masses of matter exhibit
mental characteristics, so that here molecular motion is
accompanied by consciousness. The more highly organ-
ized the nerve-centres in question, the higher the con-
sciousness ; the simpler the organism, the simpler the
consciousness, until, low in the scale, we come to what
seem to be unconscious organisms, and lower still, to what
seems to be inanimate matter. The doctrine of evolution
teaches us that the transition from lower to higher has
been, so far as the material processes are concerned, a
continuous process. The more complex has evolved from
the simpler. The organisms that possess consciousness
are the offspring of an ancestry which in earlier stages of
evolution would have seemed to possess none. Moreover,
each conscious individual, in his growth from the egg,
passes from the condition of a little mass of protoplasm
to the condition of a knowing and thinking being. As
matter organizes, mind gives evidence of its presence.
As the brain disintegrates in old age or in disease, mind
alters or disappears. What now is the meaning, the out-
come, of all these facts ? Is it not this ? As the material
elements of the brain existed before the brain, and came
together to form it, so the elements of the mind existed


802


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


apart from and before the conscious mind itself, and by
their synthesis have produced it. And what, once more,
can this mean ? Does it not signify that the elements of
the mind and the elements of the brain are not two sorts
of substance, but one ; that the consciousness is, as it
were, only the inner aspect of that which, seen from with-
out, appears as the brain ; and that each atom of the
brain is only the representative, in the world of physics, of
that which, otherwise viewed, is in its essence an element
of the mind 'i The world that the doctrine of evolution
shows us is, in fact, a world of one continuous process.
At one end of this process we find what seems to be dead
matter. At the other end we find, say in our own inner
life, what seems to be pure mind. How can one process
show such different things ? Yet the continuity of the
process, its persistence through all the ages of the evolu-
tion of our planet, the absence of proof of external inter-
ference, all these indicate that there must have been one
real stuff present throughout, despite the variety of its
manifestations. The various manifestations must then be
only in seeming and not in ultimate foundation various.
The so-called dead matter was always in essence mental.
The consciousness known to us in our inner life has that
physical aspect which the observer calls our brain. The
same substance it is, then, that seen from within ” ap-
pears as mind, and that seen from without ” is called
matter.

A well-known passage of M. Taine's book on “ The In-
tellect ” uses, to state this doctrine, the figure of a text
and interlinear translation,* which, in the book of nature,
appear in some places side by side, as the two series : the
mental and the physical phenomena of the world. In
some regions the text only appears to the observer (as
each one of us, and he only, knows his own inner life) ;
while elsewhere, as in our observation of dead ” matter,
only the translation appe^ to us, not the text. The inr


THE RISE OF THE DOCTRINE OF EVOLUTION. 808

ference is that, mutilated as our copy of Ihe text may be,
both text and translation are meant in the original of our
book to be parallel, correspondent, and, in deepest sense,
one. This, then, is the theory of Monism, as the doctrine
of evolution has suggested it to many recent thinkers.

In further development the expressions of the doctrine
differ widely. The lamented Clifford, in one of the most
brilliant of his essays, that on “Mind-Stuff,’’ gave to
modern monism one of its most suggestive formulations.
Independently, Dr. Morton Prince, of Boston, in a liook
on “The Nature of Mind and Human Automatism,”
reached, a number of years since, the same thought. So
stated, monism declares that the real stuff of the world
is not an unknown somewhat, an that when viewed as
we view our own states appears as mind, and that when
viewed from without appears as matter. On the con-
trary, this real stuff of things is, for Clifford and for Dr.
Prince, nothing but mind itself, known to us directly and
in its true essence when we know our own feelings, known
to us indirectly and obscurely when it is formed of the
feelings that are not ours, and that, affecting our feelings
from without, are represented therein by our ideas of
material things beyond us. The world is thus in reality
mind, but not of necessity conscious mind, rather only a
vast congeries of elementary feelings, out of which, when
they come into close relations to one another, as they do
in our organisms, complex mental life, and finally con-
sciousness, can be and is made. The process of evolution
is the process of the organization of this mind-stuff. The
laws of nature’s mechanism are the laws of the relations
of mind-stuff atoms ; and there is but this one stuff in
all things.

Other lovers of this modem monism are not always so
simple in their formulations. To many the truth of the
doctrine lies in the thought that matter and mind are sim-
ply diverse aspects of one ultimate substantial stuff. But


804 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

what this is, conscious or unconscious, feeling or not-feel«
ing, we are not to know. The true stuff is an sc with two
faces, a substance more like Spinoza’s, whose two attri-
butes, material and physical, we comprehend by experi-
ence, but whose essence is only made articulate for us in
terms of these its attributes.

Such is a suggestion of this, one of the best-known ten-
dencies of recent speculation. You see its tentative and
empirical character ; you see its close relation to the doc-
trine of evolution ; you see also how far it is from meet-
ing the critical requirements that, since Kant, are neces-
sarily made of a philosophy. This naive acceptance of
the possibility that out of a mass of feelings you can build
up a self, this faith that feelings can somehow “ come to-
gether ” or “ organize themselves,” when we know of no
such thing in experience as a loose feeling out of organ-
ization at all, or apart from the unity of a self, this belief
in the oneness ” of things on the basis of an uncriticised
experience, — all these things make modern empirical
monism rather a suggestion than a philosophy. , In some
ways, as you will later see, 1 prize it highly and make use
of its insight. 1 cannot rest content with it.

VIII.

Herewith ends my sketch of the rise of the doctrine of
evolution. Of the positive signiiicance of the doctrine
for philosophy, a later discussion must say something. And
herewith, as sometimes before in my lectures, I lay aside
the attitude of the mere chronicler ; only this time I lay
it aside finally and altogether. We have traveled a long
road in company ; we have now, at last, reached the prob-
lems, of the present day. Heretofore I have tried to tell
a story, — in my own words indeed, generally with my
own illustrations, often in so untechnical a fashion as to
run the risk of leaving my author sadly misunderstood ;
but always with a desire to let the history in some fashion
unfold its own inner meaning, display its own continuity,


THE RISE OF THE DOCTRINE OF EVOLUTION. 806


and furnish its own criticism of the errors and partial
insights which we have encountered. You have seen
throughout, 1 suppose, where my sympathies have been ly-
ing ; at the outset I confessed to you the nature of my own
philosophical creed ; and on several occasions, especially
in recent lectures, I have freely supplemented history by
personal expressions of opinion. But from this time forth
I am no longer to be a chronicler who frequently criti-
cises, but a student who risks his own positive creed for
whatever it may prove to be worth. The substance of this
creed 1 shall in the concluding lectures suggest, with spe-
cial reference to the point that we have now reached in
our study. I shall try to make my doctrine the legitimate
outcome of the reflective process that I have been de-
scribing to you. I am, as you now know, an idealist. I
find Kant’s analysis of our knowledge in its essence the
true one. Kant erred chiefly in what he omitted to ana-
lyze, and in his assumption of those useless things in
themselves. As far as his deeper study of the inner life
of the intellect went, he was on his own ground, and he
knew it wonderfully well, for all his burden of technical
subtleties and for all his pedantic schematism. He held
that space and time are mental. To my mind this is un-
questionable. He held that all judgment is essentially
only an appeal to my own deeper Self, and that all know-
ledge depends on my unity with my deeper Self. This
seems to me the profoundest truth of philosophy. What
Kant did not make clear was what this, my deeper Self,
is. It certainly is n’t my empirically conscious self. It
certainly is n’t the person called by my individual name.

I find in the later idealists many suggestions as to what
this deeper Self is. I am very fond, as you have seen, of
Hegel’s tragic but highly vital formula for the paradox
of consciousness, the struggle of self-knowledge and self-
mastery, as the very life of this passionate deeper Self.

I do not, however, think that Hegel has told the whole
truth about the Self. I find great interest in saying, with


806


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


Sohopenhauer, that to know the Self we must first watch it
as it plays the world-game, not as if the facts of the world
were ever really external to thought, but because the
deeper Self, although one, needs an infinity of sense-facts
to express its will, and writes its ideas in a vast hiero-
glyph, whose characters we call experience. Hence it is
that I love to study science. And when I study science
1 do so naively, submissively, straightforwardly, just as if
the atoms and the suns and the milky-ways, the brains and
the nerve-ceLs and the reflex mechanisms, were all things
in themselves. They are n’t things in themselves ; they
are mere manifestations of the Self. But I must for this
very reason accept them as they come. Nor do I try, as
the romanticists did, to find obvious symbolic interpre-
tations for hastily recorded facts of sense before cau-
tious science has scrutinized these facts thoroughly. I
have confidence enough in the depth of meaning that the
Self has to embody in the world, not to try to guess this
meaning of its hieroglyph before a good deal thereof has
been empirically examined. I do not grow restive in lis-
tening to the story of evolution, merely because I am
well aware that the whole temporal view of things is
largely illusory, and that the true Self, far from *being
subject to time, creates time. I rather delight in this
craft whereby the Self thus hides its true nature in ener-
getic nebulous masses and in flying meteors, pretends to
be absent from the inorganic world, pretends to have de-
scended from relatives of the anthropoid apes, pretends,
in short, to be bounded in all sorts of nutshells ; yes,
plays hide and seek amongst the seons of forgotten time,
when this planet was not, and demurely insists that with-
out phosphorus it could not possibly have learned how to
think. The Self has its comedies as well as its tragedies ;
and these comedies are as far from being mere farces as
'the tragedies are from being the mere horror-plays at
which Schopenhauer’s saints turned pale, until they grew
ineffectively holy, and finally vanished. No, the com-


THE RISE OF THE DOCTBINE OF EVOLUTION. 807

edies are as deep as the tragedies. The Self is as truly
present in evolution as he is in sin and in ignorance.
These are the World-Spirit*s garments that we see him by.
Only we must see patiently, watching every fold and lis-
tening to every rustle of the garment ; for behind this
garment stirs the infinite life, and to each one of us
philosophy says. That art Thou. It is only after a pa-
tient scientific scrutiny has revealed, as is the ease with
the doctrine of evolution, a vast unity in a long series of
phenomena ; a growth like this which links civilized to sav-
age man ; and savage man to an animal ancestry ; aud the
animal ancestry to unicellular organisms ; and these to the
inorganic matter of a primitive earth-crust ; and this crust
to an antecedent fluid earth-ball, glowing, and parting
with its bulky satellite, the moon ; and this glowing ball to
a primitive nebula ; and perhaps this nebula to a previous
manifold streaming of multitudinously clashing meteors,
— it is only then, I say, when such a book as this splen-
did history of life lies open before us, only partly deci-
phered) but still suggestively grasped in its magnificent
outlines, daily more clearly read by science, that we have
a right to ask : Who, then, is this Self, and what man-
ner of life is this be writes in this book, itself merely a
waif from the lost tales of endless time, just as the end-
less time also is merely an illusory form wherein the Self
is pleased to embody and manifest this truth? Its illu-
sory form is not wholly an illusion. For the Self is all
that is, and his world is the chosen outcome of his eter-
nal reality. Beyond all these illusions must lie a mean-
ing deeper than we have ever yet comprehended, higher
than our thought will soon reach. What fragment, then,
of the meaning does the story of evolution convey ? To
give that question a precise definition and to risk a sharp
answer, to make this answer less mystical and more con-
crete than the one now suggested, and to develop before
you something of its proof, will be my business in the
remaining lectures.


PART n.


SUGGESTIONS OF DOCTRINE.


LECTURE X.


KATUBE AND EVOLUTION; THE OUTER WORLD AND ITS
PARADOX.

We begin herewith the task of thinking for ourselves
concerning the problems of philosophy. We shall have
learned little from the preceding historical discussions, if
they have not sfrongly suggested to us that the world of
truth must be something very unlike the naive notions
of its nature that our primitive consciousness gives us.
Empirical science is full of romantic surprises ; but phi-
losophy has shown itself to be far more so. Copernicus
transformed the universe for the natural man ; but Kant’s
‘‘ Copernican discovery ” suggested a far more wondrous
transformation. Our own work we have defined in ad-
vance as an effort to bring into synthesis the thoughts
that the history of modem philosophy has suggested to
us. Following, then, in the paths of Kant and of his
successors, we shall not expect to get glimpses of less
marvelous things than they beheld. What we desire is
that these insights of ours should be reasonable, and
should be adjusted to the facts of life and of nature.


I.

It is the world of the outer order in which our histori-
cal studies have left us. The idealistic interpretation of
this world that I suggested as I closed the last lecture
will not at first sight appear to you more than a mystical
romance. Let it pass, for the moment, as such. I shall
not here begin with it ; 1 shall begin with the assumption
of realistic science, with the hypothesis of our own age,


812 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHT.

namely, that there is a real world, which our senses more
or less truly perceive, which a well-guarded experience
can fruitfuUy investigate, and which our natural science
has been learning in some measure to comprehend. This
assumption is one presupposition of our age. We shall
study it as critically as we can. If it needs a peculiarly
cautious scrutiny, if it lacks in any sense foundation, or
if it must be transformed before it can be accepted, we
shall hope to discover the fact in the course of our
analysis.

That, once granting the foregoing presupposition, the
reflection of a metaphysician should have any rights as
against the stupendous acquisitions of the sciences of ex-
perience, would seem at first glance absurd enough, were
it not that the highest flights of science are precisely the
ones that, to reflective persons, are always most suggestive
of the need of a philosophy. At the close of the remark-
able address of the president of the British Association
at Cardiff (delivered in August, 1891), I find noteworthy
words, concluding a presentation of the recent marvels of
the progress of astronomy : —

“ Astronomy, the oldest of the sciences,” says Dr. Hug-
gins, “ has more than renewed her youth. At no time in
the past has she been so bright with unbounded aspira-
tions and hopes. Never were her temples so numerous,
nor the crowd of her votaries so great. . . . Happy is the
lot of those who are still on the eastern side of life's meri-
dian. . . . Since the time of Newton our knowledge of
the phenomena of nature has wonderfully increased, but
man asks, perhaps more earnestly now than in his days.
What is the ultimate reality behind the reality of the per-
ceptions ? Are they only the pebbles of the beach with
which we have been playing? Does not the ocean of
ultimate reality and truth lie beyond ? ”

Let these words of Dr. Huggins be the text of what is
immediately to follow. The more one becomes absorbed


NATURE AND EVOLUTION.


813


in' the study of the wonders of nature, the nearer must
lie the thought, that these things are not what they seem ;
that space and time, and matter and motion, and life and
our human consciousness, are but the show, the finite em-
bodiment, the temporal manifestation, of a deeper truth.
If this world of experience is indeed real, its reality must
be far profounder than our experience. May not an analy-
sis of the conditions of experience suggest to us wherein
lies this profounder actuality, behind the show, and yet
incorporated in it ?

This world of scientific realism is first of all a world
in space and in time. Space and time are themselves, as
Kant has shown us, such puzzling conditions of natural
law and of human knowledge, that we should run the
risk of complicating hopelessly our inquiry if we here
already dwelt afresh upon their paradoxes. Let us post-
pone such a consideration until later ; let us look rather
at the contents of the space world, as experience shows
them to us. In space we find the universe of the stars
and the nebula', as the world wherein occur all the
changes that fall within our ken. These changes, as
physical science knows them, are, to use the well-known
phrase, “ redistributions ” of matter and of energy. So
far as we know, neither matter nor energy is ever altered
ill quantity. It is their distribution, the form of the
physical world, which changes. As for the general ex-
tent and character of these changes, the astronomer tells
us (to quote once more from Dr. Huggins’s address)
something of the following nature : —

“ The heavens are richly but very irregularly inwrought
with stars ; the brighter stars cluster into well-known
groups upon a background formed of an eiilacement of
streams and convoluted windings and interwined spirals
of fainter stars, which becomes richer and more intricate
in the irregularly rifted zone of the Milky Way.

We who form part of the emblazonry can see only


814 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

the design distorted and confused; here crowded, there
scattered, at another place superposed. The groupings
due to our position are mixed up with those which are
'real.

Can we suppose that each luminous point has no rela-
tion to the others near it than the accidental neighborship
of grains of sand upon the shore, or particles of the wind-
blown dust of the desert ? Surely every star, from Sirius
and Vega down to each grain of the light dust of the
Milky Way, has its present place in the heavenly jjattern
from the slow evolving of its past. We see a system of
systems, for the broad features of clusters and streams
and spiral windings which mark the general design are
reproduced in every part. The whole is in motion, each
point shifting its position by miles every second, though
from the august magnitude of their distances from us and
from each other, it is only by the accumulated movements
of years or of generations that some small changes of
relative position reveal themselves.”

A “system of systems,” then, with the “broad fea-
tures” “ reproduced in every part,” is before us. Its very
outlines suggest a general process of physical evolution.
This impression is after a fashion confirmed by two well-
known considerations, one of which is relatively older in
science, while the other is at the moment in process of
highly novel development through spectroscopic research.
The first consideration relates to the fact that the energy
of this vast material system is now distributed in a man-
ner that, from the nature of the case, is, so to speak, pecu-
liarly unstable, and that appears to involve enormous
future changes of distribution ; while if we look back-
wards we see that there must have been involved in the
past a long and continuous process of a particular type
leading towards the present state. The hot stars, in cold
space far from one another, are just now continually dissi-
pating their heat by radiation. If one inquires into the


NATURE AND EVOLUTION.


816


most probable source of all this heat-euergy, now so waste-
fully poured out, one finds but one highly plausible hypo-
thesis, which has been suggested after a very considerable
study of the phenomena of our own sun. Contraction,
under the infiuence of gravity, most probably furnishes*
the source of this heat in case of each of the great stellar
masses. Contraction, read backwards, and interpreted in
the light of the well-known and now pretty widely con-
firmed nebular hypothesis, indicates that each star must
once have been far larger than it now is, and that the
energy now radiated as heat must once have been stored
up as the energy of position of widely diffused matter,
whose particles gravitated towards one another, and whoso
state is probably indicated to us by such vast masses as
certain of the nebulas show us. Condensation, the con-
version of the energy of position into heat, radiation of
heat, the continued contraction of stellar masses : such is
the process that we now probably see indicated before us.

The recent spectroscopic study of the stars furnishes a
second and subordinate sort of evidence, which adds still
further plausibility to the idea of this unity of process
throughout the heavens. The stars seem, we are told, to
fall into classes, whose physical condition strongly sug-
gests, although it cannot yet prove, just such varieties of
age, just such different stages in the process of condensa-
tion and of cooling, as we might expect to discover in a
universe of a stellar evolution of the sort that the nebular
hypothesis demands. The confirmation from this source,
incomplete though it is, is highly significant.

Granting these hypotheses about the world-system around
us, — hypotheses rendered daily more probable in the light
of that general unity of material structure and of physical
law which the spectroscope so wonderfully reveals, — then
the process that is going on has a character that renders
it very highly problematic. The energy of this system is
being transformed^ as we have seen; but the average


816 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

transformations appear to conform to a type which sug*
gests that the bright world of the hot stars, as it now is,
must be destined to only a finite period of existence.
These transformations, namely, are taking place in one
‘direction. The energy of the stellar world seems to be
“ running down,” that is, to be passing from “ available ”
to unavailable ” forms. The total quantity of energy
in the world remains constant ; but its scrviceableness for
continuing the world -process that we now observe and
admire must be growing momentarily less. We cannot
with serious probability discover any compensating pro-
cess of sufficient magnitude and universality to enable us
to see how the stellar evolution could go on forever, in
any one part of space, however large, without an entire
change in the character of the events involved. A rhythm
of growth and decay, a passing of energy from “ higher ”
to “lower” forms, and then back again from “lower” to
“ higher ” forms, in case that were the law of the process
before us, would suggest an ultimately stable “ moving
equilibrium ” in the universe, whose “ broad features,”
“ reproduced in every part,” would be those of an endless
life of ripening and decaying solar and stellar systems.
But unfortunately, the greater part of the energy involved
in this world of the hot stars and the cold space no sooner
reaches the form of heat energy, shown in the glowing
stellar surfaces themselves, than it is radiated oif into
space ; and there is nothing rhythmical, so far as we can
see, about the results of the process of radiation. The
fashion of this world changes ; and no restoring process
adequately compensates for the change. The stellar uni-
verse continually casts this bread of its energy on to the
waters of infinite space. When shall it be found again ?
To speak of the facts more particularly, each star tends
to cool off, since it is radiating enormous quantities of
heat. What can supply the loss, and keep the star hot ?
The answer is, that the contraction of each stellar mass.


NATUBE AND EVOLUTION.


817


by reason of gravitation, continually converts energy of
position into heat-energy. But in no single case could this
contraction go on indefinitely. The stars that we know
must one and all grow old and die. What could restore
life to the cooling universe ? Collisions of stellar masses ?
These in any one case would bring to pass enormous dif-
fusions of matter, would form fresh nebulse, would begin
the vast processes of single systems once more ; but would
do so only by drawing afresh on the store of the higher
forms of energy (that is, upon the energy of position and
the energy of relative stellar motions). The energy thus
won, and made available, would be radiated off in the
end ; would be lost in the depths of space ; and the pro-
cess would continue only at a loss.

This law of the “ degradation of energy, of the ten-
dency everywhere for higher forms of energy, such as
those of the energy of position and the energy of the mo-
tion of masses of matter, to pass, when transformed, into
the lower form of energy, namely, heat, and then to be
radiated off into space, is a well-known tendency, present
in all sorts of physical processes. Only at a certain loss
can heat-energy be transformed back into higher forms
of energy, even by the best of known devices. Heat wa-
ter, here at the earth’s surface, and you can make steam,
and get the steam to raise bodies to higher levels, and so
get some of your heat-energy stored up once more in forms
that will be later “ available ” for useful service. But you
can do so only at a loss. In order to transform some of
the heat-energy at your disposal into a higher and more
useful form, you have to waste a good deal of heat, by let-
ting it heat up the bodies in the neighborhood of the
water that you use, and by so letting it ultimately diffuse
itself through space by radiation. Lost heat you can’t
restore. Energy you employ, then, only by giving part of
it away as waste heat, and using the remainder to do your
work. That seems to be the way of our universe. Its


818 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

energies continually diffuse themselves through infinite
space in “ degraded ” form as ether vibrations. The stars
waste vastly more than they can give to their planets.
And even what they give to their planets is continually
being lost, as our own earth shows us, through radiation.

If, then, this stellar universe possesses at present any
finite quantity of “ kinetic ” or of “ potential ’’ energy in
available undiffused forms, that is, if the process before
us is confined to any finite portion of space, then the
energy serins to be so tending to lose itself in diffused
form, that in some finite time the whole process must
“ run down.” The evolution must cease.

So, at least, it would seem. The problem as suggested
to us in the other direction is obvious. If this evolution
must sometime cease, how, carrying it backwards, can we
conceive it as having been without a beginning? A
rhythmical process, in which there is a regular alternar
tion of certain conditions, can easily be conceived as hav-
ing always existed. Look back, namely, as far as you
will, and you will find this process present at any moment
of time, in some stage of its endlessly repeated rhythm.
But a physical process that shall have gone on through
endless time, and yet always in the same direction, an
endless wasting of energy by the continual conversion of
higher into lower forms, — how hard to conceive of such
a process as having already gone on forever ! The only
plausible hypothesis that makes such a conception ])ossible
seems at firib sight to be the one discussed by Professor
W. K. Clifford, in his brilliant lecture on “ The First and
Last Catastrophe.” ^ In order to follow Clifford’s thought,
let us fix our attention for a moment on the case of the
earth. If, says Clifford, we follow back the probable con-
dition of the earth itself, we find that, according to cer-
tain computations, this planet must have solidified a lim-

^ See his Lectures and Essays^ vol. i. pp. 191-227 ; in particular,
the passages, pp. 220, 221.


NATURE AND EVOLUTION.


819


ited number of millions of years since. Before that, it
was cooling as a liquid.” And before this again, further
computations would show that, at a certain time, the earth
had passed from the gaseous to the liquid state. And
then, continues Clifford : —

“ If we went further back still we should probably find
the earth falling together out of a great ring of matter
surrounding the sun, and distributed over its orbit. The
same thing is true of every body of matter ; if we trace
its history back, we come to a certain time at which a ca-
tastrophe took place ; and if we were to trace back the
history of all the bodies in the universe in that way, we
should continually see them separating up into smaller
parts. What they have actually done is to fall together
and get solid. If we could reverse the process we should
see them separating and getting fluid ; and, as a limit to
that, at an indefinite distance in past time, we should find
that all these bodies would be resolved into molecules,
and all these would be fl3ring away from each other.
There would be no limit to that process, and we could
trace it as far back as ever we liked to trace it. So that
on the assumption — a very large assumption — that the
present constitution of the laws of geometry and mechanics
has held good during the whole of past time, we should be
led to the conclusion that, at an inconceivably long time
ago, the universe did consist of ultimate molecules, all
separate from one another and approaching one another.
Then they would meet together and form a ^at number
of small, hot bodies. Then you would have the process
of cooling going on in these bodies, exactly as we find it
going on now. But you will observe that we have no evi-
dence of such a catastrophe as implies a beginning of the
laws of nature.”

Clifford, as you will see from his words, does not regard
this hypothesis as more than a very provisional one. All
that we are seeking for the moment, however, is a plausi-


820 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

ble way of regarding the world that now is as continuously
linked with what was, and with what will be, by a world
process that extends indefinitely both towards the past
and towards the future. Towards the future, as we have
seen, it is very hard to conceive the present process as
indefinitely extended without coming to what Clifford
himself (page 224 of the same lecture} describes thus : —

“ If we were to travel forward, . . . and consider
things as falling together, we should , come finally to a
great central mass, all in one piece, which would send out
waves of h^t through a perfectly empty ether, and grad-
ually cool itself down. As this mass got cool it would be
deprived of all life and motion; it would be just an
enormous frozen block in the middle of the ether.”

In the past, again, extending the present process back-
wards, we come, as Clifford has shown us, to a condition
of greater and greater diffusion of matter, to a state where
more and more energy took the form of energy of position,
and where there was less and less of the present condi-
tion of stellar systems with highly heated solar surfaces.
In both cases our effort to conceive the World-process as
one. process is founded, as Clifford points out, on the
“ large assumption ” that the “ present constitution of the
laws of geometry and mechanics has held good during the
whole of past time,” or in other words that the world is
what it now seems to be to our more exact scientific con-
sciousness. The question now is whether the conception
that we thus get is an essentially coherent one.

At the present stage of our inquiry it would be mere
Philistinism to dwell, as many are disposed to do, upon
the disheartening notion of the past and future state of
our universe which these considerations and hypotheses so
far suggest. Our criticism of the presuppositions of mod-
em inquiry will have, in due time and place, to study the
moral and religious aspect of the real world. But just
now we dare not call in question hypotheses as to nature^


NATURE AND EVOLUTION. 821

merely because they do not meet the longings of our
hearts. Our criticism must go deeper.

Turning back at once, however, to the theoretical as-
pect of the matter, we find that this conception of the
real world is, as we have already observed, at all events
a very highly problematic one. We may well doubt the
ultimate coherence of these our empirical notions of the
physical world when thus driven, as it were, to their limits,
when pressed into service to define a possible world-pro-
cess that shall include the known phenomena, and that
shall still be continuous and boundless in tin^ Yet not
in vain will have been our efforts so far if we take into
account a consideration that just now becomes highly im-
portant for us.

There is, namely, no more useful expcriiiient in philo-
sophy than just such an effort as the one now before us,
to universalize our conceptions of things, to try what be-
comes of them when we do pass to the limit, and suppose
them true for all tlie world and for all time. Such an
experiment often is for philosophy what a crucial test in
a laboratory is for physics. It decides for us, namely,
what sort of conception we are dealing with ; and tliat is
why these speculations are worth our while. A concep-
tion that could consistently be thus universalized, that
could be used to define an absolute or a self-completed
world-process, that thus could have an essentially bound-
less application, might be a conception of an objective
and well-founded type, true of the real worft apart from
our merely human point of view. But a conception that
you can’t universalize, that seems to contradict itself, or
that gives rise to highly suspicious incongruities, so soon
as you press it to the limit, so soon as you suppose it t^l
apply semper et uhique^ is thereby shown to be in all prob-
ability a conception of an essentially human character or
else of no world-wide objectivity. It may have truth
about it, but this truth will in part be due to our own


822


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


limited point of view, to our particular station in the uni«
verse. This notion will be, so to speak, a mortal concep*
tion of things, not a conception of a really eternal truth.
For example : the notion of the earth as supported by
an elephant that stood on a tortoise was such an essen-
tially transient and merely human conception, just because
it was derived from the analogy of a very special and
limited experience of ours, and was obviously incapable of
true universalization. Seeking to pass to the limit, you
found yourself in a world whose law was that all things
needed su^ort from beneath, while you could never find
a real supporter in the world, whether for the earth or
for anything else. For any supporter in your world-series
would be such only in so far as he was first conceived
to be supported. And so as no unsupported supporter
could be found in a series thus defined, while an unsup-
ported supporter would be essentially needed somewhere
to give all above him a real foundation, the defined series
would be worthless for the purpose of explaining the
earth’s apparent stability. Very different, however, is
the conception (a purely ideal one, to be sure) of the
stability of a gravitative system in otherwise absolutely
empty space, — a system that should consist, say, of a sun
and a planet, both moving with perfect freedom about
their common centre of gravity, both uninfluenced by
disturbances from without, and both rigid and homogene-
ous spherical bodies. Such a system, although it does not
exist in our physical world, can be conceived as existing.
Such a system, moreover, under the law of gravity, would
give us an endless rhythmic change of position on the
part of its members, the small planet revolving in an
established orbit about its large sun, or rather both mov-
ing about their common centre. The motion in question
would be a stable one. There would be no difiiculty in
predicting the position, velocity, and acceleration of the
planet at any time, from its position and motion at any


NATURE AND EVOLUTION,


328


other. The possible positions of the planet in its orbit
would form a closed curve. One complete cycle of the
system would exhaustively exemplify all, and would not
be in need of a support or explanation from any source
outside the system. The motion in an universe so consti-
tuted would be, as defined, essentially endless. In this
empty space no physical condition could have produced or
begun it ; and nothing could end it. The conception o£
such an universe is essentially self-completed, and so as
an universe possible. Such an universe, then, although it
is not real, might be real. The universe wh^e the stabil-
ity of things was only to be explained by such a notion
as that of the earth supported by elephant and tortoise,
carCt be real; for either elephant and tortoise, as con-
ceived, would not be real supporters at all, or else if they
were, then, like the conceived earth itself, they would need
support ere they could become supporters, whilst in the
world as so conceived they could find no ultimate support
whatever,

I exemplify ' this rather abstruse-seeming distinction
between essentially coherent and essentially incoherent
notions of the universe in its wholeness, not for the sake
of involving my argument in unnecessary subtlety, but
for the sake of preparing the way for what seems to me a
not unimportant step forwards in our discussion.


n.

No one doubts the validity of the foregoing inductions
of physical science when judged by their own presupposi-
tions, and taken within their chosen limits. But they are
confessedl}' inductions about the world as it seems. As
they are originally made, they therefore do not profess to
give us a theory about the ultimately real world. It is our
own reflective interest that has now suggested to us the
mere experiment of seeing whether the conceptions that
these inductions involve are capable of being universalized,


824 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

of being pressed to the limit, and whether they remain
coherent when this is hypothetically done. The purpose
of the experiment is to see whether the world as it seems
to outer experience can really be viewed as a fair speci-
men of the world as it really is.

Supposing this process of the aggregation of matter
and the radiation of energy into space to be .a specimen
of the ultimately real process of nature, can we, with Clif-
ford, #*egard this as a process that, uncertainties apart,
can without incoherence be conceived as boundless in
time? As an example of a hypothetical process that
caw be so conceived, we have just had the case of the
ideal system of rigid sun and planet, alone in space and
changeless in inner physical structure. Their rhythm
would be a perfect one. Their motion would occur in
closed cycles. Beginning or end of their process would
be physically unintelligible. An universe that contained
them and them only would be logically as well as physi-
cally complete. No evolution would occur there ; and
none would be needed or conceivable. Is our seeming
World that is now one of a “ running-down ” energy, con-
stant in quantity, but such that it is tending to “ degrada-
tion ” in form, a world that we can coherently conceive as
eternal ?

Difficulties at once occur to us. Let us put them as
simply as possible. A process called aggregation shall
have been endlessly going on. What stage has it now
reached? The answer is, one of very imperfect aggre-
gation. The masses of matter now coherent in the world
before us are, despite their imposing size, after all com-
paratively small. Their number is, meanwhile, compara-
tively speaking, very great. Many millions of suns, — no
sun in sight that we are forced to regard as after all so
very much larger than our own sun. Sonie stars may be
several hundreds or thousands of times the mass of our
own sun. None, however, are big enough to show os


NATURE AND EVOLUTION.


825


across the interstellar spaces any disk. What we see
are mere points of light. Where instead of points we see
large nebulae, of considerable apparent area, we get evi-
dence of the presence of diffused gas and perhaps, also, of
meteor - swarms, not of highly aggregated and still ex-
tremely vast masses of matter. As to the significance of
this fact, there is indeed nothing exact, as yet, about our
present consideration. So far it .merely arouses our sus-
picion. If aggregation has been going on endlessljll^ there
ought to be, one would think, at least a few prodigious
centres of aggregation, as big, say, in angular size, when
seen even across these prodigious spaces, as the larger
nebulae appear to us, and still as coherent at least as" is
the mass of Sirius. The small average size of the suns is
precisely what one might expect t6 see if at some finite
time in the past aggregation had begun hereabouts in
space, the nebular gaseous matter, or the meteoric swarms,
having at the beginning of that time filled pretty evenly
our part of space. Hut this is not what our hypothesis,
carried, to the limit, pretends to suggest. Universal
aggregation, going on wherever there was matter, — this
is what shall have filled the endless past. And still, —
this incomplete result !

1 repeat, I do not at all exaggerate the force of so inex-
actly formulated a consideration. Clifford’s way of stat-
ing his hypothetical case of a look into the past might al-
ready seem to have forestalled our objection. But I give
it this form by way of introducing later a more serious
reflection.

Meanwhile, a second doubt comes to mind, and this
time with regard to the energy of our world. It shall
have tended always towards the final state of indefinite
degradation and dispersion. And yet there is so much of
it still available I ” These stars are so hot, this store
of energy, wasted for an infinite time, shall have left us
after all still so far from the frozen termination of all


826


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHT.


evolution! Is not this ino^mpleteness another cause of
suspicion ? Can our conceptions thus be fully universal-
ized without a curious inconsistency ? Ought not a pro-
cess that from all eternity has taken but one direction to
have been completed long ago ?

But I hasten to correct these inexact considerations by
opposing to them Clifford’s very simple way of stating
the case for the inner coherence of our present concep-
tions #f natural law. What “the bodies of the universe ’’
“ have actually done,” he says, “ is to fall together and
get solid. If we could reverse the process we should see
them separating, . . . and as a limit ... at an indefinite
distance in past time we should find that all these bodies
would be resolved into molecules, and ” [if we read the
process backwards] “ all these would be flying away from
each other. There would be no limit to that process, and
we could trace it as far back as ever we liked to trace it.”
In this way, thinks Clifford, we should get a definable
endless process for the physical universe. That we our-
selves happen to live and to be sentient just at the mo-
ment when the infinite process has reached this stage, is,
after all, not more marvelous than that we live at all.
Infinite past and future time being once assumed, we our-
selves must of course come somewhere in the process, and
we come just^where we actually find ourselv(»s, the pro-
cess being in a peculiarly criti<^l and transitional stage.

But it is not our own existence that is just here the
problem. It is the real world which thus conceived has,
when viewed in time, a very singular character. There is
a stage in its endless life, when, for a finite period, which
we may call E (meaning thereby the portion of time during
which what we call processes of evolution are possible),
there is a considerable, but still not an extreme aggregar
tion of its matter, and yet a considerable, though not an
extreme retention of energy of position on the part of its
constituent masses. During this time suns and systems


NATURE AND EVOLUTION.


827


form, stars are hot, and plan^^ary life may, as on our earth,
be possible. Before this period lies an endless time P, a
past when aggregation was small, but when there were
nebulae, meteor swarms, yes, if you go far enough back,
separated molecules. These had much energy of position,
or of motion, or of both. They had not yet, on the aver*
age, converted much of it into heat. There were in those
times no processes of evolution possible. Then beyond
and after the time E there is to lie an endless ffture F,
wherein once more the matter is aggregated but cold, the
energy is dispersed through space in the ether, and what
we call evolution is over. The result is an absolute divi-
sion of infinite time into the three parts : —

< P 1 E I F >

and this division shall be not merely onr private and finite
interpretation of the thing, but the truth of nature. The
world of high temperatures, of large and rapidly condens-
ing masses, of planets and suns, of all the complex nat-
ural processes, electrical, magnetic, chemical, connected
with the life of solar systems, — this world is an excep-
tion in the wastes of infinite time. P contains nothing
of the sort. F contains nothing of the sort. Only the
select region E, of the temporal process, gives birth to
such things. ^

Now a natural process that is essentially confined to one
part of infinite time, ana that finds no place elsewhere,
is the real anomaly with which wo have so far to deal.
We wanted to conceive nature as one process. We have
really conceived it as a drama in three acts, essentially
separate in physical character from one another, despite
the continuity of motions that joins them. This anomaly
needs, at all events, further scrutiny. This is an odd
world that we have got ourselves into. Uow odd, we shall
in some measure comprehend only after I have taxed your
patience with yet one more subtlety, to which I now invite
your brief, but very careful attention.


828


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHT.


m.

Whatever other difficulties this conceived world may or
may not contain, it is sure that its boundlessness in time,
and the fashion of its presence in boundless space, are
of a sort very different from those which we before as-
cribed to the conceived simple gravitative system consist-
ing of two bodies. In the latter world, namely, there was
always going on a certain cyclical process of one fixed
type. The sun and its conceived planet were somehow
there in space. Looking back as far as we liked, we
should always find the pair occupying some one of the
determinate relative positions that they pass through
during their endlessly repeated cycles. Looking back-
wards or forwards, therefore, we should not be driven by
any special physical problems of this conceived world
to puzzle ourselves about the sense in which there is any
real infinity of space and time at all. It is true, as every-
body has heard, that there are obvious and serious difficul-
ties in the way of conceiving how space and time . are to
be really infinite actualities, — how, off yonder, there can
actually exist parts of space infinitely remote from us, or
how, looking backwards, we can say that there ever did
occur events an infinitely long time ago. But now, as we
see, the worl(!^of our closed cycle of planet revolving
about sun suggests by no marli^d physical peculiarity of
its processes any question about this reality of infinite
space and infinite time as such. We have called its exis-
tence boundless in time. We mean by that only that its
supposed existence would seem to be as endless as is
time, — not less so, not more so. If there is any trouble
about conceiving of infinite time, that is the fault of
time, not of this simple mechanical rhythm of planet
swinging about sun. Whatever endless time means, that
the rhythm of this conceived simple system is adequate
to fill. Even so, too, fn case of space. We have supposed


NATURE AND EVOLUTION.


829


OUT sun and planet to be alone in boundless space. Just
what an actually boundless fpace is, it is hard to define.
One soon comes to suspect, when one tries a definition,
that one is dealing with a self-contradictory notion. But
be that as it may, the conceived sun and planet, there to-
gether in space, require space to exist in, but have by
hypothesis no physical relations to infinite space, do not
trouble themselves, as it were, about whether space is in-
finite or no. If a really infinite space can exist, then the
sun and planet can be in it ; but for their physical rela-
tions they require only the finite bit of space within their
own masses and within the planet’s orbit. The existence
of such a system, then, is to be called essentially bound-
less in time just because its physical properties drive us to
no assumptions about what boundless time is and means,
but are processes that, as being rhythmical and self-com-
pleted, arouse no question as to how or when they could
have begun, and are therefore boundless in whatever sense
time itself proves to be boundless. This same existence
is again intelligible as a conceived fact in boundless space,
because, whatever boundless space means, this process, as
being a definite and limited one, could find its place in
such a space.

But now (and here is the important point), the world of
the “ running-down ” energy, and of the endlessly consoli-
dating matter, difPers from this simple world of tlie sun
and planet, in that its exftteuce has, as conceived, an essem
tially physical relation to an actually infinite space and
time, so that its processes cannot be conceived as bound-
less in time, merely because they suggest to us, like the
sun and planet, no possible beginning ; but can only be
jonceived as boundless by first meeting and overcoming
all the difficulties as to an actually infinite space and time.
Infinite space and time as such become, in such a theory,
matters, not of dim possibility, but rather parts of a phys-
ical hypothesis. They render this physical hypothesis.


880


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHT,


therefore, peculiarly hard to conceive with congruity.
This is no place for dwelling in full upon what these diffi-
culties about infinite space and time really are. I am not
here setting forth at length a philosophy, but only sug-
gesting one. What I have to point out, however, may be
indicated by returning to a former analogy. I have said
that this world, where all the processes take the one direc-
tion towards the consolidation of matter, is very unlike the
simple and rhythmical world of the conceived sun and
planet. What. I now have to point out is that this our
world of the endlessly consolidating matter, if taken as
an absolutely real world, would much resemble in one
feature that other conceived world where the elephant
rested on the tortoise. The trouble with that world was
that support was assumed to be needed, and yet none was
ever defined. The trouble with this world is that the
store of available energy at any moment, lacking both
permanency in itself and any tendency to get, through
rhythmic processes, a periodic restoration of its previous
quantity, sends us backwards endlessly in time for a
definition of the very physical process and constitution
to which its present quantity shall have been due. Now
some sort of endless regress in time is in one sense forced
upon us by every physical process. The sim^e rliythm
of the sun and planet also sent us back en *essly into
time; not in order that we should find out what soil;
of process it was (for that we learned from any oii(3 cy-
cle), but only in order that we should see how such a
process as that could not be conceived to have a pliysical
beginning. But this process of the endlessly consolidating
world, as Clifford defines it, sends us back into time much
as the earth, elephant and tortoise series would send us off
into space. Would it be any answer to an objector t8
say, in case of the elephant and tortoise series : — Oh, the
tortoise, too, is supported by another creature, say a giant ;
and he by a tree ; that by something else ; and so on ad


NATURE AND EVOLUTION.


331


infinitum ? No, for thus no support would to all infinity
ever begin to be explained. Even so, although a perfectly
rhythmical and complete physical process can easily, with-
out incongruity, be regarded as unbounded when we look
backwards, — a boundless regress where, on the other
handball the character of the process changes as we go
backwards, and changes, wholly without rhythm or any
sort of reversal of type, in one general direction, does and
must involve incongruity.

What incongruity* may now be finally and succinctly
pointed out. Any moment of time, however remote, must
actually have been passed through in order that our con-
solidating world should have reached its present ^tate.
To any such past moment, would correspond some aotual
physical state of our supposed world. Far back in time
its state would have been one of greater and greater dis-
integration. Passing to the limit we can say that our
hypothesis would suppose, (1) that at an infinite past
time the particles of matter now together in the stars
must have been infinitely distant from one another ; and
(2) that, since every state, even the present one, presup-
poses and demands all the previous states of this un-
rhythmical process as physically necessary antecedents,
the present state of the universe could not be unless that
anteceden^tate of the mutually infinite remoteness of its
parts actually did precede.

The idea of infinite remoteness, as being an actual
physical fact, is, however, notoriously hard to conceive*
It is one thing to say that our space is such that, however
far you go out into its depths, you could always go further*
To mention that character of space is merely to state a
fact of our space conception, — a fact that nobody has
any trouble to conceive. It is quite another thing to try
to conceive a state of the world in which thc^e are actu'
ally two particles of matter that shall be an infinite num-
ber of leagues apart. The conception of the boundless-


882


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


ness of space is, in the first case, a mere expression of our
actual failure to conceive of a boundary. This failure is
a fact of immediate observation for our consciousness.
But if I say, in the second case : There are, in a certain
state of the world, two particles of matter, p and and
the distance between these two particles is an infinite dis'
tance, I contradict myself. For the line pq which joins
these particles must by hypothesis end in one direction at
p and in the other direction at — in other words must
be finite.

And yet our present hypothesis as to the real world
demands of us the assertion that such a contradictory state
of things must have been real in order that the present
state of the world should have come to pass.

Clifford himself, in stating the hypothesis, avoids our
present incongruity by saying only that, in case of the
endlessly consolidating world, the behavior of things is
such that if we go back as far as ever we like, we shall
find the particles of matter further and further apart.
But unfortunately such a statement does not exhaust the
difficulty in‘ case this seeming process has always been an
absolutely real one. Fixing our attention once more on
two particles, p and we see that, by the hypothesis, at a
time (^i) they were a certain distance apart and that
an earlier time (^2) were yet further aparP(say a dis-
tance (^2)9 and so on indefinitely. But now in order that
they should reach the distance apart that we have called
they must before have been actually at the distance from
another that we have called c?2* Passing to the limit,
then, we have to say that in order to reach the less dis-
tances they must universally have been first at the greater
distances, so that unless one presupposes the greater as
real, and so at the limit, the infinite distance as actually
precedent, the finite distances cannot have been reached.
It is n’t merely the case, then, that we are dealing with
an hypothesis of a process that, however far we choose to


NATURE AND EVOLUTION.


883


follow it, proves to be for our consciousness, and from our
point of view, unlimited. The trouble is that unless we
first conceive the unlimited distances as real, the limited
distances can never be reached. Therefore; if the process
is what it seems to be, namely, an absolutely real one, the
unlimited distances must have been real. Our infinite in
this case is n’t the indefinite beyond that we do not attain,
however far back we go. It is the impossible that yet
must have been actually and absolutely attained before
any of the states of the world that we experience could
have been reached. Only by passing through this im-
possible infinite distance from one another, can the parti-
cles p and q have reached the conceivable finite distances
from one another.

The parallel between this supposed real world and that
of the elephant and tortoise is now fairly plain. The
true supporter of the elephant-tortoise earth must, f/he
exists at all, be infinitely remote and yet real. Without
him elephant and tortoise, by hypothesis, could not sup-
port anything, being themselves unsupported. Even so,
the true antecedent of our present physical world must,
on Clifford’s hypothesis, be a state in which the space
relations of the smallest particles of matter were relations
of infinite Umoteness from one another. Dropping out
the consideration of the infinite time, we can then say in
absolute terms that, on this hypothesis, there was for-
merly a real state of the world in which its ultimate par-
ticles were at infinite distances from one another. Is this
not as if we said of the elephant and tortoise : There is,
at an infinite distance, that which supports the whole
series and them ?

I repeat, upon the more technical aspect of the difficul-
ties regarding infinite space and time, I have not here
further to dwell. What we have found is simply this : —

1. There are possible physical processes that you can
conceive as universalized, as essentially boundless in time.


884 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

as existent in boundless space, without any effort to define
what the positive nature of a really infinite time and
space are. Such processes are the ones known as cycli-
cal.” In case of these processes, the definition of one
cycle involves the description of all. A “ cyclical ” physi-
cal process, conceived as isolated in space, could not
change its character through any physical cause. How-
ever long, therefore, you followed it forwards or back-
wards, you would find only the same thing repeated. In
this conception there is nothing difficult. Such a process
you would call essentially endless ; meaning thereby that
whatever endless time really means, and whatever its ulti-
mate nature turns out to be, the processes in question
would be adequate to that endlessness. Of such processes
our supposed sun and planet example is an illustration.
There is no incongruity involved in universalizing such
processes.

2. But there are, on the other hand, possible physical
processes that you cannot thus universalize, without pre-
supposing infinite space and time as being themselves, in
all their infinity, elements in the definition of certain
states of the physical process in question. Of such phys-
ic^al processes the world pf the elephant^ and tortoise
series, and the world of Clifford’s hypothesis are possible
examples, so soon as you suppose them to be not seeming
but genuinely real worhls. Common sense will at once
say that as we have no notion of infinite space and time
as actual physical wholes, we can have no right thus to
universalize such processes, in case we meet with special
examples of them in our experience. Philosophy goes
deeper, and declares that thus to universalize such physi-
cal process involves us in incongruity, involves the presup-
position of a real past state of the world whose very defi-
nition is self-contradictory.

The result, so far, is that the world of the endlessly con-
solidating matter can’t be the ultimately real world, but


NATURE AND EVOLUTION.


835


must be only a seeming world whose anomalous character
is due to our private and human point of view. Seen as
we see it, the empirical truth about matter and energy
must be only the show of a deeper truth. This appai'ent
law of the endless consolidation of the universe must be
only a fragmentary aspect. These stars and “ intertwined
spirals ” and “ convoluted windings ” of stars, these hypo-
thetical moleciUes that have been forever falling nearer
and nearer together, this process that has been forever
taking one direction without reacliing as yet its goal, —
all these things must belong to the show of reality. The
substance, the soul of it all, must lie behind. The real
world process cannot thus be essentially a paradox, essen-
tially incomplete, fundamentally absurd. It must have at
least as much unity and self-consistency as a cyclical ”
physical process. When we see it as we do, in this ragged
and unintelligible shape, that must be because, in our ex-
perience, we are but playing with the pebbles on the
beach.” The ‘‘ ocean of ultimate reality and truth ” must
lie beyond.

In all the foregoing I have not wished to create diffi-
culties ; I have merely found them where they exist. Nor
have I wished to make light of the world of our modern
realism. On the contrary, as I repeat, those who study
this world most devotedly are often the first to acknow-
ledge not only its mystery, but its probable fragmentari-
ness, its suggestion of a hidden truth beyond. “ Unknow-
able,” some investigators call this real world on account
of such paradoxes. It is, however, precisely the men who
thus call reality unknowable, who seem to me to make
light of the serious business of science. What one learns
from such puzzles is not that our scientific experience is
untrue, but that it is n’t the revealer of the whole truth,
— not that matter and energy and their laws are illusions,
but that they are partial revelations only of what, seen
from a higher point of view, would have to get the unity


886 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY/

and completeness that our human point of view so far
lacks. These puzzles, then, do not turn us away from the
world of science ; they rather encourage us to philoso-
phize as to the meaning of the presuppositions that lie be-
neath science. If you find a significant limitation in
your knowledge, philosophy bids you scrutinize the bases
of your knowledge to see what in the human point of view
it is that is the source of this limitation.

Clifford, whose way of stating the hypothesis of the law
of endless consolidation we have been criticising, was him-
self one of the first to insist, although for other reasons,
upon the probable inadequacy of this hypothesis. Him-
self one of the most admirable minds of recent British
thought, he was restlessly at work, during his brief career,
at the task of criticising the fundamental postulates of
science. That the laws of physics and even of geometry
are probably not ultimate truths about the nature of
things, he used to argue with all the clearness of the ma-
thematician and all the reflective skill of the born specu-
lator. Our space and time, with their paradoxical infini-
ties, he used to regard as very suspicious appearances. In
criticising him I have therefore, after all, only borrowed
certain of his own methods«of thinking. He was his own
keenest critic. He dwelt on the borderland of philosophy.
It is a source of deep regret that he never lived to enter
into that land with the powers which he had been training
so skillfully. He would there have proved himself a
great conqueror.

IV.

The considerations of the foregoing discussion must
have been wearisome enough in their abstractness. 1
hasten to suggest their more concrete bearings.

The problem of the outer order, as we conceive it in
these modern days, is the problem of the true relation of
nature and evolution. The question of the previous dis-
cussion has been only a highly abstract formulation of


KATTJR£ AND EVOLUTION.


887


this problem. The seeming world, as we find it in space
and time, is one whose matter and energy are permanent
in quantity, while their distribution is endlessly changing.
The changes of distribution going on about us on this
planet have been, for what we call a long time, favorable
to evolution. These same changes will, however, so far as
we can see, lead to the ultimate extinction of evolution on
our planet. The question arises, Does the same relation
between the nature of the physical world and the evolu-
tion, the progress, of the significant features of its varidus
parts, hold true universally? The heavens, too, in their
wholeness, suggest to us, from one point of view, a vast
process of cosmical evolution. Examined more carefully,
however, their physical phenomena seem to show that this
evolution is but a transient stage of the endless world-
process. The further question arises hereupon : Can we
form a conception of the world -process in its true and
entire nature, and so make out how it is actually related
to what we call evolution? To this question we have
found .thus far only such an answer as suggests that the
true world, whose mere show is embodied in these physi-
cal events now before our eyes, is at all events very in-
adequately represented by tj^em. For the solution of our
problem, if it is to find any, we must search deeper.

In what direction we have to search, our argument it-
self very readily suggests. .It is plain that in what we
said about the incongruity of such physical conceptions
as involve the existence of an actually infinite space and
time, and of actually infinite distances between bodies, we
have touched close upon those considerations concerning
the objectivity of space and time themselves which we
have now learned to associate with the name of Kant.
What if the foregoing paradoxes of the world of the
“ running down ” energy, and of the endlessly consolidat-
ing matter, were due to the fact that we have been try-
ing to give an hypothetical account of an absolute world*


888


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


process in terms of human forms of conception and of
experience? What if the truly complete world-process
does not occur in time at all, but can only be conceived
“under the form of eternity/* as Spinoza would have
said ? “ Such existence,” said Spinoza, speaking of eter-
nal truths, “ cannot be explained by means of continuance
or time.” What if both the permanent laws and energy
of nature on the one hand, and wliat we know as the pro-
cess of evolution on the other, were but the temporal sign
of something whose significance is to be otherwise con-
ceived ? Doubtful phrases these, one may say ; yet, after
all, what more doubtful than the ultimate truth of a
physical world in which occur such paradoxical processes
as we have been examining?

On the other hand, what more obvious than that if one
conceives man as the product of a physical evolution of
the type that we have heretofore been discussing, if one
says that a planet-crust, at a particular stage of its his^
tory, brought forth man, while the heat of a slowly dying
sun sustained his life, as it had done the lives of his
countless animal ancestors before him, — if one holds all
this to be true, then one must indeed look with equal won-
der upon the power of such a creature to conceive at all
of the real universe, or of the eternal, and upon the
naivete that trusts, without analysis and criticism, his no-
tions of space and of time, his natural perceptions of the
outer world, as if they were sure to be well-founded. The
marvel of marvels, that this being, evolved from inorganic
nature, from the stuff ^nd the energy of a cooling solar
system, — this mortal bit of mechanism — should after all
know^ should look forwards and backwards to eternity,
and learn so much of the nature that gave him birth, —
such a marvel surely calls for a deeper scrutiny. The
world where such things appear is surely not what it
seems ; and the lesson is that, in the critical study of just
this knowing power of ours, in the scrutiny of our most


NATURE Alb EVOLUTION. 889

fundamental ideas, is to be found, if anywhere, the key
to these mysteries. We have been so far inquiring into
this or that truth. Now, more than ever, we see the need
of assailing the problem. What is truth itself? What are
our powers to know ? And what validity have our ideas
of the world and of its endless life ?

And thus we are prepared, by the paradoxes of the
outer order, to return for awhile, in order to seek a solu-
tion of them, to the recesses of the inner life, there to
examine our conceptions of the world once more with a
truly ]>hilosophical reflectiveness.

Does our result so far seem nothing but a sense of the
mystery of things ? Then remember at least that, as all
modern thought has been teaching us from the start, the
outer world is n’t merely foreign to us. What we call the
dark external universe yonder is, after all, our universe,
even when we only go so far as to doubt or to wonder
about it. Whatever the success or the failure of this or
that idealistic theory, tlie permanent lesson of modern
idealism has been that the inner and the outer worlds
must have organic relations. If one of them is the world
of the thinker, the other is the object of his thought.
Ignorant as he may be of numberless facts in it, it has to
echo somehow, even from its remotest heavens, the magic
words that utter his deepest beliefs about it. Philosophy
promises help, just because, when it speaks of the world
whose mystery man’s mind longs to penetrate, it also
speaks of the mind itself whose nature it is to acknow-
ledge, yes, and in acknowledging, just so far to penetrate
the mystery. For, as we shall hereafter see, I cannot
recognize a rational problem even as a problem, unless I
already know a good deal about the object whose nature
gives me this problem. What I definitely recognize as
unknown must have such a knowable nature as enables
me to make sure that it is unknown. An object of my
conscious and rational ignorance is still an object, deter-


840 THE SPIBIT OF HODEBM FHILOSOPHT.

mined as such for me by my thought, and so in one aspect
known to me, even in order that in some other aspect it
may be unknown. Ignorance, if only it be definite igno-
rance, is sure to be partial knowledge. In so far as our
study has made us aware of the mysteries that are in the
world, it has already taught us much about ithe world.
We don’t know, the precise value of the ratio of the cir-
cumference of a cirele to its diameter. That is a good
example of a rational mystery. For it is a definite, a
highly scientific mystery. But see, we don’t know this
ratio just because we do know enough about the nature
of a circle to be sure that this ratio is absolutely unstate-
able in any finite form. Well, even so, if philosophy
shows us in any definite way how mysterious the world
is, that will only be because philosophy, will tell us enough
about the true nature of the world to make clear to us
where the mysteiy lies. Vague mysteries are the amuse-
ment of fools. Precise and rational mysteries are, in one
sense, the goal of science. In defining our relation to
nature, then, in making clear the issues of science, philo-^
Sophy will aid us, not to solve all mysteries, as a dream
might pretend to do, but to know where the deepest prob-
lems of the world lie, and thereby to show us something
of the very essence of the reality which we have a right
to find obscure.

It is in this spirit that I shall in the next lecture under-
take to give you, in brief, my reasons for holding that an
idealistic interpretation of the physical world, and in par-
ticular the theory of one absolute Self as the truth em-
bodied in both nature and mind, is a doctrine that, with-
out any presumptuous effort to transcend our humao
powers, may be explained and established.


LECTURE XI.


BEALITT AND IDEALISM : — THE INNER WORLD AND ITS
MEANING.

Such brief essays as I am to embody in these untech-
nical discussions must needs fail somewhere. I shall be
glad, at all events, if they do not fail in frank state-
ment of opinion. I do not want to weary you with bare
assurances ; 1 do not want to leave you with nothing to
remember but my own word that in case I had time, 1
wmld expound my meaning and my reason for it ; but 1
do want, above all things, in so far as 1 see any glimpse
of truth, to risk in your presence a plain confession of it.
If I must come short of the purpose of these lectures, let
it be ill technical exactness, since once for all that belongs
elsewhere; but let me not fail of showing you that I
have convictions, such as they are, whether I can make
you agree with them or not. I do not know how you
have found it, but for my part, as I have read the writ-
ings of some of the modem authors whose intelligence
and caution I most value, I am frequently tormented
with their tenderness of conscience about risking a state-
ment of their personal beliefs. They have been driven to
take this attitude, no doubt, through the warning which
is given them by the traditional dogmatism of certain the-
ologians. Longing to escape from the over-assurance and
intolerance of such, the writers to whom 1 now refer lay
more stress upon liberality, caution, patience, and learn-
ing, than even upon courage. 1 hope that I do not under-
value liberality or caution, and I am sure that I long for
vastly more learning and patience than 1 shall ever pos-


842


THE SPIRIT OP MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


sess ; but, after all, it is what a man by chance believes,
not what he does not believe, that enables him to be of
service to his fellows as a thinker; and whatever frag-
ment of knowledge one may possess will surely remain
undiscovered unless he sometime ventures assertion of his
temperament for whatever it may happen to be worth.

The business of the present lecture is to tell you in
what sense and for what reasons I am an idealist. In the
next following lectures, returning to the study of the outer
order, I shall try to explain how, in consequence, I ven-
ture to concede our human relationships to that physical
world from which we have sprung and of which we are a
part. In my concluding lecture I shall set forth what
practical consequences I conceive to flow from my philo-
sophy concerning that which constitutes the vocation of
man. You will not require me to say that, as to all these
three matters, I must needs be not only very fragmentary
and unpersuasive, but also highly unoriginal. Other
investigators may deal with novelties. It is the fate of
the philosophical student to be cut off, by his very task,
from all but a very relative and imperfect sort of original-
ity. He is simply making articulate the life which he is
privileged no enjoy. He invents nothing ; he only con-
fesses. Prophets create ideals ; he critically expounds
them. Poets, whose relation to passion is more direct
and momentary, and therefore less universal, less abstract,
less critical, less systematic, have for this very reason far
more of the inventive about them. The student of pliilo-
sophy is privileged to survey, to contemplate life from
without, to reword. Others create ; he observes. Con-
sequently, were a philosophy original? it would be ipso
facto untrue. The doctrines of philosophy are borrowed
from passion. If, for instance, idealism is true at all,
that is because all of you are already idealists. The phi-
losopher only tells you so. He does not make you sa
The fashion of my exposition in the following lectures may


BEALITT AND IDEALISM.


343


have this or that of my own about it. The matter is as
old as it is true ; or, if it is not old, then that is because
it is not true.

But in still another sense is this discussion unoriginal.
The time is long past when really intelligent thinkers
sought to do anything outside of intimate relations to the
history of thought. It still happens^ indeed, that even in
our day some lonesome student will occasionally publish
a philosophical book that he regards as entirely revolu-
tionary, as digging far beneath all that thought has ever
yet accomplished, and as beginning quite afresh the labors
of human reflection. Such men, when they appear nowar
days, as once in a while they do appear, are anachro-
nisms ; and you will always find them either ignoraqt of
the history of the very subject that they propose to revo-
lutionize or incapable of reading this history intelligently.
What they give you is always an old doctrine, more or
less disguised in a poorly novel terminology, and much
worse thought out than it has already been thought out,
time after time, in the history of speculation. It is one
of the defects of the current liberalism in matters of opin-
ion that it does encourage, only too often, this sort of
thinking ; and the sole corrective of the error is a certain
amount of philosophical study of an historical sort before
one begins to print one’s speculations.

Now, as you know, I have been fearing such unliistori-
cal fashions of procedure so much that I have been devot-
ing myself wholly, during the first part of these lectures,
to telling a story, and adding occasional criticisms. It fol-
lows that I have no doctrine to teach save the one that
this history has t^ght me. Personal conviction, then,
offered for whatever it is worth, — a reflective confession
of my own temperament — but all this reflection guided
throughout by the light which the history of thought gives
me about what is really human and worth confessing
in this temperament of mine, — such must be the bust


844 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

ness of these concluding lectures. For how it is that a
man can thus be at once merely the critic of his own
deeper nature, and still merely the mouthpiece for the
teUing of the lesson that he has learned from the history
of thought, you will now after all these discussions sui-ely
be able to see. The philosophical student confesses his
own ideals; for what others has he to confess? He
learns, however, from history what amongst his ideals
have any permanent human value ; for the history of
thought is the school in which alone one can learn to
humanize o le’s reflective proces#s, and to distinguish the
accidental from the essential in one’s temperament.


I.

I am very sorry that I cannot state my idealism in a
simple and unproblematic form; but the nature of the doc-
trine forbids. I must first of all puzzle you with a para-
dox, by saying tliat my idealism has nothing in it which
contradicts the principal propositions of what is nowa-
days called scientific Agnosticism, in so far, namely, as
this agnosticism relates to that world of facts of experi-
ence which man sees and feels and which science studies.
Of such agnosticism we learned something in our last
lecture. But I must go on to say that the fault of our
modern so-called scientific agnosticism is only that it has
failed to see how the world in space and time, the world
of causes and effects, the world of matter and of finite
mind, whereof we know so little and long to know so
much, is a very subordinate part of reality. It will be
my effort to explain how we do kn^ something very
deep and vital about what reality is in its innermost
essence. My explanation will indeed be very poor and
fragmentary, but the outcome of it will be the very highly
paradoxical assertion that while the whole finite world is
full of dark problems for us, there is absolutely nothing,
not even the immediate facts of our sense at this moment,


BEAUTY AND IDEALISM.


845


BO clear, so certain, as the existence and the unity of that
infinite conscious Self of whom we have now heard so
much. About the finite world, as 1 shall assert, we know
in general only what experience teaches us and science
records. There is nothing in the universe absolutely sure
except the Infinite. That will be the curious sort of
agnosticism that 1 shall try in a measure to expound.
Of the infinite we know that it is one and conscious. Of
the finite things, that is, of the particular fashions of be-
havior in terms of which the infinite Consciousness gives
himself form and play||f.the world-game, we know only
what we experience. Yet doubtless it will at once seem
to you that in owe important respect my announced doc-
trine is in obvious conflict with a wise agnosticism. For
is it not confessedly anthromorphic in its character?
And is not anthropomorphism precisely the defect that
modern thinkers have especially taught us to avoid ?

Anthropomorphism was the savage view, which led
primitive man to interpret extraordinary natural events
as expressions of the will of beings like himself. How-
ever he came by his fancy, whether by first believing in
the survival of the ghosts of his ancestors, and then con-
ceiving them as the agents who produced lightning, and
who moved the sun, or by a simple and irreducible instinct
of his childish soul, leading him to see himself in nature,
and to regard it all as animate ; in any case he made the
bad induction, created the gods in his own image, and
then constituted them as the causes of all natural events.
His ignorant self-multiplication we must avoid. Shall
our limited inner experience be the only test of what
sorts of causatiiffi may exist in the world? What we
know is that events happen to us, and happen in a certain
fixed order. We do not know the ultimate causes of these
events. If we lived on some other planet, doubtless
causes of a very novel sort would become manifest to us,
and our whole view of nature would change. It is self*


346 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

contradictory, it is absurd, to make our knowledge the
measure of all that is I The real world that causes our
experience is a great wholly unknown to us except in
a few select phenomena, which happen to fall within our
ken. How wild to guess about the mysteries of the infi-
nite !

But now this agnosticism, too, as I assure you, 1 ar-
dently and frankly agree with, so far as it concerns itself
with precisely that world in which it pretends to move,
and to which it undertakes to apply itself. I have no
desire to refate it. Touching a^the world in space and
time beyond experience, in the scientific sense of the term
experience, I repeat that I know nothing positive. I
know, for instance, nothing about the stratification of
Saturn, or the height of the mountains on the other side
of the moon. For the same reason, also, I know nothing
of any anthropomorphic daemons or gods here or there in
nature, acting as causes of noteworthy events. Of these I
know nothing, because science has at present no need for
such hypotheses. There may be such beings ; there. doubt-
less are in nature many curious phenomena; but what
curiosities further experience might show us, we must
wait for experience to point out ere we shall know, I re-
peat, in its own world, agnosticism is in all these respects
in the right. For reasons that you will later see, I object
indeed to the unhappy word unknowable. In the world
of experience, as in the world of abstracter problems,
there are infinitely numerous things unknown to us. But
there is no rational question that could not somehow be
answered by a sufficiently wise person. There are things
relatively unknowable for us, not things absolutely so.
There are numberless experiences that I shall never have,
in my individual capacity; and there are numberless
problems that I shall never solve. But the only absolute
insoluble mysteries, as I shall hereafter point out to you,
would be the questions that it is essentially absurd to ask.


REALITY AND IDEALISM.


847


Still, not to quarrel over words, what many agnostics
mean by unknowable is simply the stubbornly unknown,
and, in that sense, I fully agree and indeed insist that
human knowledge is an island in the vast ocean of mys-
teiy, and that numberless questions, which it deeply con-
cerns humanity to answer, will never be answered so long
as we are in our present limited state, bound to one planet,
and left for our experience to our senses, our emotions,
and our moral activities.

But, if I thus accept this agnostic view of the world of
experience, what chance left, you will say, for anything
like an absolute system of philosophy? In what sense
can I pretend to talk of idealism, as giving any final view
of the whole nature of things? In what sense, above all,
can I pretend to be a theist, and to speak of the absolute
Self as the very essence and life of the whole world ? For
is this not mere anthropomorphism? Isn’t it making
our private human experience the measure of all reality?
Is n’t it making hypotheses in terms of our experience,
about .things beyond our experience ? Is n’t it making
our petty notions of causation a basis for judging of the
nature of the unknown first cause ? Is n’t it another case
of what the savage did when ho saw his gods in the thun-
der-clouds, because he conceived that causes just like his
own angry moods must be here at work? Surely, at best,
this is sentiment, faith, mystical dreaming. It can’t be
philosophy.

I answer, just to change our whole view of the deeper
reality of things, just to turn away our attention from any
illusive search for first causes in the world of experience,
just to get rid of fanciful faith about the gods in outer
nature, and just to complete the spiritual task of agnosti-
cism by sending us elsewhere than to phenomena for the
true and inner nature of things, — for just this end was
the whole agony of modem philosophy endured by those
who have wrestled with its problems. Is any one agno»


848 THE SI^IRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHT.

tip about the finite world ? Then I more. I know no-
thing of any first cause in the world of appearances yon-
der. I see no gods in the thunder clouds, no Keplerian
angels carrying the planets in conic sections around the
sun ; 1 imagine no world-maker far back in the ages,
beginning the course of evolution. Following Laplace, I
need, once more, no such hypothesis. I await the ver-
dict of science about all facts and events in physical
nature. And yet that is just why I am an idealist. It
is my agnosticism about the causes of my experience that
makes me r carch elsewhere than amongst causes for the
meaning of experience. The outer world which the
agnostic sees and despairs of knowing is not the region
where I look for light. The living God, whom idealism
knows, is not the first cause in any physical sense, at all.
No possible experience could find him as a thing amongst
things or show any outer facts that would prove his exist-
ence. He is n’t anywhere in space or in time. Ho makes
from without no worlds. He is no hypothesis of empiri-
cal science. But he is all the more real for that, and his
existence is all the surer. For causes are, after all, very
petty and subordinate truths in the world, <*ind facts,
phenomena, as such, could never demonstrate any impor-
tant spiritual truth. The absolute Self simply doesn’t
cause the world. The very idea of causation belongs
to things of finite experience, and is only a mytliological
term when applied to the real truth of things. Not be-
cause 1 interpret the causes of my experience in terms of
my limited ideas of causation is the universe of God a
live thing to me, but for a far deeper reason ; i^r a rea-
son which deprives this world of agnosticism of all sub-
stantiality and converts it once for all into mere show. I
am ignorant of this world just because it is a show-world.

And this deeper reason of the idealist I may as well
first suggest in a form which may perhaps seem just now
even more mysterious than the problem which I solve by


REALITY AND IDEALISM.


349


means of it. My reason for believing that there is one ab«
solute World-Self, who embraces and is all reality, whose
consciousness includes and infinitely transcends our own,
in whose unity all the laws of nature and all the mysteries
of experience must have their solution and their very
being, — is simply that the profoundest agnosticism which
you can possibly state in any coherent fashion, the deepest
doubt which you can any way formulate about the world or
the things that are therein, already presupposes, implies,
demands, asserts, the existence of such a World-Self.
The agnostic, I say, already asserts this existence —
unconsciously, of course, as a rule, but none the less inev-
itably. For, as we shall find, there is no escape from the
infinite Self except by self-contradiction. Ignorant as I
am about first causes, I am at least clear, therefore, about
the Self. If you deny him, you already in denying affirm
him. You reckon ill when you leave him out. Him when
you fly, he is the wings. He is the doubter and the
doubt. You in vain flee from his presence. The wings
of the morning will not aid you. Nor do I mean all this
now as any longer a sort of mysticism. This truth is, I
assure you, simply a product of dry logic. When I try
to tell you about it in detail, I shall weary you by my
wholly unmystical analysis of commonplaces. Here is,
in fact, as we shall soon find, the very presupposition of
presuppositions. You cannot stir, nay, you cannot even
stand still iii thought without it. Nor is it an unfamiliar
idea. On the contrary, philosophy finds trouble in bring-
ing it to your consciousness merely because it is so famil-
iar. Wi^en they told us in childhood that wo could not
see God just because he was everywhere, just because hi^
omnipresence gave us no chance to discern him and to fix
our eyes upon him, they told us a deep truth in allegori-
cal fashion. The infinite Self, as we shall learn, is actu-
ally asserted by you in every proposition you utter, is
there nt the heart, so to speak, of the very multiplication


850


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHT.


table. The Self is so little a thing merely guessed at as
the unknowable source of experience, that already, in the
very least of daily experiences you unconsciously know
him as something present. This, as we shall find, is the
deepest tragedy of our finitude, that continually he comes
to his own, and his own receive him not, that he becomes
flesh in every least incident of our lives ; whilst we, gazing
with wonder upon his world, search here and there for
first causes, look for miracles, and beg him to show us the
Father, since that alone will sufiice us. No wonder that
thus we have to remain agnostics. Hast thou been so
long time with me, and yet hast thou not known me ? ”
Such is the eternal answer of the Logos to every doubting
question. Seek him not as an outer hypothesis to explain
experience. Seek him not anywhere yonder in the clouds,
lie is no “ thing in itself.’’ But for all that, expeiience
contains him. He is the reality, the soul of it. Did not
our heart burn within us while he talked with us by the
way ? ” And, as we shall see, he does not talk merely tc
our hearts. Ho reveals himself to our coolest scrutiny.


II.

Blit enough of speculative boasting. Coming to closer
quarters with my topic, 1 must remind you that idealism
has two aspects. It is, for the first, a kind of analysis of
the world, an analysis which so far has no absolute char-
acter about it, but which undertakes, in a fjishion that
might be, acceptable to any skeptic, to examine what you
mean by all the things, whatever they are, that you be-
lieve in or experience. This idealistic aualysii consists
merely in a pointing out, by various devices, that the
world of your knowledge, whatever it contains, is through
and through such stuff as ideas are made of, that you
never in your life believed in anything definable hut ideas,
that, as Berkeley put it, this whole choir of heaven and
furniture of earth ” is nothing for any of us but a«'systeni


BEALITT AND IDEALISM.


351


of ideas which govern our belief and our conduct. Such
idealism has numerous statements, interpretations, embod-
iments : forms part of the most various systems and expe-
riences, is consistent with Berkeley’s theism, with Fichte’s
ethical absolutism, with Professor Huxley’s agnostic em-
piricism, with Clifford’s mind-stuff theory, with countless
other theories that have used such idealism as a part of
their scheme. In this aspect idealism is already a little
puzzling to our natural consciousness, but it becomes
quickly familiar, in fact almost commonplace, and seems
after all to alter our practical faith or to solve our deeper
problems very little.

The other aspect of idealism is the one which gives us
our notion of the absolute Self. To it the first is only
preparatory. This second aspect is the one which from
Kant, until the present time, has formed the deeper prob-
lem of thought. Whenever the world has become more
conscious of its significjince, the work of human i^hiloso-
phy will be, not nearly ended (Heaven forbid an end I),
but for. the first time fairly begun. For then, in criti-
cally estimating our passions, we shall have some truer
sense of whose passions they are.

T begin with the first and the less significant aspect of
idealism. Our world, I say, whatever it may contain, is
such stuff as ideas are made of. This preparatory sort
of idealism is the one that, as I just suggested, Berkeley
made prominent, and, after a fashion familiar. 1 must
state it in my own way, tdthough one in vain seeks to
attain novelty in illustrating so frequently described a
view. ^

Here, then, is our so real world of the senses, full of^
light and warmth and sound. If anything could be solid
and external, surely, one at first will say, it is this world.
Hard facts, not mere ideas, meet us on every hand. Ideas
any one can mould as he wishes. Not so facts. In idea
socialists can dream out Utopias, disappomted lovers can


852 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

imagine themselves successful, beggars can ride horses,
wanderers can enjoy the fireside at home. In the realm
of facts, society organizes itself as it must, rejected lovers
stand for the time defeated, beggars are alone with their
wishes, oceans roll drearily between home and the wan-
derer. Yet this world of fact is, after all, not entirely
stubborn, not merely hard. The strenuous will can mould
facts. We can form our world, in part, according to our
ideas. Statesmen influence the social order, lovers woo
afresh, wanderers find the way home. But thus to alter
the world we must work, and just because the laborer is
worthy of his hire, it is well that the real world should
thus have siicli fixity of things as enables us to anticipate
what facts will prove lasting, and to sec of the travail of
our souls when it is once done. This, then, is the pre-
supposition of life, that we work in a real world, where
house-walls do not melt away as in dreams, but stand
firm against the winds of many winters, and can be felt
as real. We do not wish to find facts wholly plastic ; we
want them to be stubborn, if only the stubbornness he not
altogether unmerciful. Our will makes constantly a sort
of agreement with the world, whereby, if the w^orld will
continually show some respect to the will, the will shall
consent to be strenuous in its industry. Interfere with
the reality of my world, and you therefore take the very
life and heart out of my will. ^

The reality of the world, however, when thus defined
in terms of its stubbornness, its firmness as against the
will that has not conformed to its laws, its kindly rigidity
in preserving for us the fruits of our labors, — such real-
ity, I say, is still something wholly unanalyzed. In what
does this stubbornness consist? Surely, many different
sorts of reality, as it would seem, may be stubborn.
Matter is stubborn when it stands in hard walls against
us, or rises in vast mountain ranges before the path-find-
ing explorer. But minds can be stubborn also. The


BEALITT AND IDEALISM.


S5S


lonely wanderer, who watches by the seashore the waves
that roll between him and his home, talks of cruel facts,
material barriers that, just because they are material, and
not ideal, shall be the irresistible foes of his longing
heart. “ In wish,” he says, ‘‘ I am with my dear ones,
but alas, wishes cannot cross oceans ! Oceans are mate-
rial facts, in the cold outer world. Would that the world
of the heart were all ! ” But alas ! to the rejected lover
the world of the heart is all, and that is just his woe.
Were the barrier between him and his beloved only made
of those stubborn material facts, only of walls or of
oceans, how lightly might his will erelong transcend them
all ! Matter stubborn ! Outer nature cruelly the foe of
ideas ! Nay, it is just an idea that now opposes hidi, —
just an idea, and that, too, in the mind of the maiden he
loves. But in vaiu docs he calls this stubborn bit of dis-
dain a merely ideal fact. No flint was ever more definite
in preserving its identity and its edge than this disdain
may be. Place me for a moment, then, in an external world
that shall consist whoUy of ideas, — the ideas, namely,
of other people about me, a world of maidens who shall
scorn me, of old friends who shall liave learned to hate
me, of angels who shall condemn me, of God who shall
judge me. In what piercing north winds, amidst what
fields of ice, in the labyrinths of what tangled forests, in
the depths of what thick-walled dungeons, on the edges
of what tremendous precipices, should I be more gen-
uinely ill the presence of stubborn and unyielding facts
than in that conceived world of ideas! So, ajf one sees,
I by no means deprive my world of stubborn reality,
if I merely call it a world of ideas. On the contrary, as
every teacher knows, the ideas of the people are often the
most difficult of facts to influence. We were wrong, then,
when we said that whilst matter was stubborn, ideas could
be moulded at pleasure. Ideas are often the most impla-
cable of facts. Even my own ideas, the facts of my own


854


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


inner life, may cruelly decline to be plastic to my wish.
The wicked will that refuses to be destroyed, — what rock
has often more consistency for our senses than this will
has for our inner consciousness ! The king, in his soli-
loquy in “Hamlet,” — in what an unyielding world of
hard facts docs he not move ! and yet they are now only
inner facts. The fault is past ; he is alone with his con-
science.

“ What rests ?

Try what repentance can. What can it not ?
l"'et what can it, when one cannot repent ?

O wretched state f O bosom black as death I
O limed soul, that, struggling to be free,

Art more engaged 1 ”

No, here are barriers worse than any material chains.
The world of ideas has its own horrible dungeons and
chasms. Let those who have refuted Bishop Berkeley’s
idealism by the wonder why he did not walk over every
precipice or into every fire if these tilings existed only in
his idea, let such, I say, first try some of the fires and the
precipices of the inner life, ere they decide that dangers
cease to bo dangers as soon as they are called ideal, or
even subjectively ideal in me.

Many sorts of reality, then, may be existent at the
heart of any world of facts. But this bright and beauti-
ful sense-world of ours, — what, amongst these many possi-
ble sorts of reality, does that embody ? Are ftie stars and
the oceans, the walls and the pictures, real as the maiden’s
heart is real, — embodying the ideas of somebody, but
none the less stubbornly real for that ? Or can we make
something else of their reality ? For, of course, that the
stars and the oceans, the walls and the pictures have some
sort of stubborn reality, just as the minds of our fellows
have, our analysis so far does not for an instant think of
denying. Our present question is, what sort of reality ?
Consider, then, in detail, certain aspects of the reality


REALITT AND IDEALISM.


855


that seems to be exemplified in our sense-world. The
sublimity of the sky, the life and majesty of the ocean,
the interest of a picture, — to what sort of real facts do
these belong ? Evidently here we shall have no question.
So far as the sense-world is beautiful, is majestic, is sub-
lime, this beauty and dignity exist only for the appreciative
observer. If they exist beyond him, they exist only for
some other mind, or as the thought and embodied purpose
of some universal sold of nature. A man who sees the
same world, but who has no eye for the fairness of it, will
find all tlie visible facts, but will catch nothing of their
value. At once, then, the sublimity and beauty of the
world are thus truths that one who pretends to insight
ought to see, and they are truths which have no meaning
except for sucdi a beholder’s mind, or except as embody-
ing the thought of the mind of the world. So here, at
least, is so much of the outer world that is ideal, just as
the coin or the jewel or the bank-note or the bond has its
value not alone in its physical presence, but in the idea
that it symbolizes to a beholder’s mind, or to the relatively
universal thought of the commercial world. But let us
look a little deeper. Surely, if the objects yonder are
unideal and outer, odors and tastes and temperatures do
not exist in these objects in just the way in which they
exist in us. Part of the being of these properties, at
least, if not all of it, is ideal and exists for us, or at best
is once mo*re the embodiment of the thought or purpose
of some worhl-mind. About tastes you cannot dispute,
because they are not only ideal but personal. For the
benumbed tongue and palate of diseased bodily condi-
tions, all things are tasteless. As for temperatures, a well
known experiment will show how the same water may
seem cold to one hand and warm to the other. But even
so, colors and sounds are at least in part ideal. Their
causes may have some other sort of reality ; but colors
themselves are not in the things, since they change with


356 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY. •

the light that falls on the things, vanish in the dark
(whilst the things remained unchanged), and differ for
different eyes. And as for sounds, both the pitch and the
quality of tones depend for us upon certain interesting
peculiarities of our hearing organs, and exist in nature
only as voiceless sound-waves trembling through the air.
All such sense qualities, then, are ideal. The world yon-
der may — yes, must — have attributes that give reasons
why these qualities are thus felt by us ; for so we assume.
The world yonder may even be a mind that thus ex2)resses
its will to iis. Ilut these qualities need not, nay, cannot
resemble the ideas that are produced in us, unless, indeed,
that is because these qualities have place as ideas in some
world-mind. Sound-waves in the air are not like our
musical sensations ; nor is the symphony as we hear it
and feel it any physical property of the strings .and the
wind instruments; nor are the ether-vibrations that the
sun sends us like our ideas when we see the sun ; nor yet
is the flashing of moonlight on the water as wo watch
the waves a direct expression of the actual truths of fluid
motion as the water embodies them.

Unless, then, the real physical world yonder is itself
the embodiment of some world - spirit’s ideas, which he
conveys to us, unless it is real only as the maiden’s heart
is real, namely, as itself a conscious thought, then wc have
so far but one result; tliat real world (to repeat one of
the commonplaces of modern popular science) is in itself,
apart from somebody’s eyes and tongue and ears and
touch, neither colored nor tasteful, neither cool nor warm,
neither light nor dark, neither musical nor silent. All
these qualities belong to our ideas, being indeed none the
less genuine facts for that, but being in so far ideal facts.
We must see colors when we look, we must hear music
when there is playing in our presence ; but this must is a
must that consists in a certain irresistible presence of an
idea in us under certain conditions. That this idea must


REALITY AND IDEALISM.


867


«

come is, indeed, a truth as unalterable, once more, as the
king’s settled remorse in Hamlet. But like this remorse,
again, it exists as an ideal truth, objective, but through
and through objective ybr somebody, and not apart from
anybody. What this truth implies we have yet to see.
So far it is only an ideal truth for the beholder, with just
tlie bare possibility that behind it all there is the thought
of a world-spirit. And, in fact, so far we must all go to-
gether if we reflect.

But now, at tliis point, the Berkelej^an idealist goes one
step further. The real outside world that is still left un-
explained and unanalyzed after its beauty, its warmth, its
odors, its tastes, its colors, and its tones, have been rele-
gated to the realm of ideal truths, what do you now 7nean
by calling it real ? No doubt it is known as somehow real,
but what is this reality known as being ? If you know
that this world is still there and outer, as by hypothesis
you know, you are bound to say v^liat this outer character
implies for your thought. And hero you have trouble.
Is the .outer world, as it exists outside of your ideas, or of
anybody’s ideas, something having shape, filling space,
possessing solidity, full of moving things? That would
in the first place seem evident. The sound is n’t outside
of me, but the sound-waves, you say, are. The colors are
ideal facts ; but the ether-waves don’t need a mind to
know them. Warmth is ideal, but the physical fact called
heat, this playing to and fro of molecules, is real, and is
there apart from any mind. But once more, is this so
evident ? What do I mean by the shape of anything, or
by the size of anything ? Don’t I mean just the idea of
shape or of size that I am obliged to get under certain
circumstances? What is the meaning of any property
that I give to the real outer world ? How can I express
that property except in case I think it in terms of my
ideas ? As for the sound-waves and the ether-waves, what
are they but things ideally conceived to explain the facts


868 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

of nature ? The conceptions have doubtless their truth,
but it is an ideal truth. What I mean by saying that the
things yonder have shape and size and trembling mole-
cules, and that there is air with sound-waves, and ether
with light-waves in it, — what I mean by all this is that
experience forces upon me, directly or indirectly, a vast
system of ideas, which may indeed be founded in truth
beyond me, which in fact must be founded in such truth
if my experience has any sense, but which, like my ideas
of color and of warmth, are simply expressions of how the
workrs order must appear to me, and to anybody consti-
tuted like me. Above all, is this plain about space. The
real things, I say, outside of me, fill space, and move about
in it. But what do I mean by space ? Only a vast sys-
tem of ideas which experience and my own mind force
upon me. Doubtless these ideas have a validity. They
have this valulity, that I, at all events, when I look upon
the world, am bound to see it in space, as much bound as
the king in Uamlet was, when he looked witliin, to see
himself as guilty and unrepentant. But just Us his guilt
was an idea, — a crushing, an iiTCsistible, an overwhelm-
ing idea, — but still just an Idea, so, too, the space in which
I place ray world is one great formal idea of mine. That
is just why 1 can describe it to other people. “It has
three dimensions,” I say, “length, breadth, depth.” I
describe each. I form, I convey, I construct, an idea of
it through them. I know space, as an idea, very well.
1 can compute all sorts of unseen truths about the rela-
tions of its parts. I am sure that you, too, share this
idea. But, then, for all of us alike it is just an idea ; and
when we put our world into space, and call it real there,
we simply think one idea into another idea, not volun-
tarily, to be sure, but inevitably, and yet without leaving
the realm of ideas.

Thus, all the reality that we attribute to our world, in
so far as we know and can tell what we mean thereby,


BEAUTY AND IDEALISM.


859


becomes ideal. There is, in fact, a certain system of ideas,
forced upon us by experience, which we have to use as
the guide of our conduct. This system of ideas we can’t
change by our wish ; it is for us as overwhelming a fact
as guilt, or as the bearing of our fellows towards us, but
we know it only as such a system of ideas. And we call
it the world of matter. John Stuart Mill very well ex-
pressed the puzzle of the whole thing, as we have now
reached the statement of this puzzle, when he called mat-
ter a mass of “ permanent possibilities of experience ” for
each of us. Mill’s definition has its faults, but it is a
very fair beginning. You know matter as something that
either now gives you this idea or experience, or that would
give you some other idea or experience under other cir-
cumstances. A fire, while it burns, is for you a jierma-
nent possibility of either getting the idea of an agreeable
warmth, or of getting the idea of a bad burn, and you
treat it accordingly. A precipice amongst mountains is
a permanent possibility of your experiencing a fall, or of
your getting a feeling of the exciting or of the sublime in
mountain scenery. You have no experience just now of
the tropics or of the poles, but both tropical and polar
climates exist in your world as permanent possibilities of
experience. When you call the sun 92,000,000 miles
away, you mean that between you and the sun (that is,
between your present experience and the possible experi-
ence of the sun’s surface) there would inevitably lie the
actually inaccessible, but still numerically conceivable
series of experiences of distance expressed by the number
of miles in question. In short, your whole attitude to-
wards the real world may be summed up by saying ; “ I
have experiences now which I seem bound to have, expe-
riences of color, sound, and all the rest of my present
ideas ; and I am also bound by experience to believe that
in case I did certain things (for instance, touched the
wall, traveled to the tropics, visited Europe, studied


860 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

physios), I then should get, in a determinate order, de-
pendent wholly upon what I had done, certain other expe-
riences (for instance, experiences of the wall’s solidity, or
of a tropical climate, or of the scenes of an European tour,
or of the facts of physics).” And this acceptance of
actual experience, this belief in possible experience, con-
stitutes all that you mean by your faith in the outer
world.

But, you say. Is not, then, all this faith of ours after all
well founded ? Is n’t there really something yonder that
corresponds in fact to this series of experiences in us ?
Yes, indeed, there no doubt is. But what if this, which
so shall correspond without us to the ideas within us, what
if this hard and fast reality should itself be a system of
ideas, outside of our minds but not outside of every mind?
As the maiden’s disdain is outside the rejected lover’s
mind, unchangeable so far for him, but not on that ac-
count the less ideal, not the less a fact in a mind, as, to
take afresh a former fashion of illustration, the price of a
security or the objective existence of this lecture is an
ideal fact, but real and external for the individual person,
— even so wliy might not this world beyond us, this “ per-
manent possibility of experience,” be in essence itself a
system of ideal experiences of some standard thought of
which ours is only the copy ? Nay, must it not be such a
system in case it has any reality at all ? For, after all,
is n’t this precisely what our analysis brings us to ? No-
thing whatever can I say about my world yonder that I
do not express in terms of mind. What things are, ex-
tended, moving, colored, tuneful, majestic, beautiful, holy,
what they are in any aspect of their nature, mathematical,
logical, physical, sensuously pleasing, spiritually valuable,
all this must mean for me only something that I have to
express in the fashion of ideas. The more I am to know
my world, the more of a mind I must have for the pur-
pose. The closer I come to the truth about the things,


REALITY AND IDEALISM.


361


the more ideas I get. Isn’t it plain, then, that if my
world yonder is anything knowablo at all, it must be in
and for itself essentially a mental world ? Are my ideas
to resemble in any way the world ? Is the truth of my
thought to consist in its agreement with reality? And
am I thus capable, as common sense supposes, of conform-
ing my ideas to things ? Then reflect. What can, after
all, so well agree with an idea as another idea ? To what
can things that go on in my mind conform unless it be to
another mind ? If the more iny mind grows in mental
clearness, the nearer it gets to the nature of reality, then
surely the reality that my mind thus resembles must be in
itself mental.

After all, then, would it deprive the world here' about
me of reality, nay, woiiltl it not rather save and assure
the reality and the knowableness of my world of experi-
ence, if I said that this world, as it exists outside of my
mind, and of any other human minds, exists in and for a
standard, an universal mind, whose system of ideas sim-
ply cpnstitntes the world ? Even if 1 fail to prove that
there is such a mind, do I not at least thus make plausi-
ble that, as I said, our world of common sense has no fact
ill it which we cannot interpret in terms of ideas, so that
this world is throughout such stuff as ideas are made of?
To say this, as you see, in no wise deprives our world of
its due share of reality. If the standard mind knows
now that its ideal fire has the quality of burning those
who touch it, and if I in my fiuitude am bound to con-
form in my experiences to the thought? of this standard
mind, then in case I touch that Are I shall surely get the
idea of a burn. The standard mind will bo at least as
hard and fast and real in its ideal consistency as is the
maiden in her disdain for the rejected lover ; and I, in
presence of the ideal stars and the oceans, will see the gen-
uine realities of fate as certainly as the lover hears his
fate in the voice that expresses her will.


862 THE SPIRIT OP MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

I need not now proceed further with an analysis that
will be more or less familiar to many of you, especially
after our foregoing historical lectures. What I have de-
sired thus far is merely to give each of you, as it were,
the sensation of being an idealist in this first and purely
analytical sense of the word idealism. The sum and sub-
stance of it all is, you see, this : you know your world in
fact as a system of ideas about things, such that from
moment to moment you find this system forced upon you
by experience. Even matter you know just as a mass of
coherent ideas that you cannot help having. Space and
time, as you think them, are surely ideas of yours. Now,
what more natural than to say that if this be so, the real
world beyond you must in itself be a system of some-
body’s ideas ? If it is, then you can comprehend what its
existence means. If it is n’t, then since all you can know
of it is ideal, the real world must be utterly unknowable,
a bare x. Minds I can understand, because I myself am
a mind. An existence that has no mental attribute is
wholly opaque to me. So far, however, from such a world
of ideas, existent beyond me in another mind, seeming to
coherent thought essentially w?ireal, ideas and minds and
their ways, are, on the contrary, the hardest and stubborn-
est facts that we can name, j^the external world is in it-
self mental, then, be this reality a standard and universal
thought, or a mass of litth? atomic minds constituting the
various particles of matter, in any case one can con)pre-
hend what it is, and will have at the same time to submit
to its stubborn, authority as the lover accepts the real-
ity of the maiden’s moods. If the world is n't such an
ideal thing, then indeed all our science, which is through
and through concerned with our mental interpretations of
things, can neither have objective validity, nor make satis-
factory progress towards truth. For as science is con-
cerned with ideas, the world beyond all ideas is a bare x.


REALITY AND IDEALISM.'


868


m.

But with this bare sc, you will say, this analytical ideal-
ism after all leaves me, as with something that, spite of all
my analyses and interpretations, may after all be there
beyond me as the real world, which my ideas are vainly
striving to reach, but iVhich eternally flees before me. So
far, you will say, what idealism teaches is that the real
world can only be interpreted by treating it as if it were
somebody’s thought. So regarded, the idealism of Berke-
ley and of other such thinkers is very suggestive ; yet it
does n’t tell us what the tnie world is, but only that so
much of the true world as we ever get into our compre-
hension has to be conceived in ideal terms. Perhaps,
however, whilst neither beauty, nor majesty, nor odor, nor
warmth, nor tone, nor color, nor form, nor motion, nor
space, nor time (all these being but ideas of ours), can be
said to belong to the extra-mental world, — perhaps, after
all, there does exist there yonder an extra-mental world,
which, has nothing to do, except by accident, with any
mind, and which is through and through just extra-mental,
something unknowable, inscrutable, the basis of experi-
ence, the source of ideas, but itself never experienced as
it is in itself, never adequately represented by any idea
in us. Perhaps it is there. Yes, you will say, must it
not be there ? Must not one accept our limitations once
for all, and say, “ What reality is, we can never hope to
make clear to ourselves. That which has been made clear
becomes an idea in us. But always there is the beyond,
the mystery, the inscrutable, the real, the x. To be sure,
perhaps we can’t even know so much as that this x after
all does exist. But then we feel bound to regard it as
existent ; or even if we doubt or deny it, may it not be
there all the same ? ” In such doubt and darkness, then,
this first form of idealism closes. If that were all thers
were to say, I should indeed have led you a long road in


364 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHT.

vain. Analyzing what the known world is for you, in
case there is haply any world known to you at all, — this
surely is n’t proving that there is any real world, or that
the real world can be known. Are we not just where we
started ?

No ; there lies now just ahead of us the goal of a syn-
thetic idealistic conception, which will not be content with
this mere analysis of the colors and forms of things, and
with the mere discovery that all these are for us nothing
but ideas. In this second aspect, idealism grows bolder,
and fears not the profoundest doubt that may have entered
your mind as to whether there is any world at aU, or as
to whether it is in any fashion knowable. State in full
the deepest problem, the Iiardest question about the world
that your thought ever conceived. In this new form ideal-
ism olfers you a suggestion that indeed will not wholly
answer nor do away with every such problem, but that
certainly will set the meaning of it in a new light. What
this new light is, I must in conclusion seek to illustrate.

Note the point we have reached. Either^ as you see,
your real world yonder is through and through a world of
ideas, an outer mind that you are more or less compre-
hending through your experience, or else,, in so far as it
is real and outer it is unknowable, an inscrutable as, ah
absolute mystery. The dilemma is perfect. There is no
third alternative. Either a mind yonder, or else the un-
knowable ; that is your choice. Philosophy loves such
dilemmas, wherein all the mightiest interests of the spirit,
all the deepest longings of human passion, arc at stake,
waiting as for the fall of a die. Philosophy loves such
situations, I say, and loves, too, to keep its scrutiny as
cool in the midst of them as if it were watching a game
of chess, instead of the great world-game. Well, try the
darker choice that the dilemma gives you. The world
yonder shall be an a?, an unknowable something, outer,
problematic, foreign, opaque. And you, — you shall look


BEAUTY AND IDEALISM.


365


upon it and believe in it. Yes, you shall for argument’s
sake first put on an air of resigned confidence, and say,
“ I do not only fancy it to be an extra-mental and un-
knowable something there, an impenetrable x, but 1 know
it to be such. I can’t help it. I did n’t make it unknow-
able. I regi*et the fact. But there it is. I have to ad-
mit its existence. But I know that I shall never solve
the problem of its nature.” Ah, its nature is a prohlemy
then. But what do you mean by this “ problem ” f
Problems are, after a fashion, rather familiar things, —
that is, in the world of ideas. There are problems soluble
and problems insoluble in that world of ideas. It is a
soluble problem if one asks what whole number is the
square root of 64. The answer is 8. It is an insoluble
problem if one asks me to find what whole number is the
square root of 65. There is, namely, no such whole num-
ber. If one asks me to name the length of a straight
line that shall be equal to the circumference of a circle of
a known radius, that again, in the world of ideas, is an
insoluble problem, because, as can be proved, the circum-
ference of a circle is a length that cannot possibly be ex-
actly expressed in terms of any statable number when
the radius is of a stated length. So in the w^orld of ideas,
problems are definite questions which can be asked in know-
able terms. Fair questions of this sort either may be
fairly answered in our present state of knowledge, or else
they could be answered if we knew a little or a good deal
more, or finally they could not possibly be answered. But
in the latter case, if they could not possibly be answered,
they always must resemble the problem how to square the
circle. They then always turn out, namely, to be absurdly
stated questions, and it is their absurdity that makes these
problems absolutely insoluble. Any fair question could
be answered by one who knew enough. No fair question
has an unknowable answer. But now, if your unknow-
able world out there is a thing of wholly, of absolutely


866


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


problematic and inscrutable nature, is it so because you
don’t yet know enough about it, or because in its very
nature and essence it is an absurd thing, an x that
would answer a question, which actually it is nonsense to
ask? Surely one must choose the former alternative.
The real world may be unknown ; it can’t be essentially
unknowable.

This subtlety is wearisome enough, I know, just here,
but I shall not dwell long upon it. Plainly j/*the unknow-
able world out there is through and through in its nature
a really inscrutable problem, this must mean that in
nature it resembles such problems as. What is the whole
number that is the square root of 65 ? Or, What two
adjacent hills are there that have no valley between them?
For in the world of thought such are the only insoluble
problems. All others either may now be solved, or
would be solved if we knew more than we now do. But,
once more, if this unknowable is only just the real world
as now unknown to us, but capable some time of becoming
known, then remember that, as we have just seen, only a
mind can ever become an object known to a mind. If I
know you as external to me, it is only because you are
minds. If I can come to know any truth, it is only in
so far as this truth is essentially mental, is an idea, is a
thought, that I can ever come to know it. Hence, if that
so-called unknowable, that unknown outer world there,
ever could, by any device, come within our ken, then it is
already an ideal world. For just that is what our whole
idealistic analysis has been proving. Only ideas are
knowable. And nothing absolutely unknowable can exist.
For the absolutely unknowable, the x pure and simple,
the Kantian thing in itself, simply cannot be admitted.
The notion of it is nonsense. The assertion of it is a con-
tradiction. Round-squares, and sugar salt-lumps, and
Snarks, and Boojums, and Jabberwocks, and Abracada-
bras ; such, I insist, are the only unknowables there ara


BEALITY AND IDEALISM.


867

The unknown, that which our human and finite selfhood
has n’t grasped, exists spread out before us in a bound-
less world of truth ; but the unknowable- is essentially,
confessedly, ipso facto a fiction.

The nerve of our whole argument in the foregoing is
now pretty fairly exposed. We have seen that the outer
truth must be, if anything, a “ possibility of experience.”
But we may now see that a hare possibility ” as such, is,
like the unknowable, something meaningless. That
which, whenever 1 come to know it, turns out to be
through and through an idea, an experience, must be in
itself, before I know it, either somebody’s idea, somebody’s
experience, or it must be nothing. What is a “ possibil-
ity ” of experience that is outside of me, and that is still
nothing ybr any one one else than myself? Is n’t it a bare
X, a nonsense phrase ? Is n’t it like an unseen color, an
untasted taste, an unfelt feeling? In proving that the
world is one of “ possible ” experience, wo have proved
that in so far as it is real it is one of actual experience.

Once more, then, to sum up here, if however vast the
world of the unknown, only the essentially knowable can
exist, and if everything knowable is an idea, a mental
somewhat, the content of some mind, then once for all we
are the world of ideas. Your deepest doubt proves this.
Only the nonsense of that inscrutable a?, of that Abraca-
dabra, of that Snark, the Unknowable of whose essence
you make your real world, prevents you from seeing this.

To return, however, to our dilemma. Either ideal-
ism, we said, or the unknowable. What we have now
said is that the absolutely unknowable is essentially an
absurdity, a non-existent. For any fair and statable
problem admits of an answer. If the world exists yonder,
its essence is then already capable of being known by
some mind. If capable of being known by a mind, this
essence is then already essentially ideal and mental. A
mind that knew the real world would, for instance, find it


868 « THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

a something possessing qualities. But qualities are ideal
existences, just as much as are the particular qualities
called odors or tones or colors. A mind knowing the real
world would again find in it relations, such as equality
and inequality, attraction and repulsion, likeness and
unlikeness. But such relations have no meaning except
as objects of a mind. In brief, then, the world as known
would be found to be a world that had all the while been
ideal and mental, even before it became known to tlie
j)articular mind that we are to conceive as corning into
connection with it. Thus, then, we are driven to the sec-
ond alternative. The real world must be a mind, or else
a group of minds.

IV.

But with this result we come in presence of a final
problem. All this, you say, depends upon my assurance
that there is after all a real and therefore an essentially
knowable and rational world yonder. Such a world would
have to be in essence a mind, or a world of minds. But
after all, how docs one ever escape from the prison of the
inner life ? Am I not in all this merely wandering amidst
the realm of my own ideas ? My world, of course, is n’t
and can’t be a mere cc, an essentially unknowable thing,
just because it is my world, and I have an idea of it. But
then does not this mean that my world is, after all, for-
ever just my world, so that I never get to any truth beyond
myself? Is n’t this result very disheartening? My world
is thus a world of ideas, but alas! how do I then ever
reach those ideas of the minds beyond me ?

The answer is a simple, but in one sense a very prob- .
lematic one. You, in one sense, namely, never do or can
get beyond your own ideas, nor ought you to wish to do so,
because in truth all those other minds that constitute your
outer and real world are in essence one with your own self.
This whole world of ideas is essentially one world, and so
it is essentially the world of one self and I%at art Thou,


REALITY AND IDEALISM. ^ 369

*

The truth and meaning of this deepest proposition of
all idealism is now not at all remote from us. The con-
siderations, however, upon which it depends are of the
dryest possible sort, as commonplace as they are deep.

Whatever objects you may think about, whether they
are objects directly known to you, or objects infinitely far
removed, objects in the distant stars, or objects remote in
time, or objects near and present, — such objects, then, as
a number with fifty places of digits in it, or the moun-
tains on the other side of the moon, or the day of your
death, or the character of Cromwell, or the law of gravi-
tation, or a name that you arc just now trying to think of
and have forgotten, or tlie meaning of somo mood or feel-
ing or idea now in your mind, — all such objects, I insist,
stand in a certain constant and curious relation to your
mind whenever you are thinking about them, — a relation
that we often miss because it is so familiar. What is
this relation ? Such an object, while you think about it,
need n’t be, as popular thought often supposes it to be,
the of your thoughts concerning it. Thus, when

you think about Cromwcirs character, Cromwell’s charac-
ter is n’t just now cavsing any ideas in you, — is n’t, so to
speak, doing anything to you. Cromwell is dead, and af-
ter life’s fitful fever his character is a very inactive thing.
Not as the ca?/,sc, but as the object of your thought is Crom-
well present to you. Even so, if you choose now to think
of the moment of your death, that moment is somewhere
off there in the future, and you can make it your object,
but it is n’t now an active cause of your ideas. The mo-
ment of your death has no present physical existence at
all, and just now causes nothing. So, too, with the moun-
tains on the other side of the moon. When you make
them the object of your thought, they remain indifferent
to you. They do not affect you. You never saw them.
But all the same you can think about them.

Yet this thinking ah(mt things is, after all, a very curi-


370 » THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

ous relation in which to stand to things. In order to
think about a thing, it is not enough that I should have
an idea in me that merely resembles that thing. This
last is a very important observation. 1 repeat, it is not
enough that I should merely have an idea in me that re-
sembles the thing whereof I think. I have, for instance,
in me the idea of a pain. Another man has a pain just like
mine. Say we both have toothache ; or have both burned
our finger-tips in the same way. Now my idea of pain is
just like the pain in him, but I am not on that account
necessarily thinking about his pain, merely because what
I am thinking about, namely my own pain, resembles his
pain. No ; to think about an object you must not merely
have an idea that resembles the object, but you must mean
to have your idea resemble that object. Stated in other
form, to think of an object you must consciously aim at
that object, you must pick out that object, you must al-
ready in some measure possess that object enough, namely,
to identify it as what you mean. But how can you mean^
how can you aim at^ how can you possess^ how can you
pick out^ how can you identify what is not already pres-
ent in essence to your own hidden self ? Here is surely a
deep question. When you aim at yonder object, be it the
mountiiins in the moon or the day of your death, you
really say, “ I, as my real self, as my larger self, as iny
complete consciousness, already in deepest truth possess
that object, have it, own it, identify it. And that, and
that alone, makes it possible for me in my transient, my in-
dividual, my momentary personality, to mean yonder ob-
ject, to inquire about it, to be partly aware of it and partly
ignorant of it.” You can't mean what is utterly foreign
to you. You mean an object, you assert about it, you talk
about it, yes, you doubt or wonder about it, you admit
your private and individual ignorance about it, only in so
far as your larger self, your deeper personality, your to-
tal of normal consciousness already has that object. Youz


BEALITT AND IDEAUSM.


871


momentary Und private wonder, ignorance, inquiry, or
assertion, about the object, implies, asserts, presupposes,
that your total self is in full and immediate possession of
the object. This, in fact, is the very nature of that curi-
ous relation of a thought to an object which we are now
considering. The self that is doubting or asserting, or
that is even feeling its private ignorance about an object,
and that still, even in consequence of all this, is meaning^
is aiming at such object, is in essence identical with the
self for which this object exists in its complete and con-
sciously known truth.

So paradoxical seems this final assertion of idealism
that I cannot hope in one moment to make it very plain to
you. It is a difficult topic, about which I have elsewhere
printed a very lengthy research,^ wherewith I cannot here
trouble you. But what I intend by thus saying that the
self which thinks about an object, which really, even in
the midst of the blindest ignorance and doubt concerning
its object still means the object, — that this self is identi-
cal with the deeper self which possesses and truly knows
the object, — what I intend hereby I can best illustrate
by simple cases taken from your own experience. You
are in doubt, say, about a name that you have forgotten,
or about a thought that you just had, but that has now
escaped you. As you hunt for the name or the lost idea,
you are all the while sure that you mean just one particu-
lar name or idea and no other. But you don’t yet know
what name or idea this is. You try, and reject name after
name. You query, “Was this what I was thinking of,
or this ? ” But after searching you erelong find the name
or the idea, and now at once you recognize it. “Oh,
that,” you say, “ was what I meant all along, only — I
did n’t know what I meant.” Did not know ? Yes, in one
sense you knew all the while, — that is, your deeper self,

1 See The Religious Aspect of Philosophy (Boston, 1885), eh. xi.,
“ The Possibility of Error,” pp. 384r435.


372 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

your true consciousness knew. It was your momentary
self that (lid not know. But when you found the long-
sought name, recalled the lost idea, you recognized it at
once, because it was all the while your own, because you,
the true and larger self, who owned the name or the icfea
and were aware of what it was, now were seen to include
the smaller and momentary self that sought the name or
tried to recall the thought. Your deeper consciousness of
the lost idea was all the while there. In fact, did you not
presuppose this when you sought the lost idea ? How can
I mean a name, or an idea, unless I in truth am the self
who knows the name, who possesses the idea ? In hunting
for the name or the lost idea, I am hunting for my own
thought. Well, just so I know nothing about the far-off
stars in detail, but in so far as I mean the far-off stars at
all, as I speak of them, I am identical with that remote
and deep thought of my own that already knows the stars.
When I study the stars, I am trying to find out what I
really mean by them. To be sure, only experience can
tell me, but that is because only experience can . bring
me into relation with my larger self. The escape from
the prison of the inner self is simply the fact that the in-
ner self is through and through an appeal to a larger self.
The self that inquires, either inquires without meaning,
or if it has a meaning, this meaning exists in and for the
larger self that knows.

Here is a suggestion of what I mean by Synthetic Ideal-
ism. No truth, I repeat, is more familiar. That I am
always meaning to inquire into objects beyond me, what
clearer fact could be mentioned ? That only in case it is
already I who, in deeper truth, in my real and hidden
thought, Tenoxo the lost object yonder, the object whose na-
ture I seek to comprehend, that only in this case I can
truly mean the thing yonder, — this, as we must assert, is
involved in the very idea of meaning. That is the logical
analysis of it. You can mean what your deeper self


REALITY AND IDEALISM.


878


knows ; you cannot mean what your deeper self docs n’t
know. To be sure, the complete illustration of this most
critical insight of idealism l^elongs elsewhere. Few see
the familiar. Nothing is more common than for people
to think that they mean objects that have nothing to do
with themselves. Kant it was, who, despite his things in
themselves, first showed us that nobody really means an
object, really knows it, or doubts it, or aims at it, unless he
does so by aiming at a truth that is present to his own
larger self. Except for the unity of my true self, taught
Kant, I have no objects. And so it makes no difference
whether 1 know a thing or am in doubt about it. So
long as I really rnmn it, that is enough. The self that
means the object is identical with the larger self that
possesses the object, just as when you seek the lost idea
you are already in essence with the self that possesses the
lost idea.

In this way I suggest to you the proof which a rigid
analysis of the logic of our most commonplace thought
would give for the doctrine tliat in the world there is but
one Self, and that it is his world which wc all alike are
truly meaning, whether we talk of one another or of
Cromweirs character or of the fixed stars or of the far-
off jcons of the future. The relation of my thought to
its object has, I insist, this curious character, that unless
the thought and its object are parts of one larger thought,
I can’t even be meaning that object yonder, can’t even
be in error about it, can’t even doubt its existence. You,
for instance, are part of one larger self with me, or else
I can’t even be meaning to address you as outer beings.
You are part of one larger self along with the most mys-
terious or most remote fact of nature, along with the
moon, and all the hosts of heaven, along with all truth
and all beauty. Else could you not even intend to speak
of such objects beyond you. For whatever you speak of
you will find that your world is meant by you as just


874


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


your world. Talk of the unknowable, and it forthwith
becomes your unknowable, your problem, whose solution,
unless the problem be a mere nonsense question, your
larger self must own and be aware of. The deepest prob-
lem of life is, “ What is this deeper self? ” And the only
answer is. It is the self that knows in unity all truth*
This, I insist, is no hypothesis. It is actually the pre-
supposition of your deepest doubt. And that is why
I say : Everything finite is more or less obscure, dark,
doubtful. Only the Infinite Self, the problem-solver, the
complete thinker, the one who knows what we mean even
when we are most confused and ignorant, the one who in-
cludes us, who has the world present to himself in unity,
before whom all past and future truth, all distant and
dark truth is clear in one eternal moment, to whom far
and forgot is near, who thinks the whole of nature, and
in whom are all things, the Logos, the world-possessor, —
only his existence, I say, is perfectly sure.


V.

Yet I must not state the outcome thus confidently with-
out a little more analysis and exemplification. Let mo
put the whole matter in a slightly different way. When a
man believes that he knows any truth about a fact beyond
his present and mcment«ary thought, what is the position,
with reference to that fact, which he gives himself? We
must first answer. He believes that one who really knew
his, the thinker’s, thought, and compared it with the fact
yonder, would perceive the agreement between the two.
Is this alU however, that the believer holds to be true of
of his own thought ? No, not so, for he holds not only
that his thought, as it is, agrees with some fact outside his
present self (as my thought, for instance, of my toothache
may agree with the fact yonder called my neighbor’s
toothache), but also that his thought agrees with the
fact with which it meant to agree. To mean to agree,


REAUTT AND IDEALISM.


875


however, with a specific fact beyond my present self, in-
volves such a relation to that fact that if 1 could somehow
come directly into the presence of the fact itself, could
somehow absorb it into my present consciousness, I should
become immediately aware of it as the fact that 1 all
along had meant. Our previous examples have been in-
tended to bring clearly before us this curious and in fact
unique character of the relation called meaning an ob-
ject of our thought. To return, then, to our supposed
believer : he believes that he knows some fact beyond his
present consciousness. This involves, as we have now
seen, the assertion that he believes himself to stand in
such an actual relation to the fact yonder that were it in,
instead of out of his present consciousness, he would rec-
ognize it both as the object meant by his present thought,
and also as in agreement therewith ; and it is all this which,
as he believes, an immediate observer of his own thought
and of the object — that is, an observer who should in-
clude our believer’s present self, and the fact yonder, and
who .should reflect on their relations — would find as
the real relation. Observe, how^ever, that only by rejleo
lion would this higher observer find out that real relation.
Nothing but Reflective Self-consciousness could discover
it. To believe that you know anything beyond your pre-
sent and momentary self, is, therefore, to believe that you
do stand in such a relation to truth as only a larger and
reflectively observant self, that included you and your
object, could render intelligible. Or once more, so to
believe is essentially to appeal confidently to a possible
Larger self for approval. But now to say, I know' a truth,
and yet to say, This larger self to whom I appeal is ap-
pealed to only as to a possible self, that need n’t be real,
— all this involves just the absurdity against which our
whole idealistic analysis has been directed in case of all
the sorts of fact and truth in the world. To believe, is to
say, I stand in a real relation to truth, a relation which


876


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


transcends wholly my present momentary self ; and this
real relation is of such a curious nature that only a larger
inclusive self which consciously reflected upon my mean*
ing and consciously possessed the object that I mean,
could know or grasp the reality of the relation. If, how-
ever, this relation is a real one, it must, like the colors,
the sounds, and all the other things of which we spoke be-
fore be real^/br somebody. Bare possibilities are nothing.
Really possible things are already in some sense real.
If, then, ’ny relation to the truth, this complex relation of
meaning an object and conforming to it, when the object,
although at this moment meant by me, is not now present
to my momentary thought, — if this relation is genuine,
and yet is such as only a possible larger self could render
intelligible, then my possible larger self must be real in
order that my momentary self should in fact possess the
truth in question. Or, in briefest form. The relation of
conforming one’s thought to an outer object meant by
this thought is a relation which only a Reflective Larger
Self could grasp or find real. If tlie relation is real, the
larger self is real, too.

So much, then, for the case when one believes that one
has grasped a truth beyond the moment. But now for
the case when one is actually in error about some object
of his momentary and finite thought. Error is the actual
failure to agree, not with any fact taken at random, but
with just the fact that one had meant to agree with.
Under what circumstances, then, is error possible ? Only
in case one’s real thought, by virtue of its meaning, does
transcend his own momentary and in so far ignorant self.
As tlie true believer, meaning the truth that he believes,
must be in real relation thereto, even so the blunderer,
really meaning, as he does, the fact yonder, in order that
he should be able even to blunder about it, must be, in so
far, in the same real relation to truth as the true believer,
llis error lies in missing that conformity with the meant


REALITY AND IDEALISM.


877


object at which he aimed. None the less, however, did he
really mean and really aim ; and, therefore, is he in error,
because his real and larger self finds him to be so. True
thinking and false thinking alike involve, then, the same
fundamental conditions, in so far as both are carried on
in moments; and in so far as, in both cases, the false
moment and the true arc such by virtue of being organic
parts of a larger, critical, reflective, and so conscious
self.

To sum up so far : Of no object do I speak either
falsely or truly, unless I mean that object. Never do I
mean an object, unless I stand in such relation thereto
that were the object in this conscious moment, and imme-
diately present to me, I should myself recognize it as
comideting and fulfilling my present and momentary
meaning. The relation of meaning an object is tlius one
that only conscious Reflection can define, or observe, or
constitute. No merely foreign observer, no external test,
could decide upon what is meant at any moment. There-
fore, when what is meant is outside of the moment which
means, only a Self inclusive of the moment and its object
could complete, and so confirm or refute, the o])iuion that
the moment contains. Really to mean an obj(K*t, then,
whether in case of true opinion or in case of false opinion,
involves the real possibility of such a reflective test of
one’§ meaning from the point of view of a larger self.
But to say. My relation to the object is such that a reflec-
tive larger self, and only such a reflective and inclusive
self, could see that I meant the object, is to assert a fact,
a relation, an existent truth in the world, that either is a
truth for nobody, or is a truth for an actual reflective
self, inclusive of the moment, and critical of its meaning.
Our whole idealistic analysis, however, from the begin-
ning of this discussion, has been to the effect that facts
must be facts for somebody, and can't be facts for nobody,
and that hare possibilities, are really impossible. Hence


878 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

whoever believes, whether truly or falsely, about objects
beyond the moment of his belief, is an organic part of a
reflective and conscious larger self that has those objects
immediately present to itself, and has them in organic
relation with the eriing or truthful momentary self that
believes.

Belief, true and false, having been examined, the case
of doubt follows at once. To doubt about objects beyond
my momentary self is to admit the “possibility of error’’
as to such objects. Error would involve my inclusion in
a larger self that has directly present to it the object
meant by me as I doubt. Truth would involve the same
inblusion. The inclusion itself, then, is, so far, no object
of rational doubt. To doubt the inclusion would be
merely to doubt whether I meant anything at all beyond
the moment, and not to doubt as to my particular know-
ledge about the nature of some object beyond, when once
the object had been supposed to be meant. Doubt pre-
supposes then, whenever it is a definite doubt, the real
possibility, and so, in the last analysis, the reality of the
normal self-consciousness that possesses the object con-
cerning which one doubts.

But if, passing to the extreme of skepticism, and stating
one’s most despairing and most uncompromising doubt,
one so far confines himself to the prison of the inner
life as to doubt whether one ever does mean any object
beyond the moment at all, there comes the final consider-
ation that in doubting one’s power to transcend the mo-
ment, one has already transcended the moment, just as we
found in following Hegel’s analysis.^ To say. It is im-
possible to mean any object beyond this moment of my
thought, and the moment is for itself “ the measure of all
things,” is at all events to *give a meaning to the words
thie moment. And this moment means something only in
opposition to other moments. Yes, even in saying this
^ See, in the lecture on Hegel, pp. 204-207.


BEAUTY AKD IDEALISM.


879


moment^ I have already left this moment, and am mean-
ing and speaking of a past moment. Moreover, to deny
that one can mean an object beyond the moment ’’ is
already to give a meaning to the phrase beyond the mo-
ment^ and then to deny that anything is meant to fall
within the scope of this meaning. In every case, then,
one must transcend by one’s meaning the moment to
which one is confined by one’s finitude.

Flee where we will, then, the net of the larger Self en-
snares us. We are lost and imprisoned in the thickets
of its tangled labyrinth. The moments are not at all in
themselves, for as moments they have no meaning ; they
exist only in relation to the beyond. The larger Self
alone is, and tliey arc by reason of it, organic parts of it.
They perish, but it remains ; they have truth or error
only in its overshadowing presence.

And now, as to the unity of this Self. Can there be
many such organic selves, mutually separate unities of
moments and of the objects that these moments mean?
Nay, were there many such, would not their manifoldness
be a truth? Their relations, would not these be real?
Their distinct places in the world-order, would not these
things be objects of possible true or false thoughts ? If
so, must not there be once more the inclusive real Self for
whom these trutlis were true, these separate selves inter-
related, and their variety absorbed in the organism of its
rational meaning ?

There is, then, at last, but one Self, organically, reflec-
tively, consciously inclusive of all the selves, and so of all
truth. I have called this self. Logos, problem-solver, all-
knower. Consider, then, last of all, his relation to prob-
lems. In the previous lecture we doubted many things ;
we questioned the whole seeming world of the outer order ;
we wondered as to space and time, as to nature and evo-
lution, as to the beginning and the end of things. Now
he who wonders is like him who doubts. Has his wonder


880


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


any rationality about it ? Does he mmn anything by hia
doubt ? Then the truth that he means, and about which
he wonders, has its real constitution. As wonderer, he
in the moment possesses not this solving truth ; he appeals
to the self who can solve. That self must possess the
solution Just as surely as the problem has a meaning.
The real nature of space and time, the real beginning of
things, where matter was at any point of time in the past,
what is to become of the world’s energy : these are mat-
ters of truth, and truth is necessarily present to the Self
as in one all-compi‘ehending self-completed moment, be-
yond which is naught, within which is the world.

The world, then, is such stuff as ideas are made of.
Thought possesses all things. But the world is n’t unreal.
It extends infinitely beyond our private consciousness,
because it is the world of an universal mind. What facts
it is to contain only experience can inform us. There is
no magic that can anticipate the work of science. Abso-
lutely the only thing sure from the first about this world,
however, is that it is intelligent, rational, orderly, essen-
tially comprehensible, so that all its problems are some-
where solved, all its darkest mysteries are known to the
supreme Self. This Self infinitely and reflectively tran-
scends our consciousness, and therefore, since it includes
us, it is at the very least a person, and more definitely
conscious than we are ; for wliat it possesses is self-reflect-
kig knowledge, and what is knowledge aware of itself,
but consciousness ? Beyond the seeming wreck and chaos
of our finite problems, its eternal insight dwells, there-
fore, in absolute and supreme majesty. Yet it is not far
from every one of us. There is no least or most transient
thought that flits through a child’s mind, or that troubles
with the faintest line of care a maiden’s face, and that
still does not contain and embody something of this divine
Logos.


LECTURE XII.


PHYSICAL LAW AND FREEDOM: — THE WORLD OP

DESCRIPTION AND THE WORLD OF APPRECIATION.

We return from the general notion of the world as the
universe of the Logos, to the business of trying to inter-
pret the facts of experience. “ Ye men of Galilee, why
stand ye gazing up into heaven ? ** We must go into all
the world and preach the gospel of this rationality and
unity of the truth, until the most unspiritual and misbe-
Jieving of phenomena shall have been converted. Our
business is not that of gazing, but of interpreting. And
it is hard indeed so to interpret idealism that it shall seem
to the ordinary mind anything but an idle comment upon
the general connectedness of things.

The business of the present lecture is with the idealistic
interpretation of the outer order. In what precise sense
is this world in space and in time still real for us ? Is
the true world one of rigid necessity, or is it a world of
free and spiritual ideals ? What place in it h.ave the sci-
entific notions of causality, and of such physical truths as
energy and matter ? In what sense has the doctrine of
evolution a place in this universe of the Logos ? Is this
world a moral order ? And is it a world where a man’s
mind is still dependent upon his nervous mechanism, as
empirical science assures us ? And what ultimate connec-
tion does idealism recognize between finite mind and the
truth that physical science calls matter ?

These questions, technically called the problems of a
philosophical cosmology, are befoi^ us. The study of
them is hard and dry. The exposition must of necessity


382


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


bo in some places extremely intricate, in others far too
dogmatic and aphoristic. The outcome may be unex-
pected, and even light-giving. The fashion wherein we
shall attack the undertaking will be in some respects dif-
ferent from the traditional one ; but we shall still at every
step be guided by the lessons of our historical lectures.


I.

Despite our idealism, and in fact even because of out
idealism, the world of experience is to appear to us, in
what follows, as at least the outward aspect of a genuinely
real world. We have asked. What sort of a world is it ?
The answer has been. It is a world of outer and ideal
truth, a world of mind. The doctrine of the idealist is
not one that involves or encourages any doubt that there
is truth beyond his own private and finite selfhood. A
popular and trivial objection to idealism, often repeated
by critics who comprehend it not, accuses each finite ideal-
istic thinker of believing more in this his finite self than
in anybody or anything else. But, on the contrary, as
we have seen, it is only the idealist who has a reasonable
account to give of his faith in outer truth, and of his own
relation thereto. This outer truth is for him the content
of the transcendent personality of the Logos, of whom our
experience is a fragmentary suggestion. As I have
pointed out elsewhere, in the book to which I have already
referred, it is just the popular, the common-sense notion
of external reality, for w’hich the outer world is a bare
postulate, a mere practical assumption.^ Only idealism,

^ lielhjious Aspect of Philosophy^ pp. 304-305. — “ If the history
of popular speculation on these topics could be written, how much of
cowardice and shuffling would be found in the behavior of the nat-
ural mind before the question : * How dost thou know an external
world ? ’ Instead of simply and plainly answering, ^ 1 mean by the
external world in the first place something that I accept or demand,
that I posit, postulate, actually construct on the basis of sense-data,'
the natural man gives us all kinds of vague compromise answers. . • .


PHYSICAL LAW AND FREEDOM.


883


with its theory of the world of the Logos as the one objec-
tive reality, implied by every doubt and half-conscious
belief of every finite fragment of this true self, finds a
warrant for the postulates of common-sense, converts the
mere faith in the outer world into an insight, possesses an
objective truth in coming thus to an awareness of our
relation to our own deepest nature, and interprets our own
deepest nature by showing that it is not our finite self-
hood merely as such, but is through and through objec-
tive.^

II.

This being premised as to the idealist’s attitude towards
the objective truth, our next undertaking must be, to
define more exactly the cliaractcristics that objective
truth, as such, possesses. For such a definition will of
necessity throw light on the nature of the world in which
we find ourselves. This task is a very hard one, and can
be accomplished only by advancing from one tentative
definition to another.

We. must begin, therefore, with a provisional definition
of tlie genuine outer reality as distinguished from any
seeming outer world. What character, we ask, is the
essential character of an objective truth as such ? What
do we mean by the outer order ? The natural and provi-

The ultimate motive with the every-day man is the will to have an
external world. . . . We construct but do not receive the external
reality.” I quote this passage here because some of my critics have
taken it, strangely enough, as the expression of my own idealism.
On the contrary, it is expressly stated in the book in question as the
siibstancc of the popular and every-day point of view, to which only
a genuine idealism ever gives any sound and objective basis.

^ It is of this objective truth that on p. 332 of the Religmis Aspect
I ventured to speak as of something ** not our postulate.” Of this
absolute aspect of the outer truth, later chapters of that work sought
to give proof. Yet, in common with other objective idealists, I
have occasionally had the fortune to be spoken of as one who does
not pretend to any truth beyond the finite self, but only to pos-
tulate such truth.


384 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

sionally acceptable answer is, that from our human point
of view, the outer order, in so far at least as it is the
object of science, is simply so much of the truth of the
self as is revealed, through our experience, and to our
finite consciousness, in aspects that are universal and
abiding, and not merely private, fleeting, and momentary.
The contrast between the inner and the outer is generally
recognized, in fact, as the contrast between the transient
and the permanent in our outer experience. What per-
sists in experience, must, we say, correspond to some real
truth beyond our private selves. In this sense we call a
dream unreal, because all the dream-people and the
dream-objects vanish when we awake. On the other
hand, we caU the matter of physical nature real, because
its quantity appears to be unchangeable, in so far as our
experience enables us to measure this quantity. For a
similar reason it is that Professor Tait has frequently
argued that from the physical point of view the two cer-
tain realities of the outer order are matter and energy
(the latter being distinguished very decidedly from what
is technically called force). For these two, says Profes-
sor Tait, are permanent throughout the whole range of
scientific experience. But at all events, whether any
given theory as to what the permanent elements in expe-
rience may be proves correct or no, it seems very fair
indeed to say, at the outset, that the objective, the outer
reality is for us mortals that which is experienced as
enduring.

Yet permanence, as such, is not the only character of
the reality that we call outer. There is another character,
closely associated with permanence, that is of still deeper
meaning. We are accustomed, namely, to distinguish the
inner from the outer by saying that their contrast is that
between what only some one finite consciousness, or only
a certain limited number of such consciousnesses expe-
rience, in their relati^re and fleeting life of limitations,


PHYSICAL LAW AND FREEDOM.


885


and that which all must experience, in so far as they
share in a common rationality. As I now am, I feel pain
or pleasure. That is, in itself considered, just my pain or
pleasure, in so far as I am this finite and changing bit
of a self, bound here to these moments of time. That
pleasure or pain, then, for the first, exists only in me and
in nobody else. The world of the true and absolute Self
contains that fact, but contains it here only. The true
* Self has the pleasure or pain, but only in so far forth as
he, is limited to me. You know nothing directly concern-
ing it. You are another bit of a self, like me ; you have
your feelings, I mine. It is true that in order even to be
thus bounded in time and experience, we must have a real
and organic communion of life in and through the one
Spirit. It is he who feels and works in us. No fragment
of our life but is his. But our feelings, the facts of our
inner life as such, are his only in so far as he is conceived
under the form and the limitations of our various finite
selves and moments of life.

On tlie other hand, I now can think of numbers, and
when I think that three and two together make five, I
think by virtue indeed of feelings that are mine and not
yours, but with reference to a truth that I mean, and that
in the finite and individual sense of the words is neither
yours nor mine, but tlmt is truth for all of us. So space
and time, if indeed they are more than mere seemings of
our human point of view, are such universal and conse-
quently ever present truths. To say that space and time
are objectively real is to say, then, that these tilings, re-
vealed though they are through your feelings and through
mine (and so far merely facts of the inner life), are yet
truth for all of us, like the numbers, and not only for all
of us men, but for every intelligent bit of a self in all the
universe, be he archangel or dweller in Mars. To doubt
the reality of space is to doubt just this opinion.^

^ An objector may say that, if this account of the nature of outer


886


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


There is, then, for us, this provisional contrast between
the inner order and the outer. Whether this contrast
expresses the last word of philosophy, we have yet to see.
So far it is n’t a contrast that enables us to separate the
two orders, but it is one that does enable us to distinguish
them. This contrast is that between the permanent and
universal elements of experience on the one hand, and
the private and fleeting elements of experience on the
other. Oiir finite life has its inner aspect in so far as it
is just iniividual, the truth of our moments as such, the
breaking of just our waves of consciousness on the beach.
But our finite consciousness relates to outer and physical
truth in so far as it means something that may be pre-
sent for any and all intelligent moments and individuals.
When one questions, as we did in an earlier lecture,

truth be even provisionally accepted, the laws of number would be
objectively true in no other sense than the laws of physics. But (so
the objector will ask) are numbers real in the same sense in whieh
matter is real ? I answer, It is a familiar proposition of what is
called modern positivism in philosophy that the laws of arithmetic,
of geometry, and of mathematics generally, arc merely physical
truths of a peculiar simplicity and abstractness. This proposition
of positivism I fully accept. Numbers, in so far as they are ab-
stractions, are indeed unreal, because our experience is always of a
miinber of physical facts. But the laws of arithmetic are laws of
the physical world, and are true because they are so. To be sure,
the physical world is not what many who call themselsres positivists
take it to be. It is the world of the truth, in so far forth as this
truth is public property for all Unite intelligences ; it is the world of
the truth that lasts, and that can be shared, that is n’t the private
property of momentary consciousness, like our feelings, but that,
although revealed to each of us through his feelings, has a commu-
nicable, an universal aspect. In this sense, the principle that three
and two make five, or such a principle as tlie binomial theorem, is
as genuinely physical a law as is the law of gravitation ; save that
the last-mentioned law deals with a far more complex and concrete
reality, and may have, for that very reason, a far more limited scope.
In what sense the arithmetical laws are a priori and absolutely utu«
versal, we shall sec later.


PHYSICAL LAW AND FREEDOM.


887


whether the world of the interwoven spirals and streams
of stars, the world of the consolidating matter and of the
“ running down ” energy, is what it seems to be, one’s
question means this : Is this world that we men have been
thinking out as we interpreted our human feelings, a
world of truth that would necessarily be present to other
than* human intelligences in the same form as those in
which it is present to us ? If the archangels can count,
if the inhabitants of Mars can add, they will all agree
with us that three and two make five. But we know not
as yet whether they would or would not, in case they came
to think of the same truth that wo think of when we look
at tlie stars, agree with us as to the forms and laws of
this truth. Therefore, and in no other sense, do we
doubt whether the world of the stars is what it seems,
and whether we are after all playing with the pebbles
on the beach.”

111 .

WliJit we want, then, next in order, is a fuller state*
ment of what is implied in this provisional criterion of
objectivity. Each of us is thinking in more oi* less frag-
mentary ways and moments. We want some means of
distinguishing the essentially private in our thoughts from
the permanent, the public, «and the universal.

Our effort to define such a criterion must begin in an
extremely naive and simple fashion. If I am dealing
with my neighbor, and he says that he has experiences
which stand for outer truth, and which arc n’t merely his
private feelings, my first disposition is to demand that he
shall put me where I can get these experiences, too, or
something that we shall both recognize as similar expe-
riences. If he sees a rainbow, and regards it as standing
for a real and outer truth, as being essentially an objec-
tive idea, and I doubt that he sees the rainbow, I ask
to be shown it. If, looking towards the quarter of the
heavens to which he points, I see that to which I readily


888 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

apply the same name, I am quickly convinced, from the
point of view of untutored common sense, that we are both
seeing the same rainbow. A very close and critical ob<
servation would, however, erelong prove to us both, as
he and 1 moved about, that his rainbow and mine do not
occupy precisely the same apparent place, with reference
to our experiences of other objects. If we become aware
of this fact, we may first begin to differ as to whose rain-
bow is the real one, and later, with proper instruction, we
shall come to sec that just because an essential character
of the visible rainbow, namely, its seeming place in the
world of the things upon whoso reality we are already
agreed, is a matter of the point of view, the rainbow it-
self must have a decidedly different sort of physical
objectivity from that possessed by other objects, say, for
instance, trees and mountains.

So far, tlien, the test of objectivity is the apparent
similarity of our human experiences when two or more
of us arc in given circumstances. This similarity, how-
ever, is critically examined by comparing, as far as pos-
sible, the accounts that we can give to one another of the
relations amongst the objects of our experience. In
other words, the test of objectivity is, so far, permanence
and community of ideas, and the test of the permanence
and community of ideas is the sameness of the descrip-
tion that we can give to one another of the relations
amongst the various parts of our private experience.

Hero at once appears an important distinction in our
private experiences themselves. As they come to us, they
are very complex, and they interest us from moment to
moment in ways that embody just our private mood. But
07ie interest we take in them which brings to pass for us
just that distinction upon which the whole of natural
science depends. This is the interest in describing them.
The distinction that it introduces is one between what ia
describahle^ and what is only appreciable. As my expe*


PHYfijlCAL LAW AND FH££DOM.


S89


rience conies to me at any moment, I may, namely, be
said to £^ppreciate it in some fashion. TW is, it feels
to me so or so. I like it or I hate it. Or again, where
pleasure and pain are n’t marked, still there is an essen-
tially indescribable value that my experience has for me
when regarded just as my own feeling. Tastes have one
sort of worth for me, colors another. An electric shock
from a Leyden jar is appreciated as a peculiar and atro-
cious interruption of all other trains of feeling, such that
its painful value is surely, but inexpressibly, different
from that of all other experiences. Such elementary and
personal interests in the passing moment, such essentially
dumb appreciations^ have in them few elements dr none
whereby we can test whether or no we have them in
common with our neighbors. Real sympathy, real shar-
ing of even the most elementary appreciations there may
be ; and of the significance of such, in case they exist, we
shall hear something later on. For the moment we are
disposed to call our elementary appreciations indescrib-
able, •and to regard them as the most characteristic in-
stances of private and individual experience, which reveal
merely wie es uns zu Muihe ist^ not what can be called
objective.

On the other hand, there are certain elements of our
experience which we regard as describable. How my own '
hat feels when I pick it up, taking it from amongst a large
number of hats in a dimly lighted cloak-room, is something
that I can only appreciate. I know my hat by the /eel
of it when I pick it up. How I know it I can’t tell you.
On the other hand, that I find my hat hung a peg higher
than I myself left it, that it is hung on the right or the
left side of the room, that just as I took it the clock struck
ten, these are experiences that I pretend to be able to
describe. I can tell you, so I say, just what I mean by
them. I hold them to be experiences that anybody might
have, whether he felt about my hat as I do, or did not.


890


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


Now the character that makes an experience describa*
ble, involves two facts concerning its nature. The first
fact is that an experience, just in so far forth^ as it is
describable, is reproducible at pleasure by the person who
can describe it. For him, indeed, the act of description
is always a voluntary and more or less cum})letc or abbre-
viated reproduction of the experience described. As he
thus reproduces for the purpose of description, he has a
sense of his own power over the reproduction. The feel-
ing was confined to the moment ; the description already
involves a communication from moment to moment within
a man’s own life. Here, already, is a partial interpretOr
tion of the permanence which we before recognized as a
character of outer truth. The describablij, as such, has
for us one sort of permanence. The second fact is that, in
the unity of consciousness, the relations amongst feelings
which permit us to describe the content of any moment
must themselves fall under certain general types, or, as wo
more technically say, under either Forms or Categories of
experience. By forms of experience we mean the charac-
teristics which we exj)ress by saying that our experience
involved ideas of space or of time ; that is, that our feel-
ings were those of extensive size or of shape, or of dura-
tion. By categories of experience we mean at present the
characteristics which enable us to say, that what we expe-
rienced consisted of one or of many feeling's, of like or of
different feelings, or again, of feelings that differed from
one another, or resembled one another, in quantity or in
quality. There are many other such categories used in
the work of physical science. Here is no place to enu-
merate or to explain them. Our meaning at jiresent is
that the formless and uncategorized experience, in so
far as it is such, appears, from our present and provi-
sional point of view, a merely private appreciation, which
does not reveal outer truth, while the well formed and
sharply categorized experience is in so far regarded as


PHYSICAL LAW AND FREEDOM.


891


capable of description, and therefore as apt to reveal
outer truth. I can’t tell you much about the curious
minor feelings of vague depression that once followed, in
my own case, an attack of influenza. If you have passed
through a similar experience, you may appreciate my feel-
ings. But I can never be quite sure that you do. On
the contrary, I can tell you, if I like, a good deal about
any experience that I can define in terms of known geo-
metrical figures, of numbers, of duration, of size, or of
some law of the recurrence of experiences. “ Ten strokes
of the clock,” “ two feet to the right,” “ a regular recur-
rence of wind and rain, following, on several occasions, a
rapidly falling barometer,” — all these are phrases of
description, — not indeed of unlimited or of complete de-
scrii)tion ; for all these phrases suggest elementary expe-
riences of sound, of sight, and of otlier indescribable feel-
ings, that are in so far mere appreciations. But they are
phrases of description in so far as they express definite
relations in sjpace and in time, and relations that fall
under such typical categories as quantity, number, recur-
rence, likeness, regularity, and other such notions, — these
relations of experience being so far under our control that
we can reproduce at will typical instances which exem-
plify them. All such phrases pretend to tell something
about a conceived outer reality. Of such is the kingdom
of natural science.

To recapitulate : (1) An experience is indescribable if
I lose it beyond clear rccalT as soon as it is gone. In
order to be describable it must contain aspects that I can
reconstruct out of their elements at pleasure, so long as
my intelligent memory lasts. I can describe oidy what I
can keep and permanently think out. (2) In the next
place, this my power to think out and reconstruct my
experience must, in every case of description, depend
upon my discovery of the forms and the categories that
the experience exemplifies. (3) Only that which is re*


S92 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHT.

vealed through our experience in describable form, how*
ever, has, so far in our discussion, approved itself as
objective, as public property, as universal. It may indeed
be that we shall need to modify soon this provisional and
tentative account ; and that some of the objective truths
are indescribable. But so far we have not found in-
stances of the soi*t. Thus far describable facts and objec-
tive facts mean pretty much the same thing for us who
live under ordinary human limitations. The business of
natural science is the description of the world of experi-
ence.” And the real is so far the describable.

With such a provisional definition of the real in mind,
let us glance back at the world of the mere appreciations,
to bring out the contrast now defined. The noblest and
the most stupid appreciations, it would seem, may, and
in many cases do alike exemplify this formless and uncate-
gorized chjiractcr of the merely private and so far illusory
experience. On the other hand, the most artistically
worthless fact in what we call nature, the 4 )hysical thing
that wo appreciate least and regard as of least worth, will
exemplify, in so far as it is an outer fact, this definable,
this universal character, this conformity to rules of de-
scription, this presence in space and in time, this submis-
sion to categories, which together make natural science
possible. The reasons in both cases appear so far to be
ones already pointed out. What is describable is as such
public property. A man who knows it once for what it
is, and who keeps his wits, can think out its characters,
can mentally reproduce the relationships of its elements,
can tell his neighbor about it, and can feel tolerably sure
that if any intelligent being got into the right place in
the world-order, he too would experience something of
much the same description, however colored his inner feel-
ings might be. On the other hand, what is rCt so defined
by space and time and number and quantity, and the
otlier types of intelligent experience, as to have the relai


PHYSICAL LAW AND FREEDOM.


893


tions of its parts describable is, first of all, when once it
is past, like the tender grace of a day that is dead.” It
comes not back. While it is present it is like the tears,
idle tears,” whereof ‘‘ I know not what they mean.” It is
like —

“ That sense, which at the winds of spring
In rarest visitation, or the voice
Of one beloved, heard in youtli alone,

Fills the faint eyes with falling tears which dim
The radiant looks of iiiibc wailing flowers,

And leaves this peopled earth a solitude
When it returns no more.”

The merely appreciable, then, as such, is, in our human
world, notoriously fleeting. So with all the lovely things
in Schiller’s lines : —

** IVarum bin ich verganglicht O Zeus f So fragte die Schonlieit.

Macht dich docA, sagte dcp Gott, nur das Vergdngliche sekon I
Und die Liebe, die Jiigend, der Thau und die Bliimen vernahmen ’s ;
Alle gingen sie weg, weinend von Jupiter’s Thron.”

The atoms, as describable, seem thus far to be realities,
and they survive. The noble emotions of youth and of
lovers die. If^ however, this provisional definition of the
real is to be in any way supplemented, and if the apprecia-
tions too are to become of eternal significance, as the poets
desire, then the appreciations, it would seem, must not be
the appreciations of merely temporal and transient beings,
but of some being that himself does not live in moments,
as we mortals on earth do, but that appreciates in eter-
nity, or that shares in such an eternal appreciation.

“ Only that which never lias been,” in our world of time,
as Schiller tells us, “ that alone grows never old.” He is
speaking of course of appreciable realities, not of physical
ones. Or, again, the enduring appreciation may be com
ceived as belonging to an immortal soul, that survives the
loveliness of all passing moments : —

Sweet spring, full of sweet days and roses,

A box where sweets compacted lie.


394


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


My music shows ye have your closes,

And all must die.

“ Only a sweet and virtuous soul

Like seasoned timber never gives ;

But though the whole world turn to coal
Then chiefly lives.”

Or finally, a community of such free spirits might share
together the lasting appreciation. But such eternal ap-
preciation is confessedly, for us mortals, far too much an
ideal. Whether we do in any measure partake of such
an appreciative consciousness remains to be seen, and
forms one of the deepest problems of constructive philoso-
phy, For the moment, we have suggested to us, in this
distinction between the outer reality which is dcscribable,
and the inner appreciation which is unreal, one tragedy of
our finitude, namely, that our descriptive consciousness,
coldly and dispassionately devoting itself to the typical,
to the relatively universal structure of our experience,
seems to seize upon what is for that very reasoi) real,
abiding, yes, like the numbers and the atoms, everlasting
in time, while, on the other hand, that which makes the
moment often so dear to us, its appreciable aspect, its
value, is indescribable, and so essentially private and
fleeting. This it is that makes science often so cold to
us, and facts so lifeless, while the glowing world of appre>
ciation appears to be, after all, so fantastic and vain ; —

“ Grau, theurer Freund, ist alle Theorie,

Und griin dcs Lebciis goldener Baum.’

So far, however, we have come seeking for the conse-
quences of our provisional definition of the essential
nature of the outer order. We see now, plainer than at
first, that the outer order as viewed by us men must be
one of well-knit and universal law, structure, order, that
it must be in definite forms, subject to categories, inde*


PHYSICAL LAW AND FREEDOM.


395


pendent of momentary caprices. All this, as we begin to
see, it must be in order to be describable. And describar
ble it must appear to us in order that the content of one
intelligent moment of conscious life should be, under the
conditions of our finite human existence, communicable to
another. In short, the outer and natural order is begin-
ning to show itself in its complete character as a “ World
of Description,” that, as such, is bound to appear in our
experience as a world of permanence and of necessity.
Forms and categories are necessary to description, and
these mean order and fixity of type.

On tlie other hand there may alreaily appear, on the
horizon of our discussion, the notion of another sort of
conceivable reality, different from our natural order, buf
as possible in the logical sense as ours, namely, the real
ity of what we may call a World of Appreciation. For
consiiler, wore our hum<an intercourse of anotlier sort,
were all the moments of all our human lives directly
appreciable by us together and at our pleasure, — thm
the world of our accessible truth would have quite another
aspect from that of the world of description. Conceive,
namely, for the sake of argument, and as an ideal, of
beings who were so aware of their common relations to
the true Self that their life together was one of an inti-
mate spiritual communion, so that the experience of each
was an open book for all of them. In other words, con-
ceive of beings who were mutually perfect mind-readers
one of another. Their highest spiritual world would be
for them what, in our finite bondage, our physical world
of the outer order is not for us, a world of “ one undivided
soul of many a soul.” The truth of it would be universal,
without having to be first abstractly described. Or, to
remind ourselves of what we learned in studying Hegel’s
characteristic theory of universals, tlie community of
truth, in the world of such spirits, would be rather of the
Hegelian type of universality, than of the ordinary type


896


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


of the more abstract universality. Forms and categories
there would doubtless be in the experience of such beings,
but the necessity for such forms would be of another
kind. The experience of each individual would there be
directly and organically related to the experience of all.
It wouldn’t be necessary to put it into abstract shape
before communicating it. Nor would the appreciative
moment, once passed, be for each individual beyond recall,
leaving this peopled earth a solitude when it returned no
more, lor each spirit in that free world would read at
pleasure his own past mind and experience as well as his
neighbor’s, would not abstractly and discursively recon-
struct, but would directly acknowledge the world of his
whole inner and of his whole outer order, by virtue of
the one organic and complete form of intercourse which
would there exist. In such a world of spiritual inter-
course, all the thoughts of one man would become directly
the object of his neighbor’s thought. In such a case we
should stand in the presence of an order in which the dis-
tinction of outer and inner would be no ultimate one. All
would be appreciable, spiritual, significant. But, as such
appreciative mind-reading is under ordinary human con-
ditions denied us, what we mean by having common
objects, a common truth, and the same nature of things
present to us all, is expressible only by saying that in so
far as we can describe the contents of our moments of
experience, and communicate these descriptions through
imitative gestures, or through conventional speech, — so
far and no further does our experience appear to us to
represent the permanent, the outer, the objective. And
hence, however the objective world may appear to freer
spirits, or however it ultimately appears to the Self in his
wholeness, to us it must appear, for the first, as a world of
formed and well-categorized experience, that is, as a world
of orderly universality. For only orderly universality is
describable.


PHYSICAL LAW AND FREEDOM.


397


IV.

I must beg you to glance back once more over the
course of this necessarily intricate argument. We have
been trying to define what is meant by the true and ob-
jective, as distinct from the private and merely subjective
elements of our human experience. We have provision-
ally defined the physically real, for us men, as that which
we exi)erienci and can describe. We have defined the
business of natural science, therefore, as the description
of the content of experience. We have formed a provi-
sional notion of nature, as being “the World of Descrip-
tion.” As only that whicii has Form, Categories, Univer-
sality, about it is describable, we have asserted already
that tliis world of description must be a world of rigid
necessity.

On the other hand, however, we have suggested hypo-
thetically what a “ World of Appreciation ” might be. It
would be a world such as the organic Self in his whole-
ness might have present to him at a glance, or such as
the community of conceived spiritual mind-readers might
share. It would be a world whose Universals were of
the type that Ilegcl defined. It might be free from
the typo of necessity that our order of nature possesses.
It might be a world altogether inspired by appreciative
ideals ; and yet it would bo a world of objective truth, for
each individual in it, each conscious moment of it, would
find the others as outer and yet not foreign facts.

But now we must turn back from the hypothetical sug-
gestion of that world of appreciation, whose reality we
have yet by no means verified, and must study a little
more closely the world of description, — the world, as we
have seen, in which our actual human science moves.

This world of empirical science suggests a w<'ll-known
philosophical problem to which we must next refer. Sci-
ence, as everybody knows, assumes that the physical world


898


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


is one where the law of causation rules, where nature is
uniform, and where, in general, what have been called
axioms, namely, certain obvious and a priori principles,
are valid. Now it is an old problem how empirical sci-
ence comes by these a priori principles. You remember
Hume’s doubts about the original of our idea of neces-
sary connection.” You remember the controversy over
the innate ideas. You remember Kant’s “ Transcendental
Deductif n of the Categories.” Now in our Say many stu-
dents of the philosophy of science, following more or less
unconsciously in the footsteps of Kant, have been more
and more inclined to agree upon an account of the nature
of these so-called “ axioms ” that I myself regard as un-
questionably on the right track, although there is still
much to be done in developing this view in aU its details.^
According to this view the one postulate of physical sci-
ence is that the real objects revealed to us in our experi-
ence are describable in universal terms, and are so whether
these objects are “ things ” or ‘‘ events.” In order to be
describable, the things and the events must appear, to us
men, in space and in time, because these forms of our ex-
perience are actually the aspects of our conscious life that
we have to use as the basis of every description. Fur-
tliermore, in order to make our description valid for all
intelligent human beings, the fashions of our description
have to be universal. We can’t describe the unique, e, jr.,
Shelley’s “ sense that at the winds of spring,” etc. That
we have to appreciate. Therefore it is n’t an object of
scientific experience. Moreover, in order to describe, we

^ The present is no place for a bibliog^raphy. I must refer to the
now almost classic discussions in the introductory lecture of Kirch-
hoff’s Vorlesungen uher Mathematische Pkysikf in the Lectures and Es^*
says of ClitTord, vol. i. pp. 111-123, and in Mach’s THe Mechanik in
Hirer Entwichdung^ etc. Sec, for a popular sug^^^stion of some re-
lated views, the interesting book on Fundamental Problems^ by Dr.
Paul Carus. The present use of the word* description” 1 borrow
from Kirclihoff, extending, however, his notion in my own way.


PHYSICAL LAW AND FREEDOM.


899


have to reduce the transient to the permanent. Other-
wise the description would not be independent of the
appreciative content of the moment. Hence we have to de-
scribe in terms of assumed changeless things (e. atoms,
elements, media, — in a word, substances). And in so far
as the world of experience endlessly changes, we have to
refer (1) these changes of experience to changes of space
and time relations amongst the assumed substances, and
(2) the. ways of changing themselves, so far as possible,
to universal laws. The axiom of the ‘^permanence of
substance” has this very simple meaning, namely, that
in so far as I can describe my experience to other men,
who stand quite outside of this moment, there must be
elements in the thing that is the object of this experi-
ence which are quite independent of the particular time
when I experienced the object itself. In fact, so far as
anybody else, at any other time, could conceivably expe-
rience this same thing, it must, ipso facto^ be ohangcless.
And unless anybody else you please could conceivably
experience this same thing, either at the same time, or at
any other time you please, the object is n’t public property,
and I am doubtless in so far busied with my private ap-
preciation. The changing elements in my experience of
things may, however, themselves be described, in so far as
they involve changes of relation amongst the permanent
things that have been assumed to exist in space and time.
For types of change must have permanent descriptions.^
From this point of view events too, as well as things, may
be objects of scientific experience, i. e., may be freed from

^ The discovery of the exact meaning of this truth by Galileo and
his contemporaries gave rise later to the Calculus, which is esi)ccially
devoted to the mathematical description of the permanent types of
change (c/, Newton’s name, Theory of Fluxions), ami eventually has
brought within the prospective range of exact science the vast world
of ** sublunary” changes, which ancient thought found almost hope-
less, or only sought to Appreciate in terms of ideals ; cf. Laaswiti^
Die Atomistik, vol. i. pp. 79-85 and 175-183.


400 THK SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHT.

the appreciative privacy of the momentary experience.
The axiom of Causation is the axiom of tlie Describability
of Events, in so far as they are real and public and are
not merely events as privately appreciated. The axiom
of the Uniformity of Nature is the axiom that the event
once described, i, e., reduced to an universal type, is de-
scribed forever. Is that event one of a type that may be-
come a possible object of anybody’s experience, — then it
has universal and unchangeable characteristics. These
constitute its law. Whoever experienced an event of the
type, i. c., an event involving the same things in the same
time and space relations, would observe in it these same
characteristics. For otherwise there is something incom-
municable, L e., merely appreciable about the event.

All these thoughts I have to suggest very dogmatically.
Let a few brief illustrations indicate, not their proof, but
their meaning.

First then, all the so-called axioms of natural science
relate to things and events in so far as they are describa-
blc. There is notoriously no axiom as to the caprices of
maidens, or as to the wayward human heart generally.
The axioms of natural science are about number, space,
time, motion, force (in the technical sense of the word),
^all describable matters.^

Ill the second place our most assured and universal ax-
ioms all relate to matters of the completest describability.
I know that all beings, if only they can count, must find
that three and two make five. Perhaps the angels can’t
count ; but if they can, this axiom is true for them. If I
met an angel who declared that his experience had occa-
sionally shown him a three and a two that did not make
five, I should know at once what sort of an angel he was.

^ Or about matters assumed to be describable. A deeper study
than there is here room to undertake would show how limited oui
actual powers of description are. At the basis of every description,
e. ff., of space, one finds a fundamental and irreducible appreciation.


PHYSICAL LAW AND FRKEDOM.


401


But now why am I so sure of this ? Simply because my
description of three and of two is so free from merelj^
appreciative elements, because I know so perfectly theii
precise structure, and know that it is their structure, and
is not any part of the appreciative content of tlie feelings
of the moiueiit when I count three and two. My feelings
may be of what you will, of notes of music or of chalk-
marks. I count ; that is enough. The numbers as num-
bers are producible and reproducible at my pleasure by my
counting, and are not matters of my feelings. They are
then indeed in my experience, but are not q/' the moment.

Of geometrical axioms there is no time to speak at
present. Let us pass immediately to more concrete in-
stances. Take the aiuuent case of the principle that all
men are mortal.” This is confessedly no .axiom. It is an
induction from experience. What is the reason why we
are so sure of it ? If anybody, c. r/,, tlic angel aforesaid,
told us that in his experience there were cases of men
who had lived a hundred thousand years, and who ap-
peared to him to be essentially immortal, what should we
reply ? If we thouglit already pretty highly of the angel
in question, we might not respond according to our first
impulse, but might reflect a little. If we did thus hesi-
tate, what axiomatic answer to his assertion could we verjf'
soon suggest ? Very obviously this : That if this indeed
were so, then the people that he called men must be in
some fashion of a very different description from the peo-
ple to whom we are accustomed to limit the name. That
answer would express the scientific postulate very pre-
cisely. If any man is a real man, and not a creature in
a dream, then he must have some sort of public and defi-
nite description, capable of being put into universal terms ;
and this description must be such as to follow him through
all his fortunes to the end. The description will be one
involving substances, and changes in the relations of these
substances, the changes having a definable type. If this


402 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

definable type of change is such as to involve some day
the death of the man, — well then, anybody else who
corresponds to this same description must also be doomed
to death. That is the whole story of the universal mor-
tality of man. That is all that we know about it, except
indeed in so far as our knowledge of the description of
the typical process of heredity enables us to say that the
offspring of men must be dcscribable as a man, and must
therefore be as mortal as his fathers.

To take another illustration : the Paul of Acts xxviii.
2-6 gathered sticks to make a fire, and thereupon the
viper came out of the heat, and stung him. The barba-
rians, looking on, anticipated his death, and made appro-
priate but rather narrowly appreciative comments. But
“ he shook off the beast into the fire, and felt no harm.’’
So, after they had looked a great while and saw no
harm come to him, they changed their minds, and said
that he was a god.” The reasoning, granted the facts of
the narrative, was crude, but not extraordinary. Evi-
dently these barbarians used, after their fashion, the prin-
ciple of the uniformity of nature. And what was this
principle in their eyes ? It was the principle of the uni-
versality and consequent permanence of descriptions. A
i^an was described, according to their notion, as a being
who, amongst other general characters, possessed that of
swelling up and dropping down dead when stung by a
viper. The description was inexact, but it served for
lack of a better. Now Paul did not do this. He felt no
harm. Well then, what followed ? Not that one changed
one’s description of a man, but that one looked for an-
other class with another description, wherein to place
Paul. Paul’s companions already had in mind a certain
sub-class of men, described as apostles, who were, amongst
other general characteristics, exempt from injury by the
touch of “ deadly things.” To them, therefore, the class!'
fication as god ” was both superfluous and excluded.


PHYSICAL LAW AND FREEDOM.


408


The real axiom is then, that both things and events, in
so far as they are objective, have universal and perma-
nent descriptions, in whose unity all that is real concerning
the events is so bound up that a given grouping of char-
acteristics can be predicted for any object that corre-
sponds to the given description. All prediction of natural
events is therefore of necessity hypothetical. The sun
will certainly rise to-morrow ^in this part of the cosmos
the same bodies keep moving in the present ways ; and
this they will do unless some describable physical cata-
strophe (e. the blowing into small fragments of the
earth from some enormous internal tension) takes place
before to-morrow; and this catastrophe, again, will not
take place, unless describable physical changes are now
going on in the earth and in the universe at large that are
tending towards such an explosion, and tending in such
manner as to lead to it before to-morrow. So one must
always state one’s predictions. That the same causes lead
to the same effects means, when interpreted in exact me-
chanical terms, that certain definable motions, velocities,
and accelerations of certain definite bodies are such,
that when you describe them mathematically and exactly,
you find certain earlier conditions of a system of bodies
leading to and involving, as part of the whole descriptiqj|^
certain later states. The belief that there is physical
causation is then the belief that such mathematically ex-
act descriptions of the things and events of the world are
possible, whether we have found them as yet or not. And
the genuine foundation of this belief is the observation
that only by thus categorizing and formalizing our experi-
ence do we find ourselves able to make its content public
property, for our later thought, or for our neighbors. I
must reconstruct my experience, or it is not publicly mine,
is not universal, is not impersonal. And to reconstruct it
I must lay stress upon so much of it as exemplifies forms
and categories.


404 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

One returns then, for the sake of characterizing this
whole world of description, to the suggestion that the
case of the rainbow already brought before us at the out-
set. My neighbor experiences this or that. He says that
this experience was not his alone, but was an experience
of universal truth. Wdl then^ we say, tell us what it
was. In so far as he does this, with exactness, and under
the conditions of scientific rigidity, he describes. If he
describer successfully, he tells us, then, of definite and
permanent things, in space and time, that behave in defi-
nite and permanent ways. Does he fail of this rigidity of
description (as our imperfect science is continually failing,
ill all but its mathematical departments), what is our con-
clusion ? It is one that first voices itself thus : T/ien, as we
say, you have not yet experienced enough of your object.
Go hack to it^ and study it and its relations to other ob-
jects until you, have reached mathematical exactness.
Does our observer now reply : — “ But I can’t reach such
exactness, with any amount of study, because the object
itself is n’t exact, conforms to no laws, behaves in no per-
manent way, is n’t a lasting or a definite object ” ? — Then
our final answer is : Ah, very well, if this be so, your
object is n’t an object, but your private feeling. This
Gewiihl von Erscheinungen we have heard of before from
Kant. It is the very essence of the private and personal
experience, uncategorized, incapable therefore of being
shared by anybody else, and therefore not objective.

So much then for a sketch of the world of description.
So much for the gist of what I take to be the only possi-
ble “deduction of the categories” of physical nature.
Therefore is this our physical world one of rigid law, of
immovable order, of atoms and ether vibrations and well-
conserved energy. Therefore, moreover, is it an essen-
tially human world, the world not of the fully conscious
Self as such, in his eternal completeness, but of beings
who never communicate with exactness through any de«
vices but those of abstract description.


PHYSICAL LAW AND FREEDOM.


405


V.

It hardly needs a very elaborate proof to show that
this world of description as it has now at length been de-
fined for us cannot be the whole of the real world. Our
provisional assumption has indeed aided us thus far very
well. It has defined for us the world of exact natural
science, a world of boundless intellectual concern to us
men, and surely a part or at all events an aspect of the
real world. But our assumption has not pretended to be
adequate to the account of one sort of outer reality, in
which we all believe, and which we continually long to
know.

Here in my world of daily experience is my friend.
In what sense is he real to me ? Very inijicrfectly I can
describe him — a man of such height, so or so conditioned
and habited as to this space form, wherein I find all the
things of my world. Science teaches me to guess at a
closer description of him. If one saw him through and
through, as with my poor eyes I see him not, one would
ultimately experience as the describablo jiliysical facts
about him, — a quivering mass of molecules. I need not
go further as to the constitution of these molecules.
Enough, they would be flying about together, a swarm of
trillions upon trillions, — restless with the pent-uji energy
of their unstable mutual positions, and witli the live
energy of their swift and ceaseless flight. Multitudes of
them would be perpetually leaving, at every breath he
draws, the form that I call his. Multitudes of new ones
would take the place of what he had lost. Especially
complex with intertwined spirals and streams of multitu-
dinous molecules would be each of the many tens of mil-
lions of cells of his brain. In this “ system of systems,’’
like the astronomer in the boundless heavens, I the ob-
server, were I acute enough to witness all this, would be
lost. Thus my friend, however, might be found, as a fact


406


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


in space and tiihe, public before all men and angels in so
far as they too were able to view him. Thus he might
be found? Nay, I have as yet found him not at all.
I did not mean this maze of molecules by my friend. I
meant liis intelligence, which he more or less transmits to
me through his own descriptive gestures and speech, —
this and his appreciations themselves, which, as I have all
along been saying, are his, and his alone, purely, private
facts of his inner life, but which, after all, I value most
about him. His ideals, which I so admire, his will, which
is often so much wiser than mine, his approval, which I
prize so highly, — where are all these ? Are they for me
fact» in my world ? Yes, for I mean to speak of them.
I think about them, and either they are real as I think
them to be, or else, if I am in error, the true Self, who
knows all things, is aware of what place in the true and
absolute order the genuine object of my thoughts occu-
pies, and knows what facts really constitute that to me in-
accessible object. Facts they are for me ; and they are
not facts within me ; nor yet are they describablc facts in
my space and in my time. The forms of my world con-
tain them nowhere. The categories of my understanding
cannot be impressed upon them. And yet they are real.
They are in truth amongst the most vitally real objects of
my faith, of my thinking, and of my will.

What sort of reality then is this ? Is it not a most
familiar kind of reality, in which our human social con-
sciousness is absolutely bound up, without constant refer-
ence to which we speak hardly a waking word ? And yet
is it not a reality that as such absolutely transcends our
private consciousness, and absolutely defies our powers of
physical description ?

And still all along, even in trying so resolutely to con*
fine the objective consciousness to the consciousness of
whatever is describable, were we not meanwhile recogniz*
ing and appealing to this objective other consciousness of


PHYSICAL LAW AND FREEDOM. 407

our fellows ? Yes, we were ; for we were speaking of what
truth we could describe, and so share with the beings who
possess this other consciousness. What we pretended to
share, however, with them, was some abstraction or other,
which in their experience we hoped that they could aho
realize. Their experience as such we never hoped to share.
That was private, inner, incommunicable. What we
could describe would be real for them only in case they
too could experience what they could then abstractly
describe in the same forms as those used by us. What
was shared was then never consciousness, but only the
imitative abstract and epitome of it, rendered cold and
unappreciative, in order tliJit it might the better be trans-
ferred, through word and gesture, from our appreciative
inner life to their foreign but equally warm and glowing
world of feeling. Yet all along they were real for us and
for one another. Their monad-like privacy, their window-
less isolation of momentary consciousness, — we acknow-
ledged its existence, and we pretended to intrude upon it
with our descriptions of our own space and time world,
descriptions wliich we asked them to verify. What could
we be meaning by all this ?

Our answer, as idealists, is already fully prepared and
indicated. The reality that I attribute to my friend, the
genuine external existence that (even while we defined the
outer order as that which could be experienced and de-
scribed) we all the while had to attribute to the appre-
ciations of our fellows (which we can never, in our finite
capacity, either experience or describe), — all this is unin-
telligible except in so far as one recognizes that we seem-
ingly isolated and momentary beings do share in the
organic life of the one Self. I mean my friend’s inner
life when I am fond of him. And yet my friend’s inner
life is not one of my finite experiences at all ; nor can it
ever become so, however much I peer about for his mind
in all my own world of space and of time; nor can I


408


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY,


describe how it must seem to all beholders, as I describe
the things of nature. What do I mean by him, then ?
Anything definite? Yes, a most definite, although not
a physical fact. I mean a fact in the same conscious
spiritual realm with me, a fact whose relation to me, as
the true object of my thought, only the inclusive Self,
in whose thought, for whose reflection, both my friend
and I exist, — only he can know, and knowing CSin con-
stitute.

Neither my friend’s inner life, nor the human lives all
about me whose experience I try to re-word in abstractly
universal terms in iny descriptive science, are themselves
describablc objects. They arc, nevertheless, real ; and so
there is a sense in which, despite my limitations, I know
myself as in a world of appreciation, a world whose facts
are hard and fast, arc beyond my private life, cannot be
expressed in terms of my space and time, and yet must
be present and united in the organic universality of the
one Self. And I presupposed this world at every step,
even while I spoke provisionally as if the objective and
the dcscribable were one and the same. The communion
of spirits, then, is genuine, although we have no con-
sciousness of a spiritual mind-reading of other finite
beings. Our relations with the universe are essentially
social. The world of description itself but expresses, in
so far as it is the truth, one aspect of this fact of our
sj)iritual intercourse. Because we can communicate with
each other, therefore we can so far identify our descrip-
tive accounts of our various inner experiences as to know
that we have truth in common. But we could not even
mean to communicate with each other, did we not presup-
pose, as an objective fact, such organic spiritual relations
as cannot possibly be expressed in any physical terms, but
only in terms of the assertion that all the spirits are truly
together in one Spirit.


PHYSICAL LAW AND FREEDOM.


409


VI.

The facts of the world of appreciation have already
forced us to alter in one respect our definition of the
nature of this world. At the outset it was for us the
world of essentially private appreciations, that is, of what
we called feelings. In so far as we regard ourselves as
beings 'bounded in time and space, the appreciative facts
do indeed still retain this private and inner nature. But
what we have now further found is the truth that the facts
of this universe of appreciative feelings are not as iso-
lated as at the outset they seemed to be, or as," in the
world of space and of time, they must still seem. My
friend yonder is, as fact of space and time, real to me
only in so far as his inner life is foreign. But in so far
as I truly communicate with him, wc are members of the
same world of appreciation ; and in this sense he is real
to me by virtue of our oi’ganic unity in the one Self.
This organic unity, whereby the monads of the spiritual
world . cease to be merely monads, has already introduced
that form of universality into the world of tlie apprecia-
tions which wo have just recognized. This world is one
whose parts never become public property for one another,
in so far as you observe them from without. Their ties
are of another sort. They are “ windowlcss ” (as Leibnitz
said of the Monads that in his doctrine made up the uni-
verse of finite beings) ; but they are windowless only to
one another’s finite view in the world of space and time
relations. From tibove they are open to the light of the
reflective Self, in whom they live and move and have their
being. It is with their relations as it is already within
our own finite lives, in so far as we are individual bits of
the Self. For the moments of our lives are all separate
in time, — • isolated as the various finite selves are, yet
in reflection we commune within ourselves, and catch in
one moment the meaning of a thought that was only half


410


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


articulate in another ; or correct, or otherwise review and
reword the ideas that, left solely to time, would seem to
be lost and dead forever. However small a bit of a self
I am, I already, then, possess something of the inclusive
transcendency of the true Self, for I “ look before and
after,” and join in my one consciousness more of time
than the mathematical instant would possess. And as the
moments of my finite thought are to me when I reflect
upon my own meaning, and upon the relations of many
moments of my life, so my neighbors and 1 are to the
larger Self when, discoursing together about the same
objects, we find ourselves as it were but moments in his
inclusive unity.

The world of appreciation is, then, one of a sort of
reflective “ publicity ” and interconnectedness ; and such
an interconnection and publicity is, as we have seen, the
very presupposition of the existence of any genuine truth
in the world of description. If I cannot really communi-
cate with my neighbor, and think of meanings tliat are
like his, there is no truth in any of our descriptions.
Without the multitude of genuinely interrelated expo,
rieiiccs, no true similarities, no describable universality
of experience ; without the facts of appreciation, no laws
of description ; without the cloud of witnesses, no ab-
stract and epitome of the common truth to which they
can bear witness. Destroy the organic and appreciable
unity of the world of appreciative beings, and the de-
scribable objects all vanish; atoms, brains, ‘‘suns and
milky ways ” are naught. On the other hand, if you
destroy our describing kind of intercommunication, you
can at least conceive of beings, as we did before, whose
communications were of a direct and appreciative sort, as
those of mother bird and nestlings now often seem to be
as we look at them. The world of science, then, preaup*
vosea the world of apiritual oneneaa ; the unity of the
Self is through and through His Own, and is in so fax
appreciative.


PHYSICAL LAW AND FREEDOM. 411

Nor are all appreciations dumb. The whole Moral
W'orld presupposes a sharing of definite and express ap-
preciations amongst moral beings,^ a realization ” of the
life of one by another. Describable phenomena may aid
this mutual realization, but can never assure it ; and only
when it is assured does the moral life begin. What Kant
called the Practical Keason, the moral nature of man, is
through and through appreciative, but it is not on that
account merely emotional. It is like the true Self, thor-
oughly and reflectively rational. The moral law itself is
in no physical sense an outer reality. You cannot describe
its facts as you can those of gravitation, by looking on
and computing; but none the less is the moral law a
truth, — a truth, namely, of the universal appreciation of
the world of finite ideals and strivings, all of them inner
facts, but, in their totality, an universe of genuine objec-
tivity. The world of appreciation is, then, the deeper
reality. Its rival, the world of description, is the result
of an essentially human and finite outlook.

Not’on tliat account, however, is the latter unreal It
is simply the way in which the world of appreciation, the
world of tlie true and spiritual Self, must needs appear
vdien viewed hy a finite being whose consciousness expe-
riences in the forms of our space and of our time^ and
who is interested in giving to his fellows a dispassionate
and universalized account of how he views it. Here is
the permanent truth of Kant’s doctrine.

But now, ere we pass to a closer study of the relations
of tlieso two aspects of reality, shall we not restate the
modified view that we have gained of the nature of the
world of appreciation ? As we now view it, it is the world
whose categories are not those of abstractly formal de-
scription, but arc not the less true categories. They are
the Categories of Self-Consciousness as such. When one

1 See The Religious Aspect of Philosophy^ chap vi. : The Moral Ine
fight, p. 131 sqq.


412


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


is describing an object of physical science, he is so much
concerned with the structure of this object, that it is his
butuness to forget, as we say, himself, and to live solely
in the process of constructive imitation whereby he seizes
upon what is enduring about this object. When he appre-
ciates, he says, on the contrary : So this thing is for me.
lienee it was that, at the outset, appreciation appeared to
us a sort of private exercise of each self-consciousness. It
was, as we first found it, a sort of speaking with tongues,
whereby each little bit of a self edified himself, but not
the brethren. Now, however, we have learned a more
excellent way. The truly objective and universal appre-
ciation is lilce the Pauline charity. It is none the less
self-conscious because it secketh not its own, and rejoiceth
rather in the truth. It stands for the unity of self-con-
sciousness of the one Spirit, whom all finite things and
experiences presuppose. His appreciations are indeed his
own ; for he is alone and none beside him. Yet in them
we all share, for that fact is what binds us together.

Categories the universal appreciation has, and what are
they ? They are the categories of the self-conscious and
of the significant world, the categories of the realm of
inter-related interests, and of the mutual dependence of
each finite consciousness upon others for its own truth
and meaning. In this realm it is, too, that thoughts have
objects beyond them and true relations to these objects.
Here, also, the categories of objective worth and of pur-
pose have validity ; for it is self-consciousness that gives
worth to things, and that reflectively compares the worth
of things seen from one point of view with their worth as
estimated otherwise. The world of appreciations is, then,
the world of ideals. In space and in time you find no
such things as worth and ideals ; there you find only hard
facts. The consciousness of us finite beings who know
and judge the things of space and time is the source of
the transient worth which appears to us here or there in


PHYSICAL LAW AND FREEDOM.


413


our world. Only the eternal consciousness, in its time-
transcending completeness, can know the really abiding
and eternally true value of the world.

On the other hand, the specific categories of the world
of description have no application to this world of appre-
ciation, in so fjir as it is regarded in itself. It is real, but
there is no physical necessity in it, no natural causation"
links together its parts ; and we know this, at j^rcsent,
because we have found what is the nature of physical
necessity and of natural causation. In so far as two
finite beings, A and B, separated in space and time, are
to communicate with each other by abstract rewording of
experience, they must find present in the experience
of each of them a world of facts that submit to tlie cate-
gories of science ; and of these one is tliat of physical
necessity. But in so far as A considers wliat he means by
the inner existence of B, he finds here a fact, to wit, an-
other self-consciousness, recognized by him as real. This
fact, however, is one that he cannot d(jscribe. He can
describe the outward seeming of B, but never the inner
appreciations of B as sucli. It is useless to say, therefore,
that the category of physical causation applies to the true
relations of B and A. A's body, indeed, by virtue of its
changes, cawes changes in the body of B. So far physi-
cal causation reigns supreme ; but A’s body «and IVs body
are describablc phenomena in the world of space and time,
and only <lescribable phenomena have ])hysical relations.
A and B, however, are in their actual and apjjreciable
relations by virtue of the part they both play in the inner
self-consciousness of the organic and inclusive Self, who,
being what he is, embodies his personality in numerous
finite bits of selfhood, whereof A and B are examples.
In him they are together, in so far as each of them thinks
of the other. Another person of whom I think is, as
such, not the cause, but the appreciable object of my
thoughts. Where real things are in this relation, they


414


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


are not in the describable relation called that of cause
and effect. The spiritual world, as such, then, causes in
me no thoughts. I think of it thus or thus by virtue of
my place in its organic wholeness. The more of a self I
am, the more and the deeper do I know its truth. And
^ a whole the world of the self is caused by nothing, is
what it is by virtue of its own self-knowledge, is consti-
tuted by the reflective self-consciousness in and for which
it has its own being. It is, then, through and through, a
world of Freedom ; its own significance is what occasions
it thus to expivss itself. Nothing causes or explains it
from without. It is its own excuse for being.

As for the proof of all this, 1 can now only refer you
again to the argument as to the nature of objective truth,
and as to our relation thereto, that I so imperfectly set
forth at the last time. Just this problematic but real
relation of a thought to its object is the one implied in
every least assertion of our lives. It is not true that we
believe in outer objects because we suppose somehow, a
•priori^ that our inner experiences must have adequate
causes, and then make hypotheses as to the nature of
these causes. On the contrary, unless I first believed in
outer objects, and in the validity of my thoughts about
them, I should never talk of laws and of causes at all.^
The objects of my thought are not the producers of my
thought, but the trutlis that correspond thereto. A cup
of coffee may, as I say, “ set me thinking,” that is, may
increase the activity of my nerve-cciitres ; but what I
think of may, then, be, not the coffee, but tJie feelings of
my fellow-men, or the nature of things, or the prepara-
tion of this lecture. Tb j relation of object to thought
is here, you sec, not a physical, but a logically appreciable
one, — one that only Piy relation to the inclusive Logos
can explain or express. And this case is typical. Kela-

^ A fuller exposition of these considerations will be found in the
Religious Aspect of Philosophy , pp. 354-^0.


PHYSICAL LAW AND FREEDOM.


416


tions of causation, however, exist amongst certain objects
of thought, in a certain aspect of their nature. Is an
object, namely, to be regarded by me in so far forth as it
is abstractly describable, then^ and only then, does it stand
in causal relations to other objects. As for causes that
affect me personally, these do so, once more, only in so far
as I, too, am conceived, not in my inner and appreciable
nature, but as myself capable of being looked upon and
described from without, that is, as myself an object
amongst objects, existent in space and time, and public to
all men. The coffee sets me thinking : ” this expression
refers to the physical fact of the essentially describable
relation of a certain alkaloid to the physiological changes
that its presence in my blood produces in my nerve cen-
tres. Of this describable change in me as phenomenal
thing my own inner life, after 1 drink coffee, is the appre-
ciable aspect.

VII.

Our last word, ‘‘aspect,’’ suggests to us at once how
near in one way we have now come to the language of the
so-called “Monism” of recent times.^ In fact, unsatis-
factory as the “ mind-stuff ” theory seems to an idealist in
the ordinary formulation of this theory, he lias only to
substitute his own interpretation of the fundamental truth
of things for certain of the statements of Clifford and
of the other Monists, and the doctrine of the “ Double
Aspect ” becomes at once luminous and inevitable. We
shall aid ourselves greatly if we interpret the theory now
in our hands by the aid of this monistic formula. In doing
so we shall again survey, but from a new outlook, our
whole argument.

The true world is, to state our theory afresh, the system
of the thoughts of the Logos. His unity, as we have seen,
is a reflective, a self-conscious, and so an appreciable, but
not, in its deepest truth, a describable unity. We know
1 See above, Lecture IX., pp. 300-304.


416


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


this unity just in so far forth as we ourselves consciously
and rationally enter into it and form part of it. There*
fore, in so far as we have inner unity of thinking, in sg
far as we commune with our fellows, and in so far as we
rightly see significance in the outer universe, we are in
and of the world of appreciation that embodies the
thought of the Logos.

On the other hand, once having recognized ourselves as
finite beings, distinct from our fellows in so far as we are
different centres of appreciative consciousness, and sun-^
derexl from them in so far as we are all only bits of the
true Self, we become aware of our private. world of inner
truth as distinguishable from the truth as experienced by
other men, and from the universal truth of the all-know-
ing world-consciousness. A new question then arises : —
How ranch of this private truth of ours is a revelation
to us in our finitude of what other finite selves can also
knc w ? Then comes the answer : So much as can be de-
scrihed to these other finite selves and then, in their ex-
perience, appreciatively verified^ may be regarded as not
our private content, but as universal. Herewith began a
little while ago our effort to describe the content of our
experience. Using the space and time forms, and the cate-
gories of theoretical science, we get, as the result of a long-
continued common effort of humanity at describing things,
the world of science. But again the question returns
upon us. In what sense is this world of description real ?
Tlie only answer is. It is real in so far as it is in very
truth an aspect of the world of the Logos, such an aspect,
namely, as can be expressed by finite consciousness in
terms of the space and time forms, and of the categories
of empirical science. Only as. such an aspect has the
physical world a reality. Consequently all its laws, all
its necessity, its causation, its uniformity, belong, not to
its inner nature as such, but to the external show of this
nature. If we could grasp the whole truth at a glance^


PHYSICAL LAW AND FREEDOM.


417


as the Logos does, we should sec what now is dark to us,
namely, why and how the world of appreciation, when
viewed under the conditions of our finite experience, has
thus to seem a world of matter in motion. As it is, Iiow-
ever, we already know that the world of nlatter in motion
is simply an external aspect of the true aud appreciable
world. That is, in substance, the whole of our pliilosophi-
cal insight into the matter. Therefore it is perfectly true
to say that my friend’s brain, with its countless molecules,
is simply the outward aspect of my friend’s inaccessible
inner life, in so far as this life is expressed, symbolized,
translated, into the language of my personal experience
of time and space phenomena. My friend, as he is in him-
self, is therefore not a new sort of tiling, called a soul or
mind, existent somewhere yonder in space, in amongst his
brain molecules, — a thing imprisoned in his body. IJo,
he is himself the reality that, when 1 look at his body, I
am vainly trying to see and describe. What I see and
describe is simply the physical, the phenomenal aspect of
his inner and appreciative life. That he does ajipear at
all in my world of phenomena is due to the fact, not fur-
ther explicable from the human point of view, that he and
I, by virtue of our places in the world-order, have spirit-
ual relations, think of each dther, and do somehow indi-
rectly commune together. That this relation of his inner
life to me is symbolized by the describable facts of his
physical organism, is due in general to my nature as a
being who can perceive and describe only what appears
to me in space and in time. That just this particular set
of facts, however, should symbolize to me his inaccessible
inner life, is once more, for us .human beings, an ultimate
datum. The Logos knows, not we, inner feelings,
outwardly symbolized in space and time to our percep-
tions, should appear as nerve-centres made up of countless
flying molecules. The twofold aspect itself is, however,
a certain truth of our experience. There is my friend.


418 THE SPIBIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHT.

He is for himself conscious, i. e., appreciative. The only
aspect of this appreciative life that can become manifest
to me actually appears to me as matter in motion. And
lAis is describable. Herewith we have however onli/ the
fact of the double aspect. The inner intelligibility of
this fact is regarded by us as something that must be un-
derstood by the Logos. It is for us a problem ; but is
not so for our true Self, who completes the insight that
for us is so fragmentary.

Our theory, then, does not declare, as do other forms of
the double aspect theory, that there is a curious kind of
substance in the world, a substance mysterious and essen-
tially inscrutable, that has the two ' aspects, the mental
and the physical. For our theory undertakes to know
what this substance is. It is the conscious life of the
Logos, whereof my friend is a finite instance, and whereby
I too am so conceived as to be in appreciable relations to
him. Nor yet do wo say, as the mind-stuff theory says,
that my friend is a mass of mind-stuff atoms, which pro-
duce effects upon my mass of mind-stuff atoms. On the
contrary, for our theory, my true friend stands in relations
to me that are essentially appreciable, not physical at all.
He causes no effects in me whatever. His body affects
my body ; but that is an affair of physics, not of inner life.
I am genuinely related to him in so far only as the insight
of the Logos reflectively so constitutes our mutual concern
for each other that, as a fact, it is what it is. My friend
then is no cause in the world of physical phenomena, at
all. He is neither matter nor energy. His thoughts
move no molecules. His feelings towards me innervate
no muscles, set in motion no bodily limbs, release no phy-
sical energy. But his organism, as it appears in space aud
time, is the describable show and symbol of the inner and
appreciable reality that is his ; and, even so, the physical
effects that his organism produces upon mine are merely
the describable show of our spiritual and appreciable inter-


PHYSICAL LAW AND FBEEOOM.


419


relationships. His matter and energy, his nervous tre-
mors and his innervated muscles, his deeds and their phy-
sical effects are the phenomenal aspect of his part of the
world-order. His mind does not influence his body. His
body is merely a very imperfect translation of his mind
into the describable language of space. The physical
causation that 1 attribute to him should be attributed,
therefore, solely to this body. For all physical causation
is only the describable translation of the inner meaning of
things into terms of relations amongst bodies. The rela-
tions of the world of appreciation, which is the true world,
to the world of description, which is its show, are there-
fore themselves in no wise relations of cause and effect.
I as observer, interpreting the true world in terms of our
human forms and the categories of theoretical science, am
bound to see, in the world as thus interpreted, rigid laws
of causation. But the laws thus seen are symbols of
deeper truth, and not the physical effects of this truth.
This deeper truth itself is not causal. It is only such
truth as, in order to be describable, must show the aspect
that the laws of causal connection in our experience inter-
pret in their own imperfect way.

VIII,

Three further and closing considerations occur to us, in
this connection, as giving fuller expression to our form
of the doctrine of the “double aspect.’’ The first of
these is suggested by the problem of the relation of the
inorganic world to our human consciousness. The second
is suggested by the problem of the real nature of physical
evolution. The third has to do with the problem of the
freedom of the will.

The theory of the “ double aspect,” applied to the facts
of the inorganic world, suggests at once that they, too, in
so fat as they are real, must possess their own inner and
appreciable aspect. Upon this suggestion we have no


420


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


time to dwell at great length. In general it is^n obvious
corollary of all that we have been saying.

When I think of the stars and of matter, of space and
of the energy that appears forever to be dissipating itself
therein, I think of something real, or else of merely a pri-
vate experience of mine. If, now, the cotiimon experience
of humanity is our sufficient warrant for assuming some
universal reality as actually embodied in these hot stars
and cold interspaces, of what sort must this reality be ?
In and for itself, we now answer, it must be an appre-
ciable reality, *^^he expression of what, in Schopenhauer’s
sense of the word, may be called a World-Will; as.well
as of what, in Ilegel’s sense, may be called an Universal
Self-Conscious Thought. But to say this is not to commit
ourselves to the acceptance of those paradoxes of the seem-
ing outer order which we set forth in our tenth lecture.
These paradoxes were due to the assumption of infinite
spa^e and time as themselves outer and real, and to their
introdu(»,tion into our account of the physical processes of
the stellar world. We now have reached a deeper insight.
The “ antinomies ” of the physical order no longer terrify
us. They arc due to our trying to express the whole
appreciable system of things in our human forms of space
and time. Here before us is the order of the embodied
Logos. We try to describe it. Our science undertakes
the task ; our highest descriptive synthesis encounters in-
congruities. What do these mean ? They mean simply
that our descriptive science is, indeed, in one aspect of its
work, playing with “ pebbles on the beach.” For the
fashion of this world of space and time is such as to
give us no united and intelligible definition of the world-
process in its wholeness. Only the self-completed is in-
telligii)le ; and our physical world in endless time and
in infinite space, being no world of self-completed, that is,
of “ cyclical ” processes, is a mere aspect of the true world,
and is also an aspect that must be but fragmentary.


PHYSICAL LAW AND FREEDOM.


421


Higher b^iiigs than we may have other forms of descrip-
tive science, based upon a consciousness, say, of some other
form of space and time, e. gr., of a “non- Euclidean”
space of three dimensions, or of a space of four or more
dimensions, and of a time that includes the truth of ours,
and that still makes clear how the world-process somehow
returns into itself. Such higher forms of consciousness
we can speculatively view as possibilities. They may be
adequate to a description of the whole world of pheno-
mena as viewed by such higher beings. We, however, in
our limitation, know only that the Self must have unity
in himself, — an appreciable wholeness in his conception
of the world. We speak of him as infinite; we do not
mean that he is vaguely infinite, so that however much
of his thought one might considet there would always be
more to consider. On the contrary, ho knows himself as
one, and so as eternally complete, — as a finished whole.
Otherwise he wouM be no self. Therefore our vague in-
finities of space and time, never finished, never explor-
ablc .as wholes, are very poor embodiments of his truth.
His infinity, however it is constituted, must mean self-
completion. We may expect, therefore, so soon as
appro<ach the limits of our science about the phenomenal
things in space and time, to get warnings that our descrip-
tive knowledge is an inadequate translation of the truth.
Such a warning we got in the study of the outer order a
little while since. The world of the stars, then, and of
the “ running down ” energy is not really what it seems.
It is a well-founded phenomenon,” but not a final truth.

On the other hand, we have, indeed, a perfect right
thus to say that the world of the stars is, like the brains
of our friends, the well-founded show in space and time
of an appreciative consciousness, and that the unity of the
laws of physical nature is the outer aspect of some deep
spiritual unity of will and plan in the world. We have a
right to interpret this unity, in hypothetical forms, as well


422 THE SPISIT OF HODEBN FHILOSOPHT.

f

as we are able. Only we must not say that tl)fs will and
plan are in any physical sense the causes of our show-
world. On the contrary, all physical causation is itself
part of the show, in so far as the show is describable.
They are perfectly right, therefore, who deny designs as
factors in natural processes. The true World-Will, being
no phenomenon in space and time, is no form of physical
energy, and moves no matter. The laws of matter more
or less completely portray, but do not, physically speak-
ing, result from the Logos. No creative fiat produced the
world at any n^oment in past time. To say that would be
to assert the existence somewhere in time of an ut^ierly
indescribable event, which is precisely what nobody can
assert of the world of time, since this world is nothing
unless in so far as it is describable. For the same
reason no will, infinite or finite, ever, by any temporal
interference, turned aside a single atom in its flight.
The' physical world shows us, indeed, a plan, but only in
so far as the space and time phenomena symbolize and
very poorly translate an unity, that, as it is in itself, is an
unity of will, of self-consciousness, of a divine interest in
truth, of an equally divine self-possession, of an eternal
rest in the fullness of perfected being. In this will, the
finite wills themselves share, and of it they are a part,
since this unity includes, knows, and justifies the organ-
ized relationships of the whole universe of finite apprecia-
tions. The physical world, then, exprenses such a world-
will, but is not subject to the interference of this will.

Turning to the other aspect of the natural order — to
the aspect in which this seems to be a world of evolution,
— we now see something of what that point of view also
means. The world is for us human observers a world
that contains processes of evolution, in so far as, in this
or that portion of it, we detect temporal series of pheno-
mena that are not merely describable, but that, regarded as
wholes, suggest to us something significant, — a tale, an


PHYSICAL LAW AND FREEDOM.


423


appreciably form of some lengthy sequence, — an ideal
realized, a bit of a plan embodied. The first question of a
philosophy of evolution is, Have we a right thus to look
for the suggestion of plans symbolized by the most rigid
and necessary causal sequences of nature ? The answer
is. Certainly. For, as we now see, all describable truth is
an outward symbol of an appreciable truth. Of this one
central principle our doctrine of the Logos assures us ; and
to look for a plan embodied in a physical sequence is not
to look for a designing Daemon in nature, interfering
with rig^d causation. On the contrary, thus to look is
simply to watch for signs and hints of the appreciable
aspect that, as we already know, is there. To believe
that my friend lives as a conscious being, is not to doubt
that in the physical worhl his only representative is a
nervous mechanism, whose physiological processes are as
rigidly necessary and purely material as the flight of a
planet or the fall of a stone. My friend’s physical life is,
indeed, merely a series of reflexes, with which his will
never, interferes, any more than the concave side of the
curve interferes with the convex. Regarded physiologi-
cally, his consciousness is a superfluous extra accompani-
ment, or as it has been called, an epiphenomenon,” that
does nothing with his brain-molecules, but merely runs
parallel to them ; but regarded more deeply, his will, his
appreciative inner life, is really his bit of the truth of the
Logos, and is the only real truth present. It is the physi-
ological view, after all, that has to do only with seemings.
His brain is the phenomenal outer aspect of this deeper
truth. Well, even so in nature the truth present is once
more the mind of the Logos. Of this mind the laws of
matter are the show. When we search for a hint of the
significance of filings, we do not doubt the absolute valid-
ity and unchangeableness of physical laws in their own
sphere. We look for signs of the truth that is behind
them, interfering not with them, but speak* ig through


124


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


the mask of them. Such signs appear to us as processes
of evolution. As I often misread my friend’s mind, so
every such interpretation of nature’s facts is tentative,
^.nd may be wrong. In this sphere we can but guess.

We have, however, now mentioned a somewhat novel
contrast between our descriptive and our appreciative atti-
tude towards a temporal series of events, a contrast at
which it is necessary still to glance a moment. When,
namely, I physically describe, that is, explain events by
their causes, I first seize upon some one instant of time,
some one ev( iit, and ask : What is the configuration of the
world nov^f Having found in a measure this descrip-
tion of one moment of the world, this cross section of the
temporal series of events, I ask myself : How did this
condition result from the previous state of the world?
Descriptively, or contemplatively, then, I study the world
from one moment to another. But when I view a physi-
cal series appreciatively, when I estimate the world, or
any part of it, say a kind action, or the inner life of my
friend, or a process of evolution, I don’t thus dwell on the
momentary description or configuration of things, but I,
as it were, take in at one gLance a whole series of mo-
ments. I treat some portion of the world as a story. I
look before and after until I have grasped the whole of it.
So (to take a case that already illustrates our attitude
towards all evolution), as I follow a melody, I don’t dwell
so much on the single note, but on the whole sequence,
and on the sequence as a whole. Or, once more,’ to esti-
mate such an act as that of the good Samaritan in the
parable is not to study his single attitudes, as configura-
tions of the molecules of his body. Now indeed he
comes, now ho stops, now he kneels, now he rises. And
all these conditions might be causally explained as a
series of described configurations of his molecules. But
not thus docs one estimate the good Samaritan ideally.
One rather looks at the whole story of his deed as one


PHYSICAL LAW AND FREEDOM.


420


whole story, just as one considers a melody, or a progres-
sion of chords, or a drama, or any such sequence of
events.

To appreciate the world in historical terms, then, to
find processes of evolution in it, we must in some mea-
sure forsake the purely temporal and limited point of view
to which we naturally find ourselves confined, and to which
every scientific explanation of nature is always confined.
To appreciate even hypothetically the meaning of a pro-
cess in time, we must in some measure transcend time.
And this once more suggests how the ideal interests that
the processes of nature seem to serve wherever we find evo-
lution cannot themselves be viewed as physical factors in
these processes. An evolution is a series of events that
in itself as series is purely physical, — a set of necessary
occurrences in the world of space and time. An egg de-
velops into a chick ; a poet grows up trom infancy ; a
nation emerges from barbarism ; a planet condenses from
the fluid state, and develops the life that for millions of
years, makes it so wondrous a place. Look upon all these
things descriptively, and you shall see nothing but matter
moving instant after instant, each instant containing in its
full description the necessity of passing over into the next.
Nowhere will there be, for descriptive science, any genuine
novelty or any discontinuity admissible. But look at the
whole appreciatively, historically, synthetically, as a musi-
cian listens to a symphony, as a spectator watches* a drama.
Now you shall seem to have seen, in phenomenal form, a
story. Passionate interests will have been realized. The
will of the growing animal, the ideals of the poet, the his-
tory of the evolving races, these will have passed before
you. Tn taking such a view are you likely to be coming
nearer to the inner truth of things? Yes; for the con-
sciousness of the Logos must be one that essentially tran-
scends our own natural time-limitations ; and in so far as
W9 vi^w sequences in their wholeness, we are therefore


426 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

likely to be approaching the unity of his world-possessing
insight. In doing all this, however, we are not learning
how ideals have interfered with nature’s mechanism, but
how nature’s mechanism, in its temporal sequences, sym-
bolizes, as it must, a world of ideals. The student of evo-
lution finds the world mechanical, because he is watching
describable processes. But he finds the world also teleo-
logical, because he is viewing not merely the sequences
as such, but the wholes of sequence ; is listening not merely
for the notes of nature’s music (the passing events of in-
stant after inptant), but for the melody (the appreciable
total of the life that is made up of many successive in-
stants). And as the appreciable is deeper and truer than
the describable, as the insight into the whole of what we
mortals call time is logically prior, in the unity of the
eternal Logos, to the isolation of our own finite lives, so
the student of evolution, in thus viewing the world of his-
toiy, the world of interests that in the world of appre-
ciation contend for the mastery, of ideals that long for
realization, is coming nearer to the truth of things than
is he who merely describes the necessary sequence of
time. It is true that every such interpretation of nature
is fragmentary and hypothetical; since we dwell not at
the centre of the truth of the Logos, but in our finite iso-
lation of half-conscious temporal insights. It is also true
that every interpretation which I make of my friend’s in-
ner life is fragmentary and hypothetical. It is neverthe-
less true that in both cases interpretation in appreciative
terms is deeper than mere description of phenomena, and
is more likely to get at the truth of things.

And now, surely, we may see how vain are the anxi-
eties of those who wonder how conscious life could ever
have been evolved on our planet under purely physical
conditions, and what will become of all such life when
the energy of the stars runs down. For at the present
stage of our argument we know that there is no real


PHYSICAL LAW AND FREEDOM.


42T


process of nature that must not have, known or unknown
to us, its inner, its appreciable aspect. Otherwise it could
not be real ; since in so far as it is merely describable, it
is also merely show, is merely abstract, like the numbers
and the geometrical figures, and has no true fullness of
being.^ The difference between living and inanimate na-
ture is for us now merely the difference between the na-
ture that like the face of a friend is near enough to out
own for us to get a sympathetic suggestion of what ap-
preciative truth it probably embodies, and the nature that
like the infinitely complex ether waves which fill the inter-
planetary spaces is too remote from our own to be appre-
ciable from our point of view. But the power of nature
to embody divine appreciations is not in this fashion lim-
ited. Even so, processes of evolution are for us such,
series of events as are near enough to our human interests
to suggest their probable interpretation as stories. And
so what we call life appeared on our globe as soon as na-
ture’s products were such as can at present come within
the r^iige of our apjn’eciativo insight. The “ miracle ”
of the beginning of life is merely the subjective miracle
of our own human point of view. Beyond that beginning
we have no appreciative insight. This side of it wo have.
The “ discontinuity ” exists in us, not in the truth.

“ Animism,” to be sure, the tendency that we formerly
also called “ anthropomorphism,” the tendency by mere
analogy to endow stones or planets with a quasi-human
life, remains a misleading tendency. For it is not ours
to speculate what appreciative inner life is hidden be-
hind the describable but seemingly lifeless things of the
world. But what we know is that it must be what it is
in so far as the self-consciousness of the Logos finds a
place for it ; and this place must be, like that of our own
finite consciousness, a place in the world of appreciation.
The rest is to us mortals as yet wholly unknown. But this
1 Or, as Hegel would say, WirJdichkeU.


428 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY;

consideration sets aside the anxious question as to the rise
of consciousness in general. The world has always had
its appreciable aspect. We mortals ourselves stand on the
shore of this boundless world of appreciation, and describ-
ing this or that pebble, or looking at this or that breaking
wave, seem to understand a little of their meaning. We
know that the whole limitless ocean is full of an infinite
meaning, since otherwise its throbbing billows and innu-
merable currents, its depths and unexplored solitudes, its
rcjsistless tides and its divinely mighty storms, would not
be real. If we ask what this meaning is, we see again
only wave after wave approaching, curving, gleaming,
and breaking on the beach ; and we hear only the eter-
nal thunder of this restless life. Each new wave we men
call a process of evolution. The world of what appears
to us as endless time seems in our neighborhood to be
filled with such processes. And herewith our empirical
knowledge ends. Do we doubt whether there is truth
and clear insight behind all this imperfect experience of
ours ? The very question, as we have already seen, in-
volves its own answer. The problem can exist only as
transcended by the insight of the Solver of problems.


IX.

The third and last of our ^concluding considerations
relates to the problem of freedom.

If one asks as to the world of appreciation in its whole-
ness, What efficient power caused it to exist? the ques'
tion is for the first meaningless. For cause, as usually
understood, relates to the world of description, and to the
explanation of temporal sequences. The only cause that
you can seek in the world of appreciation is in a very dif-
ferent sense a cause. It is, namely, a justification for this as
against any other fashion of will and of self-consciousness.
The world in its wholeness appears to us in space and
time as a describable system of phenomena, bound together


PHYSICAL LAW AND FREEDOM.


429


by rigid law. That, however, just this system of phe-
nomena, these atoms, these physical laws, this order of
nature should be there, rather than some other equally
describablc system, with other atoms and other types of
motion, — this seems to us the mere fact, the gigantic ca-
price of nature. Viewing this same caprice in its other
aspect, namely, as a system of appreciable truth and of
the inner ideals of the Logos, we do not indeed get rid of
the aspect of what Hegel called UnmittelbarJceit or “ im-
medijicy ” about the world. It is what it is. So the
Logos, from eternity, and in one organic all-embracing
act, constitutes his system of appreciative truth. If we
still ask why ? we must answer, not with Schopenhauer,
“For no reason,” but with all the rational idealists,
“Freely, and solely for the reason* most pleasing to him-
self, but not without reason.” For such is the necessary
consequence of the conception of an untrammeled and
fully self-possessed Self, who solves all his own problems,
including the problem. Why this eternal choice? The
element of caprice is there, in so far as none but the Self
can fathom his own will. The World-Will is so far like a
fair maiden, “ in her silence eloquent,” who chooses be-
cause such is her choice. Yet the caprice is, in the case
of the completely self-conscious Will, a necessary element
of its reason. The highest*Rea8on has no reason beyond
it, and in so far it is capricious. But it includes all
lower reasons, and all finite points of view, and so as
against them is infinitely less capricious, in the baser
sense of the word, than they, since they are infinitely less
aware of their own meaning ; and it lacks their blindness.

It is for this reason that we have called the world of
appreciation one of freedom. But how are our finite
wills related to this freedom? Are we predestined to
our place in the world-order ? Are we “ impotent pieces
of the game he plays ? ” The answer, as I conceive, is
this : In so far as we are clearly conscious of our own


430


THE SPIBIT OF MODEBN PHILOSOPHY.


choices, we ourselves are part of the world of apprecia-
tion. We are then, ourselves, conscious bits of the Self.
Our wills are part of his freedom. And hereby we too are
free. Only in so far, however, as we are not conscious of
our choices, but only find in ourselves blind and unco^
scions impulses, mere facts of hereditary temperament, or
of momentary mood, we do not enter into his freedom.
Some one else, we know not who, some ancestor, some
good or evil angel, may then have chosen these things for
us, not we. But our conscious volition is a fragment of
the freedom of the World- Will.

But how, one may ask, can I be in any sense thus free ?
After all, is not my consciousness, viewed as a fact in
time, tied hopelessly to this describable nervous mechanism
of mine ? The world, in its divinely free capriciousness,
involves a physical order that necessarily contains just
this organism. What the organism itself will do in given
circumstances, is therefore physiologically determined by
the whole order of nature and by the whole of past time.
And my will moves no atom of this mechanism aside from
its predestined course. And yet I, whose will is just
so much of the world of appreciation as constitutes the
inner aspect of this describable mechanism, — I shall in
some sense be free ? IIow explain such a paradox ?

In answer I appeal afresh fi> that double aspect which
the world of time has already presented to us as we spoke
of the facts of evolution. Whatever the true facts about
what we call time may be, as they are known to the Self,
we are sure that the order of nature, from what we are
obliged to call the infinite past to the infinite future, just
because it does all of it express one law, just because it
must all be absolutely foreknown, is present in one time-
transcending instant to the insight of the Logos. It is
present, I insist, because it is all one truth, and because
the infinite Self is there to know all truth. But how all
the world of time can and must thus form to the infinite


PHYSICAL LAW AND FBEEDOM.


431


Self a single instant of time-transcending knowledge is
after all not so veiy hard to conceive, at least in general*
You all the while, in your finite capacity, in so far as you
are self-conscious, do transcend time, yes, you yourself.
A sequence of chords is not a mere series of events to you,
%hose earlier moments are non-existent when the later are
there. The whole series is one artistic moment to you.
Reflection continually transcends time. Your life is a
“looking before and after.” This time-transccndcnce
bears precisely the relation to the single events of your
life that consciousness in general bears to your brain-
states. This transcending of a time-series, and estimat-
ing it as one whole, is in fact what one might call the soul*
of the natural order. For the ideal or appreciable order
is thus in fact linked to the natural order precisely as mind
in the finite sense is linked to body. Without time to re-
flect upon and transcend, there would indeed be no finite
consciousness of an ideal or appreciable value in things.
But this consciousness of the appreciable aspect of the
events of time views the temporal world as the musical
hearer views the whole symphony, seeing the end in the
beginning, and the beginning in the end, not explaining,
not describing in causal terms, but making an appreciable
synthesis of time in one glance.

This being the case, our bwn consciousness, at a moment
of choice, is itself twofold. Our organism passes through
a series of states, constituting what we call an act. This
act fills up a considerable time. Of the successive states
we are aware. So far we ourselves live in time, and fol-
low the series, perceiving nothing but what must be de-
scribable and necessary. On the other hand, if we are
truly self-conscious, we are aware of some significance, of
some ideal value, in the series of states as a whole. The
melody (to return to that figure) — the melody of con-
duct interests us, far more than the notes of our momen-
tary physical reaction. But in just so far we actually


482


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


seem to ourselves to be choosing the conduct as such, since
we are approving this whole series of physical events. On
this side of our twofold consciousness, then, we are all the
while truly transcending time, yes, are taking hold upon
and forming spiritually part of that absolutely time-trsm-
scending appreciation that the Self possesses in view or
the whole physical order. Such an inclusive moment of
conscious choice, in fact, does possess in one act a past
and a future, does estimate whole series of events, and,
although, in its finite capacity, it is dependent on a brain
state, still, in Ics significance, in this its ideal comment, it
takes hold upon the distant in time. Such consciousness,
therefore, being always a time-transcending estimate of
physical series as wholes, may be indeed dependent on
brain-states, but in significance it is already, in its mea-
sure, a part of the eternal world-estimate, wliich, as we
have learned, is a far deeper reality than the world of phy-^
sical nature itself, and as a whole is no event in time at
all, but a transcendent spiritual estimate of all time.

But if you have followed me thus far into this rather
breathless region of speculation you may now finally ask,
“ But docs all this make us morally free ? *' I answer,
in a very profound sense, it does. For gather once more
into one the threads of our argument. The Self, we say,
regards its world in a twofold way: (1) As a time series
of events in which the earlier events fatally cause the
later; (2) As an eternally complete world total, whose
significance it ideally estimates and chooses. And wc, in
so far as we are morally judging beings, in so far as we
too make ideal estimates, are a part of the Self in this
second sense, living not merely in time, but also above
time, beyond time. In so far as we are temporal facts,
we arc indeed mere descendants of an animal ancestry,
mere creatures of nerves. But we are far more than tem-
poral. And now remember: this temporal order, rigid
and necessary in itself, is it not after all only one of infl<


PHYSICAL LAW AND FREEDOM.


433


nitely numerous possible world-orders, any one of which
could be conceived by the Self, but all of which, from the
eternal point of view, are deliberately left unconceived,
unreal, because of the ideal estimate which the Self makes
l^n choosing thi^ world ? What then, though we are bound
in the temporal world, may we not indeed be free, — yes,
and in a non*temporal and transcendent sense effective too
in the eternal world ? May we not in fact, as parts of an
eternal order, be choosing not indeed this or that thing in
time, hut helping to choose out and out what world this
fatal temporal world shall eternally he and have heen ?
This, as some of you know, was Kant's famous doctrine
of what he called the transcendental or extra-temporal
freedom and the temporal necessity of all our actions.
From this point of view, as you may already in part see,
the natural and the spiritual orders, the physical and the
^ moral orders, the divine and the human, the fatal and
the free, may be finally reconciled. If this be so, then
indeed we shall no longer fear fate, no longer dread the
facts* of nervous physiology, no longer be appalled by na-
ture,, no longer appeal to temporal miracles to save the
ideals. God and Caesar will indeed become reconciled.
Is such an hypothesis after all impossible ? I think not.
I hold it rather to be the deepest truth.

But all this, I once more admit, must still seem, when
thus presented, very unpersuasive. The limits of a rela-
tively untechnical discussion permit as I thus close only
this dim suggestion of one of the deepest insights of
modern philosophy. If it is right, your acts are at once
from the temporal point of view absolutely bound, and
from the eternal point of view absolutely free. For you
enter into the divine order in two ways. In this world
you are a fact in time, descended from the animals, a
creature with just this brain, doomed for countless ages
to precisely this conduct. But the whole temporal order
is for the absolute Self, of whom you are a part, only


434


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHT.


one way of looking at truth. All eternity is before
him at a glance. He has chosen not temporally, but in
an act above all time, yet an act in which you yourself
share, to conceive this world which contains you. He has
chosen this world for the Sake of its worth. And in the
estimate that eternally chooses, your will, your time-tran-
scending personality, your consciousness has its part also.
You are not morally free to change laws in this world.
But you are moral and free because you are in the eter-
nal sense a part of the eternal World-Creator, who never
made the world at any moment of time, but whose choice
of this describable world of time in its wholeness is what
constitutes the world of appreciation, which is the world
of truth.


LECTURE Xin.


OPTIMISM, PESSIMISM, AND THE MORAL ORDER.

Too long I have detained you, in the previous lecture,
with the discussion of the intricate speculative problems
suggested to us by the physical world. Tliis evening I
return to more practical issues. During the course of
our historical discussions, we have had occasion to study
the idealistic doctrines of earlier thinkers from two points
of view. They appeared as efforts to explain the nature
of human knowledge, and as attempts to give form to the
spiritual interests of humanity. It is, of course, in the
latter sense that idealism usually seems most attractive to
the general reader. Other theories of the world may or
may, not be influenced by ethical considerations. A doc-
trine which defines reality in terms of the absolute Self
seems bound to make prominent the spiritual. In fact
this is, to many minds, a defect of idealism, in that the
doctrine appears to them rather the outcome of a moral
enthusiasm than an embodiment of a cool and critical
scrutiny of the world as it is. We have already tried, so
far as our limited time permitted, to remove from idealism
something of this reproach of being a mere poem of moral
enthusiasm. We do not believe in the world of the abso-
lute Self because we merely long for something spiritual
in our world. The doctrine, such as I conceive it to be,
seems to me rather the outcome of a rigid logical analysis,
whose nature indeed I could only sketch in these brief
lectures, but whose value for philosophy is indicated by
the whole history of modem thought. Yet now that the
theoretical question has been considered, we have a right


436


THE SPIRIT OP MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


in conclusion to draw what advantage we can for our spirw
itual interests from the truths that theory has taught us.


I.

You are aware already how much and how little this
idealism pretends to know about the world. The world
lias inevitably the moment of relatively capricious will
about it. Its existence is a fact, chosen from eternity by
the Self. We cannot fathom this choice, we cannot be
clear as to the precise meaning of this decree, except in
so far as we men too share in the choice, that is, in so far
as we too, in our own active life, are conscious of our own
purposes. In choosing for ourselves, wo enter into and
partake of the Self who chooses this from the infinity of
possible worlds. No abstract ‘‘ descriptive ’’ reason can
deduce what it is about the world which makes it good, that
is, worth choosing. Wo can for the first only say. So it
is. Wo can comprehend the significance of this world-
estimate, of this appreciative aspect of things, only in so
far as we too are appreciative, are more than theoretical,
are will as well as thought.

From the purely theoretical or “descriptive” point of
view all will, all appreciation, is capricious ; for in vain
do you try to show by merely describing the laws and
contents of things why they should possess this or that
value. Deduction only proves ideal values when such
values have already been presupposed. Yet this capri-
eiousness of the will is not, as Schopenhauer thought,
irrationality. The rational will is one that to complete
self-consciousness adds self-justification, and that is, ac-
cordingly, its own judge and its own vindicator. Is the
choice that wills the world of this nature Regarded
from the purely theoretical side it must appear as capri-
cious, for there can be no merely theoretical, or, as we are
accustomed to say, logical reason, why it might not have
chosen otherwise. But regarded as the choice of an eternal


OPTIMISM, PESSIMISM, AND THE MORAL ORDER. 437

World-Self, the world cannot, so to speak, be the choice
of a dissatisfied and peevish Logos, who eternally sorrows
that he does not choose some other world instead. For
dissatisfaction is due to either one of two causes : (1)
That the dissatisfied will is not the only one concerned,
but finds itself defeated by a foreign opponent; or (2).
That the dissatisfied will is foolish, and knows not what it
really wants. We finite bits of the Self are well ac-
quainted with both these sources of grief ; and since the
World-Self is simply the self-conscious organism of all of
us, he too is inevitably well acquainted with the nature of
these our woes, and in so far shares them. But his
acquaintance with our griefs need not be, cannot be, the
sense of the entire failuro of the whole orgsinism of his
timeless choice. That choice includes all the time events,
and it is of the essence of temporal moments of conscious-
ness to be discontented. But Hegel has already suggested
to us how above the endless conflict victory may live. It
is the pur])ose of this final lectu; to give to that thought
further illustration.

Two principles must be propounded at the start. Their
reconciliation may be difficult. They form in fact the
opposing members of the great “ antinomy ” of the spirit-
ual world. Tliey are, that is, in sharp apparent conflict
with each other. Yet they must both be true, for they
are both demonstrable.

One of them is the principle that there must be some
sort of evil present wherever there is a finite will. It
is not joyous to be finite, in so far as one is finite. One
longs always to know more, and to possess more; and
one lives in all sorts of paradoxical relations to other
finite life. One lives in time, or in some such imperfect
form of appreciative consciousness, and one preserves
one’s finitude, and so one’s endless cares, by wondering
and striving with some sort of reference to the other
moments of time, to the other appreciations that lie be*


488 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

youd one. To be sure all this has too its joyous side, in
so far, namely, as there is more about our finite life than
its mere finitude. Most of us had rather be finite than
nothing, although even that is not necessarily our opinion.
But to be bounded in a nut-shell and to have bad dreams
as well is of the essence of temporality and finitude in so
far as they are regarded as such.

In view of this truth one can well say that, speaking in
temporal terms, there just now is in the world nobody
who is content with it. The Omar Khayyam, stanzas of
Fitzgerald are so far philosophically right, and forever
true : —

“ Up from Earth’s Centre through the Seventh Gate
1 rose, and on the Throne of Saturn sate,

And many a Knot unravel ’d by the Road ;

But not the Master-Knot of Human Fate.

" There was the Door to which I found no Key ;

There was the Veil through which I might not see :

Some little talk awhile of Me and Thee
There was — and then no more of Thee and Me.

** Earth could not answer ; nor the Seas that mourn
In flowing Purple, of their Lord forlorn ;

Nor rolling Heaven with all his Signs revealed
And hidden by the sleeve of Night and Morn,”

No better account could be given of the temporal order
as it appears, when viewed appreciatively, at any finite
moment, or of the inevitable result of seeking the divine
or the satisfying therein. So viewed the seas are indeed
of their Lord forlorn. As Lord ho is found in no temporal
moment, whether one passes through the “ seventh gate ”
or not to look for him. If one is speaking of the com-
plete God, the true Logos, and if one is using the temporal
and not the eternal sense of is^ it is perfectly accurate to
say that God is not^ say in the year 1892, just sis he was
not in Elijah’s fire and earthquake. He is no affair of con-


OPTIMISM, PESSIMISM, AND THE MORAL ORDER. 439

temporary history. No reporter of even a celestial news-
paper could discover, by any watching, items of curi*ent
interest concerning him. His omnipresence is the presence
of time and of space in him, not of his completeness in
any part of them. He is their universal, they are not his
prison. Therefore search the world as you might at this
moment, with the well-known astronomer’s telescope that
very truthfully showed no God, or with the eyes of men
and angels; you would doubtless find only discontented
worms and seraphs, and other such finite toilers, — the
whole creation groaning and travailing in pain, and cry-
ing, Lord, how long ! For time is in fact very long, nor
does one get to the end of sorrow in the w'hole of it.
Some of these finite creatures would indeed be calling
this or that temporal joy good, but all of them, however
amused they were, would be in the act of striving for the
next moment of time to come. For to do that seems to

si

be of the very essence of temporal consciousness. Not
one of them all who knew what he was saying would be
uttering the fatal cry that Faust was to avoid : “ Oh
moment, stay, thou art so fair ! ” The best of their joyous
moments would be under the illusion that the next mo-
ment was likely to be a little better ; and they would be
hoping for that, as one hopes continually, wliile one listens
to music, for the next phrase, and colors one’s joy with
this longing.

The other principle mentioned above is the thought
that, notwithstanding all this, the Logos in his wholeness
must find his choice of this universe rational, and so, in
and through all this imperfection, must find a total pei*-
fection. Were it a problem how to have a better world,
the Self, as complete, would have solved the problem.
Were it a question of a wiser choice, the Self in his wis-
dom would have executed from eternity this wiser choice.
Were it a matter of foreign necessity that inflicted evil,
the Self would, in existing, have eternally absorbed this


140


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


foreign element into his own organic nature.^ The world
that is, is then indeed, as Leibnitz said, the best of pos<
siblo worlds. The problem is. How can this be, without
interfering with the foregoing principle of the essential
evil of finite existence ?

II.

Let us begin our discussion of this ancient problem
with its most immediately obvious illustration, the 2 >rob-
lem of moral evil. One who first sees the truth that the
world of the Self must be, in its wholeness, a good world,
is likely to rejoice even too easily in the notion that
through this insight he has come indeed very near to the
goal that all the religions have sought. Yet one who finds
himself thus close, as it were, to the gate of the celestial
city and to a gliini3se of the golden glories within it, nigh
to the palace of the king, docs, after all, well to tremble,
nevertheless, when he considers how easy it is to say such
things about the perfection of God’s world, and how hard
it is to give concreteness and weight to the mere abstrac-
tions of the religious consciousness. God’s world, in be-
ing good, can surely be nothing less serious than a moral
order. And a moral order, regarded from a temporal
point of view, is so grave and stern a thing ! Eemember
the fate of poor Ignorance, in Bunyari’s “ Pilgrim’s Prog-
ress,” the fate that wo mentioned when we were studying
Schopenhauer’s ' pessimism. Poor Ignorance reached the
very gate of the celestial city, yet the angels carried him

* Here, of course, Von Hartmann’s doctrine of the twofold nature
of his unconscious, as Will and Wisdom, these two being essentially
foreign to each otlier, will suggest itself to some. The former lec-
ture has suggested my own reason for holding that these two are
inseparable. The parallelism and at the same time the opposition of
my own views to those of Von Hartmann will be obvious to many
readers. Like him I am endeavoring to draw a synthetic conclusion
from the post-Kantian idealists, from Schopenhauer, and from modem
science. 1 have worked, fur the most part, quite independently of
his influence. 1 must acknowledge his great value and bis priority*


OPTIMISM, PESSIMISM, AKD THE MORAL ORDER, 441

away to the bottomless pit. Those who view the perfec-
*tion of God’s world merely in this first abstract fashion
run indeed the risk of a similar fate. Pessimism and
despair are not so far away from them as tliey think. It
is not until they shall have learned somehow the serious-
ness of the moral aspect of the divine order ; it is not
until they have faced the tragedy of life, as well as its
divine consummation ; it is not until they have learned to
recognize the moral order as essentially a hard master,
and the misery of the finite world as a necessary element
of the essentially severe significance of the universe ; it is
not until all this has come home to them that they will
have any real right to the comfort that idealism offers. I
want to make this fact plain.

All popular religious faith usually begins, as we saw in
an earlier lecture, by assuring a man after far too light
and easy a fashion that everything will be well in this
world for those who do God’s will, and that the moral
order secures at once the triumph of the good cause, and
the joy of all who serve this cause with a pure heart.
Just at the present moment, curiously enough, despite all
the skepticism of the day, such easy religious optimism As
this chances to be in great popular favor ; and for all my
idealism, I regret this popularity of optimism. During
these controversies concerning creed-revisions and other
forms of religious progress which hjive been before the
public during the past few years, I have noticed not only
that it has been customary to frown upon all attempts to
defend stern old dogmas, such as the depravity of man
and the universal condemnation of all our race in its
unsaved condition, but that the reason given as an axio-
matic justification for this disapproval has usually been a
very optimistic reason. People who pretend at other
times to be very agnostic, become here of a sudden very
confident. It would be melancholy, they say, to live in a
world where the heathen had not as fair a chance for ssJf


442


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


vation as anybody else. It would be atrocious if the
consequences of sin were to prove too grave. If we can<*
not reconcile a given supposition with the mercy of God,
then the supposition must be false. And all this reason*
ing, when more fully analyzed, usually proves to mean, in
the minds of those who use it, a sense that if there is any
spiritual order in this universe it must be an order that
does not permit very many ills, and that, above all, does
reward, quickly, all good efforts. Thus reasoning, the
religious optimist of the day finds his comfort in an as-
surance of tl c kindliness of God, of the early triumph of
morality and of the general peacefulness of the universe,
an assurance, I say, which, on the whole, I cannot share.
I believe, indeed, that all the evil is part of a good order.
I believe in the supremacy of the spiritual ; and yet often
during those popular controvei*sies of recent years, I have
found myself, as a relatively dispassionate metaphysical
observer, sympathizing rather with the advocates of the
sterner old creeds, not, to be sure, because I have accepted
the sometimes irrational form which tradition had given
to this or that dogma, but because I regretted the loss of
moral rigidity which our fathers knew how to conceive as
the very essence of the truly spiritual. But, not to weary
you with the details of too well-known and unfruitful
theological controversies, I may as well at once remind
you of a modern poem which confesses in a most interest-
ing fashion just such a religious optimism as I now have
in mind, and as I do not accept. I am undertaking at this
point a study and criticism of such a fashion of conceiving
the world of spiritual concerns ; I am glad to be able to
let it express itself so fervently and skillfully. The poem
which I refer to is one of the few really strong produc-
tions of the interesting Southern poet, Sidney Lanier,
whose death a few years since deprived our country of a
promising, but so far comparatively undeveloped man.
The poem, entitled “ How Love looked for Hell,” is in*


OPTIMISM, PESSIMISM, AND THE MORAL ORDER. 448

tended to describe the world where all evil is purely illu-
sory, and where the spirit triumphs by simply denying
the existence of all its opponents. Many people, and for
that matter many idealists, conceive their world in these
terms. And I therefore let Lanier state their case : —

** To heal his heart of long-tinoo pain
One day Prince Love for to travel was fain
With Ministers Mind and Sense.

*Now what to thee most strange may be ? ’

Quoth Mind and Sense. * All things above,

One curious thing 1 first would see, —

Hell/ quoth Love.

"Then Mind rode in and Sense rode out ;

They searched the ways of man about.

First frightfully groaiieth Sense,

‘ 'T is here, ’t is here,' and spurreth in fear
To the top of the lull that hangeth above
And plucketh the Prince : * Come, come, ^t is here.^

* Where ? * quoth Love.”

Accordingly, as Lanier proceeds to describe, Love fol-
lows. his minister Sense to the place where, according to
the latter, there is a very black stream flowing, and where
a very cold wind blows, while beyond the stream one can
see lost souls struggling in burning lakes. Love goes
very curiously to the place, hunting somewhat skeptically,
as if, to borrow a certain modern and possibly too crudely
optimistic comparison that I have sometimes found in use,
he were an electric light engaged in the search for a
shadow ; and lo I when he reaches the spot in question,
somehow the scene has become transformed. The black
stream has changed to a living rill, and instead of the
flaming lake beyond there are only lilies growing.

Sense is of course somewhat disconcerted by this change
of the scene.

" For lakes of pain, yon pleasant plain
Of woods and grass and yellow grain
Doth ravish the soul and sense ;


444


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


And never a sigh beneath the sky,

And folk that smile and gaze above.”

Such a transformation Love has wrought by his mere
coming, and in his unconsciousness he also wonders.

** Then Love rode round, and searched the ground,

The caves below, the hills above ;

* But 1 cannot find where thou hast found — •

Hell I * quoth Love.”

Hereupon, however, Sense having failed, the other minis
ter is appealed to : —

“ There, while they stood in a green wood
And marveled still on 111 ai^ Good,

Came suddenly Minister Mind.

*In the heart of sin doth hell begin :

*T is not below, *t is not above.

It lieth within, it lieth within : *

(* Where ? * quoth Love.)

** * I s.aw a man sit by a corse ;

Hell *s in the murderer's breast : remorse 1 '

Thus clamored his mind to his mind ;

Not fleshly dole is the sinner’s goal,

* Hell ’s not below, nor yet above,

’T is fixed in the ever damned soul ’ —

‘ Fixed ? ’ quoth Love.

‘ Fixed : follow me, would^st thou but see
He weepeth under yon willow tree.

Fast chained to his corse ! ’ quoth Mind.

Full soon they passed, for they rode fast.

Where the piteous willow bent above.

* Now shall I see at last, at last.

Hell,’ quoth Love.

There when they came Mind suffered shame S

* These be the same and not the same

A-wondering whispered Mind.

Lo, face by face two spirits pace
Where the blissful willow waves above :

One saith : ^ Do me a friendly grace — *

(* Grace 1 ’ quoth Love.)


OPTIMISM, PESSIMISM, AND THE MORAL ORDER* 445

*** Read me two dreams that lioger long,

Dim as returns of old-time song,

That flicker about the mind.

I dreamed (how deep in mortal sleep !)

1 struck thee dead, then stood above
With tears that none but dreamers weep ; *

' Dreams,’ quoth Love.

^ * In dreams, again, I plucked a flower

That clung with pain and stung with power^

Yea, nettled me, body and mind.

’T was the nettle of sin, ’t was medicine ;

No need nor seed of it here Above ;

In dreams of Hate true Loves begin.’

• True,* quoth Love.

** * Now strange,’ quoth Sense, and ‘ Strange,’ quoth Mind';

* We saw it, and yet ’t is hard to And,

— But we saw it,’ quoth Sense and Mind.

* Stretched on the ground, beautiful crowned
Of the piteous willow that wreathed above,’

* But I cannot find where ye have found

Hell,’ quoth Love,’*

Once, more, then, Love falls, you see, since even as he
approached Remorse, too, has fled. Thus Lanier depicted
Love as wandering in his own universe. Mind and
Sense find all sorts of mischief there, but they cannot
show such things to their master. Abiding is only the
ideal ; evil is but the illusion.

Here, then, is an embodiment, — in extreme form to be
sure, but in a form that you will recognize, — of that mod-
ern faith which, in curious contrast to the prevalent agnos-
ticism of our age, defends the spiritual in the world by
denying the very existence of evil. I need hardly tell
you more at length how to many minds such a doctrine
contains the very deepest essence of religion. In such a
world, think they, we can make easy work of demonstrat*
ing the immortality of the soul, the final restoration of
all things, the unreality of Satan, the triumph of every


446 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

good cause, in short, the gracious perfection which is hid*
den behind every apparent and illusory evil of life. To
suqh persons thus to deny ill is to have spiritual insight,
and Love is indeed ignorant of hell just because Love
knows all things. I do not know how far Lanier regarded
this as a final doctrine. But let us for the moment treat
it as such, and draw further conclusions for which he is
indeed not responsible.

Extremely characteristic of the mood of such religious
optimism is in many minds a dread of the natural order
as science knows it. Your optimist of this type, if he
devotes himself to political theorizing, has a peculiarly
violent dislike for economic facts. To his mind there are
no evils in society except competition and poverty, which
will both cease so soon as we by chance fall to loving one
another, and to owning the property of the nation in
common. Crime is not a result of anything deep in human
nature ; selfishness is a mere incident of a defective social
system. With fewer hours of labor, we should have many
times the spirituality that we now have. Sin is not only
mere ignorance ; it is something still more limited ; it is
mere ignorance of the proper theory of the functions of
government. Satan is mainly an invention of false theories
in political economy. A single tax system, or a national-
ized labor army, would end the sorrows of mankind, and
make us all artists and patriots. The end of human woe
is n’t far off ; the day of the Lord is at hand.

The day of the Lord is in fact, in one form or another,
the favorite hope of these romantic optimists. Evil being
only an illusion, the spiritual powers being in complete
ownership of the entire world, there is no reason why any
day the scene of our sorrow should not be entirely trans-
formed. In the hope of such transformation the faithful
wait and trust. Meanwhile they expect little help from
mere science, which once for all deals with the world of
mind and of sense in a lower sphere. The truth of the


OPTIMISM, PESSIMISM, AND THE MORAL ORDER. 447

spirit is not plain to the natural man ; the faithful rather
pray to the Lord that such an one’s eyes may be opened,
so that he may see the chariots of the Lord all about him.
Then he will believe in his immortal destiny, he will for-
sake remorse, gloom, dread, yes, even strenuousness itself.
Spirituality, after all, is n’t a very strenuous thing. That
is n’t its true quality. It rather blesseth him that gives
and him that takes. In the world of the divine love all
is well.


III.

But now is this, after all, a truly spiritual doctrine of
the world ? Is this the notion of life and its problems
to which a genuine idealism leads us ? I confess that I
do not think so ; I hold rather that Love, in Sidney La-
nier’s vision, was rather the deluded one, or, if you like,
the deceiver ; I hold that good is the final goal of iU in a
wholly different sense, and that the gravity of the issues
of the spiritual world is one which no one is fitted to under-
stand .until he has once fairly comprehended the sense
and the bitterness of such a pessimism as even that of
Schopenhauer himself. For a true pessimism, not as the
last word of wisdom, but as an element of the true doc-
trine, is as much a moment in genuine spirituality as
tragedy is a part of the fortune of true love. Even in
Lanier’s poem Love had felt heart-pain, and needed heal-
ing. Evil is not a dream, but a bitter truth, which we
make spiritual by conquering it. And as for the day of
the Lord, as for the moment when the divinely grave
meaning, the genuine spirituality, of the world dawns
upon man’s comprehension, the first of the great prophets
whose literary remains have come down to us from the
days of ancient Israel fully expressed the essential fact
concerning that experience when he said to the optimists
of his time : “Woe unto you that desire the day of the
Lord I To what end is it for you ? The day of the Lord


448 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHT.

is darkness, and not light. As if a man did flee from a
lion, and a bear met him ; or went into the house, and
leaned his hand on the wall, and a serpent bit him.”

I assure you in all earnestness, speaking as an idealist,
as one who longs to have men recognize the spiritual order,
to believe in the supremacy of the good in this our world,
to rise above sense, and to feel secure of the rationality of
the universe, — speaking thus, I still regard as one of
the most lamentable and disheartening features in our
modem life the dreary opposition between those who,
studying the order of nature as science shows it, remain
agnostic about the spiritual realities of the world, and
those who, on the other hand, believing, as they say, in a
divine order, remain gently optimistic, and refuse to look
at the woes and horrors of the world of Darwin and of
science, because forsooth, since the Lord reigns, all must
be right with the world. Thus on the one hand we have
a romantic idealism that loves, with false liberalism, to
cheapen religious faith by ignoring all the graver dogmas
of the traditional creeds, that invents, meanwhile,, social
utopias, that denies the profound waywardness and wick-
edness of human nature, and that refuses to grapple by
the throat the real ills of life ; while on the other hand
we have an agnosticism that refuses to believe in the spir-
itual, because once for all there is so much mischief in the
phenomenal order of nature. A genuine synthesis of this
optimism and its opposing pessimism, a spiritual idealism
that does not deny the reality and the gravity of evil, a
religion that looks forward to the day of the Lord as to
something very great and therefore very serious, and that
accepts life as something valuable enough to be tragic

this is what we need.

In human history the schoolmaster to bring us to the
higher sense of what a genuine idealism means has al-
ways been just that bitter sense of the unreality and
vanity of religious optimism which Amos so fervently


OPTIMISM, PESSIMISM, AND THE MOBAL OBDEB. 449

expressed, and which for other thinkers, for a Voltaire or
for a Swift, has frequently taken either the form of a
skeptical assault upon all faith in the supremacy of the
good in the universe, or else the shape of a cynical despair
which, at all events in man’s nature, could find no encour-
aging feature. The difficulties of religious optimism are
indeed manifold enough. If all is ordered for the best in
the best of possible worlds, if, in the presence of the
divine love, even the hell of remorse itself ceases to exist,
if what is called sin is a mere medicine of the soul, a net-
tle that stings a trifle, in order that we may be the better
spiritually for the experience, if in a higher state we shall
see that there was positively nothing to lament in this
mortal life, then indeed the w^hole universe of action loses
its gravity and its earnestness. Why should I not sin,
since sin also is an illusiou ? Why not experience the
sting of the nettle of crime, since that also is a medicine ?
If all is well, what is there to resist, to conquer, to
change, to meet courageously, to regret, to avoid? If
diving wisdom is present equally in the highest and the
lowest, equally in the good and in the ill, then why resist
the unreal evil ? Whatever I am God chooses me, and
surely not as a vessel of wrath, for there is no wrath in
him at all, only gentleness, love, peace.

I need not dwell on such difficulties of the optimistic
scheme. In its spirituality, as you see, it is in danger of
becoming out and out immoral. Nor need I point out
how, along with the study of the empirical facts which
show us the world full of apparent ills all about us, these
fundamental difficulties of optimism have led many to
abandon altogether the hope of vindicating for any spir-
itual order a supremacy in our world. And, in fact, for
those who, like myself, accept a general idealistic scheme
of things there would seem at first sight to be no resource
open, but either a resigned acceptance of the divine order
as something to be conceived only in mystical terms, or
else a consent to such a pessimism as Schopenhauer’s.


150 THE SmiT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

The first resource here, to wit, mystical resignation,
which once for all accepts the divine order as real and
supreme, which still admits that the finite world is full of
evil, and which then solves its problem by simply refus-
ing to face it, and by surrendering all clear thought in
favor of a rapt and helpless adoration of God, — this re-
source is already known to uafrom our study of Spinoza,
and, still better, of the Imitation.” Your mystic is never
an optimist of the type suggested in Sidney Lanier’s
poem. He rather loves to dwell on the miseries of the
finite life. These are for him perfectly real miseries.
The source of them, however, is simply our own absorp-
tion in our finitude. Why the divine order permits us to
become thus absorbed is never clear, nor can it be made
clear for the mystic. It is God who knows, not I, why I
am thus imprisoned in the fatal misery of my finite igno-
rance. What he means by letting m^ become finite is
utterly mysterious. I submit to this, as to eveiything
else: —

** The Ball no question makes of Ayes and Noes,

But Here or There as strikes the Flayer goes ;

And he that toss*d you down into the Field,

He knows about it all — He knows — He knows.”

The divine wisdom is existent for itself, not for me. It is
remote, foreign, impenetrable, so long indeed as I remain
finite. If I consent to lose myself indeed, there may
come moments of ecstasy, when I shall, as it were at the
moment of my vanishing, seem to catch a glimpse of
God’s meaning. But the glimpse will mean little ; it will
be inexpressible, a divine suggestion, with no bearings
upon practical life in this world.

Are we now, as idealists, condemned to such a mysti-
cism as this ? If we are, is not the way indeed a short one
to Schopenhauer’s pessimism ? In fact, all the three views
of life that we have just been considering are not so
remote from one another in theb oppositions as might


OPTIMISM, PESSIMISM, AND THE MORAL ORDER. 451

seem at first sight to be the case. The fact is that the
finite world is full of at least apparent evils. Beligious
optimism of the simple-minded sort simply denies their
actual existence. God’s perfection, it says, excludes
them. They are n’t anything positive. They are essen-
tially unreal. All is light and clear when viewed from
above. The ills of life, including even the crimes of the
world of sense, vanish from God’s point of view. Mysti-
cal resignation, on the contrary, while asserting that the
evils of life have a genuine existence, deprives them of
any significant place in the divine order as such. The
evils are, for the mystic, once more illusions, only so long
as you remain in the finite world they are necessary illui-
sions. God, too, knows them to be here in our finite
world, doubtless even wills them to be Jiere, so long as we
remain remote from absorption in him. The sins in-
separable from iour finite existence are imposed upon us
as the penalties of our consenting to remain apart from
him. The difference between these two views is, that, on
the one hand, for the believer in Sidney Lanier’s con-
quest of divine Love, the higher insight brings with it to
the finite beings a certain joy in their very finitude, a
delight in their own past sins, in these experiences that
have proved a medicine to them. This joy seems to make
them content with the flowers and caresses of their world.
On the other hand, the mj^stical resignation never sees in
the finite world anything but dust and ashes, and to the
end turns from it scornfully to God, who is the only
good. Yet the' two views agree in this, that they both
alike deprive the finite world of all gravity and of all
deeper ethical significance. What we do here, our work,
our purposes, our problems, our doubts, our battles, all
these things have for the mystic as for the optimist no
essential meaning. There are no issues in the finite
world for either view. And this idea, that just because
there are no true issues in the finite world, just because


452


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


there is no gravity about it, nothing stern, Nothing worthy
of a good fight, no salvation that may be lost, and is hard
to win, no significant toil that ought to be entered upon
and that is calling for us with the voice of a positive duty
— that just because of all this our life is essentially vain ;
what is such an idea but the very essence of pessimism
itself ? Pessimism, then, the sense of the utter vanity of
life, is the necessary outcome of every half-hearted scheme
of the moral order, of every scheme which says you can
escape the evils of finitude, if at all, only in case you can
find some way to deny their existence. For the fact is
that from every such half-hearted scheme of the moral
order we return to the facts of life themselves. There
they are, our ills and our sins — denying does not destroy
them, calling them illusions does not remove them, de-
claring them utterly insignificant only makes all the more
hollow and empty the life of which the^are an organic
part. If, then, the only escape of our philosophy from the
individual ills of life lies in denying their significance, and
so the significance of this whole seeming world whereof
they are a part, then indeed are we of all men most mis^
crable. For our life is in this world. And if the world
of experience is ordy a vain show, then the last word is a
sense of the utter illusoriness and insignificance of the
issues of life which is the very essence of pessimism.

Or once more, to put the matter more concretely : If
one who had long been toiling courageously up the steep
and narrow path of virtue, fighting sin after sin, doing
good as it was given him, aiming in his little way for the
victory of righteousness in the finite world, if such an
one, I say, has suddenly revealed to him as a truth the
substance of Lanier’s vision of all-conquering Love, wha
wins not by warfare with ill, but by a simple ignoring of
ill, in whose presence crimes become the medicine of the
soul, and hatreds the germs of the glorified friendships of
free spirits — will not your moral hero of the finite world.


OPTIMISM, PESSIMISM, AND THE MORAL ORDER. 463

scarred with his long warfare, worn with toils and sor-
rows, a patient servant of the good cause which as he
fondly had hoped needed him — will he not see the cheat
and delusion of all his warfare ? What vainer than the
conflict with all the powers of hell, when there are no
such powers ? Will he not say of us all in a new and
bitter sense : —

’T is we who wrapt in gloomy visions keep

With phantoms an unprofitable strife ” ?

Nay, what shall it profit us that after the manner of men
we have fought wild beasts at Ephesus ? There are no
wild beasts, you see. It was all a dream, our morality.
This optimistic awakening, — could any irony of fate
seem to us more bitter ? We have offered our little all to
virtue, and the offering was vain ; for in the world of
truth there wa#no offering to bring to virtue. Thus the
whole moral conduct of finite beings proves to be based
upon as irrational a striving as that which makes Scho-
penhauer call the blind world-will so worthless a thing. If
the mystical interpretation of life be the right one, if the
finite world is indeed simply banished from God, and has
no share in him except at the moment when it denies
itself, the pessimistic result is once more the plain one.
All these half-hearted views, in their endless dialectic,
resolve themselves into the same vanity.

And yet they are not without worth — these partial
insights — as approaches to the truth. When religious
optimism declares the joyous divine love to be all-conquer-
ing and omnipresent, it is trying to express a truth. Dis-
satisfied with his eternal world the divine Self cannot be.
It is only in the temporal world that from moment to
moment, as the drama changes, there is of necessity rest-
lessness, evil, strife, and therefore a serious business in-
volved. That the evil also, however real to the finite
being, however lamentable or hateful from the finite point


454


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


of view, has its place in the perfection of the Self, this is
what optimism means, and in so far it is right. The
truth in fact will lie somehow in a synthesis of all these
points of view, for all three have a certain relative valid-
ity. The genuine moral order must contain that ^^per-
fection in imperfection ” which Browning, in his best and
most vital poems, was always striving to describe to us.
Thus constituted it must be indeed problematic, even as
the mystics make it, and tragic, even as the pessimists
declare it, but also somehow perfect just as optimism
dreams.

IV.

Can wo now suggest, from an idealistic point of view,
how the world of the one Self can be thus at once a world
of moral issues, and a world of moral completeness ; a
world of goodness, and yet a world where evil has its genu-
ine place ; a world of restless spirituality, where at every
moment of time there is something for moral agents to do,
and a world of supreme triumph, where the spirit eter-
nally rests from his labors ? All these things, apparently,
a moral order which is to be at once divine in its perfec-,
tion so that wo can worship it, and great in its needs
so that our life may not be vain as we try to serve the
good — all these paradoxically opposed qualities a moral
order must contain. Is it conceivable that they should
be reconciled ? Is not the very attempt an absurdity ? I
answer that, on the contiary, if you look at the matter
fairly, and from the point of view of an idealist’s inter-
pretation of life, nothing is more possible than just such
an union of the apparently conflicting requirements of the
religious conception of the world.

Consider, then, that more familiar problem of practical
and daily life with whose philosophical beiirings our his-
torical study of Hegel and of Schopenhauer has now
made us acquainted. All living, in the first place, how*
ever commonplace its aims, however accidental its idealsi


OPTIMISM, PESSIMISM, AND THE MORAL ORDER. 455

involves a deep paradox. We long to live. Very well,
then, we long to be active. For life means activity ; and
activity, that again means longing, striving, suffering
lack, hoping for the end of the activity in which we are
immediately engaged. This is the essence of living, just
as Schopenhauer said. Life is will ; and every will aims
at its own completion, that is, at its own cessation. I will
to be wiser than I am. Well, then, I will that my present
foolishness shall cease. 1 will to get somebody’s love ;
and that means that I will the cessation of my unloved
condition. Every will aims at the attainment of its
desire ; and attainment is the death of just this desire,
and so of just this act of will. And yet, on the whole,.!
will to live. I will then that which will always be in one
sense a longing for its own cessation; I will to suffer
lack ; I desire to be always desiring. My highest good,
then, whatever my life, will always have this tinge of bit-
temcss about it, will always be a restless, longing, suffer-
ing good. Hegel saw this paradox, declared it to be the
very essence of spirituality, gloried in it, and founded his
whole system on the paradoxical logic of passion. Scho-
penhauer saw the same truth in another light, and aban-
doned hope in life because of the universality of this
truth. As for us, we have found reason to side in this
one respect rather with Hegel. The life that we seek in
this world cannot be colorlessly perfect. At the very low-
est estimate of its seriousness it has the worth and the
risk of the game about it. We win only by risking de-
feat ; we have our courage only by conquering our fear ;
we can triumph in life only by transcending the pains of
risk and of conflict even while they are in us and part
of us. Well, if this be so in other sorts of life, may it
not also be so in the moral life ? Sin is moral defeat,
and is therefore indeed a part of a world where there is
serious moral effort, just, as lost games are part of the
world of every earnest player. Imagine, then, that the


156


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


infinite Self, in the unity of his eternal life, wills a com-i
plete moral consciousness. Must not this consciousness
express itself in a world of finite persons, each one of
whom is limited enough not merely to strive and suffer,
but also to be in danger of sin? Many of these moral
agents, then, will sin, will fail in the conflict of life.
Their errors will not be unreal ; their remorse will not be
an illusion. But in the spiritual tragedy of the world as
known to the divine perfection their failure will have the
share that bitterness and sorrow always have in the life
of the stern and earnest will. Or, once again, to make
this notion of the moral world clearer, remember that, as
we saw at the last time, the infinite Self, looking at the
world in its entirety, must contain, must include, must
consciously possess its whole spiritual world, as the musi-
cal consciousness, in its estimate of the succession of
sounds, contains not merely the single notes, not merely
the chords as they come singly in time, but the whole
symphony, whose dissonances may thus be moments in the
eternal perfection of the whole. Regarded temporally,
music, which, as Schopenhauer suggested, does in this
respect resemble the whole life of the will, is restless, in-
satiable, unable to give you any perfeetion at any single
moment of its progress. Everything it gets only to flee
from its own attainment. And even the final ehords
which its striving reaches in any composition would be
worthless if alone. Yet this finite and temi)oral imper-
fection, this restless flight from every note, eveiy melody,
every ehord, every chord-sequence, constitutes the indwell-
ing perfection of the whole work. Mozart, as you may
know, used to say, in words which the German philoso-
pher Von Hartmann has very significantly quoted, that
the blessedest moment of his artistic production was the
one wherein this significance of his whole composition
came home to him in one ins^t, wherein as it were he
transcended time, and possessed all the succession of rest-


OPTIMISM, PESSIMISM, AND THE MORAL ORDER. 457

less musical strivings in one artistic glance. “ My ideas,”
says, in substance, Mozart, in a letter to a friend, come
as they will, 1 don’t know how, all in a stream. If 1 like
them I keep them in my head, and people say that I often
hum them over to myself. Well, if I can hold on to them,
they begin to join on to one another, as if they were bits
that a pastry cook should joint together in his pantry.
And now my soul gets heated, and if nothing disturbs me
the piece grows larger and brighter until, however long it
is, it is all finished at once in my mind, so that 1 can see
it at a glance as if it were a pretty picture or a pleasing
person. Then I don’t hear the notes one after another,
as they are liereafter to be played, but it is as if in my
fancy they were all at once. And that is a revel (das ist
nun ein Schmaus'). While I ’m inventing, it all seems to
me like a fine vivid dream ; but that hearing it all at ouco
(when the invention is done), that ’s the best. What I
have once so heard I forget not again, and perhaps this is
the best gift that God has granted me.”

Well, such non-temporal grasping of the significance of
a restless temporal progress, we must indeed attribute, as
we have seen, to the Self in whom our logical analysis
found the realization of all truth. The truth of time
must be seen by the absolute Knower, as Mozart saw his
whole compositions. For that is, not the dream, but the
technically defensible result which our idealism has forced
upon us. If what we have to call the infinite past and
future have even at this instant a genuine truth, so that
of any moment in the past or in the future there is only
one of tw'o contradictory assertions now true, then the infi-
nite Self to whom I appeal when 1 talk of past and future
must, in the eternal sense, grasp and possess the whole of
time. After this fashion, then, the very paradox may be
realized by his consciousness which we are now seeking
to explain, the paradox ^ a world where, in the individ-
ual moments of life, tlmre is indeed evil, dissonance,


458 THE 8P1E1T OF MODEBN PHILOSOPHY.

tragedy, restlessness, imperfection, where the struggle
with these things is not illusory, and where the value of
the whole does not come, as in Sidney Lanier’s dream,
through an abolition of the knowledge of individual ills,
through an ignoring of evil, whether physical or moral,
but rather through an eternal insight into the value of
the entire restless life of the whole temporal world.

But perhaps you may say that such a vindication as this
of the perfection of the divine order does not, after all,
sufficiently do j istice to the gravity of the moral world.
The moral world, as experience shows it to us, is not
a symphony, nor anything else artistic, but either it is a
world of moral agony, of crime, of darkness, as Amos
said, and not of light, or else our conscience, in condemn-
ing sin as absolutely hateful, is wrong. Conscience de-
clares that moral evil simply ought not to exist. Moral
evil is n’t a mere dissonance in the world-symphony, any
more than it is, as Sidney Lanier’s optimistic dream made
it, a gentle medicine for the soul. Sin is through and
through i*egrettable, diabolical. It ought not to exist.
No contrast of temporal and eternal will save us here.
So, in its stem hatred of the wrong, our moral conscious-
ness seems to declare. Can our idealism aid us in recon-
ciling the divine perfection with such dissonances, with
such paradoxes as these of the moral world ?

Well, I admit, indeed, that it is very hard to formulate
the truth as to this problem without giving it the false
accent. Yet, after all, we have now in our hands all the
elements that are necessary for a genuine solution of the
problem of the existence of sin, in so far, at least, as it
is related to the consciousness of the sinner himself.
Spiritual evil has, to be sure, other aspects that will need
yet more study.

Sin, says our moral consciousness, is utterly hateful,
and ought not to exist in a pei^ot world. If our moral
consciousness is wrong in asserang this, then one appaiv


OPTIMISM, PESSIMISM, AHD THE MOBAL ORDER. 459

ently returns to Lanier's superficial optimism. Evil is
only illusory. But in that case, as we saw, the world
utterly loses deeper significance. If, however, moral evil,
as it exists in the sinner’s soul, is not illusory, then how
can the divine order be at once good and triumphant, in a
world where there is so much sin ? The answer is sug-
gested to us by a consideration not now of sin as such,
but of latent sin, namely, of temptation. In the world of
our own acts we have an experience which is very enlight-
ening as to the paradoxical constitution of the whole
moral world. Only the tempted, as we saw when we
studied Hegel’s doctrine, — only the tempted can be holy.
For instance, if I find in myself an evil impulse, I find
what in itself considered is, indeed, something hateful,
lamentable, possibly horrible, something which regarded
for itself can apparently form no part of a good order.
If I tolerate the impulse, if I declare it to be just the nettle
of sin, if I call its evil illusory, then my moral optimism
is indeed open to the condemnation of Amos, who cries
woe upon all such vindications of the divine order. But
suppose I resist the evil impulse, hate it, hold it down,
overcome it, then, in this moment of hating and condemn-
ing it I make, it a part of my larger moral goodness.
The justification of the existence of my evil impulse comes
just at the instant when I hate and condemn it. Con-
demning and conquering the evil will makes it x>art of a
good will. Here is the paradox of all will stated not now
in artistic but in moral terms. There are elements in a
good world which, individually regarded, ought not to be
there, which are in themselves hateful, regrettable, the just
object of wrath. Yet they become part of the world of
the good will just in so far as they are in fact hated, con-
demned, subdued, overcome. The good world is not inno-
cent. It does not ignore evil ; it possesses and still con-
quers evil.


460


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


resisted temptations, if they are permissible parts of a
moral order, in so far as they are condemned and hated
by our larger moral consciousness, then, I ask, may not
the same be true of our actual sins, only in a yet graver
and more tragic sense ? Is n’t there a deep truth after
all in the stern theology that said that even sin exists for
the glory of God, but that God’s glory is vindicated not
through an ignoring, but tiirough a hating and a triumph-
ing over sin ? “ I,” a sinner may say, “ am in all my

wickedness a part of the divine order, which is perfect.
Therefore my sin is illusory.” We answer, not illusory
is this sin. Only, just because our idealism makes of the
divine Self one transcendent person, in whom and for
whom are all things, persons, and acts, just for this reason
there is open to us a vindication of the moral order of
God, which will insist at once upon the gravity of sin and
upon the perfection of the divine morality. In God, so
we say to the willful sinner, you are a part of a good will,
which bears just such organic relation to your sinfulness
as, in a good man, his virtue bears to the evil impulse
that forms a part of his goodness. The hatred and co?i-
demnation of just your life and character makes God
holy. God loves you, indeed, in so far as you are in any
wise worthy ; but just in so far as you are a rebel, you
enter into the perfect moral order, not because your evil
is illusory, but because God knows you to hate you and to
triumph over you. Your evil will bears to his the rela-
tion that a brave man’s fears bear to his triumphant
courage, just the relation that a good man’s weaknesses
bear to the scorn which his conscience feels towards such
weaknesses. Just because of that unity of the infinite
Self which idealism teaches, God’s organic perfection vin-
dicates sin by scorning it, makes it a part of his moral
order only by hating it, binds in the chains of his hatred
aU the counidess ills of the finite world, and rests in his
eternal perfection beyond the moral dissonances of the


OPTIMISM, PESSIMISM, AND THE MORAL ORDER. 461

temporal world, just because everywhere in this tem-
poral world each dissonance is resolved, is condemned, is
restlessly transcended. Whatever we are, we are, indeed,
a part of God’s perfection. But the question is, what
sort of part ? Are we there to be scorned, despised, con-
demned by the organic Self, whose perfection will be vin-
dicated in such case through the very courage and em-
phasis of its scorn and hatred for us? If so, whatever
our sin, it is pai't of the moral order, only the moral order
exists by conquering us, and we live only to be despised
by the very Self that includes us. God’s holiness we,
then, assist, but only as the evil impulse serves the saint’s
triumphant higher self. God’s glory wc then, in our way,
also serve, but only as vessels of his wrath. But do we
ourselves choose the good ? Then once more we enter into
the divine order, but this time as vessels of honor, as min-
isters of the good, as servants and not as enemies, as co-
workers and not as rebels, as beloved and not as scorned.

Thus I have tried to show you how idealism, by its
very definition of the divine Self as the one organic per-
sonality, in whom and for whom we all exist, is able
to suggest a solution of this one amongst the religious
problems of the ages, and a synthesis of the truths that
are at the heart both of moral optimism and of moral
pessimism, both of the mystical and of the morally
active religious piety, both of the faith in God’s eternal
perfection and of the desire to do right in the temporal
world. All this, you remember, is true, so far as to the /
explanation of the existence of sin as it exists within the ^
evil-doer’s soul. There is another aspect of the problem
of evil that is much darker from our finite point of view
than this due ; and to this other aspect 1 must pass as I
close.

V.

For I do not feel that I have yet quite expressed the
full force of the deepest argumehc for pessimism, or the


462 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

full seriousness of the eternal problem of evil. In fact,
when, in the past, I have gone over these considerations in
company with those of my fellows who have experienced
widely and deeply, I have always found that whether they
were themselves naturally disposed to be pessimists or not,
they declined to recognize this way of looking at our
question about evil as really exhausting the meaning of
it. The mood that genuinely questions the value of life
is after all a very gloomily ingenious mood. Its dialectic
is endless ; it turns its reflection from sorrow to sorrow,
with a remorselessly industrious scrutiny ; it refuses easy
comfort ; it readily finds the philosopher’s formulas pedan-
tic and unspiritual ; and in fact no lighter experience of
grief, no superficial disappointment, no mere wounded
sentiment, nor yet even a transient remorse, can give you
a true sense of what the problem of evil is. Even that
remorse which Lanier’s poem depicts is ill-adapted to ex-
press whether hell has its seat in this universe. In fact,
to see where the worst problems of life lie is a very black
experience. And yet, so much docs human reason love
insight, that I have never met a man who was alive to
these deepest problems, and who still repented him of his
insight. The strong and hearty beings who know not the
clear bitterness of all higher truth often wonder how men
can doubt as to the worth of life, and often condemn as
mere morbidness every such scrutiny as that in which we
are now engaged. Many persons I know, and honor, too,
— men of cheerful souls and well-knit purposes, high-
minded men and strenuous, to whom every ultimate,
above all every philosophical inquiry as to this matter of
the meaning and the final justification of life, seems essen-
tially either vain or dangerous. Why we live, they say,
and what our duty is, and why it is a worthy thing to do
our duty, and how evil is to be explained, — to ask this
why ? is to hesitate, to dream, to speculate, to poison life.
The best thing is to work and not to inquire.


OPTIMISM, PESSIMISM, AMD THE MORAL ORDER. 468

Yet there is another way of viewing life, and that is
just the way upon which we have, been dwelling. It is the
way of men who demand ultimate answers, and who, if
they can't get them, prefer doubt, even if doubt means
despair. Pessimism, in the true sense, is n’t the doctrine
of the merely peevish man, but of the man who, to bor-
row a word of Hegel’s, “has once feared not for this
moment or for that in his life, but who has feared with
all his nature ; so that he has trembled through and
through, and all that was most fixed in him has become
shaken.” There are experiences in life that do just this
for us. And when the fountains of the great deep are,
once thus broken up, and the floods have come, it is n’t
over this or that lost spot of our green earth that we sor-
row ; it is because of all that endless waste of tossing
waves which now rolls cubits deep above the top of what
were our highest mountains. In our natural state, you
see, we desire many things, some more, and some less ;
life has its strange mingling of joys and of pangs ; but
there* is nothing in it absolute, nothing whose place
cpuldn’t be taken by another. We are, then, cheerful
and reasonably content, just because everything in our
world has its price, and can conceivably be gained by
finite labor ; nor is there for us anything this side death
that might not, with good fortune, turn out well for us.
This is the mood that, of course, with an inaccurate use
of the superlative, and so with a very characteristic ex-
aggeration of speech, common sense calls optimism. The
mood which really opposes it, however, is just the mood
that has learned to demand absolute standards, and that
finds iionQ ; the mood that refuses to be comforted with
such good things as can be brought, because it longs for
the priceless goods of the spirit. This opposing mood,
then, this true pessimism, is in its very nature the mood
of the painfully awakened, who cry for God’s truth, and
who so far find it not. It is che despair of those who


464


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


want a plan in life, and who see how our ordinary and
natural life is planless, accidental, a mere creature of for-
tune. This despair is the first voice, in many hearts, of
the truly devout spirit. He who has never felt it does
not know what the deepest religious experience must in*
volve. And he who has once become possessed of this
longing for a deeper meaning in life than natural expe-
rience can give or can find there, would not for worlds
exchange his insight, gloomy as he may find it, for the
vain cheerfulness of unchastened optimism. Better, to
his mind, this waste of dark tossing waves than the blind
and misbelieving world before the flood ; better to be
broken in spirit, than to be vainly puffed up with miser-
able finite conceits.

Well, it is just this absolutely inquiring mood, just this
thorough-going doubt, that we shall not yet have shaken
by all the foregoing. Easy it is, such doubt will say, easy
it is to refute the religious optimists of Lanier’s type ;
easy it is to get past the stately resignation of the mysti-
cal mood ; easy, too, if you will, for an idealist, to justify
the existence of countless evils in the finite world, if only
they have the less tragic typo. Only there are still doors
to which we have found no key. The eternal insight of
the All-knower may look in lofty peace upon the rest-
less flight of our time - moments. Everywhere in his
world there will be change and dissatisfaction ; yet in
his completeness he may Judge it all as good. But there
is still one condition that must be met by the struggles of
the finite world, if they are obviously to conform to this
solution of our problem. They must, namely, be signifi-
cant conflicts. If they arc, then, so far, the difference of
the eternal and the temporal aspects does, indeed, aid us.
As for the willing sinner and his just remorse, it is n’t in
his case that one need feel deeply concerned. He has
played the game of sin ; he is only exemplifying the rules
of the game. The awakened sinner may sometimes ban-


OPTIMISM, PESSIMISM, AND THE MORAL ORDER. 466

Ish himself almost cheerfully to that hell, bearing, with a
stem contempt for his own sorrow, the bitterness of his
moral defeat.

No, the worst tragedy of the world is the tragedy of
the brute chance to which everything spiritual seems to be
subject amongst us — the tragedy of the diabolical irra-
tionality of so many among the foes of whatever is sig-
nificant. An open enemy you can face. The temptation
to do evil is indeed a necessity for spirituality. But one’s
own foolishness, one’s ignorance, the cruel accidents of dis-
ease, the fatal misunderstandings that part friends and
lovers, the chance mistakes that wreck nations : — these
things we lament most bitterly, not because they are pain-
ful, but because they are farcical, distracting, — nq^^ foe-
men worthy of the sword of the spirit, nor yet mere pangs
of our finitude that we can easily learn to face courage-
ously, as one can be indifferent to physical pain. No,
these things do not make life merely painful to us ; they
make it hideously petty. They are like the ‘^mean
knights ” that beat down Lancelot during his hopeless
, wandering in search of the Grail.

Some of you may know a little poem called “The
Fool’s Prayer,” a bit of verse that was first printed some
years ago, and that has more recently been rather often
quoted by the author’s growing circle of readers and ad-
mirers. The author himself, a man of not altogether
happy destiny, is now dead. I knew him well ; lie was
first a valued teacher and adviser of my own, and after-
wards an intimate friend. The words sprang so earnestly
from his heart, and they suggest our problem here so
thoughtfully, that I may venture to repeat the most of*
them : —

" The royal feast was done ; the king
Sought out some new sport to banish care^

And to his jester cried : * Sir Fool,

Kneel now, and make for us a prayer.’


466 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

“ The jester doffed his cap and bells
And stood the mocking court before ;

They could not see the bitter smile
Behind the painted grin he wore.

lie bowed his head, and bent his knee
Upon the monarch’s silken stool ;

His pleading voice arose : * O Lord,

Be merciful to me, a fool I

** * No pity. Lord, could change the heart
From red with wrong to white as wool ;

The rod must heal the sin ; but Lord,

Be merciful to me, a fool I

" * Tis not by guilt the onward sweep
Of truth and right, O Lord, we stay ;

’T is by our follies that so long
We hold the earth from heaven away-

" * These clumsy feet, still in the mire>

Go crushing blossoms without end ;

These hard, well-meaning hands we thrust
Among the heart-strings of a friend

‘ The ill-timed truth we might have kept-—
Who knows how sharp it pierced and stung ?
The word we had not sense to say —

Who knows how grandly it had rung ?

^ * Our faults no tenderness should ask,

Tlie chastening stripes must cleanse them all ;
But for our blunders* — oh, in shame
Before the eyes of heaven we fall.

^ * EaHh bears no balsam for mistakes ;

Men crown the knave, and scourge the tool
That did his will ; but thou, O Lord,

Be merciful to me, a fool.’ ”


I think that you will see how my old friend here sug-
gested where the burden of the problem of evil lies much
more wisely than Lanier did. For my friend, who wrote


OPTIMISM, PESSIMISM, AND THE MORAL ORDER. 467

these words, thus touched upon one element of that caprice
of life which does prove the cruelest note in all its trage-
dies. As I knew him, the poet of these verses was pecu-
liarly sensitive to the presence in the world of that will-
fulness both of fortune and of our fellows, which not
because of conscious sinfidness, nor yet because of any
obviously necessary discord of motives, but because of
mere brute accident or stupidity, tears to pieces whatever
is spiritual, kills our infant children, leaves our unrecog-
nized heroes to die neglected and ineffective, sunders the
wounded hearts of faithful lovers, makes brother war with
brother, plunges society into bitter confusions, defeats
over and over the most sacred ideals. My friend some-
times even used this fateful fact of defeat, 1 remeiijber,
as a sort of test of the spirituality of things. Were they
good,, he said, willfulness would assail them the more
surely. Once, when he was a little weaiy because of the
hatred that he had met with during some of his under-
takings in a very good cause, I said to him, by way of
a sort of conventional comfort and of friendly admonition
at once, “ Why do you work so hard as you do for the
good of people who only misunderstand you after all?
They don’t deserve the good things that you offer, for
they are people who won’t and can’t appreciate your
trouble. Why cast pearls before swine ? They only turn
and rend you.” “ Ah, Royce,” replied my friend, “ but
one does n’t quite surely know that they were pearls that
he cast until he feels the tusks.”

But perhaps you will say that, thus put, the problem of
the stupidity o£ our human nature and of our fortune
seems a rather sentimental problem, after all. Is not this
capriciousness of life simply part of its painfulness ? Is
it manly to lament just this woe so deeply? I answer, to
the enlightened soul it is n’t ever so much the painful-
ness as the blind irrationality of fortune that seems to
drive God out of our thoughts when we look at our world*


468 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHT.

Mere pain can be borne, for cause, very fairly. One maj
whine, but one can still hold out to the end and not la*
ment it when it is once over. But this capriciousness of
life is what really makes it seem like an evil dream.
Consider once more that horror involved in hereditary
disease, and in the fatal and unearned baseness which
often goes therewith. Consider the way in which the
wrong-doing of one person often entails not the physical
pain, but tho utter and inevitable corruption and end-
less moral degradation of another. Consider how not
mere disloyalty, but a transient mistake, may wreck the
most spiritual of causes, after years of devotion have
built up its fortunes nearly to the heights of success.
These, alas ! are the mere commonplaces of our temporal
order. Is it easy to say that these things are needed as a
part of the gravity of the spiritual world ? No, for they
don’t make the world spiritually grave I They make it
rather insane and contemptible. Moral evil in the willful
sinner himself, you can look in the face and defy, and that
too even if you are yourself the sinner. Here, you can
say, is my natural foe ; I know what he is and wherefore
he is. I condemn him, and I rejoice in defeating him.
But the hopeless and helpless degradation of the sinner’s
passive victim, how shall you speak comfortably or even
defiantly after that ? Here is the place only for pity ;
and in a world that is full of such things, and that always
will be full of such things, so long as its order is the prey
of the mechanical accidents of nature, where is there
room for anything but pity for its worthlessness ?

Well, here indeed we find the enemy of whose works
Shakespeare wrote in the sonnet that begins

** Tired of all these, for restful death I cry.**

And this will always be the cry of our darker moments so
long as the tragedies of our world decline to appear to us
as mainly moral tragedies. Nay, if it were only our sin


OPTIMISM, PESSIMISM, AND THE MORAL ORDER. 469

that kept us from God, might men not often hope to see
his face? The true devil isn’t crime, then, but brute
chance. For this devil teaches us to doubt and grow cold
of heart ; he denies God everywhere and iu all his crea-
tures, makes our world of action, that was to be a spirit-
ual tragedy, too often a mere farce before our eyes. And
to see this farcical aspect of the universe is for the first
time to come to a sense of the true gloom of life.

• VI.

Well, then, if this is the final and deepest truth of pes-
simism, what comfort still remains for one who in hope-
less affliction, or in the chaos of defeated spirituality, still
looks to the truth for aid ? Surely concerning this sort of
doubt one can only speak in the tenderest and most re-
spectful of terms. Cowards shrink from the petty pains
of fortune ; sinners and sentimentalists want to get rid of
the penalties of sin ; but they who most lament and won-
der over this capricious irrationality of the world are just
the noblest and gentlest of souls, who would pause at no
heroism were its warfare only a significant one, who would
shrink from no pang, if only by enduring it one served
God ; but who cannot endure this weary dwelling cheek
by jowl with the mocking demons of chance and absurd-
ity. Well, can one still plausibly insist that somehow,
in fashions unknown to us, the infinite Self is strong
enough to make the facing and the endurance of even
these demons somehow significant ? Can our chance be
by any possibility his rationality ; our chaos his order, our
farce his tragedy, our horror his spirituality? Yes, even
this may come home to us if we remember that he at
least, in his absoluteness, does not find these things as
foreign facts, forced upon him from without. He endures
them, as we do ; he condemns them as we must ; but he
knows them, as we in .our finitude cannot. And so, if
knowing them he wills these horrors for himself, must he


470


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


not know wherefore? In our strength we cannot walk
when we face them. Can we not walk in his strength ? He
who solves all problems, shall he not solve this one also ?
And thus, indeed, if in our iinitude we have but one com-
fort, surely we have that. From our finite point of view
there is no remotely discoverable justification for this
caprice. This is to our eyes no embodiment of a stern
moral order. It is Satan’s own irresistible and mocking
presence in o ir life. He ought not to be here ; yet no
thing that we can do will have any ehance to remove
him. And so, indeed, were our insight into the truth of
the Logos based upon any sort of empirical assurance, it
would surely fail us here. But now, as it is, if we have
the true insight of deeper idealism, we can turn from
our chaos to him, who is our own true and divine self, and
can hear from him with absolute assurance this one word :
“ O ye who despair, I grieve with you. Yes, it is I who
grieve in you. Your sorrow is mine. No pang of your
finitude but is mine too. I suffer it all, for all things are
mine ; I bear it, and yet I triumph.” This word of dihe
Self, I say, we can be sure of, for it is the one final word,
of our whole idealistic insight. It is this thought of the
suffering God, who is just our own true self, who actually
and in our flesh bears the sins of the world, and whose
natural body is pierced by the capricious wounds that hate-
ful fools inflict upon him — it is this thought, I say, that
traditional Christianity has in its deep symbolism first
taught the world, but that, in its fullness, only an ideal-
istic interpretation can really and rationally express.
Were not the Logos our own fulfillment, were he other
than our own very flesh, were he a remote god, were he not
our own selves in unity, were he foreign to the horror and
to the foolishness of our chaotic lives, we should indeed
look to him in vain ; for then his eternal peace' would be
indifference and cruelty, his perfection would be our de*
spair, his loftiness woidd be our remote and dismal help


OPTIMISM, PESSIMISM, AMD THE MORAL ORDER. 471

lessness. But he is ours, and we are his. He is pierced
*and wounded for us and in us. Our defeats are his;
and yet, above time, triumphant in the sacred glory of
an insight that looks before and after through the en^ess
ages and the innumerable worlds, he somehow finds
amidst all these horrors of time his peace, and so ours.
“ My peace,” he says, “ I give unto you ; not as the world
giveth, give I unto you.” This, then, at last, is the true
realization of the rapt wonder that the mystics sought.
What in time is hopelessly lost, is attained for him in his
eternity.


I know not that I have persuaded you of all this.
True philosophical persuasion would rest upon something
much more elaborate than I have had time to present. I
have only sketched. What I do know is that of such
truth philosophy must yet some day persuade those who
are ready to listen and apt to comprehend. Herein, too,
as I think, are woven into one cord the strands of partial
knowledge that in our history we have been finding. Spi-
.noza and Schopenhauer, Berkeley and Fichte, Kant and
Hegel, join in suggesting to us our result. Like the pre-
decessors of Childe Roland, they stand at the close of our
day, ranged along the hillsides to view the end of our
quest. For herewith, indeed, the task of these lectures is
ended. We have found in a world of doubt but one assur-
ance — but one, and yet how rich f All else is hypothesis.
The Logos alone is sure. The brief and seemingly so
abstract creed of philosophy : This world is the world
of the Xoj/os,” has answered our questions in the one
sense in which we can dare to hope for an answer. The
rest is silence — and, here on the earth, endless labor in
the might of the spirit, for whom and in whom is all sor-
row and bitterness, and all light and life — and peace.


APPENDIX A,


Antthing resembling an exhaustive bibliography of the topics
treated in the present book is excluded by the plan of the work.
A syllabus, with notes, containing a few suggestions for the fur-
ther study of the problems and thinkers considered in the course
of these lectures, was prepared, was printed in a series of broad-
sides, and was then put into the hands of the hearers on some of
the occasions of the delivery of the lectures. This syllabus,
much revised, here follows as an appendix. For its fragmen-
tariness, the nature of tlie present undertaking may be some
explanation. It extends to the historical lectures of the course.
Of the doctrinal lectures it gives only a brief suggestion in a
single summary statement.

SYLLABUS.

The general purposes of this course are : —

1. To give personal characterizations of some of the more note-
worthy modern thinkers.

2. To suggest, as clearly as may bo possible without technical
details, something of the nature of their various attitudes towards
the great concerns and issues of humanity.

3. To illustrate, in the light of such a study, certain significant
spiritual problems of our own day.

LECTURE I.

INTRODUCTION.

I. The general business of philosophy.

II. The variety and seeming failure of the philosophers.

III. The positive significance of philosophy.

IV. The many-sidedness of truth.

V. The skeptical element in philosophy in its relation to* the posi-
tive purpose of the study.
yi» The limitations of the present undertaking.


474


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHT.


LECTURE n.

THE PERIODS OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY ; CHARACTERISTICS OF THN
FIRST PERIOD ; ILLUSTRATION BY MEANS OF THE RELIGIOUS
ASPECT OF SP1NOZ18M.

I. The periods of modern philosophy.

II. General observations on the first period.

III. Spinoza as an illustration of the first period ; his fortune and

character.

IV. Spinoza’s relation to the problems of religion. Two general

forms of the religious consciousness distinguished, and illus-
trated from various sources, including the devotional book
called ** The Imitation of Christ.”

V. Spinoza possesses one of these two sorts of religious interest,
but not the other. Parallel between his mysticism and that
of the “ Imitation.”

VI. His system as an outcome of his religious interest. His concep-

tion of the Substance, of the Eternal Order, of Body and of
Mind. Mystical experienc^ justified by geometrical meth-
ods.

VII. Spinoza’s ideal of the wise man and of the love of God.

Notes. The periods of modem philosophy, as distinguished for the
present purpose, are : —

1*. Period of Naturalism and of Rationalism : From Galileo to Spinoza.
[Its specially noteworthy characteristics are, in addition to its general •
interest in outer nature : (1) Its belief that the whole order of nature is
subject to rigid laws of a mechanical type ; (2) Its faith in the power of
the human reason to know absolute truth ; and (3) Its fondness for mathe-
matical methods in philosophy.]

II. Period of the study of the Inner Life : From Locke to Kant.

[Its general characteristics are : (1) A critical analysis of the powers of
man's mind ; (2) A growing skepticism ; (3) In the end a tendency towards
revolutionary reconstructions of all doctrine].

III. Period of recent philosophy : From Kant to the present time.
[Beginning at the culmination of the pi'evious critical period, the third

period is at first devoted to the study of the inner life, but is later led to
fresh efforts fo comprehend outer nature. It is throughout much influ-
enced by natural science and by the newer study of history. In conse-
quence it develops the idea of evolution. Its problem is the synthesis and
reconciliation of our knowledge of outer nature with our understanding of
the inner life of man.]

The principal dates of Spinoza's life are as follows : birth, 1632 ; ex-
communication from synagogue, 1656; first philosophic work (Princtples
iif Cartesian Philosophy) published, 1663; Theologico-Politioal Tractate


APPENDIX A.


476


pnbli^ed 1670 ; refnsal of a call to a professoxdbip in Heidelberg, 1673 ;
death, 1677. Spinoza’s principal treatise is the Ethics, published posthn-
i||ouslj in 1677. He lived first in Amsterdam, then in various minor Dutch
towns, and died at the Hague.

His principal works have been recently translated into English in Bohn’s
Philosophical Library, in two volumes. The best accounts and commenta-
ries in English are those of Pollock {Spinoza's Life and Philosophy, Lon-
don, 1880), Martineau {Study of Spinoza), and John Gaird {Spinoza, Edin-
burgh, 1888). The boat complete edition is that of Van Vloten and Land
(The Hague, 1882-83, 2 vols.).

For comparison are added the dates of several other early modem think-


Montaigne

1533-1592

Jakob Boehme

1575-1624

Giordano Bruno

1548-1600

Hobbes

1688-1679

Bacon

1561-1020

Descartes

1596-1650

Galileo

1564-1641

Pascal

1623-1062

Cainpanella

1568-1639

Locke

10.32-1704

Kepler

1571-1630

Malebranche

1638-1715


LECTWRE III.

THE BEDISCOVKRY OF THE INNER LIFE ; — FROM SPINOZA TO
KANT.

Iptroductory characterization of this period as one of analysis,
skepticism, and study of the Inner Life.

I. Value of skepticism in philosophy.

II. Tlie problem concerning Innate Ideas ; its origin and early
stages in modern discussion.

III. Locke’s treatment of the question : historical consequences of

the controversy, direct and indirect ; its value for the study
of the Inner Life.

IV. Berkeley’s idealism.

V. Hume’s skepticism.

VI. The transition of Kant

Locke (1632-1704) has been often edited. A good edition of his Essay
on the Human Understanding, for purposes of actual study, is the one in
Bohn’s Philosophical Library, in the edition of his Philos(phical Works..
The best life is that by H. R. Fox Bourne, London and New York, 1876,
2 vols.

Berkeley was bora 1684, died 1753. He matriculated at Trinity Col-
lege, Dublin, in 1700, took liis Master’s degree in 1707, published his
Essay towards a New Theory of Vision in 1709, and his Treptise concerning
the Principles of Human Krwwledge in 1710. From 1729 to 1731 he lived


476


THE SPIBIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


in Rhode Island, planning his nniversity, which was to be established in
the Bermudas. The plan came to nothing. In 1732, returned to Eng>
land, he published his Akiphron. He became bishop of Gloyne in 1734.
The best recent edition of his works is that of Fraser (Oxford, 1871). Tbft
same editor has also written his life, published at the same time as the
works.

Hume was bom in Edinburgh, 1711, died 1776. His History of England
appeared in 1754-1762. His first philosophical treatise, the Treatise on
Human Nature^ was written between 1734 and 1737. His Essays appeared
in 1748. The philosophical works have been edited in four volumes by
Green and Grose; London, 1874-75. On this whole period one may read
Leslie Stephen’s History of English Thought in the Eighteenth Century*

LECTURE IV.

KANT.

I. DifiBculties of the study of Kant.

II. Kant’s person and character.

III. Kant’s religious views, and his early philosophical develop-

ment, in outline.

IV. His doctrine of Space and of Time.

V. His doctrine as to the Laws of Nature.

VI. The Moral Law as the central truth in Kant’s world.

Kant was bora in 1724 ; received his appointment as professor in the
university of his native city, Konigsberg (in far eastern Prussia), in 1770 ;
published the Critique of Pure Reason in 1781 ; published his own prin-
cipal works between this year and 1798; and died in 1804. The best'
English translation of the Critique is that of Max Miillor. The transla-
tion in Bohn’s library, by Meiklejohn, is now regarded as superseded.
Watson’s Selections from Kant (Macmillans, 1880), Wallace’s Kdn^ in
Blackwood’s Philosophical Library (Edinburgh and Philadelphia, 1882),
Edward Caird’s Critical Philosophy of Immanuel Kant (2d ed.. New York,
Macmillans, 1889, 2 vols.), and J. H. Stirling’s Text-Book to Kant (New
York, Putnams, 1882), are the best aids to the study of Kant in English.
The German literature on the subject is enormous, embracing some hun-
dreds of works.

BIUEF OUTLINE SUMMARY OF KANT’S DOCTRINE.

1. The origin of Kant’s philosophy is the problem of human reason as
the eighteenth century had developed this problem. The problem was,
How can the truth which not only theology, but also common sense and
natural science, pretend to know about our world, be defended against
skepticism ? Our human powera being once for all so limited, how can any
genuine truth of any sort be known ?

2. Kant’s first answer is : Things in themselves are of necessity unknown


APPENDIX A.


477


to ns. We can know in a theoretical sense only the things that appear to
our senses, that is, the Phenomena of the World of Show. Neither com-
iqpn sense, nor science, nor theology, can, with theoretical assurance, carry
us beyond the world as it seems to our human powers of observation and
experience.

3. In particular, Space and Time can be shown to be mere forms of onr
human sense-consciousness, and to have no relation to things in them-
selves. The unknowable real world without us exists, therefore, neither
in space nor in time. We know not how this world exists at all ; we only
recognize that it exists.

4. But we can nevertheless be sure that our world of seeming things in
space and time must conform to rigid laws, such as the law of causation.
For our active understanding, in thinking our world, is bound by its own
nature, in order to preserve, as it were, our very sanity (or, as I^nt would
say, the Unity of our Self-Consciousness), to regard all observed facts as
conforming to laws. Yet these laws of Nature, which science studies, arf»
the very creation of our own understanding acting upon the data of our
senses. Such laws are not the laws of the unknowable real world at all.
They hold only for the show-world of our experience. Our own under-
standing is, therefore, the source for us of all knowable rational truth.

5. Yet, ignorant as we are of all absolute truth, confined as we are for
all theoretical knowledge to the seeming world of sense and understanding
in space and time, we are yet morally bound to postulate that the real
world of the things in themselves is a Divine Moral Order ; tliat is, we are
bound to act as if such a real and absolute moral order were known to us
to exist.

6. In this way we are theoretically certain that the seeming world is a
world of orderly law, such as common sense and science believe in ; and we
are practically certain that the unknown real world is a divine and moral
world, because it is our duty to treat that unknown world as if it were
divine and moral.

LECTURE V.

FICHTE.

I. Restatement of Kant’s general significance in modern thought.

II. A possible transformation of Kant’s world : First statement of

the Idealism common to Fichte, Schelling, and Hegel, and of
its relations to Christianity.

III. Fichte’s fortunes and character.

IV. and V. Fichte’s Subjective Idealism.

VI. His book on the ** Vocation of Man.”

Johann Cottlieb Fichte was bom in 17C2, was a student in Leipzig and
Jena from 1780 to 1784, was private tutor thereafter, and lived in great
poverty, until 1794, when he was called to a professorship in Jena, as a
result of his first book, published in 1792. In 1799 he was removed from


478


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


his profeasonhip on a charge of athelsmy hut was later aotWe, as professor,
at the new University of Berlin, until his death in 1S14. His publications
were numerous. Of his best works the most popular, translated by Wil-
liam Smith, have been published in several editions by Triibner <& Go.> (8d
ed., London, 1873, in one vol.). On this whole period, in its general as-
pects, a very useful book, is the German, is the History of Literature by
Julian Schmidt.

LECTURE VI. ,

THE ROMANTIC SCHOOL IN PHILOSOPHY.

Introductory summary of Kant and Fichte : —

I. The arbitxary element in Fichte’s doctrine, and the relation
of this arbitrariness to the Romantic School and to the doc-
trines of our day.

II. The place of the Romantic School in German literature.
Wider and narrower use of the term Romantic School
Characteristics of the principal members of the Romantic
School proper.

III. Illustrations of the Romantic view of life : Friedrich Schlegel
and Novalis.

lY. Schelling and Caroline. Sketch of some of Schclling’s views.

Concerning the Romantic School, on the literary side, the reader must
be referred to the bibliographies of German literature. The well-known
early essays of Carlyle form here an introduction which has not yet lost its
value for English readers ; and his translations are of permanent worth.
Heine's sketches of the History of German Thought and Literature are As
suggestive as they are charming and untrustworthy. Schelling’s volumi-
nous writings are still for the most part accessible only in the original.
The best recent technical and critical exposition of a portion of his doc-
trine is that by Professor John Watson, Schelling^s Transcendental Ideal-
ism (Chicago, 1882).

For comparison are added a number of biographical dates, in both Ger
man and English Literature : ~


Herder

BORN

1744

Tieck

BORN

1773

Goethe

1749

Schelling

1776

Schiller

1759

Schopenhauer

1788

Fichte

1762

Wordsworth

1770

A. W. Schlegel

1767

Scott

1771

Schleiermacher

1768

Coleridge

1772

Hegel

1770

Southey

1774

Friedrich Schlegel

1772

Byron

1788

Novalia

1772

Shelley

1792


APPENDIX A.


479


LECTURE VIL

HEGEL.

I. Sohelling’s doctrine of Identity.

II. Hegel’s character and attitude.

III. The paradox of Self-consciousness.

^V. Systematic application of the paradox.

Hogol was born in 1770 at Stuttgart, studied at the University of Tubin-
gen, was private tutor from 1708 to 1800, was docent at Jena from 1801
until after the battle of Jena, was gymnasium director at Niinibeig from
1808 until 1816. was tlien made professor at Heidelberg, and from 1818
uritil his death, in 18^31, was professor at Berlin. His works, including
many very unevenly edited notes of his academic lectures, were published
by his pupils in eighteen volumes (1882-45), and his son hiis recently added
as nineteenth volume bis letters. His life was written admiringly by Karl
Rosenkranz (1844), and reviewed, together with his system, with much
severity of criticism, by Haym (Hegel und seine Zeitj 1857). Since Haym’s
book and Trendelenburg’s keen criticisni of the dialectic method in his
Logische Studien (2d ed., 1802, 8d ed., 1870), the Hegelian doctrine has
received less and less attention in Germany, although its indirect and un-
consciously effective influence has been great. On the other hand, in Great
Britain, Dr. Hutchinson Stirling’s Hecret of Hegel (London, 1865), one of
the most waywardly constructed of remarkable philosophical books, began
(through its very skillful exposition of some features of Hegel’s -thought)
a movement tliat has given Hegel first-class importance for recent specula-
tion. Wallace’s Logic of Hegel, and Caird’s Life of Hegel, in Black-
wood’s Philosophical Series, are important introductions to the study of the
philosopher. Mr. W. T. Harris’s HegeVs Logic, in Grigg’s Philosophical
Classics, is a scholarly exposition of a highly technical sort.

LECTURE VIII.

SCHOPENHAUER.

I. The significance of Pessimism.

II. The general character of Schopenhauer’s system,
ni. Schopenhauer’s person, fortunes, and quality.

IV. Summary of his principal treatise.

V. Estimate of Schopenhauer’s doctrine.

Arthur Schopenhauer was born in 1788, published the first volume of
his principal work in 1818, made in 1820 an effort to succeed as docent at
Berlin, but failing here, lived as wanderer and recluse until his death at
Frankfort in 1860. The recent expiration of the copyright upon his works
(published in six volumes by Brockhaus) has led to many reprints of part


480


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


or all of his writiiigs. His philosophy is best expounded by himself, and
BO fine a master of style should be read in his own tongue, although he is
now extremely accessible in English translations. His two biographers,
Frauenstadt and Q winner (the latter’s Schopenhauer^ 8 Lehen^ published in
1878, is the best), have told the story of his eccentric career with much
detail. Very useful is Wallace’s Life of Arthur Schopenhauer (London^.
Great Writers series, 1800).


LECTURE IX.

THE RISE OF THE DOCTRINE OF EVOLUTION.

I. The return to the outer order initiated by Schopenhauer.

II. The Romantic School in its relation to historical science.

III. The Historical School and the idea of evolution.

IV. The problems of the doctrine of Evolution.

V. Empiricism, skepticism, and philosophy.

VI. The position of Mr. Herbert Spencer.

VII. The Monistic movement.

VIII. Outlook towards a positive creed.

LECTURES X. TO XIII.

GENERAL SUMMARY OF THE POSITIVE LECTURES OF THE COURSE.

I. The positive lectures discuss : (1) The general cosmological
problems connected with certain aspects of the doctrine of Evolution
(Lecture X.) ; (2) The general doctrine of Idealism as the result of
the historical movement that the previous lectures have traced, and
as the fundamental doctrine of philosophy (Lecture XI.) ; (3) The
application of the doctrine of idealism to the explanation of the fun-
damental problems of science, in so far as they concern the relations
between natural law and moral freedom, and between the inner life
and the external world (Lecture XII.) ; and (4) The concluding
discussion of the moral and religious issues that centre about the pro-
blem of optifbism and pessimism (Lecture XIII.).

II. The doctrine of idealism itself has two portions, here called
respectively Analytic Idealism (the doctrine with which the name of
Berkeley is especially associated), and Synthetic Idealism (or the
doctrine of the universal self as the world thinker).

III. It is the province of analytic idealism to show, by a study of
the elements whereof all our beliefs consist, tliat, in case the real
world is to be knowable at all, it must be, in its deepest nature, a
world of ideas, that is, of facts that can only exist for minds. Is
other words, the knowable world is, only in so far as beings with
minds actually know it to be.


APPEmX A.


481


IV. There remains the alternatiye, however, that the real world is
existent as something essentially unknowable (as, for instance, Mr.
Herbert Spencer asserts). This doctrine is considered in Lecture
XI. and is there set aside.

y. A final objection to the whole foregoing argument for idealism
appears, in case one asserts that, after all, nobody ever docs truly
know any reality beyond his own self, so that our previous discussion
Is helpless as against a stubborn skepticism, which doubts every pos-
sible assertion about reality.

VI. To this it is finally answered that the objection is in one sense
as well founded as it is imperfectly understood by those who regard
it as a truly skeptical objection. Properly regarded, this very asser-
tion, that beyond the self no truth is knowable, brings to fiilfillinent
our synthetic idealism, by showing us that there is but one self in the
world, namely, the Logos or world-mind. The finite self knows truth
beyond its own limitations, just because it is an organic part of the
complete Self.

VII. The doctrine of idealism once thus discussed in its abstract-
ness, the remaining argument depends throughout on the thought
that only experience can give us any clue to the contents and the
actnal world of this world-mind, and that idealism is in no sense a
doctrine of illusion, or one which leaves finite selves to their own
caprices. Idealism demands (1) That we should interpret experi-
ence* in terms of the doctrine of the world-mind ; but that (2) We
sliould depend upon experience for the revelation of that truth which,
for us finite beings, must remain a fiist “ outer” truth, just because
it is the content of other mind than our own bits of selfhood, and is
universally true for all intelligences.

VIII. The problem of the philosophy of experience is, then, to
distinguish between what is really “outer” and what is “inner”
about our finite experience, that is, between “facts,” and our private
point of view about the facts.

IX. The world of outer experience is then the world of Facts. But
what is a fact ? It appears to be something, in the first place, that
one must descrihey in some sort of universal terms, in order to get at
the truth of it. The principle of ordinary realism is, that you must
not be sentimental or otherwise emotional in your account of the
truth of things, but rather exact in your descriptions of what things
are. And this principle has a thoroughly idealistic justification. Not
Appreciation, then, but Description shall give you outer truth.
This is the characteristic presupposition of all natural science. And
descriptive thinking is such as seizes on universal aspects of things
as opposed to momentary and transient aspects.


482


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


X. But what does this presupposition involve ? In the first place,
as developed in the work of science, the presupposition involves the
assumption that the world is essentially descrihahle. But one can onlj
describe, in general terms, the well-knitf the orderly^ that which con-
forms to Law. Hence science assumes the universality and rigidity
of the laws of nature. And because the most exact descriptions are
possible only in case of processes of a mechanical type, such as go on
in Space and in Time, science assumes that all things are a part of
nature’s mechanism. Man too, from this point of view is a thing
amongst things, a product of nature, with a nervous mechanism, but
without free wil’.

XI. Yet this point of view is as inadequate as it is partially true.
For a closer analysis shows that one can only describe what has first
been appreciated^ that there therefore must be universal types of
appreciation, and that in consequence Ideals must be deeper than
Mechanism, so that, in order to be relatively describable, nature
must embody purposes, and so bo possessed of worth.

XII. With this result we return to our idealism, which is now
enriched by the thought that the Natural Order must also be a
Moral Order, that the world of the absolute Self must appear to
us as having two aspects, one a temporal, the other an eternal aspect,
one of Law and one of Worth. Man then turns out to be at once
a part of nature’s mechanism, and a part of the Moral Order ; at
once temporally determined and morally free.

XIII. It is this consideration that in the concluding lecture leads
to special suggestions as to the problem of evil.


APPENDIX B


ON KANT’S TRANSCENDENTAL DEDUCTION OP THR
CATEGORIES.

The statement of the spirit of the Deduction in my text, page
126 sqq., is confessedly a paraphrase of only a few of the cen-
tral thoughts of this extremely intricate doctrine. A recent edi-
tor of the “ Kritik,’’ Erich Adickes,^ has shown, in a fashion
which I find on the whole very convincing, that the very difficult
deduction of the first edition is in fact a piecemeal combination
of a number of independent lines of argument which Kant must
have written down at decidedly different times during the years
1772-80.* As to what, notwithstanding the variety and the
diverse origin of Kant's different trains of thought in this deduc-
tion, is the most important outcome of the whole, opinions have
of oourse differed widely. But Falckenberg, in his “ Geschichte
, d. neueren Philosophie," ** has stated the general and ultimate

^ Immanuel Kant's Kritik der reinen Vernunftj" mit einer Einleitung
und Anmerkungenj hrsg. v. Dr. Erich AdicJces^ Berlin, 1880.

Op. cit. pag'e note: *‘Iin yorher^ehenden habe ich nachzuweisen
versucht, dass was man bishcr im allgemeinen fiir eine einheitliche groea^
artige Konception hielt, yielmehr als eino niosaikarti^e Zusainmenstellung
und Verschlingung verschicdoner Gedanken aiis versohiedenen Zeitenanzu-
sehen ist.’* The view here carried out by Adiekes with very great critical
ing^nufty, was suggested in a general way as early as 1878 by Benno Erd-
mann, in his book, Kant's Kriticismus in der ersten und in der zweiten
Aufiage der '*‘Kritik der reinen Vernunfl'' on page 25. The notion is to^ay
rendered an inevitable one by a combination of the internal evidence of
the text of the first edition with the evidence as to Kant*s method of work
presented in Erdmann’s edition of the Beflexionen^ and in Reicke’s Lose
Blatter. As to some of the special results of Adiekes, opinions will of
oourse differ.

^ Pages 268, 209, 272, note 3. ** Ein doppeltes ist was nach Kant ausser-
halb der Vorstellung des Iiidividnums existiert. (1) Die nnbekannten
Dinge an sich. ... (2) Die Erscheinungen selbst, mit ihreii erkennbareu
immanenten Gesetzen. . . . Die Dinge u. Ereignisse der Erscheinungswelt


484


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


result of the Kantian argument as to the reality and the consti«
tution of the world of the objects of our human knowledge, in a
fashion that, as 1 hold, correctly represents what is, for the fully
developed Kant, the most important thing to be proved in the
Deduction and in its related arguments. According to Falcken-
berg, namely, the final view of Kant is that one must distinguish
between my subjective, or momentary consciousness, and my
ueherindlviduelles transeendentales Bewusstsein, which is equi-
valent to die menscMiche Gattungsvemunft} This latter it is
which gets its sense data from the unknown Binge an sich^
which applies the categories to these sense-data, which gives the
“ laws ” to “ nature,** which constitutes the world of “ objects,”
which makes these objects independent of my momentary con-
sciousness, which distinguishes them from the suhjehtive VorsteU
hingen of the empirisches Bewitsstsein, and which at the same
time secures a complete agi‘eement between the suhjehtive Vor-
stellungen and the eine Erfahrung^ or the universal experience
wherein all sane human beings agree. This then is the out-
come of the completed Kantian doctrine, separated from all the
dross of imperfect and frequently inconsistent comments, expla-
nations, and proofs, with which, especially in the first edition,
he confused it. Thb it is which the Deduction is above all to
prove. This is that notion of the one Self, constitutive of the '
one true experience, which Kant introduced to philosophy, and
which only the peculiar limitations of his personal point of view
prevented him from developing further in the direction in which
the post-Kantian thinkers continued the progress of thought.
While, as I have said, this seems to me, in the light of the most
recent results of Kant-philqlogy,” indubitably the true outcome
of Kant’s study concerning the nature and objectivity of truth for

existieren sowohl vor als nach mciner Wahmehmun^, sind etwas von mei-
uer subjektiyen und momentanen Vorstelliin^ derseibcii verschiedenes.”

** Was ausserhalb meines gegenwartigen Bewusstseins ist, ist deslialb nooh
niebt ausscr allem menschlicheii Bewusstsein.”

^ Op. cit. page 260. Die Erscheinungt says Falckenberg, is for Kant
something that stands between the absolute object, the Ding an sirh, and
the Subjektt deren gemeinschaftliches Product es istf as a sort of relatives
Ding an sick. On p. 1.30 of my text I myself have pointed out how much
Kant's unity of selfoonsciousness tended towards the later interpretation of
Fichte and others.


APPENDIX B.


485

U8 men, the fact of .course remains that in the Eritik ” there
are very many passages which not only bear but require a less
developed and less consistent, as well as a more subjective inter-
pretation. These passages content themselves with saying that,
while the Dinge an sich are and remain unknowable, we, lim-
ited to our Vbrstellungen as we are, actually do apply our cate-
gories to the world of the Vorstellungeuy because it is our nature
to do so ; ^ and so we build up the world of the Erscheinungen
by a process of binding Empjindungen together through the
instrumentality of the categories, thus creating objects which
are themselves nothing but our own private Vorstellungen,
From this less advanced and subjective point of view the dif^
erence between my empirisches or mbjektives Bewusstsein and
my transcendentales Bevnisstsein^ that is, my total self, would
become at best merely a quantitative, not a qualitative differ-
ence. For, from this point of view, at each moment I apply
my categories. My Gemilth is of such a nature that I must do
so. By this application 1 get, in the world of each moment,
a categorized object. The object thus gained is itself nothing
but my Vorstelhing^ existent here and now. My whole expe-
rience consists of the numerous moments of my life ; and since
each moment is categorized, the whole series must be. If one
* asks why I have a right thus to categorize my moments of expe-
rience, the only answer is that my experiences are my own, and
may be treated as my own nature determines. If one asks
why I thus categorize in each moment the experiences thereof,
the only answer is, that otherwise I could not think them. If
one still asks why could I not think otherwise, the only reply
is that such is the nature of my thought. The product of the
moment thus remains subjective ; there is nothing objective but
the Binge, an sichy and they are unknowable.

Kant’s doctrine, stated in this second and purely subjective
fashion, is the doctrine that many interpreters have found in
his book, as the main outcome of the Analytik, If, as I have
stated, it is not his final view, why, one may ask, does it often
seem so prominent in the Deduction and elsewhere, especially in

^ Falckenberg reco^zes and briefly sammarizes these inconsistent paa>
sages on p. 270 and 271, op. cit.


486


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


the first edition ? Why, again, if this was the case, and Kant’s
true doctrine was not this second one, did he fail to perceive the
consequences of the assumption of the difference between the
empirisches and the transoendentales Bewusstsein ? Why did
he leave the inconsistent passages standing ? Why did he not
proceed further on the road towards the later idealism ?

These questions can only be answered by a reference to the
now so well-known but peculiarly complex conditions of Kant’s
own development. He took no definite step forwards until he
was forced to lo so. He unconsciously preferred inconsistency
to any dangerous symmetry and dogmatism of statement. His
own doctrine of an ohjektive Einheit de$ Benmsstseins, equiva-
lent substantially to what Falckenberg calls die menschllche
Gattungsvemunft^ was of extremely slow and consequently
imperfect growth in his mind. There was a stage of his criticd
philosophy in which he certainly did not yet hold it. He
worked witli wonderful patience and conscientiousness. He
builded far better than he knew. An unconsciousness as to
his own consequences remained to the end a peculiar charac-
teristic of his mind and his method. Therefore, although it is
indeed our privilege to-day to understand Kant (if one may
borrow again his own often quoted words) hesser als er sick seU
her verstand, a brief popular summary of his Deduction must:
limit itself to a comparatively neutral statement of his views.

The present is no place for any lengthy discussion of Kant-
philology. I must confine myself, therefore, to a few mere
references and statements concerning the real outcome and the
gradual development of the Kantian doctrine.

The best recent discussioi^ of the whole matter of the relation
of empirisches and transcendentales Bewusstsein is, so far as
I can see, the admirable study by Vaihinger, Zu Kant's Wider-
legung des Idealismus^ a paper wholly free from any effort to
read a falsely consistent meaning into Kant’s complex doctrine
of the nature of “objectivity,” but still seriously devoted to
demonstrating what was the actual tendency of Kant’s growing
thought. Va^inger stands side by side with Benno Erdmann

t

^ Pablished in the Strasshurger Ahkandlungen zur Philoaqphie (Freiburg
u. Tubingen, 1884), pp. 87-164.


APPENDIX B.


487


as one of the two highest authorities at present concerning
Kant’s growth and teaching. Both these scholars are thorough
philologists, cautious, elaborate, patient, and at the same time
capable of broad outlooks and wide generalizations. This pres-
ent paper of Yaihinger’s is in his best mood. His principal re-
sult is the statement and explanation of the remarkablo thesis : ^

From Kant’s fundamental assumptions follows necessarily the
existence of a physical world independent of our [subjective]
ideas.” ' Surprising as this notion must seem to those who inter-
pret their Kant in a purely subjective fashion, it is not only true
that Kant stated this thesis in so many words in the famous
Refutation of Idealism, of the second edition, but it is also
true, as Yaihinger shows, and as all intelligent readers of the

Kritik ” must in the end come to recognize, that this doctrine
is, despite all of Kant’s hesitancy and inconsistencies, the deep-
est expression of the genuine spirit of the whole Kritik.”
Nor is this principle of the real objectivity of Kant’s physical
world at all opposed to the other equally fundamental thesis of
Kant, namely, the thesis that, as I have stated the matter on
page 34 of my text, Man’s nature is the real creator of man’s
world,” so that it is the inner structure of the human spirit
which merely expresses itself in the visible nature about us.”
For Kant’s most important metaphysical deed lies precisely in
his distinction of the private or subjective personality proper
from the universally human and therefore genuine selfhood, and
in his reference of the phenomena and laws of outer nature in
space and time to the constructive and objectively categorizing
activity of the latter, that is, to the relatively universal Unity
of Apperception. Hereby he prepared tlie way for the further
universalizing of this human selfhood into the notion of the
World-Self of objective idealism, — the highest and deepest
result of all modern philosophy. ** 1 ” exist, for Kant, in a
twofold sense. I am here and now in the world as this suc-
cession of flpng moments, this empirisches Bewusstsein. But I
also exist in another way ; I have ohjektive Einheit der Apper*
eeption^ and to this ohjektive Einheit 1, as empirical subject,

^ Op, cit. p. 140 : “ Au 8 Kant's f andamentalen Annahmen folget noth-
wendig die.Existeiiz einer von der Yorstellung anabhangigen Kdrperwelt.’'


488


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


must submit. Now this ohjehtive Einheit is something essen-
tially human. We ” possess it together. ^^Es gibt nur eine
Erfahrung.'** ^ It is the ohjektives Subjekt of this higher expe-
rience who is affected somehow by the unknowable Dinge an
eichf who applies the categories to his Empfindungen, and who
thus gives laws to nature. For me, as private subject, these
laws are outer, these categorized things are objective and un-
changeable. Meanwhile, I, as private subject, can still know
these outer things because, although they are independent of
my momentary japrice, they are not independent of my deeper,
of my genuinely human personality. I, even in the privacy of
the moment, share in the nature of the objektive Einheit, repeat
its activity, reconstruct its original constructions, join my tran-
sient to my deeper selfhood, and am thus, by implication, more
than my purely subjective self.

Vaihinger’s philological demonstration of the foregoing inter-
pretation of Kant’s outcome will be all the more convincing to
the reader in view of the fact that Vaihinger himself is quite
free from all suspicion of any predisposition to force an “ He-
gelian” interpretation, or any absolutely idealistic tendencies
upon Kant. His strictly objective discussion of the fact is,
therefore, extremely persuasive. I can here only refer to if in
this general fashion, and must leave the technically skilled*
reader to study it for himself.

Apart from Vaihinger’s paper, the careful reader of the
‘‘ Kritik ” will often have pondered over such phrases as refer to
the difference between the objektive Einheit and the subjektive
Einheit der Apperception, and over such statements as those in
the deduction of the principles of causation, in the second Ana-
logy of Experience, where repeatedly the distinction is drawn

^ In one of the Reflexionen of Benno Erdmann^s edition, vol. ii. p. 285,
Kant himself gives this thought an expression that is almost startingly
near the later formulas of constructive idealism. I refer to Rejl, 980 of
Erdmann’s arrangement : — “ Dinge werden vorgestellt als Erscheiimngen,
weil es Wesen gibt, die Sinne haben. Dieselben Wesen haben aber auch
Veistand, unter dessen Gesetzen die Erscheinungen stehen, sofem ihr mog-
liches Bewusstsein nothwendig zu einem allgemeingiltigen Bewuastsein
stimmen muss, d. i., sie haben eine Natur.” Yet this note doubtless belongs
to a time before 1781.


APPENDIX B.


489


between subjective succession” in me, and ^‘objective se-
quence ” im Gegenstande. The reader will have observed that
over this distinction Kant himself struggles with an almost
pathetic earnestness of reflection, that he again and again seeks
to give it final articulation, and again and again fails, his clear-
est assertions being after all those which approach nearest to
Vaihinger’s formulation as above, and to the wording of the
Refutation of Idealism in the second edition. Slowly it will
dawn upon the reader that Kant is in the birth-tliroes of bring-
ing forth a new and wonderful reflective notion, whose corre-
spondent in the spiritual faith of humanity is very old, but
whose existence as a reflective doctrine is highly novel. This
notion is that of the objectively subjective self, — objective to me
in my private capacity, but subjectively constructive of the world
of the standard human experience, iu so far as tliis is Uie true or
normal self. Kant does not himself fully know what he is pro-
ducing. He feels the birth throes ; he gives forth all sorts of
uncertain sounds ; he often seems to deny, and in fact does deny
his own offspring. But none the less is it truly his offspring.

But the best view of Kant’s relation to the new doctrine we
get as we read the notes now accessible in Benno Erdmann’s
Reflexionen,” and in Reicke’s Lose Blatter.” Here Kant’s
endlessly patient efforts to deduce ever afresh the categories, his
wavering between a subjective and an objective interpretation
of their application, the gradual and for a long time very dim
appearance of the transceiidefitale JUinheit, Kant’s own final
obscurity as to whether it really is a conscious and wholly actual
or complete self at all, his own unconscious hints at the coming
objective idealism, — all these tilings are depicted in a fashion
-that makes intelligible to us as never before the piecemeal struc-
ture of the text of the Kritik,” the inevitable inconsistencies
of that great work, and the beautifully conscientious self-re-
straint of the patient Kant himself, who stood on the border of
the promised land of modern idealism, and could not enter. In
the light of all this we understand how the thesis of the Refu-
tation of Idealism in the second edition, a thesis which has
been a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense to numberless
readers, is in fact oi^e of the most genuinely consistent and


490 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

idealistic of Kant’s propositions, so that, as Vaihinger declares : ^
‘‘ Die Anerkennung einer von unseren empirischen Yorstellun-
gen unabhRngigen KOrperwelt im Raume, ist eine nothwendige
und unabweisliche logische Gonsequenz aus den fundamentalen
Positionen Kants. Diese Gonsequenz hat Kant auch gezogen.”

Yet, of course, there remains the conflict between the con-
sistent Kant who drew his own final conclusions, and the hesi-
tant Kant whose language is often so narrowly subjective. The
historical fact of this conflict has led me, in my general state-
ment of Kant’s results in my text, to prefer, as 1 have said, a
more neutral formulation, which points towards the deeper con-
sequences, but does not expressly embody them.

It remains, of course, all tlie while sure that Kant’s urspriing-
liche or ohjektive Einheit der Apperception was at its deepest
never the unity of a true World-Self in any absolute or com-
plete sense. The argument of the Dialectic forbade Kant to
look for absolute VoUstdndigIceib in any direction. Kant’s
highest principle was at its best, therefore, limited to what
Falckenberg calls a menschliehe Oattnngsvemimft. This limi-
tation, meanwhile, was precisely what later thinkers were bound
to transcend.

As a fact, therefore, one would give an unhistorical impres-
sion of the true Kant, in all his admirable cautiousness of phrase-.

if one took his doctrine of the transcendentales BewussU
sein, as he stated in his most advanced and suggestive discus-
sions, out of its characteristically obscure environment, and set it
down as not only Kant’s final, but as his whole doctrine. Un-
able in my text to present all the aspects of the aigument of the
Deduction, I have therefore deemed it least misleading to lay
stress on the relatively neutral and therefore somewhat equivo-
cal statement of his views. 1 have pointed out how he ap-
pealed to the transcendentale Einheit der Apperception; I
have pointed out how this Einheit is, for each of us, our true
self, and how the appeal is constantly made to it by every one
of us, in so far as he is rational. This notion is so far unques-
tionably Kantian. What I have not pointed out, except inciden-
tally, as in the passage on page 139 of the text, is that the travf^


^ Qp, cit p. 164.


APPENDIX B.


491


9C&ndentale Einheit der Apperception is in effect what Falcken-
berg calls it, a menscMiche Gattungsvemunft^ and is so already,
by implication, identical with the Self of later idealists, a Self
which is only Kant’s transcendentale Einheit writ large. I
have deliberately left doubtful, in the text, how far Kant’s cate-
gorized world of physical nature is genuinely objective for the
individual consciousness. The Kant of the final stage of the
critical philosophy knew that this world is objective for the
individual, is no product of his empiriscJies Bewusstsein, is not
set in order, nor categorized, nor objectified by his momentary
thinking, but is properly accepted by him as a world of fact.
The Kant of an earlier stage, while the critical philosophy was
forming, did not yet hold this view. The Kant of the finar
stage attributed the application of the categories to an ursprilng-
lUilie Einheit der Apperception, with which the cmpirisches
Bewusatsein is simply bound to agree. The Kant of the earlier
stage made no clear distinction between cmpirisches or suhjek^
Hues, and ohjektives or transcendentales Bewusstsein at all.
But, by reason of that curious fashion of composition which
Adickes has so well demonstrated in the text of his own edition,
various stages of the growing critical philosophy are represented
in the book as it comes before us. And the actual Kant, by
.reason of all the complexity of his marvelous investigation, was
himself never wholly aware of his own inconsistencies, nor of
the extent to which they obscured his true thought.


APPENDIX C.

THE HEGELIAN THEORY OF UNIVERSALS.

In the text, pp. 222-226,1 have briefly set forth Hegel’s
theory as to the reality of the “ concrete ” universal. The one
true Genus, according to him, is the divine Idee^ in which, ac-
cording to Hegel, every genuine individual reality has its organic
I>lace. This theory of the Organic Universal as the Totalitdt
containing and determining all the interrelated and true Indi-
viduals, which latter have genuine being only as members of
the organized body of their Universal, has been shown in the
text to be a necessary result of the Hegelian metaphysics of
Self-consciousness. The historical importance of the matter jus-
tifies here the addition of a few citations and references for the
use of the more technical student.

The Hegelian theory of Universals is intended, of course, as
the text has also shown, to offer a solution of the ancient ques-
tion as to the reality of universals. What objective validity have
our general concepts ? “ They must have validity, they must

correspond to objective truth,'’ so some thinkers have said, “ be-
cause all science is of the general, and all science is also of the
truth.” “They cannot have, cls general ideas, objective valid-
ity,” so other thinkers have said, “ because all that truly exists
in the world is individual. For there is no such thing as dog in
general. There are in the world only individual dogs. The
universal, therefore, exists only as realized in the single indi-
vidual.”

In view of this antinomy of traditional discussion, Hegel
offers his characteristic solution. The real world is the world
of the Absolute Self. His truth is organic, is allumfossend^ is
a TotalUdt^ and is, in logical formulation, the universal Idee*
Now the Idee is not an “ abstract universal,” nor a general idea
that is merely exemplified by the individual objects of the world*


APPENDIX C.


498


On the contrary, they are in it ; for in it they live and move
and have their being ; and it, on the other hand, is in tliem only
in so far forth as they are first in it. No finite individual, in
its isolation, embodies the Idee, or corresponds to this true Uni-
versal. Only the organic totality of the finite embodies the
Universal. And in this sense the Genus is real. HegcFs
theory, expressed in his own words, is : —

‘^Alles Wirkliche, in sofern es ein Wahres ist, ist die Idee,
und liat seine Wahrheit allein durch und kraft der Idee. Das
einzelne Seyn ist irgend eine Seitc der Idee ; fUr dieses bedarf
es daher noch andcrer Wirklichkeiten, die gleichfalls als beson-
ders ftir sich bestehende erscheinen ; in ilinen zusarnmen und in
ihrer Beziehung ist allein der Begriif realisirt. Das Einzelne
fUr sich entspriclit seincm Begi‘lfie nicht ; diese Beschriinktheit
seines Daseyns macht seine Endliclikeit und seinen Untergang
aus.” ^

To the illustration of this theory it is worth while, however,
to devote some further space. With his customary manysided-
ness of treatment, Hegel, of course, endeavors to show how
previous theories of the universal have a relative and historical
justification as stages on the way to the true insight, and as
embodiments of 'lower and partly untrue forms of the universal
forms, which are presented to us in the phenomenal appear-
ances of tlie finite world.

To these lower forms of the universal, Hegel devotes a patient
and extended attention ; and we must first briefly refer to the
principal one amongst them.


In particular, then, Hegel’s theory of Universals cannot be
understood witliout a clear distinction between the lower form
of what he calls Verstandes-Allgemelnheif, and the true or
higher form of the Vemunft-Allgeineinheit or Allgemeinheit
des Begriffes. The Understanding, according to Hegel, is the
first form of the activity of thought.^ As such it produces, not
Begriffe in the proper sense at all, but what Hegel technically

^ The passage here given in full is referred to and in larger part trans-
lated in the text, p. 224.

^ Encydoped, § 467, Werhe, vol. vii. 2, p. 355.


494


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


calls Gedankmy Gedanken of this first sort are the universals
of the understanding, such ideas as Tumn or house or animaL
These are often called Begriffe^ but wrongly.^ On this stage
they are the product of analysis and abstraction ; and abstrac-
tion is as necessary in the beginning of our thinking as it is
untrue from the higher point of view. It is the very business
of pliilosophy to transform Gedanken into Begriffe} The Ge-
danke, as it is first reached, embodies the universal qualities or
characteristics present in each of many individuals. Out of
such individuals it thus makes an abstractly defined class or
Gattung. This class, or genus of the understanding, is related
to the sub-classes and individuals that fall within its Umfang in
the fashion that the Aristotelian logic originally defined.^ The
Gattungy namely, has species or Arten, which as subordinate
classes are subsumed under it, foiming each a part of its Urn-
fangy while the individuals are in their turn subsumed under the
various Arten, Both GaUung and Arty for this stage of thinking,
express only das Gemeinsame found in each and all of many
individuals. In experience, meanwhile, only the individuals can
be shown, not the Gattung, For the Gattung is not yet the
Begriffy which will turn out to be much more than ein Ge-
meinschaftliches. This Gattung of the understanding has no
Existenz, For it is thus far, on its subjective side, the Gedanke
of the observer, which, being formal, does not explain either

^ Phdnomenol.y Werke, vol. ii. pp. 24-25.

* Encyclop., Werke y vol. vi. p. 324.

® Phanomenol., Werkey vol. ii. p. 20. On the definition of the Verstandy
see, also, Werkey vol. vii. 2, p. 350. Tho understanding is there ** formal.”
Its activity depends upon Ahstrahiren. “ Trennt er das Znfalli^e voni We-
sentlichen ab, so ist er durchaus in seinem Rechte nnd erscheint als Das
vras er in Wahrheit seyn soli.” Das Wesentlichey so abstracted, the undor-
standin|7 uses to define its universals.

* “Aristoteles,” says Hegel, in his Gesch. d. Philos, y Werkty vol. xiv. p.
308, “ ist der Urheber der verstandigen Log^k ; ihre Formen botroffen nur
das Verhaltniss von Endlichen zu einander, und in ihnen konn das Wahre
nicht gefasst werden.” This observation occurs in connection vrith a dis-
cussion of the Aristotelian theory of nniversalB, which is there said to in-
volve the method used ^*in den endlichen Wissenschaften,” namely, “das
Subsumiren des Besondern unter das Allgemeine'' It is just this sort of
universality and this kind of subsumption that Hegel’s theory is intended
to supersede.


APPENDIX C.


496

the content of the individual thing, or the totality of the actual
relations of this individual tiling to others in the real world.^
Speaking in objective terms we can indeed ah*eady say that the
Oedanke corresponds to an allgemeine Natur^ present as das
Wesentlicke\ or as die bestimmte Wesentlichkeit of the finite in-
dividuals that belong to the Gattung. For the thoughts even of
the understanding have a lower sort of truth. Whatever is in
the world is the embodiment of thought ; and in so far as the
Oedanken of the understanding are also the product of thought,
they do correspond to the inner nature of things. Only, the
universals of the understanding tell but a portion of Uie real
truth about the objects present in ex{)erience. And in just so
far these universals are untrue. The Begriff^ or the truly objec-
tive thought of the whole nature of things, will be mehr als nur
die Angabe der wesentlichen Bestimmtheiten, d. i., der Ver-
standesbestiminungen einer Sache.” ^ The universal of the
understanding, applying to a nature which is only exemplified
by each individual, and which exists nowhere but in such indi-
vidual examples (as anhnxiUty exists only in individual ani-
Trials)^ tells us nothing about the interrelationship of the indi-
viduals themselves, gives us therefore no Einheit des Begriffes,

Of tliis universal of the understanding Hegel gives us many
uccounts. No intelligent student of his works can confound this
soi*t of universality with the true Vernunft-Allgemeinheit, whose
exposition forms Hegers peculiar contribution to the theory of
universals. To sum up so far: The universal of the under-

^ It is of this stage of thought that Hegel is speaking when, in the En-
cydop.f Werke, vol. vi. p. 46, he says : ** Das Thier als solches ist nicht zu
zeig^n, sondern immer nur ein Bestiinmtes. Das Thier existirt nicht, son-
dern ist die allgemeine Natur der einzelnen Thiere.” Thier is, so far, no
Begriffy no true universal at all. And Existenzy with its verb existireriy
has a special meaning in Hegel’s logic. The Begriff, when we g^t to it,
will have a higher sort of reality, namely, what Hegel calls Objdctivitdty
something much more than bare Existenz.

* Logiky Werkty vol. iii. p. 274. Compare Encyclop.y Werke, vol. vi. p.
65, where the business of the understanding in grasping the weeentlichen
Inhalt of finite things, in classifying abstractly, and in applying i>redicatea
accordingly, is further illustrated. The technical phrases iveaentliche Be-
sHmmtheity bestimmte Wesentlichheity etc., rofei^ then, only to universality as
oonoeived by the understanding.


496


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


standing is the first discovery of our thought when the latter
is applied to things. Of this universal it was that Aristotle’s
logic gave the traditional theory. Aristotle himself, to be sure,
ill his metaphysical theory, really transcended the limitations of
his logical theory, and implied the existence of a deeper and
truer sort of universality in the nature of things. But he did
this haltingly.^ His metaphysical instinct is truer than his logic.
He uses the liiglier universal, but has a logical theory only of
the lower. And as for this lower, it appears to the understand-
ing as objectively existent only in each individval^ as constitut-
ing the essence or wesentliche Bestimmtheit thereof. Subjec-
tively it is represented by the Gedanke^ which is the thought of
some abstractly defined class-essence. And such class-essences
appear to the understanding to have no Existenz as such, apart
from the individuals in which they are exemplified. This is
why we are accustomed to say, from the point of view of ordi-
nary thought, that general ideas do not represent concrete reali-
ties, and that only the individual is real.


II.

Principal Caird, in his “ Philosophy of Religion,” * after de-
scribing the foregoing lower sort of universality, and pointing
out its inadequacy to the expression of the truth of the real
world, proceeds, in a confessedly Hegelian spiiit, to set forth
the nature of the Vernunft-Allgemeinheit, and its application to
the comprehension of the relations of God and the world, as
follows : — ^

“ But thought is capable of another and deeper movement.
It can rise to a universality which is not foreign to, but the very
inward nature of things in themselves, not the universal of an
abstraction from the particular and different, but the unity
which is immanent in them and finds in them its own necessary

1 Gasch, d. Phil.t Werke^ vol. xiv. p. 283 : “ Hat Aristotelos aber auch . . .
die allgemeine Idee nicht logisch herausgehoben, (denn sonst ware seine
Bogenannt Logik, die etwas Anderes ist, fiir die Methode alsder eine Begriff
in Allem zu erkennen), so erscheint dock andererseits bei Aristoteles die
Idee Gottes, selbst auch als ein Besonderes an ihrer Stelle neben den Andem,
obzwar sie alle Wahrheit ist.”

^ Page 229, sqq.


APPENDIX C.


497


expression; not an arbitrary invention of the observing and
classifying mind, . . . but an idea which expresses the inner
dialectic, the movement or process towards unity, which exists
in and constitutes the being of the objects themselves. This
deeper and truer universality is that which may be designated
^eal or organic universality. The idea of a living organism
... is not a common element which can be got at by abstrac-
tion and generalization, by taking the various parts and mem-
bers, stripping away their differences, and forming a notion of
that which they have in common. That in which they differ is
rather just that out of which their unity arises and in wliich
is the very life and being of the organism; that which they
have in common they have, not as members of a living organ-
ism, but as dead matter, and what you have to abstract in order
to get it is the very life itself. Moreover, the universal, in this
case, is not last but first. We do not reach it by first thinking
the particulai's, but conversely, we get at the true notions of the
particulars only through the universal. What the parts or
members of an organism are, — their form, place, structure,
proportion, functions, relations, their whole nature and being, is
determined by the idea of tlie organism which they are to com-
pose. It is it which produces them, not they it. In it lies their
reason and ground. They are its manifestations or specifica-
tions. It realizes itself in them, fulfills itself in their diversity
and harmony. . . . You cannot determine the particular mem-
ber or organ save by reference to that which is its limit or nega-
tion. It does not exist in and by itself, but in and through
what is other than itself, — through the other members *and
organs which are at once outside of and within it, beyond it,
and yet part and portion of its being. . . . Here, then, we have
a kind of universality which is altogether different from the
barren and formal universality of generalization, and the indi-
cation of a movement of thought corresponding to an inner rela-
tion of things which the abstracting, generalizing understanding
is altogether inadequate to grasp.”

Appl 3 ring the notion of universality thus reached to the rela-
tions of our own thought to the reality about which we think.
Principal Caird next proceeds, on p. 233, sqq., to a brief con*


498 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHT.

sideration of the relation of Nature to Finite Mind.*’ He dwells
upon the well-known opposition between matter and mind,
which, for the understanding, are two separate and opposed
realities. He states the familiar problem as to how mind can
know the natural order outside of our minds, shows that this
problem is the same in principle with the problem about the rela-
tion between finite mind and God, and suggests, as a solution of
both problems, the thought, the Nature,” the finite mind, and
God or the infinite mind, are not discordant or irreconcilable
ideas, but idear which belong to one organic whole or system
of knowledge. After devoting considerable space to the illus-
tration of this view, and dwelling furtlier on the “ principle of
Organic Unity ” (p. 238), he points out (p. 239) that the prob-
lem of knowledge is to be solved on the basis of the theory of
the organic universal itself. ^^It is but a spurious idealism
which makes the world without only the illusory creation of the
individual mind. Rather the truth is that the individual mind
must renounce its own isolated independence, must cease to
assert itself, must lose itself in the object, before it can attain
to any true knowledge of Nature. ... In order, therefore, to
attain to the universal life of reason that is in the world, it is
an indispensable condition that I renounce my own individuality,
my particular thought and opinion, and find the true realization
of my own reason in that absolute reason or truth which Nature
manifests. . . . The principle in fine that solves the difference
between Nature and Finite Mind is, that their isolated reality
and exclusiveness is a figment, and that the organic life of
reason is the truth or reality of both.”

On page 240, Principal Caird continues his discussion by ap-
plying the same ptinciple to ^‘the solution of the higher prob-
lem of Religion, or of the relation of the Finite Mind to God.”

Here, too, it will be seen that the understanding, which clings
to the hard independent identity of either side . . • renders any
true solution impossible. ... A true solution can be reached
only by apprehending the Divine and the Human, the Infinite
and the Finite, as the moments or members of an organic whole,
in which both exist, at once in their distinction and their unity.”
Principal Caird then gives as a further illustration of the true


APPENDIX C.


499


theory of universals, and as an aid in comprehending the organic
unity first mentioned, the relation of the individual to other
individuals ” in the “ case of our social relations.” “ The ordi-
nary conception of self-identity isolates the individual from his
fellow-men.” But this, says our author, is wrong. “ The ab-
stract individual is not truly man, but only a fragment of human-
ity, a being as devoid of the moral and spiritual elements which
are of the essence of the man’s life, as the amputated limb of
participation in the vital existence of the organism. The social
relations are a necessary part of the being of the individual. . . .
It is not by supposing in the first place a number of individual
human beings, each complete in himself, and then combining
tJiese individuals, that we reach the idea of the Family ; rather
must we first think the Family in order to know the individual.

. . . Here, as elsewhere, the universal is the of the par-

ticular. Yet the universal must not be conceived as having any
reality apart from the particulars, any more than the body apart
from its members. The true idea is reached only by holding
both together in that higher unity which at once comprehends
and transcends them, that organic unity, whether of the Family
or the State, which is the living integration of the individual
members which compose it.” In the same fashion,” con-
tinues Principal Caird, the true Infinite is not the negation of
the Finite, but that which is the organic unity of the Infinite
and Finite.”

III.

The foregoing quotations from Principal Caird will serve,
both to give an excellent summary of certain aspects of the
Hegelian theory of universals, and to show that the theory itself
is no novelty to English readers.^ It has become a common-
place of discussion for one whole school of neo-Hegelians.

To pass, however, to Hegel’s own account of the matter.

Thought,” says Hegel, “ is in the first place thought after the
fashion of the understanding ; but thought does not remain on
this stage, and the Begriff is not a mere Ver stand eshestimr

1 C£. also Professor Edward Caird’s Social Philosophy of Auguste Comte,
p. 199 : ** The universal of science and philosophy is . . . not merely a
generic name, under which things are brought together, but a principle
which unites them and determines their relation to each other.’*


600


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


mung'* ^ The higher movement of the Vemunft depends on
the well-known Dialektik of thought, which takes the abstract
facts and qualities that the understanding has sundered, the
Bestimmiingen^ or Seiten^ or Individuen of the finite world,
and discovers die Einhcit der Bestiinmungen in ihrer Entgegen-
setzung.” * This Dialektik has a “ positive result,” namely,
the discovery of das VeTni\nftige^ which is not merely ein Ah-
straktes, but “ zugleich ein Konkretes,* weil es nicht einfache,
formelle Einheit, sondern Einheit unterschiedener Bestimmun-
gen ist. Mit blossen Abstraktionen oder formellen Gcdanken
hat es darum tlberhaupt die Fhilosophie ganz und gar nicht zu
thun, sondern allein mit konkreten Gcdanken.”

The Allgemeinheit des Verstandes is, therefore, transformed
into the Begriff whenever two related processes have been
carried out : (1) When the formal abstractions or wesentUche
Bestimmungen^ which the understanding separates from one an-
other, and opposes to one another, — such abstractions as right
and left, inner and (niter, substance and accident, — have been
united once more by organic ties, and shown to be interrelated
and inseparable ^ ; and (2) When, by the same means, the things
of the finite world have been shown to be members of one
organic total. The intimate relationship of these two processes
for Hegel is one of the prominent characteristics of his whole
method. Das Wahre ist konkret means for him equally, “The
truth is an organic union of interrelated aspects, characters,
qualities,” and “ The truth is the Universal in which the par-
ticulars and individuals are organically joined.” ® For example,

^ Encycl., Werke, vol. vi. p. 147. The follo\eing’ contain a repeti-
tion of the account given above of the nature and limitations of the Ver-
standes-Allgemeinheit,

® Loc, cit., p. 157.

* On the Hegelian use of konkret^ see the excellent definition of Falcken-
berg^s Gesch, d. neueren Fhilosophie. p. 478: “The concrete Begriff of
Hegel is an Universal that has the Particular tn itself ^ and that produces
its ovn particulars (sick besondert)'^

* Logik, Werke^ vol. iv. pp. G.‘5, 64.

^ “Das einzelne Seyn ist irgend eine Seite der Idee,” Hegel has said in
the passage quoted above. Tn various passages he identifies Seite with
Bestimmung ; so, for instance, in the Religionsphilosophie^ Werke^ vol. xiL
p. 422, where he speaks of the Zusammenhang zweier Seiten oder Bestim^
mungen. From these and many other passages it easily becomes evident


APPENDIX C.


601


in the case of any man such as Caius or Titus, Hegel says ; ^
“ Was der einzelne Mensch im Besonderen ist, das ist er nur in
sofern, als er vor alien Dingen Mensch als soldier ist und im
Allgcmeinen ist, und diess AJlgemeine ist nicht nur etwas ausser
und neben andern abstrakten Qualitaten . . . sondern viel<
mehr das allcs Besondere Durchdringende und in sich Beschlies-
sende.** Moreover, as he tells us, das Allgemeine is here, in
case of humanity, and in its deepest truth, something more than
all men.^ It does more than include in an indifferent way the
individuals. It is for them all not “bloss etwas denselhm
Gemeinschaftliches^^^ it is their Grundy their Boden, their S^ih-
stanz. Now here is humanity regarded as something universal
and konkret. As such it is at once all vien, and it is more. It
is something pervading and determining all the characteristics
of each man, and binding together all his besondere Qualitaten.
It is thus konkret in two senses, namely, in so far as in it all
men are together, and in so far as through it all Qualitaten of
each man are united. Yet not even in this passage is Hegel
expounding the completely organic universal, but only a form on
the way towards the realization of it. It will be noticed, how-
ever, that here he distinctly declares that the individual is im
Allgermineny ‘‘ in the Cnioersal,*' which is, therefore, the inclu-
sive Suhstanz of the individuals.

The notion of the Vernunft-Allgemeinheit thus introduced re-
ceives a lengthy development in the “ Logik.” The way for this
AllgemeinheU des Begrijfes is prepared, in the larger “ Logik,*'
by elaborate discussions under the head of Wesen (that is, in Part
Second of the work). In the second division of Wesen, in dis-

that for Ilegel both abstract characters and abstract individuals arc to be
treated alike, in so far as they have their truth only in the organic ivhole
of whicli they are elements. Compare once more Falckenberg’s definition
of Hegel’s use of “ concrete,” as given above. That the Individual is con-
tained in the Universal is also expressly asserted by Hegel ( Werke, vol. vi.
p. 323 ; compare p. 316).

1 JSncyclop., Werke, vol. vi. p. 340.

3 Id., p. 339. In case of the form of logical judgment which Hegel is
discussing in the passage now cited, he is laying special stress upon the fact
that here already, although the true Vernunft-Allgemeinheit has not been
folly reached, the individual stands in relation to others, and is not con*
oeived by himself, or apart from his relations.


602 THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

cussing the Erscheinung^ Hegel shows, in a fashion which he
was elsewhere fond of dwelling upon, and illustrating, that the
qualities or Eigenschaften of every finite thing are its Weisen
des Verh/dtens zu Andern ; ^ so that all the things of the finite
world are what they are by virtue of their relations to one an-
other. They are in Weehselwirkung? and it is their nature to
be so. Hence the world of these finite things is a world of a
Gesetz, or all-embracing law, of which the things and qualities
are the appearance, while this Gesetz or Reich der Gesetze is a
self-determined Totalitdt, As the law at the basis of the finite
world is, however, fully expressed, but only expressed in the
phenomena themselves, the result here is an Einheit des Innem
und des Aeussern wherein, as Hegel tells us, the Begriff is
already present in a latent form ; for our world of finite things
is thus a totality of interrelated individuals that embody a
hiw and make it manifest. It is, however, just this Totalitdt
that im Begriff e als solchem appears as das Allgemeine.^ In
the world of Wcjsen this unity of inner and outer is so far called
die Wirklichkeit,^ The true nature of Wirklichkelt appears
in the exposition of the category of Svbstanz at the end of
Wesen, where finally die absolute Suhstanz, or general nature
of things, appears as a “ Totality ’* that is as a “ simple Whole,”
which determines itself and contains its self-determinations in ■
itself.” This Totality is das Allgemeine, which, together with
its correlated categories, das Einzelne and das Besondere, makes
up the Begriff, to which Hegel herewith passes.

The intricate exposition of the Begriff, in the third part of
the “ Logik,” is rendered somewhat clearer by the lecture notes
which were added by HegePs editors to the corresponding para-
graphs of the Encyklopadie.” Prom these one or two quota-
tions have been made in the text. It is perhaps enough to point
out here that one best and most easily sees what the Begriff is
.meant to bo if one passes forthwith to the place where its nature
is ‘‘writ large” in the world of Ohjektivitdt,^ into which it

1 Logik, Werke, vol. iv. p. 126.

« Id., p. 128.

* Logik, Werke, vol. iv. p. 174.

^ Id., p. 178. IHe Wirklichkeit appears first as das Absolute, whicli com*
jq[>oiids {loc. cit, pp. 187~190) to Spin(»a’s Substance.

* Logik, Werke, vol. v., pp. 167-228 ; Encydep., Werke, vol. vi. pp. 366-384i


APPENDIX C.


503


passes over/’ and in which it expresses itself. Here one has
a repetition on a higher stage of what took place in Wesen.
Once more one deals with a world of objects, only now they are
known to embody the Begriff, whose true universality they show
in three ascending phases, mechanism^ chemisniy and teleology.
The world of mechanism, or, as one might say, the world at
** Machine,” is the world whose parts have indeed interrelation-
ships, but only those of abstract law. In the world of affini-
ties ” or of Chemism,” the individuals exist only as interrelated,
and only by virtue of their affinities and the results of these.
In the still truer and more inclusive world of “ Teleology,” or,
as one might say, in the world as Organism,” the interre]|ited-
ness of the individual objects and their cooperation as instru-
ments of one immanent purpose, which is their true universal,
prepares the way for that complete union of Begriff and Ohjekt
which is given us in the Idee. The Idee, in fact, is the world
as Person ” so far as the categories of the Logik ” enable the
notion of personality to be introduced. The full notion of person-
ality is developed, later in the system, in the philosophy of spirit.

These Hegelian formulations of the theory of universals have
no doubt many antiquated features. Their presence and impor-
tance in the system is indubitable. As pointed out in my text,
the most interesting expressions of the whole doctrine occur in
Hegel’s ethical and theological works. A full collection of pas-
sages is impossible in the present space. A few more may yet
be given. It is an explicit and deliberate application of the
theory of the organic universal when Hegel says, in his “ Rechts-
philosophie,” that the individual man is no person ohne Rela-
tion zu anderen Personen.” * This notion, closely related to that
of the Allgemeinheit des Bewusstseins mentioned in the text,
appears very prominently in the whole structure of the “ Rechts-
philosophie.” It is another application of this same theory when
Hegel says, in the “ Religionsphilosophie,” in describing the life
of the church, that the subjective religious consciousness has to
be realized by ehie Vidheit von Subjekten und Individuen, but
that, since this consciousness is to be universal in the deeper

^ Werlct, vol. viii., p. 417. Cf. p. 110: *‘Es ist duroh dio Vernunft
ebenso nothwendig dass die Menschen m Vertrags-VerhiiltiiiBse eiugehen
ols dam sie Eigenthum besitzen.”


604


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


sense, so ist die Yielheit der Individuen durchaus zu setzen als
nur ein Schein, und eben dieses, dass sie sicb selbst als diesen
Schein setzt, ist die Einheit des Glaubens. • . • Das ist die
Liebe der Gemeinde, die aus vielen Subjekten zu bestehen
Bcheint, welche Vielheit aber nur ein Schein ist.” ^ “ Many mem-
bers,” then, but only one body, one Lord, one faith. Further
on Hegel discusses in tlie same spirit the relation of the individ-
uals to their universal as illustrated by the relation of the faith-
ful to the person of Christ. The application of the same theory
of universals the general problem of the relation of God to
the world appears at the close of the “ Encyklopadie.” The “ Na-
turphilosophie ” is also full of applications : so, for instance, the
explanation of the relations of the sexes, and of the struggle of
the various species of animals for existence, as in both cases due
to the fact that the universal can nowhere completely realize itself
in any one individual, or in any group of individuals.^ Since, ac-
cording to Hegel, the Idee cannot come to full expression in outer
nature, the Universal is in all these cases displayed to us only
impcriectly, as an endless series of efforts towards the completely
organic, which is perfectly realized only in the world as spirit.

To return, finally, for one moment, to the logical theory it-
self : It is the immanently organic nature of the true universal
that in the doctrine of the suhjektiven Begriff forces the Begriff
to develop its various Seiten in the Urtheil, since only by vir-
tue of the roliition of apparently divided, but really and organi-
cally inseparable, aspects or individuals can any universality
be realized. Of Urtheile the highest sort, before tlie class in
the TJrtJielle des Begriffes proper is reached, is the diyunc-
five jndgTmntSy just because they represent the Unterschiede
or Besonderungen of their subjects as in every case an inter-
related group of species or of individuals.* For das Allge-
meine ist das Einfache welches ebensosehr das Reichste in sich

^ Werke, vol. xii., pp. 313, 314. The important thing here is that Hegel
expressly regards this as an application of his logical theory. Compare
p. 309.

^ Werke^ vol. vii., 1, pp. 640, 641, 643, 645, 648, 649. In particular, pk
648, Die Gattung existirt in einer Reihe von einzelnen Lebendigen,”
not in any single individual.

• Werkey vd. v., pp. 102-107.


APPENDIX C.


505

Belbst ist/’ ^ and this w^th of the universal gets unfolded in
the disjunctive judgment. The univei*sal is die Negatioitdt
aherhaupt ; * and this self-differentiation gets an expression in
the disjunctive judgment. It is the Begriff itself that sich dis-
jungirt in the true disjunctive judgment.® Rut the genuine
Urtheil des Begriffes is something still higher, since not only
the fact, but the inner necessity and self-detemiination of this
differentiation must be made evident, a thing which can only be
done by forms of judgment that carry us on to the Schluss.^
The Schluss passes through a number of successive forms whose
highest is the disjunctive conclusion^ wherein once more the
reason for the result reached by the conclusion lies in the rela-
tion of one included member or Moment of some universal to the
universal itself, and to the other members or Momente of tlie
same organic and self-differentiated whole. With the disjunc-
tive conclusion the transition is made to the world of Ohjektivir
tdt^ where, as before shown, the universal is reali/.ed in expli-
citly organic form as the totality of the related individuals or
Momente, whose perfection and truth is the Idee.

One word still in conclusion as to the relation of the lower or
Aristotelian form of the “universal of the understanding,’’ to
Hegel’s own “ universal of the reason.” Hegel himself says : ®
“ The logic of the mere understanding is contained in the logic
of reason, and can be made at once therefrom. Nothing is
needed for this purpose but the omission from the latter of the
dialectical and so distinctively rational clement.” It is w^ell to
observe that, as Hegel himself has confessed, in one of his let-
ters to Niethammer,^ it was according to this method tliat he
felt himself obliged to proceed in the exposition of his logic,

1 Jc/.,p 36.

2 Jc/., p. 39. Readers of the discussion of Negativitlit in the text will
see the signifioance of this consideration.

8 Jr/., p. 105. * Id., p. 115, aqq.

8 Id., p. 162, sqq.

• Encgclop., Werke, vol. vi. p. 158 : “In der spckiilativen Logik ist die
blosse Verstandes-Logik enthalten, und kann aus jener sogleich gemacht
werden ; es bedarf dazu Nichts ab daraus das Dialektisohe uud Veinun^
tige wegzulaasen.”

7 See the recently issued vol. xix. of the Werke. edited by Karl Hegel
(Leipzig, 1887), part i. p. 340.


506


THE SPIRIT OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


which he andertook for the boys in the Nllmberg gymnasiam.
Only die verstdndige Logik, he tells Niethammer, is suited to
gyninasial instruction. Youth at this time needs purely posu-
tiven InJuUt and is not ripe for das Spebilative. The dialects*
cal can be only here and there suggested, and never correctly
presented in such elementary work. Hence it happens that in
the so-called Propaedeutik, which Bosenkranz edited from He-
gel’s posthumous MSS and published in 1840 as the eighteenth
volume of the “ Werke,” and which contains the gist of Hegel’s
instruction to the boys at Nttrnberg, one finds but few hints of
the Hegelian theory of Universals. If this little volume, in
fact, were our only record of Hegel, all his peculiar theories,
whether as to Idealism in general or as to the nature of Self-
consciousness, or as to Universals, would remain almost wholly
unknown to us ; and such theories must not be sought there,
but in Hegel’s own deliberate expressions of them, and above aU
in the works which he himself published during his life.


INDEX


Absolute, the, with E^nt, 130, 142-
145 ; with Fichte, 150, 160, 192 ;
with Schelling, 184, 193 ; with
Hegel, 213-216, 221; with Scho*
j^xSiauer, 289, 240, 253, 263, 264.
See Self, absolute.

Adickea, !^ch, Kant’s Kritik der
Reinen Vernunft ” edited by, 483.
401. * '

Agassiz, embryological studios of,
286.

Aggregation, process of, 324, 325.

Agnosticism, its relation to idealism,
344-;l40, 448.

Amos, the prophet, a false religious
optimism condemned by, 447, 448,
458, 459.

Analogies of experience, 488.

Analysis, self-, as characteristic of
the eighteenth-century philosophy,
33, 80-82, 03, 101.

Analytic and synthetic aspects of
idealism, 350, 351, 364.

Anthropomorphism, doctrine of, 345,
427.


Antinomies, cosmological, Kant, 123 ;
their source, 420 ; in the spiritual
world, 437-440.

Apperception, transcendental unity
of, 484-491.

Appreciation, distinction between,
and description, in ordinary real-
ism, 387-*380 ; its formless and un-
categorized character, 300, 301;
illustrated from Shelley, 303 ; from
Schiller, 303; that outer truth is
not given by appreciation is the
presupposition of natural science,
390, 395; a possible real world
of, 393-397 ; exemplified by the or-
«uiio unity of the spiritual world,
405-410; its categories those of


self-consciousness, 411; a world of
ideals, 412 ; presupposed by the
world of description, 410, 413-415.
See Aspect, double ; Description.

A priori principles, of empirical sci-
ence, 398. ^

Aristotle, the writings of, and Plato,
interpret Hellenic life, 9; the
founder of the logic of the under-
standing, 404, 406, 505.

Art, Schopenhauer’s theory of, 255-
257.

Ashley, Lord Anthony, later Earl of
Shaftesbury, a friend of Locke, 78.

Aspect, double, doctrine of, 415-410 ;
applied to tlie facts of the inor-
ganic world, 410-422; to the prob-
lem of evolution, 422-428 ; to the
problem of freedom, 428-434.

Astronomy, the progress of, 312.

Atoms, the nature of, 393, 300.

Axioms, of Spinoza, questioned in
the eighteenth century, 60-70 ;
of natural science, relate to the
world of description, 307-404.

Bacon, 475.

Baer, von, embryological researches
of, 286.

Beethoven, 172.

Begriff, tlie Hegelian, 221, 222, 500-
506.

Being, Berkeley’s theory of, 87-90 ;
the nature of, Kant, 124, 125,
485-4^ ; Hegel’s theory of, 218*
227, 492-506.

Belief, true and false, 37‘l-378.

Berkeley, Bishop, idealism of, a de-
velopment of eighteenth-century
humanism, 33, 71 ; type of char-
acter, 86, 87 ; his theory of vision,
88-89, 475 ; the being of sensible


608


IKDEX.


ihingBy to be peroeived, 87, 00 ; hia
doctrine an extension of Locke's,
90 ; the sources of ideas, 91 ; an
omnipresent eternal mind, 91 ; at-
tractive form of his idealism, 91,
92 ; relation of his doctrine to the
rediscovery of the inner life, 93,
3r)l; his Principles of Human
Knowledfi^e," 93, 475.

Berlin, as a centre of Gei-man liter-
ary intei’est, 170.

Bible, the, modem critical study of,
45.

Boeckh, 282.

Boehme, 475.

Bourne, H. R. F., “ Life of Locke,”
by, 475.

Brown, John, Kant the, of nine-
teenth century speculative war-
fare, 1<18.

^Browning, delight of, in the para-
doxes of passion, 201 ; “ perfec-
tion in imperfection,” 454.

Bruno, 475.

Byron, 478.

Caird, Edward, “ Philosophy of Im-
manuel Kant ” by, cited, 108, 470 ;
“ Life of Hegel ” by, cited, 195,
479; “Social Philosophy of Au-
gustus Comte ” by, cited, 499.

Caird, John, “Spinoza” by, 475;

Philosophy of Religion” by,
quoted, 490—199.

Campanella, 475.

Caprice, an element of, in the com-
mon selfhood of idealism, 230;
doctrine of, by Schopenhauer, 237^
240, 203-204 ; the, of the highest I
reason, 429. !

CarolineSchlegel, 181 ; wif e of Schel- |
ling, 182 ; lier remarkable letters,
185 ; motto in verae by, for Fichte,
18*3; Fichte's genius and Schel-
ling’s contrasted by, 183, 184.

Cams, Paul, “ Fundament^ Princi-
ples ” by, cited, 398.

Categories, Kant's, forms of thought,
127-131 ; the, of Hegel, 218-222 ;
the, of the world of description.
397-404; of the world of appre-
ciation, 411-415. See Deduction
of the categories.

Causation, origin of the conception,
Hume, 94-97; doctrine of Scho-
penhauer, 250, 251 ; physical, in-
iofficient to explain the history of


the world, 200, 425, 426; aidom
of, belongs to the world of descrip-
tion, 344-348, 400-404 ; no appli-
cation to world of appreciation,
348, 413-415 ; reality is the world-
self, ;i48-350, 415-422.

Certainty, Descartes’ quest for, 75*
78.

Chance, brute, the deepest problem
of evil, 41)5-409; our, the ration-
ality of the Infinite, 409-472.

Change. See Evolution, Nature and
Evolution.

Christopher, St., his service of God,

oJ.

Christianity, essence of, embodied m
speculative theory, 143-145.

Civilization, progress of, 7-12, 281*
287.

Clearness, essential in thought,
Locke, 83.

Clifford, W. K., “ The First and Last
Catastrophe,” a lecture by, cited,
318 ; his theory of a definable end-
less process for the physical uni-
verse, 318-324; difficulties of liia
hypothesis, 324-330.

“ Cogito, ergo sum,” famous princi-
pie of Descartes, 76.

Coleridge, 478.

Conscience, doctrine of, Kant, 112-
118.

Consciousness, discussion of human,
by liocke, 82-80; relation of, to
outer I'eality, Berkeley, 9.3 ; space
and time, conditions of, Kant,
12^3-125 ; “ all consciousness is
an appeal to other consciousness,”
Hegel, 208-210; paradox of, 210-
215; analysis of, the problem of
modem idealism, 232, 233 ; a re-
sult of evolution, mind -stuff
theory, 311; twofold character
of, 406, 407, 411, 419-434; rela-
tion of empirical and transcenden-
tal, 483-488. See Self-conscioua-
ness.

Consciousness, religious, twofold in-
terests of, 46-18; contemplative
form of, Spinoza and the “ Imita-
tion,” 49-57, 69 ; the perfection of
the divine substance, Spinoza, 58-
66 ; active form of, Kant, 11 1-118;
Fichte's theism, 160-162 ; Hegel’s
paradox, 203 - 218 ; transcends
time, in world of appreciatioi\
425-428, 457-461.


INDEX.


509


Constraotiye imagination, office of,
Kant, 130, 130.

Contraction, as a source of heat, 315.

Copernicus, Kant tlie, of philosophy,
311.

Cosmology, problems of a philosophi-
cal, 381.

Courage, spiritual, 117.

*%'ritique of the Pure Reason,”
Kant’s publication of, 34, 08, 107,
470, 48:3 ; its essential tliought, :i4 ;
phases in study of, 102-105; its
early influence, 108, 148; its de-
structive and constructive effects,
111. 8ee Kant.

Crusaders, spirit of, 229.

Curiosity, different forms of, 0-12.

Cynicism, wonderful temperament
of, in Spinoza, 50 ; occasional, of
Fichte, 149.

Darwin, his power of detailed inves-
tigation, 78 ; the doctrine of evo-
lution, and his ** Origin of Spe-
cies,” 284-287.

Declaration of Independence, 275.

Deduction of the categories, Kant’s,
120-131 ; the Kantian doctrine, a
development, Falckeiiberg, 483-
480 ;Vaihinger, 480-488 ; Erdmann,
489 ; neutral formulation of Kant’s
results, 490, 491. See Categories.

Descartes, a representative thinker

‘ of the seventeenth century, 29,
475 ; his philosophic doubt, 29, 75 ;
“ Cogito, ergo his princi-

ple of absolute certainty, 70 ; his
system of innate truths, 75-77 ;
jproblem of their multiplicity, 77,

Description, the world of, the outer
or natural order, 38:3, :395 ; its per-
manent and universal elements,
384-388 ; the test of its objectiv-
ity, similarity of human experi-
ence, 387. 388 ; the test of similar
experience, the sameness of de-
scription, 388; describable expe-
rience, reproducible and under
forms or categories, 390-395 ; de-
duction of the categories of, 397-
404; not the whole of the real,
world, 405-408; contrast of, and
the world of appreciation, 395,
396, 40iM15, 424-428 ; real in so
far as it is an aspect of the world
of the Logos, 410-423, 432-434.


Design, old aignment of, 92 ; phyri-
cal world symbolic of the, of the
Logos, 421-^^.

Diderot, 81.

Dilemma, the, either idealism or the
unknowable, 3(i4-368.

Dinge an sick, Kant’s, unknowable,
131, 476, 484, 485.

Distance, infinite, difficulties of, in
Clifford’s statement of an endlessly
consolidating world, 332-334.

Dogmatism, Kant’s relation to, 115-
119.

Doubt, philosophical, fruitful peri-
ods of, 71“74; Cartesian, 29, 75;
ablest expression of, by Hume,
9:}- 98 ; lesson of, 98-10() ; Kantian,
115-119, l26-i:32, 477; involves
the larger self, 378-4179; the, of
genuine pessimism, 463-409; an-
swered, 469-471.

Duty, emphasized by Kant, 112-
114.

Eclecticism, 16.

J^gOf the, B'ichta, 156-160.

Emerson’s ** Jlrahnia,” 99.

Emotions, human, explanation of, in
the seventeentlk century, 28; the
romantic spirit, 174.

Eneigy, redistributions of matter
and, 313-:315, 337 ; law of degrada-
tion of, and evolution, 316-318,
3 : 17 ; (Gifford’s theory of a defin-
able endless process, :118-:136 ; tho
world of the “ running down,” not
the final truth, 3:i7-340, 421.

” Epicurean Confession of Faith of
Hans llristleback,’’ Schelling’s,
186 ; its clear statement of the
NatuqMlosophie^ 186; the poem,
187-189.

Erdmann, Benno, his “Reflexlonen
Kant’s zm- Kiitischeii Philoso-
phie,” cited, 107, 119, 122, 12:3,
125, 120, 486, 489.

** Essay on the Human Understand-
ing,” Ijocke’s, publication of, 78,
475; history of, in its preface,
79, 80 ; its historical influence, 80,
81; its doctrine, 81-80. See
Locke.

Error, involves the larger self, 370*
378.

Ethics, English, of eighteenth cen-
tury, a development of the new
humanism, 33 ; the ” Ethics” ol


610


INDEX.


Spinoza, oited, 58, 60, 61, 62, 64,
475 ; quoted, 66, 67.

Euclid, Hegelian categories not com-
prehensible by deiimtions of, 2IH.

European thought, transformed, 80,
84.

Events, predetermined, Spinoza, 63 ;
character of, in the world of de-
scription, 387-404 ; in the world of
appreciation, 405-416.

Evil, attitude towards, of Spinoza,
64; of Kant, 115-117 ; problem of,
437-441 ; an illusion, Lanier, 442-
447 ; and mystical resignation, 450,
451 ; and pessimism, 462 ; the syn-
thesis, ** perfection in imperfec-
tion,’/ 454-461, 469-471.

Evolution, rise of the doctrine of,
Lecture IX; transition from ro-
mantic idealism to modern realism
in Schopenhauer, 264-266 ; the
return not an abandonment of
idealism, 266-270 ; science thereby
enriched, 270-272 ; evolution a
postulate of idealistic interpreta-
tion, 27^1-276; modem historical
spirit an outgrowth of romanti-
cism, 270-285 ; Darwin’s Origin
of Species,” 285, 286; his natural
selection and the transformation of
species, 287 ; conflict of physical
necessity and historical ideals, 288 ;
problem of the philosophy of evo-
lution, 288-291 ; synthesis, 291-
294 ; Spencor^s “ Formula of Evo-
lution,’’ 294-298 ; his Unknowable,
298 ; result of his system, 299, <K)0 ;
monistic doctrines, 300, 304 ; mind-
stuif theory, 301-303 ; the deeper
self, 304r-307. See Nature and
Evolution.

Eizperience, the basis of all know-
ledge, Locke, 83, 84; the iworld
of, a world of ideas, Berkeley, 87-
91 ; furnishes all the materials of
thought, Hume, 94 ; must conform
to ihe forms of thought, Kant,
127, 844 ; due to caprice of world
will, Soh<menhauer, 239 ; agnostic
view of, ^44-347 ; in every, the
absolute self, 348-350 ; nature
of, in the world of description,
387-395, 398-404; the reality of
the world of appreciation, 396^97,
404-415.

Eamlanation and cause, the same,
Spinoza, 59.


Faith, not a dogma but an active
postulate, Kant, 115-117.

Falokenberg, his view of the S[ant<
ian deduction, 483-486.

“Faust,” Goethe’s, a product of the
revolutionary period, 99; quoted,
100, 439.

Feeling, a guide to reason, romanti-
cists, 175.

Fichte, the significance of Kantian
doctrine, 13^139; its transforma-
tion the common task of Fichte,
Schelling, and Hegel, 139-145 ; his
career and temperament, 146-151 ;
ransomed from Spinozism by Kant,
151, 152 ; rejects Kant’s things in
themselves, 152; principles of his
“ Subjective Idealism,” 162, 153 ;
its essence, “ ethical idealism,”
154-156 ; the true self, an infinite
moral will, 156-160 ; theism of his
“ Vocation of Man,” 160, 161 ; out-
come of his doctrine, 162, 163.
Summary of lecture, 477, 478.

Finite, the, depreciation of, by the
“ Imitation,” 52 ; reality of the in«
finite ill multiplicity of, 140-142.

Fitzgerald, stanzas from “ Omar
Khayydm” of, 4il8.

“Fool’s Prayer, The,” by Edward
Rowland Sill, 465, 406.

“Fourfold Root of the Principle
of Sufficient Reason,” Schopen-
hauer’s, 250.

Frauenstiidt, “ Arthur Schopen-
hauer” by, 480.

Freedom of the will, denied, Spi-
noza, 58-60 ; as affirmed, by Kant,
131 ; by Fichte, life. See Physical
law and Freedom.

French Revolution, demonstrates the
importance of passion, 34.

Galileo, his relation to modem phys-
ical science, 28, 38 ; his verification
of hypothesis by experiment, 38,
39 ; umuence of his method upon
philosophy, 39, 40.

Genius, with the romanticists, 171;
often a pathological background
to, 243.

Germany, intellectual situation in,
before the Battle of Waterloo,
276-281; after the triumph over
Napoleon, 146, 281-284.

Geology, m^em, its indebtedness ts
tiie British mind, 285.


INDEX.


611


Geometry, the model eoience, in
seventeenth century, 40, 41 ; mathe-
matical method of Spinoza, 58-65 ;
innate, Descartes, 77 ; nature must
obey, E^t, 122, 126; laws of,
probably not ultimate traths, Clif-
ford, .m

God, doctrine of Spinoza, 60, 61;
argfument for the existence of,
Descartes, 76 ; presence of, Berke-
ley, 02; insufdcicilcy of human
reason, Hume, 04; Kants postu-
late of existence of, l>il ; the moral
order, Fichte, KiO; Hegel" s abso-
lute, 214r-216 ; with Schopenhauer,
255. See Logos.

Gh>cthe, his admiration for the works
of Spinoza, 41, 42; and Fichte,
151 ; and Schiller, at Weimar, 170,
171. See “Faust.”

Gravitative system, an imagined, 322 ;
its effects, 323, 328, 329.

Greek life, essence of, in writings of |
riato and Aristotle, 0. ’

Green and Grose, Hume"s philosophi-
cal works edited by, 476.

Grimms, the, 232.

Gwinner, “ Schopenhauer’s Leben ”
by, 476. «

Habit, basis of the idea of cause,
Hume, 05-98.

Hamlet, 276, 354, 356.

Ilarris, W. J., “ Hegel’s Logic ” by,
470.

Hartmann, von, acknowledgpnent to,
440.

Haym, Heg^ und seine Zeit ” by,
479.

Hegel, transition from Schelling to,
191-194 ; his career and tempera-
ment, 194r-202, 478, 479 ; his “ Pha-
nomenologie des Geistes,” 202,
215 ; the paradox of self-conscious-
ness, 202-204 ; illustrated by mem-
ory, 205, 266 ; an analogy in social
life, 207, 208 ; “ All consciousness
an appe^ to other consciousness,”
208; the process of self-differen-
tiation, 201), 210; analogy in the
spiritual life, 210-212 ; the law of
the universal Negaiivitdt, 213, 214 ;
the absolute, 215, 216 ; theoretical
significance of his doctrine, 216-
218; the “Logik,” 218, 219; its
dialectical metliod applied to
quantity, 219-221 ; his doctrine of


Begriffe, 221-224, 492-606; the
divine Idee, 224-227; his his-
torical relation to Schopenhauer,
240, 259, 260, 455, 456. Summary
of lecture and works, 479. See
Universals.

Heine, sketch of Kant’s daily life
by, 108, 109; his “Bucli der
Leider,” 155 ; bis position in Ger-
man literature, 169 ; “ History of
German Thought and Literature ”
by, 478.

“ Heinrich Ofterdingen,” SchlegePs,
178.

Heraclitus, 156.

I Herder, KM), 108.

I Heredity, view of Descartes, 77;

I view of Locke, 79.

Historical spirit, modem, the out-
come of the roniaikiic movement,
273-281 ; assumes definite fonn
after the battle of Waterloo, 281-
285.

Hobbes, his moiit as a thinker, 30, 58.

Hoffmann, 180.

“Holy Grail,” 97, 156, 465.

Huggins, Dr., address of, upon
Astronomy, 312-314,

Humboldt, Wilhelm von, the Bhfi-
gavat-gita expounded by, 278.

Humanity, task of idealism to spir-
itualize, 271 ; the deeper self an
opitOTne of its history, 283.

Hume, his philosophical rank, 03 ; his
extension of Locke’s empiricism,
04, 05, 101 ; the idea of cau.satiun
founded on habit by, 06, 07 ; sig-
nificance of his doctrine, 07-10(),
101, 136 ; awakens Kant from his
“dogmatic slumber,” 105, 125-
127 ; his works, 476.

Ibsen, the drama “Emperor and
Galilean ” by, quoted, 36-38.

Ideal, Kant’s, 132, m.

Idealism, analytic, of Berkeley, 33,
71, 87-92, 351 ; transcendental,
of Kant, 122-124, 477, 484-491 ;
transformation of Kant’s doctrine,
the aim of post-Kantian, 130-145,
162, 233; subjective, ef Fichte,
152-154; objective, of >Schelling,
183-186, 192, 478; absolute, of
Hegel, 2aS-225, 492-506; ideal-
ism on a Kantian basis, Schopen-
hauer, 237-240, 265 ; task of con-
BtructiTe, 235, 236, 268-282, 33fit


512


INDEX.


844-^0 ; nature of analytiCf 350-
363; of synthetic, 364^86; the
Logos, 416-434, 436-440, 454-461,
46i)-471. Summary of positive
lectures, 480 - 482. See Logos,
Reality, and Idealism.

Ideals, the -world of appreciation a
world of, 412 ; the mechanism of
nature symbolizes a world of, 426.

Ideas, innate, problem of, 74, 75;
affirmed by Descartes, 76 - 78,
denied by Locke, 79 ; their origin,
in sensation and reflection, Locke,
83, tS4; the "enso-w'orld a world
of, Berkeley, 87-92, 350; theory
of Hume, 94-97. See Idealism.

Idee, the absolute, of Hegel, 221-
224, 492-506.

Illusion, all phenomenal plurality an,
Schopenhauer, 26(); behind the,
a deeper self, 307.

Imagination, the constructive, its
nature, Kant, 130.

Imitation of Christ,’’ its state-
ment against philosophy, 5 ; its
contemplative religious mood, 51-
54 ; parallel between the religious
consciousness of its author and of
Spinoza, 54, 69.

Induction, the method of, Galileo,
38-40 ; marvelous, of Darwin, 285.

Infinite, the, pervades the ^te,
1.39-145. See Idealism.

‘‘ In Memoriam,” 246.

Inner life, period of the study of the,
from Locke to Kant, 68, 474 ; its
general characteristics, 68-74, 475.

Insight, novelty of Kant’s, 114, 115.

Intellect, will deeper than, Schopen-
hauer, 252.

Irrationalismus, doctrine of, 237-239.

Jena, a literary centre during the
romantic era, 170.

Jew, Spinoza a, by birth, 44.

Kant, mission of, in modem thought,
34, 35, 75, 100, 135 ; difficulties in
the study of, 103-105 ; his peraon
and life, 106-109; consistent de-
velopment of his religions belief,
110, 111; his piety contrasted
with Spinoza’s mysticism. 111, 1 12,
114, 1:14; the moral law revealed
by conscience, 112-114; faith not
a dogma, but an active postulate,
114-118,433; his early philosoph-


ical development, 119-122; the
subjectivity of space and time,
122-124; awakened from ** dog-
matic slumber ” by Hume’s skepti-
cism, 93, 102, 125, 126; liis “Cri-
tique of Pure Reason,” 34, 102,
126, 476, 483 ; laws of nature must
conform to laws of thought, 126,
127 ; the transcendental unity of
apperception, 128, 487-491 ; the
constructive imagination, 129, 130 ;
deduction of the categories, 128,
131, 483-491 ; absolute certainty
of the moral law, 132, 1.33; out-
come of his doctrine, 134-139 ; its
transformation the common task
of post-Kantian German idealists,
1.39-145; Fichte, and, 160, 151,
154 ; Schelling, and, 103, 217 ;
Hegel, and, 201, 204, 217; Scho-
penhauer, and, 237-239, 253, 266,
266 ; his influence upon the doc-
trine of evolution, 271, 286. Sum-
mary of lecture, books, and doc-
trine, 476, 477. See Deduction of
the categories.

Kirehofi;, “ Vorlesungen fiber Mathe*
matische Physik” by, cited, 398.

Knowledge, a scrutiny of its basis
demanded, by I^ocke, 83 ; by Kant,
125; in modern problems, 33^.

Konigsberg, birthplace of K^t, 106 ;
Kantian archives in, 120.

liagrange, 272.

Lange, |f. A., his criticism of meta-
physicians, 4.

Lanier, Sidney, hk poem ‘‘ How
Love looked for Hell," 442; ex-
presses a false religious optimism,
443-445.

Language, nature a divine, Berkeley,
91.

Laplace, nebular hypothesis of, 106,
110; his “Celestial Mechanics,”
272.

Law, sanction of, in the seventeenth
century, 31 ; laws of nature, Berke-
ley, 91 ; Kant, 126 ; mo^, cer-
tainty of, Kant, 132, 133 j the
universe its embodiment, Fichte,
162, 159, 160, 166, 167, 174, 191.

Lectures, general purposes of, the, 1,
473 ; studies of thinkers and prob-
lems, 25 ; suggestions of doctrine,
309; snmmaiy of the historical,
473-480 ; of the positive, 480-482.


INDEX. 613


Leibnitz, historical porition of, 8*3,
70 ; his philosophical theology, 71 ;
his monadology, 409; his opti-
mism, 440.

Lessing, the forerunner of classical
German literature, 109.

Life, inner, period of its rediscovery,
Spinoza to Kant, 0&-100, 274, 475 ;
an embodiment of God’s life, vrith
Fichte, 144, 145; ^ith Schelling,
180 ; paradoxes of the, Hegel, 204-
210; the urill, Schopenhauer, 254-
250 ; a deeper self, 372-874, 470.

Lisbon, eai*thquake in. A. d. 1758, 70.

Literature, German, classical period,
100-170.

Locke, second period of modern
philosophy begins urith, 33; his
career and character, 78 ; oricin of
his Essay on the Human under-
standing,” 79-80; historical value
of his insistence upon a knowledge
of the scope of hum an reason,
80-82; ideas not innate, 79, 82;
their origin in sensation and reflec-
tion, 8^3, 84; his infliienco upon
the study of the inner life, 84r^().
See pages 474, 475.

Logic, the world not explained by,
of seventeentli century, Kant,
,119, 120; categories of Hegel’s
** Logic,” 218 ; its dialetical
method, 219-222 ; its universal
Idee, 222-220, 492-500.

Logos, the, the deeper self, 372-380 ;
evolution in the unive^e of, 381 ;
the world of description real as an
aspect of, 41(5, 422 ; the world
of appreciation is the system of
the thoughts of, 415-4i{4, 454-401 ;
this world the choice of a rational,
437, 439, 440, 40(1-471.

Lorabroso, the Italian psychologist,
242.

Love, false optimistic, in a poem of
Lanier, 442-447.

Love-letters of Fichte, 147-150.

Lyell, 285.

Mach, Dio Mechanik in ihrer Ent-
wickelung” by, 398.

Man, regained as a mechanism, in
seventeenth century, 28 ; if such,
a knowing mechanism, in the sec-
ond period, 32 ; two forms of his
religions interest, 45, 46. See
life.


Martinean, ** Study of Spinoza * ’ by,

476.

Matter, an expression of tlie divine
substance, Spinoza, 63-05; proof
of its existence, Descartes, 70;
causes sensations, Lmike, Kl; a
world of ideas, Berkeley, 87, 92 ;
laws of, must conform to laws of
thought, Kant, 122, 125, 131 ; ‘'the
material for our duty,” Fichte,
152 ; permanent possibilities of
experience,” Mill, 359 ; an external
aspect of the Logos, 415-419.

Maximos, in Ibsen's ‘‘ Emperor and
Galilean,”

Meaning, analysis of, 370, 371.

Meiklejohn, his translation of Kant’s
Critique of Pure Keasoh,” 102,
174.

Memory, paradox of consciousness
illustrated by, 205, 200.

Metaphysics, value cf, 22-24 ; Kant
“a lover of,” 120.

Metempsychosis, a new form of, 28^1.

Method, mathematical, of Spinoza,
58-(5() ; dissatisfacition with, in the
eighteenth century, 69, 03; ana-
lytic and synthetic methods, of
idealism, 350, 351.

Middle Ages, the, the typical period
of romance, 278.

Mill, John Stuart, his definition of
matter, !159.

Mind, a revelation of the divine sub*'
stance, Spinoza, 03-00 ; its innate
truth, Descartes, 75, 70 ; a blank
tablet, written on by experience,
Locke. 74, 79'8() ; one omnipresent,
Berkeley, 91 ; the world of appre-
ciation, 3()8, 415-‘ll9.

Mind-stuff, theory of, Clifford and
Dr Prince, 300^304, 415.

Miracles, denied, Spinoza, 29, 70.

Montuls, of Leibnitz, 409.

Monism, as “Double Aspect” doc-
trine, 300-301; applied to the
world of the Logos, 415-434.

Mood, the skeptical, 71-73.

Morals, doctrine of, Kant, 112-114;
as “ ethical idealism,” Fichte, 152-
16 ; 3 .

Mozart, on artistic production, 456,
457.

Miiller, Max, his translation of Kant’s
** Critique of Pure Reason,” 476.

Music, best portrays the essence of
the will, Schopenhauer, 256; in


614


INDEX.


illustration of the paradox of the
moral order, 456.

Mysteries, the only insoluble, those
absurd to ask, 346.

Mysticism, parallel between, the, of
Spinoza and of the ** Imitation,**
51-55; philosophic, of Spinoza,
65, 66; hated by Locke, SOy 83;
Kant*s piety opposed to Spinoza*s,
111-114; of the historical church,
145 ; the pessimistic type, Scho-
penhauer, 245, 246; its attitude
towards evil, 450-453.

Napoleon, defeat of, advances the
liistorical movement, 276, 281, 282.

Naturalism, period of, from Galileo
to Spinoza, 27, 474. See Galileo,
Spinoza.

Nature, a vast mechanism, by Gali-
leo, 38-41 ; by Spinoza, 58-66 ;
laws of, the order of ideas, Berke-
ley, 1)1 ; must conform to laws of
thought, Kant, 122-125, 131 ; a
work of unconscious art, roman-
ticists, 175; N aturphilosqphie of
Schelling, I84rl86, 193 ; my duty
made manifest to my senses,
Fichte, 192; the philosophy of
Hegel, 218. See Evolution.
Nature and Evolution,*’ Lecture X ;
critical study of the world under
the assumption of realistic science,
312 ; its changes, redistribu-
tions ” of matter and energy, 813 ;
their character and extent, 813,
814; suggest a general process of
physical evolution, 314, 8 15 ; the
law of the “degradation** of
energy, 316, 317 ; this cessation of
evolution raises question of its
beginning, 318; Clifford's hypo-
thesis of a dehnable endless
cess, 318-321 ; the cyclical ,pro-
cess, 322, 323, 334 ; difficulties in
an endless process of aggrega-
tion, 324, 325 ; and dispersion, 325-
827 ; avoided by the gravitative
system, 328-331; the endlessly
consolidating matter not the ulti-
mately real world, 3;l 1-836; fore-
going paradoxes due io a hypo-
thetical account of a world -process
in terms of experience, 337, 338 ;
necessity of a critical study of the
knowing power of man, 3*%, 339;
permanent lesson of modem ideal-


ism that the inner and onter world
must have organic relations, 339,
340. See Refdity and Ideali^

Natural science, axioms of, relate to
world of description, 397-4U0.

Natural selection, Darwin*B theory
of, 5^287, 289.

Necessity, mathematical, of Spinoza,
58-61 ; its conception the result of
habit, llume, 95-97.

Negativitdt^ Hegel’s formula of,
213-218 ; less conceivable than
Spencer’s cosmical evolution, 297.

Newton, his conception of physical
science, 274 ; his “ Principia,’*
280.

Nihilism, the outcome of an arbitrary
idealism, 180.

Novalis, liis character, 177, 178 ; tale
of his love, illustrative of romantio
idealism, 178-180.

Objects of human knowlcdg^e, innate,
with 13escartes, 77 ; given by sen-
sation and reflection, Locke, 88,
84 ; ideas and spirits, Berkeley, 60,
91 ; impressions and ideas, Hume,
94r-08 ; the meaning of, 375-377.

“Omar KhayyAm,’* Fitzgerald’s,
stanzas from, 4tl8.

“Optimism, Pessimism, and the
Moral Order,” Lecture XIII ;
idealism both of theoretical and of
practical interest, 435, 486; anti-
nomy of the spiritual world, 437 ;
(1) evil $n essential in finite exist-
ence, 437—439 ; (2) and tlie rational
choice of this universe by the
Logos, 437, 4il9, 440 ; the problem
of moral evil, 440, 441 ; tlie denial
of its existence, 441, 442; illus-
trated by a poem of Sidney Lanier,
443-445; results in a false reli-
gions optimism, 445-447; evil a
reality, 447-449, 458 ; mystical re-
signation of Spinoza and the “ Im-
itation,” 450, 451 ; pessimism of
Schopenhauer, 450, 452, 453; a
synthesis of ‘^perfection in im-
perfection ” demanded, 454 ; par-
adoxes of the moral order, 454;
the paradox of daily life, 454, 455 ;
of mnsio, 456, 457 ; evil becomes
part of the moral oi^er only by its
condemnation, 458-460 ; t)iis solu-
tion made possible by the oiganie
personality of the divine Selfi


INDEX.


615


401 ; the mood of deepest doubt,
461-464; the tragedy of brute
chance, 465 ; illustrated by “ The
Foors Prayer,” Sill, 465-4^ ; our
chance, the rationality of the infi-
nite, 469-471 ; “ tliis world is the
world of the Logos,” 471.

Order, outer, see World ; moral, see
Optimism.

Organism, Hegel’s universal an, of
interrelated selves, 224, 225, 492,
4}>i] ; the world an, with a history
of development, 275; a manifes-
tation of the Logos, 418, 419.

Orient, the, records of, 278.

Paradox, Hegel’s analysis of the, of
consciousness, 20*1-217 ; of the re-
lation of universal and individual,
218-227, 492-50(); Spencer’s, of
evolution and the unknowalde,
29()-^100; in the moral order, of
“ pcHection in imueHectiou,” 4^17-
440 151—171.

Passion, the logic of, Hegel, 219-227.

Paul, the Apostle, 145, 402.

Perception, clearness of, Descartes,
70; by sensation and reflection,
Locke, 88, 84; space and time
forms of, Kant, 124.

Pe^ods of modem philosophy, 27-38,

.Personality, of the finite, Kant, 131 ;
of tho infinite, Fichte, 144, 145,
101 ; of the absolute, Hegel, 224;
of tile Logos, 409-413, 434, 471.

Pessimism, element of, in the Im-
itation,” 52 ; in Spiiioxa, *55 ;
Schopenhauer, its reputed expo-
nent, 228. See Schopenhauer ;
Optimism.

** Phiinomenologie,” Hegel’s, cited,
207, 208, 225, 494.

Philosophy, not an effort to explain
mysteries by any superhuman
insight, 1 ; but an attempt to give
a reasonable account of our per-
sonal attitude towards life, 1 ; the
result of a natural tendency to

■ reflect critically upon life, 1-3 ;
statement of the objection, to its
numerous systems, 3, 4 ; to its ap-
parent futility, 5, 6 ; the defense :
contemplative insight a necessary
element in civilization, 7 - 12 ;
troth, a synthesis of the various
partial reflections upon life, 13-17 ;


criticism necessary that worthy
ideals may be discovered and main-
tained, 18^22 ; its systems valuable
by their record of spiritual experi-
ence and by their bearings upon
life, 22-^.

Philology, influence of the romantic
movement upon, 280.

“Physical Law aud Freedom,”
Lecture XI£ ; the idealistic inter-
pretation of the outer order, 380-
38.3 ; provisional characteristics of
objective trutli, 384; its perma-
nence, 384 ; its universality, 384-
387 ; its describability, *388 ; con-
trast of describable and appreci-
able experience, 388-392 ; nature,
the world i>f description, 393-395,
307; deduction of its categories,
397-404; possible reality of an
appreciable world, *393, 395-*397,
405; ideals and organic spiritual
relations real, yet not describable
facts, 40*5-4(^; the world of sci-
ence presupposes tho world of ap-
preciation, 409-411 ; its categories
of self-consciousness, 411-41.3; a
world of freedom, 414, 415; tho
“double aspect” of the world of
the Logos, 415— 419; this doctrine
applied to the facts of the inor-
ganic world, 419-422 ; to evolution,
422-428; to freedom of the will,
428-434.

Plato, his analysis of Hellenic life,
9 ; Berkeley and, 86, 87.

Poe, Edgar Allan, gloom of, the out-
come of wayward idealism, 180.

Pollock, “Spinoza’s Life and Phil-
osophy ” by, 47*5.

Post-Kantian idealism, aim of, 162.

Postulates, Kant’s, of practical rea*
son, 113, 141 ; of science, enriched
by an idealistic iiiterpretfitioii, 272.

Process, the “cyclical,” 328, 334.

Quantity, Hegel’s category of, 218,

220 .

Kahn, Johanna, letters of Fichte to^
147-149.

Rationality, onr chanoe the, of the
infinite, 409-471.

Realism, the assumption of, criti*
cally studied, 311-340. See Nat*
lire and Evolution.

“ Reality and Idealism,’’ Lecture Xli


616


INDEX.


liistorical stady necessary to re-
flective confession, 34L-8^; agp-
nosticisiu as to the causes of expe-
rience, not opposed to idealism,
344-848 ; the Logos not the cause
but the soul of all reality, Ji48-
350; (1) analytic idealism, 351;
the world of knowledge, a world
of ideas, 351,352; their stubborn
reality, 352-354 ; qualities of the
sense-world, ideal, 355-357 ; its
reality known only as a system of
ideas, 357-300 ; hence a universal
mind or an i..iknowable ir, 300-
304; (2) synthetic idealism, the
absolutely unknowable, non-exist-
ent, 305, 300 ; the real world, mind,
307, 308 ; the self, meaning an ob-
ject identical with the larger self
that already has the object, 308-
373 ; tlie reflective larger self real,
in case of truth, 375, 370 ; of error,
370, 377 ; of doubt, 379 ; the unity
of the organic self, 373, 374, 379 ;
the Logos, 374, 379, 380.

Beasori, human, trusted in the seven-
teenth century, 30, 09 ; scrutinized
in the eigliteentli century, 33, Otl ;
by . Locke, 79 ; by Berkeley, 87 ;
by Ilume, 93; by Kant, 118, 470;
theoretical and practical, of Kant,
113, 141; identified by Fichte,
158 ; principle of siiiBcieiit, Scho-
penhauer, 249.

ReHcctioii, internal perception, of
Locke, 84.

Rediscovery of the inner life, period
of, 08-100, 474. See Locke, Berke-
ley, Hume, Kant.

Rcicke, “ Lose Blatter aus Kant^s
Nachlass” by, 121.

“Religious Aspect of Philosophy,'’
cited, 373, 3S2, 383, 411, 414.

Religious interest, two kinds of, 47-
57.

Resignation, mystical, 203, 450, 451.

Richter, Jean Paul, his characterizii-
tion of Schopenhauer’s style, 104,
244 ; of the German empire, 108,
150.

Riehl, “Der Philosophische Kriti-
cismus” by, 122.

Romantic school, the, in philosophy,
104 ; doctrines preceding, of Kant
and Fichte, 104, 105; FichLe’s
arbitrary ethical idealism supple-
mented by, 100-*109; in German


literature, 169 ; the general move'
ment, 170; members of the spe-
cial school, 172; Fichte’s moral
will replaced by emotion, 173, 174 ;
nature a work of unconscious art,
174, 175 ; understood only by men
of genius, 175 ; the philosophical

p attitude of, illustrated by life of

. Schlegel, 170, 177; of Novalia,
177-180 ; Schelliiig, the prince of
romanticists, 181 ; and Caroline,
181-184 ; his “ Naturphilosophie,”
1 84-1 87. Summary and literature,
478. See Schelling.

Rosenkranz, Karl-, biographer of
Hegel, 195, 479.

Rousseau, self-analysis of, 33, 79.

Sanity, the idea of, 128, 129.

Science, natural, the study of, 7, 8,
335, 330 ; recent advance of, 35 ;
coherency in the world of, Kant,
130 ; task of idealism in, 209-274,
348 ; unification of, Spencer, 290-
298; realism and, 312; the realm
of, the world of description, 387-
397 ; its presupposition, the world
of appreciation, 410.

Schelling, prince of romanticists,
181 ; his Spiiiozism, 41, 181 ; and
Caroline, 181-183; Fichte’s doc-
trine of the Ego transformed "^by,
184, 185; objective idealism of,
his “ Naturphilosophie,” 185, 180;
of his “Epicurean Confession of
Faith,” 180-189; development of
his doctrine, 191-193 ; his Identic
tiits Sffstemj 193, 194 ; and Hegel,
193, 194, 218; Irrationalismas of,

I 237. See page 478.

Schiller, and Kant, 103, 104 ; quoted,
142; Goethe and, 170, 171.

Schlegel, Augustus, a romanticist,
172, 181, 478.

SiOilegel, Friedrich, romantic critic,
172; his romanticism, 170, 177.
See page 478.

Schlcicrmachor, the theologian of the
romantic school, 1 72.

Schmidt, Julian, *^Geschichte der
Deutschen J Jteratur seit Lessing’s
Tod ” by, cited, 150, 478.

Schopenhauer, his popular repute,
228, 229; general significance of
pessimism, 229-232 ; development
of idealistic caprice, 233-237 ;
his idealism on a Kantian hasi%


INDEX.


617


28T-230 ; caprice of the world-will,
239, 240; ancestry of, 241; his
temperament and pessimism, 241-
244 ; Richter on his style, 244 ; his
career, 240-250 ; his “ Jlie Welt
als Wille und Vorstellung,’* 250;
the world of experience, our idea,
250 ; space, time, and cause, sub-
jective, 250, 251 ; hence multipli-
city, 251, 252 ; will, the essence of
the world, 252, 253; **That art
Thou,” 253-255 ; art, its embodi-
ment to the contemplative intel-
lect, 255-257 ; opposition of will
and contemplation, 257, 258 ;
Hegel and, 259-261; estimate of
his doctrine, 261-2(i4; transition
from romantic idealism to modern
realism in, 265, 266. Nummary,
and works, 479, 48(J.

Scott, influence of, on history, 279.

Selii<*tion, natural, Darwin’s, 280,
2H7.

Self, absolute, the, with Fichte, 153,
157-1()3 ; with Schelliiig, 193 ; with
Hegel, 224, 492, 493 ; with Scho-
penhauer, 252-255. See Logos.

Self-consciousness, the desire for,
94, 165; without will, no, Scho-
penhauer, 252 ; paradox of Hegel,

. 204-217 ; the reflective, 375, 377,
409, 411-414.

Sensation, as source of ideas, Locke,
83; all sensible qualities, sensa-
tions, Berkeley, 87-90; “inqjres*
sioiis,” Hume, 94.

Shakespeare, Greek tragedy and,
171 ; quoted, 468.

Shelley, his “Prometheus,” 220.

Sill, Edward Rowland, “The Fool’s
Prayer ” by, 405, 406.

Sin, latent, 459 ; actual, 460.

Skepticism, philosophical, nature of,
18-22; value of, 71-74; true atti-
tude toward, 99, 100.

Socrates, Schlegel and, 176.

Solidity, an inference, Berkeley, 89.

Space and time, forms of percep-
tion, with Kant, 152-156, 477 ;
with Schopenhauer, 250-25.3; as
system of ideas, 358, 3.59; form.s
of the world of description, 398,
412 ; antinomies due to false ap-
plication of, to the world of ap-
preciation, 420-422.

Spencer, Herbert, development of
hie philosophy, 294, 205 ; compari-


sou of, with Hobbes, 296; with
Hegel, 296; his synthetic task,
206, 297 ; his formula of evolution,
297, 298 ; his unknowable, 297,
298 ; paradox in union of his
knowable and unknowable, 298,
299; fruitfulness of his system,
293, 294. See Reality and IdeaU
ism.

Spinoza, exemplifies the philosoplik
piety of the seventeenth century,
32, 43 ; opposing views of, 41, 42 ;
his profound character, 42, 43 ; of
Jewisli anceiitry, 41; excouiinitni-
cated, 44; his “ Theologico-Politi-
cad Tractate,” 45, 475; his power
of dispassionate criticism, 45, 46 ;
his adoration of the divine order,
43, 40; tw'o forms of religious
consciousness, 40. 48; (I) the ac-
tive, of St. Chi‘ist(»pher, 47, 48;
(2) the contemplative, of tlie Im-
itation of Christ,” 48, 4‘.*; parallel
between liis mysticism and that of
tlie “Imitation,” 49-.54; his mj's-
ticisin united with a wonderful
temperament of cynicism, 54-57 ;
his doctrine founded upon geomet-
rical methods, 58-09 ; his universal
“Substance,” 00-(>2; its selLex-
pre.ssions, body and mind, ()il-05;
his description in the ‘‘ Ethics ” of
the v/iso man's love of God, 05-
07. Summary, dates, and works,
474, 475.

Stephen, Leslie, “ History of English
Thought in the Eighteenth Cen-
tury” by, 470.

Stirling, J. II., “ Text-Book to Kant ”
by, 194, 470; “Sccrat of Hegel”
by, 479.

“ Storm and Stress ” period of Ger-
man literature, .34.

Strauss, “Life of Jesus” by, 282.

“Substance,” Spinoza’s universal,
00 ; the characteristics of, de-
scribed, 69-(>2 ; its two knowable
self-expressions, body and mind,
03-05 ; in I'elation to Kant, 134,
141 ; to Fichte, 1.58 ; to Hegel,
219.

Sublime, the, Kant on, 110.

Tannhauser, 105.

Tennyson, parallel between the moral
world of, and of Kant, 113.

Thales. 11.


518


niDEX.


That art Thou,’* “ the life of all
these things/* Hindoo phrase ex-
pressive of Schopenhauer's doc-
trine, 258, 255; of the absolute
Self, 307.

Things in themselves, Kant's doc-
trine of, 125-127, 484, 485; re-
jected by Fichte, 141, 152 ; and
others, 104.

Thought, existence the standard as-
surance of, Descartes, 7(); theo-
retical limits of, Kant, 125; the
laws of, the soul of things, Hegel,
222 ; reflective self-consciousness
necessary to uniformity of, and
object, 375-380.

Tieck, Ludwig, a romanticist, 172.

Time, infinite, anomalous division of,
involved in Clifford's definable
endless process, 327, 332-334 ; its
avoidance by a suggested “cycli-
cal *’ physical process, 328-^131,
334 ; tlie theory of double as-
pect,” 422-428. See Space and
Time.

Tolstoi, his mystical resignation, 261.

Tragedy, life a, Schopenhauer, 240,
262-264. See Optimism.

Trendelenbuig, “ Logische Studien *’
by, 479.

Truth, the many-sidedness of, 12-14 ;
“ the whole,” 14-15 ; innate, Des-
cartes, 74 ; a matter of experience,
Locke, 83; its divine lang^iage,
Berkeley, 90 ; Hume's doubts, il4 ;
must be w'on, Kant, 117, 129, 138;
belongs to the moral self, Fichte,
152-156; an affair of genius, ^e
romantic school, 174; the divine
Idee^ Hegel, 224, 492; describ-
able, the outward symbol of the
world of appreciation, 419-428;
the Logos, 3744180, 415-419, 471.

Types, of men, in Spinoza, 54; in
Berkeley, 80; in Hegel, 199; in
Schopenhauer, 244, ^5; of re-
ligious interest, 46, 47, 86; of
pessimism, 245, 246, 461-465 ; of
optimism, 446-450.

Understanding, the, Kant's cate-
gories of, 131, 139, 48:^91 ; He-
gel's universals of, 492-495.

Universals, Hegel's theory of, 222-
226; the Idee not an “abstract
universal,” 492; but the oiganio
totality of true individuals, 492,


493 ; two kinds of, 493, 494 ; theix
different degrees of reality, 494-
496 ; Caird on the higher form of
the, 496-499; transformation of
the lower, into the higher by the
dialectic processes, 500, 501 ; sub-
stance as “a simple whole,” 502;
tliroe phases of the higher, 503;
the Idee 9tA “Person,” 503; ethi-
cal application of the theory of,
503, 504 ; the universal Negativi-
Hit, 505; stages in the study of
the, 505, 506.

“ Unknowable,” Spencer's, 297, 298;
its impossibility, 367.
Upanishads,'' the Hindoo, quoted,
253-255.

Vaihinger, “ Zn Kant's Widorlegung
des Idealismus ” by, quoted, 486-
488.

Van Vloten and Land, a complete
edition of Spinoza by, 475.

Via Dolorosa, 136.

Vision, Berkeley’s theory of, 87-90.

“Vocation of M.an,'' Fichte's, de-
scribed, 160; quoted, 161.

Wagnerian Briinhilde, 257.

Wallace, “Kant” by, 476; “Logic
of Hegel” by, 479; “Life of
Arthur Schopenhauer *’ by, 480!

Waterloo, the battle of, in relation
to the modem historical move-
ment, 276, 281.

Watson, John, ” Selections from
Kant” by, 476; ^Schelling's
Transcendental Idealism ” by, 478.

Waywardness, of Fichte, 155, 166;
as characteristic of the romantic
period, 1(K>, 176, 177, 186.

“Wilhelm Meister,” 171.

Will, the moral world founded on.
Kant, 114, 137; finite wills the
embodiment of the infinite, Fichte,
1.59 all reality the will,
Schopenhauer, 252-256; freedom
of the. 428-434 ; and rationality,
436-438, 469-471.

Windelband, “Die Goschichte der
nenern Philosophie ” by, 232.

World, the, its unity and necessity,
Spinoza, 60-63 ; a divine language,
Berkeley, 90, 91; the laws of,
laws of thought, Kant, 126-132 ;
“ the material for our duty,”
Fichte, 152-154; the manifestw


INDEX.


tion of Bpirit, Schelling*, 102 ; tho
true* an organism, Hegfel, 225, 493 ;
as idea and will, Schopenhauer,
238, 250-253, 260; paradox of,
j£ andlessly consolidating matter.


619

330-340; idealistio inteipretation
of, 341-370; theory of ** double
aspect ** applied to the problems
of, 419— 4ii4 ; “ This world is tb^
world of the Logos,” 471.


692
