The World and the Individual, Vol. 2 (Josiah Royce, 1901)
==========================================================
Completes Royce's Gifford lectures: nature, man, and the moral order. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (worldindividual0002josi).

OPT S 
PSRSE SESE SUSE SE oe ESO E SESE 


v 
BUNGE SER CHORE SANE GEESE 


eA 


PEO 
SS 
REECE 
. Resacass 
VE PEO 
bea tala a AU 
RNeSa eases 


Besa Suse 


as 
OY 


ee 


had 


Loe Ot, 


eDipee 


ee 


x 


Rear 
PURSE SESE OSES 


SUSY 
VSQYOLY 
BNYLIL LOY 


SOO 
ot SAREE N NTN 


Ys nas 
A 


ey 


iN: 


Nese 


~ 


RES e ace 
Mars ae! 
PEON 


aS 
aaa 
NAS 


RAL Sone 
BASRA aR Een en 


iy 


fe 


en 


ss 


é 
a, 


eke 


Py 


Son 


4 
‘ 


» 
Se 


8) 


> 


eit 
Cae 
RARE 
See 
ee 
Ph), 
ey 
OSS 
eat 


NY 
Niatarn! 
RS 


SENS : 
SVE . 
SIGE 
Raa 
ERO 
OP 


wy 
GY 


OL 
Ras 
<P 


S eee 
SOS Pes 
as 


EOE LOD 
RNa RCE ISTE 


ran 
Ca 


Leet) 
Soh 


be 
ROGERS 
Nase 


Yor 
PU aOre 


FP 
a catreeatacatace cece 


Seas 
treegeneatatatatatas 
eeu 

PUA 


be oe 
SPS 


Race eKe 
SONIA Gt 
PS 


Me 


sy 
PAP AP oP? 


PPh 


eae 
FPS, 
eae 
SASS 
ee 


> Le 

POEL OK ‘ 

COA 

CRAM EAR MAIS x 

SALE MEERA MER ALS as 
BOEING 


CARERS 
eee 
Ae 


VOMIT OS, 
SON EEEKER 


rs 


me 


eee 
ees 
eens 


SS 


Racer aes 


a eS 


rary 
PIRI PI OTE 


a 
Pat : 
Bee 


SOS 
. 


x 


Teas 
PUN tear eg tat te cg 
NNN NSE 


. 
PTs 
Een 
SS 

Sarees: 
<a 
Soy 
SS! 
Rss 

epee 


Pees 
Pak 
~ 
Bae 
vw 
NN 
SS 


es OREO 
She SO 


SN, 
bes 


een 
Sas 


PEO? 
Marea tees 


ney 

Ratierenr 
Re 
etree tas 


Saas 
FOGG: 


a 


aaa 
MEAN arte 
At CEA RAS te, 
WME TCu Reece 


CEEOL 
seta ha 


FPO P OI Goats ree 
SOMA reat DML MOS Aan Pa 
AGG 
Bh 


¥ Rerun 
UeNreere eres 


+ 
were ate 
at 


= 
tia 


S 
¥ é 
ee SDUUD 

SR ERMN 


M regtetatas 
masters 


eae 


yh 
aah arae 


¥ 
toy 


Rata 


bs 
St nara 

Seat 
Auheat 


aes Rae 

tees 

EASE aI) 
Sap earns 
Sea atid 


bet ram 
Perera 
Geeta: 
wrahaberayens: 
eit, 
Ata ee 
ae? tee 


YO 


4 Seth 
OY 
OA RRO 
RUG ERR RA 
eae 
HOU OGEeh 
CMR AAACN AACE CI 
RK Ah A EE TLC 
Rone ‘ 


Pa ey 
eRe We eS ee ae 
Cary ar ys ary 


¥, 


* 


te 


nas) 


Fire 
Par 


¥ 


pkey 


f 
oF 


PH Pages 
CAA ee eae 
or 


EA 


k y, 
eeeee 

Srortie 
vie roe 
rer 


te 


Tro eaeee 
AMARA Re Att eate 
PARE Ree RA AAAS: 
CAA Aer Mees Res 
MAAAAL ELAR EAE E RA Ed RRS 
PPP Dar Pes SMS 
FPP PIS Le Pop Por Fe 
ADM AA SAAS ie 
bes eK 
Yor 


cP iPaParey 
Pore rar 
SOL Sais 


Seana Ute 


Wee ee 
IIIT OVI TINT. 
WER AMAA Nee 
FIDL D IIH 
VII, 
FO. 
TARE A fA 
ae AN ea 
PI TL DIT III 
FIIS, 
a6 
? 


iA 


: 
For fants 


x 
FRIIS 


Feo 
TTI RAIS 

thd the 
FOOT 


Se 


FOF rr 


7. 
LFS A SAID I PIS 


eee Pate 
Frere 


Eats 
PIG IF eor 


tee ee 
Ppp aes 
ARE a 


PAAR AM Ne AoA 
PPI ITD EPID 


CREME Mee aes 


aed 
7 


FSS 


LT IIe 
VIR FI IP III, 


VIAS ISS 
FIAT IGS 7. 


y 


7 
bd 7 
vy RSLS. 

VK, vy. 

4 VIS LISTS. 
, 

VIII IS» 


“ 
“4 


VAIS. 


tte 
SANS: 
oad 


rh, 
SIIL ISI ILI: 
SEE SEEMS PA ded tie 


ry, 
hes 
ate 

ny 
sats 
PF PES 


PTL SF IPSS ED 
FOV RIP STP 


AA 
Pry 

VIII L ISS, 

EMAC EK: 

PY ILI I III IIE 
PISS ILS SLIP IIS. 
ERASE SMEG 
FV GSE 


ay PPL 
ey. tas 


L49 
VISIT IS 
MILE 

PASI SAY 


y 
¥. 


ee 
ES 


ow? know nothing in its cause} for truth lies 
hid # depth and distance.” —DEMOGRITUS. 

‘¥s man is wise while in pursuits wisdom ; 
a fool when he thinks it to be mastere THE 


* 


THE WORLD AND THE INDIVIDUAL 


GIFFORD LECTURES 


THE WORLD AND THE 
INDIVIDUAL 


Gifford Lectures 
Delivered before the Anibersity of Aberdeen 


SECOND SERIES 


NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


BY 


JOSIAH ROYCE, Pu.D., LL.D. (Aserpzen) 


PROFESSOR OF THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY 
IN HARVARD UNIVERSITY 


New Bork 


THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 
LONDON: MACMILLAN & CO., Lap. 
1901 


All rights reserved 


Coryrigut, 1901, > 


By THE MACMILLAN COMPANY. i ; 
——. : 


dV e%1S 


MARL OR ite 


VPA AAT yy Te 
vy Aa% eae ¢ 


PREFACE 


THE discussions upon which the present volume is 
based formed the second and concluding series of my 
Gifford Lectures on “The World and the Individual.” 
They were delivered before the University of Aberdeen 
in January, 1900. The delay in publishing them is 
largely due to the revision to which I have subjected 
the original manuscript. This revision amounts, in a por- 
tion of the lectures, to a rewriting, and has also come to 
include statements and arguments that I had not pre- 
viously put into shape at all. These additions have 
caused me, in some cases, more trouble than I had antici- 
pated, and more, as I hope, than the text will directly 
make manifest to the reader. 

The general need for such changes did not spring, I am 
sure, from any lack of effort on my part to adapt the 
lectures, actually read at Aberdeen, to their announced 
purpose. The variety and the complexity of the topics 
of the present volume require the printed book to contain 
much that could not have been adequately stated in any 
oral discussion; while these same characters of my sub- 
ject-matter led, at some points, to a diffuseness in the 
original lectures which I found it possible to abbreviate 
in preparing the volume for publication. In the public 
lecture-room the hearer has no time to meditate, and the 


speaker too little opportunity to be either concise or 
v 


vi PREFACE 


exhaustive. While some of the same general grounds 
for a change from the originally prepared text existed in 
case of the revision of my former series of these lectures, 
they proved to be less effective than here, since, in that 
series, the single problem of the Conception of Being 
dominated the entire discussion, while here the relations 
of the Theory of Being to various problems of empirical 
research, and to the demands of our ethical consciousness, 
have complicated the undertaking. 

The scope of this closing volume includes a sketch of 
an idealistic Theory of Human Knowledge, an outline 
of a Philosophy of Nature, a doctrine about the Self, a 
discussion of the origin and destiny of the Human Indi- 
vidual, a summary consideration of the world as a Moral 
Order, a study of the Problem of Evil, and, finally, an 
estimate of all these views in the light of what seem 
to me to be the interests of Natural Religion. This is a 
large and manifold programme. It was required of me 
by my interpretation of my task as Gifford lecturer. I 
well know how inadequate the consideration of each 
topic has necessarily proved to be. 

As to the first of these topics, — the idealistic Theory 
of Knowledge, — what I here have to say is founded upon 
studies which I began as a student at the Johns Hopkins 
University in 1876-1878. The first formulation of these 
studies I made in my thesis for the Doctorate at that 
University. A further stage of my inquiry was pub- 
lished in 1881, in a paper on Kant’s Relation to Modern 
Philosophical Progress, printed in the Journal of Specu- 
lative Philosophy of that year. The interpretation of 
our knowledge of finite facts as largely due to an active 


PREFACE Vii 


“acknowledgment,” whose significance is ethical, rather 
than to a mere passive acceptance of “given” contents 
of present experience, was insisted upon in the conclud- 
ing section of that paper. When, in preparing my Reli- 
gious Aspect of Philosophy (published in 1885), I had 
definitely passed over from my earlier sceptical position 
to the constructive Idealism that I have ever since en- 
deavored to work out, I attempted at once to take up 
this former view of our finite knowledge into what was 
then, in my own personal growth, a new doctrine as to 
the nature of the Absolute. In 1892, in my Spirit of 
Modern Philosophy, I essayed a still further development 
of this theory regarding human knowledge, in the lecture 
entitled The World of Description and the World of Appre- 
ciation. Since then, in the paper called Self-consciousness, 
Social Consciousness, and Nature, published as one of my 
Studies of Good and vil (1898), as well as in other 
essays, I have attempted to apply the same essential view 
to the explanation of the bases and characteristics of 
our human knowledge of the physical world. In recent 
years I have been much interested in comparing my 
views about this matter with those of my colleague and 
friend, Professor Miinsterberg, who has independently 
reached a somewhat similar doctrine regarding the two- 
fold nature and basis of what he also consents to call our 
“descriptive” and our “appreciative” knowledge. This 
topic, as well as the ethically significant character of our 
“acknowledgment” of facts, has been discussed sum- 
marily in Professor Miinsterberg’s book, entitled Psy- 
chology and Life, and, more exhaustively, in his important 
Grundziige der Psychologie (Vol. I, 1900). In giving 


vill PREFACE 


final form to my present statement, I have undoubtedly 
felt the influence both of these expressed opinions of 
Professor Miinsterberg, and of the admirable monograph 
by Professor Rickert entitled Der Gegenstand der Er- 
kenntniss, —a work to which Professor Miinsterberg first 
called my attention, shortly after its publication in 1892. 

In my own former accounts, so far as they bore upon 
this doctrine, the contrast between these two types of 
human knowledge, the “descriptive” and the “ apprecia- 
tive,” has been made to depend solely upon the difference 
between the “social” and the “individual” points of 
view. I still defend, and, in the fourth lecture of this 
volume I expound afresh, the thesis that the contrast 
between our “descriptive” knowledge of the physical 
world and our “appreciative” knowledge of the facts of 
finite life, is determined precisely by this difference be- 
tween our social consciousness of what is “valid for all 
individuals” and our personal consciousness of what is 
valid for the Self. But it is true that one must still seek 
within the consciousness of the individual Self for the 
motives that make it logically possible for this Self to 
regard the abstraction called “a view valid for all indi- 
viduals” as a possible abstraction. We must show how 
the Self can make such a view the object of its own con- 
templation in any sense whatever. For the human Self, 
although (as I have shown in the course of these lec- 
tures) it comes to be aware of itself in terms of its social 
contrast with other Selves, still (in so far as it has be- 
come self-conscious at all) acknowledges its objects as 
valid, in the first place, from its own point of view, and 
not from the point of view of another Self, How comes 


PREFACE ix 


it, then, to interpret its world of facts as such that 
another Self could find these same facts, or some aspect 
of them, to be also its own facts? The power to make 
this abstraction, however much social intercourse is needed 
to give it definition, must have its logical roots in the 
consciousness of the Individual. Accordingly, in the 
second lecture, I have here presented a theory of how far 
the general contrast between the World of Description 
and the World of Appreciation can be logically (not 
psychologically) defined, apart from explicitly social ex- 
periences, on the basis of a certain contrast that arises 
between two aspects of the inner personal consciousness 
of any intelligent individual whose relations to the world 
are such as are our human relations. This logical deduc- 
tion of the primal contrast between the “descriptive” 
and the “appreciative” points of view does not set aside 
my still emphasized doctrine that both the psychological 
development and the concrete logical application of the 
categories of the World of Description are possible only 
under essentially social conditions. For, as I point out 
on p. 96, sqqg., of the text, the World of Description is 
essentially a world of abstractions, valid for the Self only 
in so far as it conceives itself as at present unable to 
find how the facts express its own conscious purpose, and, 
consequently, valid for the Self only in so far as the Self, 
in its submissiveness, conceives these facts as also valid 
for an indefinite number of other points of view, which 
it has not yet made its own. Thus, within the individual 
consciousness, I point out one of the roots from which 
the more abstract interpretation of the world that is 
“valid for all” the members of a society grows. My 


x PREFACE 


present account of the logical basis of the “descriptive ” 
view of things is therefore a supplement to my former 
discussions. This present account contains, moreover, a 
good many elements which are to me, as I think that 
they will be to others, decidedly new, so that the result- 
ing view of the theory of our finite knowledge is at any 
rate not the conventional one. The views here ex- 
pressed, so far as they are new, have been, in my own 
mind, the outcome of an effort to study some of the 
recent literature of the Logic of Mathematics, — a region 
in which the Supplementary Essay of the former vol- 
ume of these lectures sought for light. The second lec- 
ture of the present volume carries still further the train 
of thought of which that Supplementary Essay was a 
part. Whatever my success or failure, I am convinced 
that such study of the Logic of Mathematics is a region 
where the philosophical student of to-day ought to work. 
I call special attention here to the doctrine of the two 
forms of Serial Order, and to their respective relations 
to the “descriptive” and “appreciative ” points of view. 

The Theory of Time and Eternity which follows, in 
my third lecture, was briefly outlined in one passage of 
the former volume, but is here developed at length. It 
is of central importance for all the problems of the later 
lectures. 

The cosmological discussions which follow, in the fourth 
and fifth lectures, constitute a deliberate effort to mediate 
between Idealism and our human experience of Nature. 
I have tried to show that an idealist is not obliged either 
to ignore or to make light of physical facts in order to 
maintain his theory of the Absolute. That the latter 


PREFACE x1 


theory is, in the only reasonable sense, itself an empirical 
doctrine, I have set forth in the former series of these 
lectures. Here I attempt to point out what links connect 
our general idealistic interpretation of all experience with 
our special interpretation of our experience of Nature. 
Hypotheses are, in such an undertaking, unavoidable. 
I pretend only to provisional views regarding all the 
details of the discussion. But that one has a right to 
such hypotheses, at the present stage of our knowledge, 
I have tried to make plain so far as my space has 
permitted. 

In these first five lectures of the present series, I have 
come nearest to the ground which was covered by the 
much more thorough and closely reasoned lectures of my 
predecessor in the Gifford Lectureship at Aberdeen, Dr. 
James Ward. I had intended to find room in the text 
for some discussion of the volumes entitled Naturalism 
and Agnosticism, in which these lectures appeared. But 
discovering that I could not adequately deal with Dr. 
Ward’s volumes under the present conditions, I have 
preferred to leave until a future opportunity a treatment 
of the relations between his views and mine. Apart 
from such usually minor differences of opinion as exist 
between us, I feel that the two lines of argument are 
complementary to each other. Dr. Ward has approached 
the problem of our knowledge of Nature from the side 
of a criticism of special doctrines that have been held, 
and of special problems of science. I have made the 
topic one to which my previously stated general theory 
of Being is to be applied. At certain points, as I have 
been rejoiced to find, we have independently reached the 


xii PREFACE 


same special statements both of our questions and of our 
solutions, although by very different roads. Dr. Ward’s 
account, in his second volume, of the unity of the uni- 
versal and the individual experience, his treatment of the 
dualism which has come to make the two seem divided, 
his consequent criticism of the mechanical conception of 
Nature, —all these are matters with which I find myself 
in close agreement. I shall be glad indeed if my own 
much more superficial discussion of this portion of my 
task can be of any service to the readers of his work. 
From Nature these lectures pass to the Human Self. 
Characteristic of this part of the argument, and of pre- 
vious statements of my own upon the same topic, are: my 
entire willingness to lay aside all assertion of the exist- 
ence of a substantial Soul; my unreserved acceptance of 
the empirical evidence regarding the dependence of the 
Human Self, for its temporal origin, for its development, 
and for its preservation in its present form of life, upon 
physical and social conditions; and my insistence that 
various Selves can possess, in the whole or in a part of 
their lives, identically the same experiences, so that one 
Self can originate, or can develope within another Self, 
and so that the lives of various Selves can be interwoven 
in the most complex ways. The known empirical facts 
of “multiple personality” possess nothing surprising for 
such a doctrine. The individual Human Self appears, in 
my account, as a part of the Selfhood of the race. Social 
intercommunication amongst Selves is explained as a phe- 
nomenal indication that they share in a common larger 
Selfhood. The phenomenal dependence of Mind upon 
Matter is interpreted as another sort of evidence whereby 


PREFACE Xili 


our personal participation in the various forms and stages 
of Selfhood that are present in Nature is indicated. No 
facts upon which Materialism has ever based its argu- 
ments need be either overlooked or belittled by such a 
view. Death, for my theory, no longer appears as a “sun- 
dering of soul and body.” Dualism in the interpretation 
of the relations of the Self and its environment is wholly 
laid aside. And yet, as I undertake to show, no spiritual 
possession of the true Self is endangered, no aspect of 
its ethical dignity is belittled, no sense in which it is 
near to God is called in question by this very doctrine 
of the temporal origin, and of the social, physical, and 
divine relations of the Self. The reconciliation of our 
natural knowledge about the Self with our Idealism and 
with our fundamental religious interests, is indicated, in 
these discussions, in a fashion that I believe to be, to a 
considerable extent, new. If my views have any cohe- 
rence, the importance of the subject ought to insure for 
them a serious hearing. They are, again, not the con- 
ventional views about the Human Self. 

As to the problem of Immortality, it is one that I long 
deliberately declined, as a student of philosophy, to dis- 
cuss in any formal way, because, for years after I pub- 
lished, in my Religious Aspect of Philosophy, my first 
statement of that general idealistic view of Being which 
I have ever since maintained, I was not clear as to how 
the general doctrine ought to apply to the case of the 
finite Individual. The problem of Individuality, as I 
have since more clearly seen, and, in the first series of 
these lectures, have explained at length, is the most cen- 
tral and important one in the idealistic Theory of Being. 


xiv PREFACE 


I felt this fact, although with less clearness, from the 
first. I was of course sure, from the time of the first 
statement of my doctrine, that I attributed conscious 
individuality to the Absolute; and I plainly insisted, in 
my Religious Aspect of Philosophy, that, in the Absolute, 
all finite individual lives, wills, meanings are consciously 
recognized, fulfilled, and justly expressed, precisely as 
they deserve to be. But I was not clear as to what 
consequences were involved in this thesis when one ap- 
plied it to the question as to the continued existence 
of this man, as he at present conceives himself. Now a 
philosophical student waits for light; and does not teach 
a doctrine until he finds light about that doctrine; and 
is careless what other people think of the practical value 
of his teachings, so long as he is conscious that he is sin- 
cerely looking for truth. I can at all events say that my 
own little contribution to the doctrine of Immortality, 
such as it is, has been no product either of a feverish 
desire for the endurance of my private consciousness, or 
of a similar longing regarding any friend of mine, or of 
any wish to conform to the traditional lore upon the 
subject. In my discussion with Professor Howison (pub- 
lished in the book called The Conception of God), in my 
more recent Ingersoll Lecture on The Conception of Im- 
mortality (published at Boston in 1900), and, finally, in 
the present volume, I have simply reported the results 
to which meditation on the nature of the Ethical Self 
and on the place of Individuality in the Theory of Being 
have led me. To make clearer my personal equation, I 
may add that, since childhood, I have never had any 
faith about the problem of Immortality except in so far 


PREFACE xv 


as I have seemed to myself to see philosophical reasons 
for such faith, and that I regard the whole issue as one 
for reason, in precisely the sense in which the properties 
of prime numbers and the kinetic theory of gases are 
matters for exact investigation. That all our beliefs 
about truth of any grade and that all theories have a 
practical meaning, I do indeed explicitly teach. That, 
in fact, as my reader will see, is my whole philosophy. 
But the process of coming to consciousness as to what 
we can rationally desire, mean, and believe, as the ful- 
filment of our highest purposes, is a process in which 
private desires must be subordinated. We must obey 
in order to triumph. And such obedience, for the stu- 
dent of philosophy, takes the form of a cool reflection 
and a patient wandering in the wilderness of ignorance 
until he sees the road home. That has been my own 
method in dealing with the problem of Immortality. 

My treatment of the Problem of Evil, in the eighth 
and ninth lectures of the present volume, is inevitably, 
in the main, a restatement of what I have elsewhere 
repeatedly discussed. Yet I have tried to bring to light 
several new aspects of this issue, in particular its relation 
to the theory of the Temporal and the Eternal. The 
doctrine of Freedom and of the Moral Order, as pre- 
sented in my later lectures, touches upon several matters 
that I have not before formally discussed. The discus- 
sion of the Union of God and Man, in the closing lec- 
ture, will also, as I hope, appeal to some theologically 
minded fellow-students as containing some relatively 
novel suggestions. 

In sum, these lectures have tried to be not a perfunc- 


Xvi PREFACE 


tory defence of the faith, and not a mere repetition of the 
common tradition of modern Idealism, but the expression 
of an individual experience of the problems at issue. I 
do not want to make mere disciples; but I hope that I 
have helped some fellow-students toward a clearer knowl- 
edge of God and of themselves. Such knowledge, how- 
ever, they can never get by merely accepting my views. 
They must use their own labor. 

My further acknowledgments are still due to many 
helpers. First, I must here remember my own pupils, 
whose criticisms have frequently aided me,—in particular, 
my friend, Dr. Richard Cabot, who for years has stood by 
me with counsel, encouragement, and criticism, even while, 
from time to time, he has found room, amidst the duties 
of his own medical profession, for some continuance of 
his philosophical studies in connection with my Seminary 
at Harvard; and Mr. Reginald Robbins, who, while also 
an occasional member of my Seminary, has written sey- 
eral closely reasoned criticisms of my work, by which 
I have profited more than he knows. My indebtedness 
to the influence of Mr. Charles Peirce continues in the 
present volume, remote as my views often are from his. 
And in closing the task that for two years gave me an 
official relation to the University of Aberdeen, I must 
especially acknowledge my indebtedness to my colleagues 
there, and to colleagues in the other Scottish Universities 
with whom I came in contact during my two visits. In 
particular, Professors W. R. Sorley (now of Cambridge, 
England) and W. L. Davidson, not only brightened my 
stay by their kindness, but aided me, by their counsel, in 
adapting especially this second course of lectures to its 


PREFACE xvli 


academic purpose. To the Senatus of the University of 
Aberdeen I offer, as my last word, not only my thanks 
for the opportunity which that body gave me to put into | 
this form my philosophical studies, and for the kind 
hospitality shown to me personally, but my cordial recog- 
nition of the interest thus expressed in closer relations 
between Scottish and American University life and work. 
May we learn still further the arts of codperation with 
our brethren. 


CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS, 
September 29, 1901. 


CONTENTS 


LECTURE I 
THE RECOGNITION oF Facts . . 5 

LECTURE II 
Tue LINKAGE OF Facts 

LECTURE III 
THE TEMPORAL AND THE ETERNAL . - 

LECTURE IV 
PuyYsicAL AND SocraAL REALITY 3 ° 

LECTURE V 
Tue INTERPRETATION OF NATURE . : 

LECTURE VI 


Ture Human SELF 5 A ‘ 
LECTURE VII 


Tur PLACE OF THE SELF IN BEING. 


LECTURE VIII 


Tue Mora ORDER 


PAGE 


43 


109 


153 


205 


243 


279 


333 


Xx CONTENTS 


LECTURE IX 


Tue Srrua@cLe with Evin 


LECTURE X 


THE Union or Gop AND Man. 


4, Pia 
acs 


THE WORLD AND THE INDIVIDUAL 


SECOND SERIES: VATURE, MAN, AND THE 
MORAL ORDER 


LECTURE I 
INTRODUCTION: THE RECOGNITION OF FACTS 


WITH no question is the student of Philosophy more 
familiar than with the inquiry: Of what bearing upon 
life are the studies in which you are engaged? This 
challenge, when uttered by one not engaged in the study 
of philosophy, comes home with especial force to the 
investigator of the fundamental problems of metaphysics. 
For such problems are, upon their face, of the most uni- 
versal character. It would seem as if their significance 
for the whole business of every man ought to be imme- 
diately obvious, unless indeed the philosopher who ex- 
pounds them has failed in his task. What concerns any 
man more than his place in the world, and the meaning 
of the world in which he is to find this place? 

But when the layman listens to the actual teachings 
of students of philosophy, as they discourse concerning 
knowledge and being, concerning truth and duty, and 
when, after listening, such a layman then asks afresh, 
“What is it that I have learned about my life, and my 
duty, and my world of daily business?” —the answer of 
many a listener is too well known: *“T have learned,” 

B 1 


2 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


such an one will often say, “not at all what I hoped to 
learn. I have learned that problems are intricate, and 
that truth is far away. I have learned how little the 
wise men see, and so I am fain to turn back again to life, 
that I may there find how much the good men do. The 
philosophers do not help me as they promised. Action 
is more enlightening than speculation. I will work while 
it is called the day, but I will not try, like the philoso- 
phers, to look with naked eyes upon the sun of truth. 
Such researches only hinder me.” 

Both this confession of too many listeners to philosophi- 
cal discourses, and the resulting question to which I have 
just referred, are to nobody more familiar, I have said, 
than to the student of philosophy himself. Nobody, in 
fact, ought to know better than he does the limitations of 
mere speculation. Does he not often feel them bitterly 
himself? Is not the imperfection of what he would like 
to call his wisdom, brought home to him at every moment 
when he has his own practical problems to solve? But 
a confession of weakness is not a cry of despair. Part of 
the business of life, and no small part of it, is to learn 
to live with our inevitable defects, and to make the best 
of them. The inevitable defects of philosophical study 
are to nobody clearer than to one who, sincerely loving 
philosophy, devotes his life, as best he can, to seeking 
clearness of thought and a soul-stirring vision of the 
truth. The way of reflection is long. The forest of our 
common human ignorance is dark and tangled. Happy 
indeed are those who are content to live and to work 
only in regions where the practical labors of civilization 
have cleared the land, and where the task of life is to 


INTRODUCTION: THE RECOGNITION OF FACTS 8 


till the fertile fields and to walk in the established ways. 

The philosopher, in the world of thought, is by destiny. 
forever a frontiersman. To others he must often seem 

the mere wanderer. He knows best himself how far he 

wanders, and how often he seems to be discovering only 

new barrenness in the lonely wilderness. 

Yet if such defects are to be freely confessed, and if 
the philosopher even glories in them, because they are 
for him a part of the search for truth, the practical good 
sense of mankind is to be respected when it demands that 
the solitary labors of the seeker for truth shall in the end 
be submitted, not only to those theoretical tests which 
philosophy recognizes as, in its own domain, the only 
decisive ones, but also to the social and ethical judg- 
ment of practical men. The truth of a philosophy is 
indeed a matter for reason alone; but the justification 
of the pursuit of philosophy as one of the tasks to which 
a man’s life may honestly be devoted, requires a recogni- 
tion of the common interests of all men. The frontiers- 
man may wander; but he must some day win what shall 
belong to the united empire of human truth. Those are 
wrong who ask him merely to stay at home. He wan- 
ders because he must; and God is to be found also in the 
wildernesses and in the solitary places of thought. But 
those are right who ask that the student of philosophy 
shall find, if he succeeds at all, a living truth; and that 
the God of the wilderness, if indeed he be the true God, 
shall show himself also as the keeper of the city. 

Now, in the former series of these lectures, appealing 
as a student of philosophy to fellow-students, I undertook 
what was, from the start, and confessedly, a wandering 


4 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


into the most problematic regions of theory. And 
in the present course, especially in the earlier lectures, 
I shall still be busy with highly theoretical issues, and 
I shall still appeal, above all, to my fellow-students. 
But we have now won the philosophical right, and have 
become subject to the practical obligation, not only thus 
to follow out our theoretical interests, but also to show 
how the philosophy set forth in our earlier lectures stands 
related to the more immediate problems of life. I shall 
devote the present lectures, in the main, to considerations 
that, however abstract they may seem, are meant to help 
us towards an interpretation of Man’s place in the uni- 
verse ; and I shall be guided by a determination to attempt, 
before I am done, a definition of man’s nature, duty, and 
destiny. The former lectures emphasized the World; 
the present course shall be directed towards an under- 
‘standing of the Human Individual. The previous dis- 
cussion dealt with the Theory of Being; the aim of 
what is to come shall be a doctrine about Life. This 
doctrine will still belong to philosophy ; but its outcome 
shall have to do with the practical interests of Religion. 

The order which has so far been followed is, indeed, 
as I must hold, the only order for a student of philoso- 
phy. Therein, if you please, is just where lies the practi- 
cal defect of philosophy, — viz. in that it can only reach 
the civilized realm of our daily business by the way of 
the wilderness of solitary reflection; that it must first, 
to use Emerson’s word, meet God in the bush, so that 
only later, and painfully, it learns to find him in the 
mart and the crowded street. I confess the defect. I 
want to show also some of the excellencies of the very 


INTRODUCTION: THE RECOGNITION OF FACTS 5 


way which this defect has required me to follow. Faith 
has its glories; but the hard toil of critical reflection 
brings its own rewards. None prize the home-coming 
more than those who wander farthest. 


I 


My first task, in the present lecture, is to indicate in 
what spirit the Theory of Being, to whose definition and 
defence the first series of these lectures was devoted, is 
hereafter to be applied to the treatment of the more 
special problems of experience and of life. Our Theory 
of Being had especially this character, namely that it 
did not undertake to demonstrate a priort what par- 
ticular facts we should meet with anywhere in the 
world, but that it did undertake to show us a certain 
method whereby we ought to proceed in attempting to 
estimate those facts, to interpret them, to find what 
rank they held in the realm of Being. People come 
with false expectations to philosophy when they expect 
it to furnish them any substitute for special science, any 
peculiar power to anticipate the particular results of 
experience, any intuitive capacity to see in the finite 
world facts that other methods of inquiry have not made 
evident. For the primary purpose of a Theory of Being 
is not thus to discover what special finite beings are 
real, but to interpret the sense in which any fact what- 
ever can be real. Its application, therefore, does not 
come in advance of experience. On the contrary, it is 
a critical study of the meaning of experience, which it 
therefore presupposes. And we are now to endeavor to 
find of what nature such applied Philosophy may be. 


6 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


For just in such application lies, as we shall come to 
see, the peculiarly intimate relation between what is 
deepest in philosophy, and what is truest and most abid- 
ing in religion. Some people have expected the philos- 
opher to construct for them, a priort, a precise scheme 
of all things in heaven and in earth. But just so other 
people have looked to their religious faith to tell them, 
in advance, their private fortune, to assure them that 
their days would be long, their flocks prosperous, and 
their health abounding. And just as too enthusiastic 
students have thus anticipated from philosophy a certain 
magical insight regarding the detailed structure of na- 
ture and of man, so an unenlightened generation has 
asked its religious teachers for signs and wonders, and 
has held that the true faith must manifest itself through 
special Providences. But the one hope is as little 
founded in the deeper spirit of reasonableness as is the 
other; and the demand for a direct sign from heaven 
is not the abiding expression, either of the religious or 
of the philosophical consciousness. 

Applied philosophy is like practical religion. It 
illumines life, but it gives no power to use the arts of 
the medicine man. What religion practically gives to 
the faithful is not the means for predicting what is 
about to happen to themselves, but the strength to 
endure hardness as good soldiers. Religious faith 
involves no direct access to the special counsels of 
God; but it inspires the believer with assurance that 
all things work together for good, and endows him with 
readiness to serve in his station the God who is All in 
all. Such religion is not, then, the power to work 


INTRODUCTION: THE RECOGNITION OF FACTS 7% 


miracles, but it is the wisdom to find in all things, 
however obscure, or fragmentary, the expressions, how- 
ever mysterious, of the Divine Love. The faith of the 
devout does not forewarn them as to the future, nor 
does it annul the value of worldly prudence; but it 
makes them glad to suffer, and willing to wait, and 
sure that however far off God seems, he actually is 
near. Now what faith accomplishes in the daily prac- 
tice of the devout, a Theory of Being must also under- 
take, in so far as it is successful, to provide for us in 
our efforts to understand Nature and Man. 

What we men call Nature comes to us as a matter of 
our extremely finite common experience. In dealing with 
nature, we feel our way ; we pass from fact to fact; we 
collect fragments. When our special sciences succeed in 
joining these fragments into some sort of empirical unity, 
the procedure is distinctly human, and the result is al- 
ways provisional. Now no philosophy can predetermine 
in this realm, either what special facts shall be observed, 
or what particular hypotheses as to their connection shall 
first be attempted, or what provisional theories shall 
prove best adapted to the purpose of any special science. 
Philosophy is powerless to act as a substitute for special 
science, precisely as it is powerless to add to the prod- 
ucts of the industrial arts. It is as unable to formulate a 
thesis in the realms properly belonging to physics or to 
biology as it is to build a steam engine. 

And in the same way, when we deal with Man, — with 
the concrete issues of his daily life, — with the problems 
of private passion or of public policy, we have to do, 
primarily, with human nature as it is, and with all the 


8 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


unconquerable naiveté of our desires, of our imperfec- 
tions, and even of our virtues. Philosophy does not 
create men, but reflectively considers their life. And 
man is as full of mystery as is the rest of nature, and is 
known to our experience as a mere fragment of a whole 
whose inmost unity is far beyond the reach of our pres- 
ent form of consciousness. Psychology, viewed as one 
of the special sciences, studies man; and so also do all 
the human branches of inquiry, — political science, eco- 
nomics, anthropology. Philosophy cannot predetermine 
the course and the outcome of any of these sciences. 
The Theory of Being is not based upon our knowledge 
of any such special regions of experience, but is due to a 
thoroughgoing reflection upon the presuppositions of all 
experience. In its turn the Theory of Being teaches us 
neither anthropology nor psychology, neither economics 
nor politics. Into such regions the philosopher, as phi- 
losopher, enters like any other layman, to learn the facts if 
he desires to know them, but not as one endowed with 
any magic power of divination. 

And yet, just as the devout are required by their 
religious faith to see God’s hand in whatever happens, 
and to view their life as his constant revelation of his 
will, although they can work no miracles, and cannot 
tell what a day shall bring forth; just so our philoso- 
phy, if indeed our former Theory of Being was sound, 
has its strength in the general interpretation of the facts, 
when once they have been found. The Theory of Being 
requires us to view every fact of nature, and of man’s 
life, as a fragmentary glimpse of the Absolute life, as 
a revelation, however mysterious and to us men now in 


INTRODUCTION: THE RECOGNITION OF FACTS 9 


detail illegible, of the unity of the perfect Whole. Why 
we hold this to be a true theory, we have set forth at 
length in the foregoing series of lectures; and the de- 
tailed proof of the general thesis concerns us here no 
longer. But the spirit in which we are to apply our 
doctrine to the theory of our knowledge of particular 
facts, and to the interpretation of such facts, interests us 
here in much the same way in which practical religion 
is interested in the spirit that the faithful ought to pre- 
serve amidst the cares and sorrows of daily life. What 
is it to believe, as the faithful do, that God is in all their 
fortunes? What is it to maintain, as our Theory of Be- 
ing does, that, amidst all the complexities of Nature and 
man’s life, we are dealing with fragmentary glimpses of 
an Absolute Unity, of the type depicted in our foregoing 
series of lectures? The two problems, in many respects, 
resemble each other. What you already know of the 
solution of one problem goes far to prepare you for the 
other. 


II 


The scope and the proposed order of the present series 
of lectures may be more precisely indicated as follows : — 

I shall begin our inquiry by a preliminary study of 
some of the conditions that are characteristic of our 
human type of knowledge. Knowledge, such as we have 
of particular facts, is only one special case of what we can 
and do conceive as the range of the possible forms of 
knowledge. Not only theology and philosophy, but also, 
as we shall see, the empirical sciences themselves depend 
upon conceiving of higher types of knowledge, higher 


10 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


“forms of consciousness,” than our human type, as at 
least possible. By contrast with such ideally definable 
higher types of insight we constantly become aware of 
our own limitations as human seekers for truth. We 
shall, accordingly, try to characterize in general terms 
some of the most marked limitations and powers of man’s 
intellect. As we do so we shall be led to state the first 
principles of a theory of the Organization of Human 
Experience. Kant’s problem of the Categories, which 
determine in what way we conceive the objects of human 
knowledge, and which also, in giving form to our experi- 
ence, define the unity that we ascribe to Nature and to 
our own life, is one that we can only touch upon very 
briefly. But so far as our time permits, we must outline 
our view as to the essential forms in terms of which we 
conceive concrete facts and their connections. Upon the 
basis of the general theory of human knowledge thus 
broadly sketched, we shall next pass to a study of the 
questions offered to our scrutiny by Nature, when 
viewed in its relation to Man. Here our main purpose 
shall be to apply our general idealistic doctrine, concern- 
ing what is meant by Reality in general, to the problem 
as to the sense in which Nature and Man are real. 

' In case of Nature we have to deal with a realm whose 
material seeming, whose unchanging laws, and whose ap- 
parent indifference to all individual interests, and to all 
ethical ideals, constitute a formidable obstacle in the way 
of every interpretation of Reality in the interest of the re- 
ligious consciousness. It will be our task to scrutinize the 
reasons that make Nature wear, to our vision, this forbid- 
ding aspect. Hereby we shall be led especially to consider 


INTRODUCTION: THE RECOGNITION OF FACTS 11 


the centrally important place that Man, when viewed as a 
product of Nature, occupies in our ordinary views about 
the cosmos. And so the development of our Metaphysics 
of Nature will enable us, before we are done, to sketch an 
hypothesis as to the meaning of the processes known to 
us men, at present, under the now favorite name Evolu- 
tion. The sense in which Nature is a realm of fixed law 
will also engage our attention ; and in the same connec- 
tion we shall prepare the way for our theory of the Free- 
dom of the Will. Passing over, after we have studied 
these problems, to what is properly called the Moral 
World, we shall, in our closing lectures, apply our general 
interpretation of Being to a study of the Human Self, 
of its Place in Being, and of the Moral Order, to a 
consideration of the problem of Evil, and finally to 
a statement of what seem to us to be the results of 
Idealism regarding the final relations of the Absolute 
and the human Individual, or in ordinary speech, of God 
and Man. In this connection we shall be led to state 
briefly our own thesis regarding Immortality. Herewith 
the task of these lectures will be completed. 


III 


I pass to the promised general considerations regard- 
ing the limitations of our human type of knowledge, and 
regarding the organization of experience. 

_ All knowledge is of matters of experience, — this prin- 
ciple we ourselves have maintained as part of our Ideal- 
ism. But what does this proposition mean when applied 


12 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


to the case of human knowledge? Whose experience is in 
question when we speak of truth? 

By any man’s private experience, taken in the narrowest 
sense of the words, we mean what a man now has present 
to his consciousness. As I speak, I am conscious that 
these words are now uttered. This is present experience. 
You have a corresponding present experience as you 
listen. One’s whole present consciousness of his meaning, 
t.e. of what we before called the Internal Meaning of his 
ideas, is, in a similarly limited sense, empirical. But the 
term experience, as customarily employed when our human 
science is said to be founded upon experience, is used in a 
much broader sense. The term, as thus applied, refers to 
a wide range of facts which are said to have been expe- 
rienced by various men at various times. But, as we had 
occasion to point out in the Eighth Lecture of our former 
series,! it cannot be asserted that any human experience 
(taking that word in the narrowest sense) ever makes 
present to any man the fact that various men besides him- 
self have their various experiences present to them. The 
broader conception of what is called “human experience ” 
is a conception that thus obviously transcends every par- 
ticular present human experience. The very existence of 
the body of facts called “man’s experience” has never 
been verified by any man. 

Now this perfectly simple observation gets a serious im- 
portance so soon as we consider its bearing upon the ques- 
tion: What shall constitute, for an empirical theory of 
knowledge, the test of an “accredited fact” ? When and 
how is any fact known to be a “ fact of human experience”’? 


1See First Series, p. 364, sq. 


INTRODUCTION: THE RECOGNITION OF FACTS 13 


We often say that the results of scientific observation 
and experiment, or the contents of the world of common 
sense, as known to men in their daily life, are typical ex- 
amples of “empirically accredited facts.” These, as we 
add, belong to the “accessible realm.” These we cannot 
deny without “running counter to actual observation.” 
On the other hand, the contents of any religious faith, — 
assertions about God, about Immortality, or about the 
“ Unseen World” in general, — these are typical examples 
of what we frequently regard as lying “beyond the range 
of human experience.” These, then, are “inaccessible ” 
matters. What is in such regions fact “nobody amongst 
men can verify.” Equally, of course, a philosopher’s as- 
sertions about the Absolute, — as, for instance, an idealist’s 
Theory of Being,—are concerned with what “lies beyond 
all human experience”; and such theories attempt to 
“transcend the range of verifiable fact.” This contrast 
between the “empirical” and the “metempirical” realm 
is very familiar. It is apparently a fairly definite con- 
trast. And to be sure, if you first define arbitrarily the 
limits of the collective whole called “human experience,” 
you may, with equal arbitrariness, define a realm of what 
is to be called “transcendent” or ‘ inaccessible” fact, 
lying beyond this whole. 

But what now concerns us is not an arbitrary classi- 
fication of conceived ranges of knowledge, but a closer 
consideration of a very obvious and natural distinction 
between the two conceptions: (1) Of that which any man 
at any time experiences as present; and (2) Of the 
totality of the several facts that are, or that have been 
experienced by the various men. The question is: 


14 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


Does any man experience the fact that there ests any 
collective whole to be called the totality of human 
experience? Does any man experience the fact that 
any other man has experience? Surely, the astronomer 
does not observe in his world of presentations the fact 
that the physician observes the phenomena of disease, or 
that the carpenter observes the making of houses. But 
if the carpenter, the physician, and the astronomer 
believe, as they do, each one, that the others have 
experience of facts, then each believes in an existence, 
viz. in the existence of the totality formed of their three 
orders of experience, although this totality is “ inaccessi- 
ble” to the personal experience of any of them. And 
still more, when the astronomer or the physician or 
the carpenter appeals, as a man of science or of common 
sense, to the “general experience of mankind,” or to 
the experience of any selected company of experts, as 
the guarantee of the truth of any of his beliefs, each 
of them appeals to a body of fact which, as such a body 
of fact, has never been present to the experience of any 
man at any time. 

It is plain, then, that if we say: “ That only is to 
constitute ‘accredited fact’ which some individual man 
has verified for himself through its presence in his 
experience,” our doctrine can be interpreted in either 
one of two ways. The first and in fact the usual way 
of interpreting the thesis is as follows: “There does 
exist the body of accredited facts, a, 6, e, etc., such 
that any fact belonging to this body of facts —as, for 
instance, a —has been verified by the experience of some 
man, let us say by A, while some other man, as B, may 


INTRODUCTION: THE RECOGNITION OF FACTS 15 


have experienced as present to himself the fact 6, and 
so on,—some of the various facts having been observed 
indeed by the same man (as a Galileo or a Faraday 
observed, each for himself, various physical facts), while 
different facts, in many cases, have been severally pre- 
sented in the experience of different men. Now only 
such facts as belong to this body of ‘facts of experience’ 
are to be regarded as duly ‘accredited.’” The thesis 
thus stated, with various added provisos regarding the 
sorts of experience, or the types of observers whose facts 
are of enough importance or exactitude to count as 
sufficiently verified, represents a frequent interpretation 
of the meaning of the doctrine called empiricism. But 
it is obvious that, in this formulation, familiar though it 
be, the thesis simply contradicts itself. For it expressly 
asserts the existence of the various facts, a, 6, ¢, etc., 
while referring them, in general, to the experience of 
various observers, A, B, etc., whose existence is also 
regarded as “accredited.” But since A, by hypothesis, 
has never had present to his experience the experience 
of B, nor any observer the observations of another ob- 
server, it is plain that there is no one man who has 
personally experienced either the existence of all the 
several observers, A, B, etc., or the presence of their 
various facts, a, 6, ce. Yet these existences and these 
various facts are, according to the thesis, “accredited 
facts,” in case the thesis itself is to be an accredited 
truth. And, nevertheless, according to the same thesis, 
no facts were to be regarded as “accredited ” unless some 
man, A, or B, or some other, had verified them in his 
experience. The thesis, as stated, consequently asserts 


16 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


the existence of an indefinitely vast range of fact that 
it also declares to be not “accredited fact.” To become 
consistent our thesis would have to be amended thus: 
“No fact is ‘accredited’ unless it belongs to the system 
above defined, except, to be sure, the fact that this system, 
together with its various observers, exists. That fact, 
indeed, is present to no human observer’s experience. 
And yet, although it thus transcends every man’s observa- 
tion and verification, it is an ‘accredited’ fact.” But the 
thesis, as thus amended, is no longer even a relatively pure 
empiricism. It is a synthesis of an appeal to human 
experience with an admission of principles that, whatever 
they are, or however they are grounded, transcend every 
man’s experience. This is a simple, but a curiously 
neglected, consideration. 

The second form in which the thesis may be held is 
this: “No fact is ‘accredited fact’ except in so far as it 
is verified by the present momentary experience of myself, 
here and now, to whom it thus becomes accredited fact.” 
So stated, the thesis is indeed remote enough from com- 
mon sense, since it excludes me from recognizing, not 
only your experience, but my own experiences of an 
hour since, or of yesterday, or of last year, as “accred- 
ited fact,” and so excludes me from regarding as “ac- 
credited fact” either the observations of experts, or the 
experience of mankind in general, or the results of my 
own observations during the course of my brief life, as 
far as that life lies beyond the limits (whatever they 
are) of what I call the present. We are not concerned 
with examining here all of the metaphysical implications 
of this form of the thesis now in question. The result 


INTRODUCTION: THE RECOGNITION OF FACTS 17 


of such an analysis, if thoroughgoing, would involve, as 
we indicated in the passage just cited from the Eighth 
Lecture of our First Series, the same dialectic process 
by which we were led through the series of the con- 
cepts of Being from Realism to Idealism. For we should 
have to ask: What form of Being have the facts that 
are at present so verified by me as to constitute a realm, 
however apparently insignificant, of “accredited facts” ? 
And the answer to the question would lead us to ob- 
serve that these facts, in so far as they have true Being 
at all, are neither wholly independent, nor wholly imme- 
diate, nor merely valid, but are what they are by virtue 
of their place in a self-determined system of facts, whose 
totality is simply our idealistic Absolute. 

Meanwhile, however, although it concerns us not here 
to go again over the ground of our whole metaphysic, 
it will be of service to us to recall so much thereof as 
to let us see that the thesis, in this second form, is, as 
it stands, quite as self-contradictory as it was in its first 
form, unless, indeed, it means to assert that at the pres- 
ent instant I can verify an infinity of facts. 

A moment’s reflection serves to show me, for the first, 
that I do not clearly know what constitutes the whole, 
the totality of fact, that I can and do just now verify 
in my present experience. Nor can I clearly distinguish 
between what is now verifiable and what is not now 
verifiable. I may say that I verify the fact of my pres- 
ent speaking of these words, so that thus much, at least, 
is, in the sense of my thesis, “accredited fact.” But what 
is it to speak these words? What is it that I verify in 
observing my own speech? Nothing is harder than to 

Cc 


18 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


say how, at any one instant, taken, so far as possible, by 
itself, my words are present as facts in my own con- 
sciousness. Nor can I easily verify how far I just then 
realize what I mean by them, or how far their sound, 
their connection, or the act of uttering them is empha- 
sized or obscured in consciousness by my concern that 
you should hear me, or by my chance consciousness of 
how the light of yonder window falls upon this paper, 
or by my muscular sensations as I turn the leaves of 
my manuscript. Ask me, then, to tell what is now pres- 
ent to my consciousness, and the notorious difficulty 
of every introspective problem reminds me that by what 
now is actually present to my consciousness, I mean 
much more than I can be said, in every sense, now 
consciously to verify. Even my verification itself occurs 
in degrees. I may verify without being clearly conscious 
that or what I verify. 

And thus the present moment has about it all the 
mystery that everywhere clouds finite facts. I am con- 
scious just now, but I am not wholly conscious of my 
consciousness. If I were, I should be capable of verify- 
ing an infinity of facts; for, as the Supplementary Essay, 
published with the former series of these lectures, has 
shown at length, to be self-conscious, in any complete 
sense, would be to be aware of the completion of an 
infinite series of presented facts. But if, as is true, 
I am not completely self-conscious, then I never com- 
pletely verify what it is that I am just now verifying. 

“But,” you may insist, “surely I can now verify some 
present fact of experience, the sound of this word, the 
presence of this feeling of discomfort, or of this intel- 


INTRODUCTION: THE RECOGNITION OF FACTS 19 


lectual inquiry.” Yes, I answer, — the present moment 
may answer, and does answer up to a certain point, 
although never completely, certain specific questions that 
have been submitted to it, by my former processes of 
inquiry, for its definite verification. If I have asked a 
specific question: “ Does some word now sound?” “Ig 
this definite hypothesis now verified?’ — then a present, 
although always a fragmentary and unsatisfactory answer, 
may be possible. But my consciousness, even now, has 
its background as well as its foreground, its obscurity 
as well as its clearness, its presented questions as to its 
own constitution as well as its presented answers to 
definite questions. And nobody amongst us human be- 
ings, as now we are, can verify precisely the whole of 
what it is that the present moment furnishes to his 
experience. In other words, the present experience it- 
self, or even the verification of the facts of this present 
experience, has more Being than I am able now to 
observe. It 7s more than it at present shows; it means 
infinitely more than it brings to the light of passing 
human consciousness. Just this aspect of the present 
moment was the one that we emphasized when we 
defined our Fourth Conception, and our relation to the 
“Other” which a finite consciousness always seeks as 
its own fulfilment. , 

Whatever, then, it is that I now verify, and whatever 
sense or degree of verification I count as sufficient, still, 
the very fact known to me through verification may be 
also known, through an indirect demonstration, to contain 
more Being than I verify. Thus let us suppose again that 
I verify the fact of my present utterance of words. If I do 


20 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


so, then the fact that I verify my utterance of words is as 
much a fact as is the fact verified, viz. the utterance 
itself. For the whole fact defined is, by hypothesis, the 
fact of my verification of my utterance of words. But to 
be conscious of my consciousness involves something more 
than merely to be conscious without such self-conscious- 
ness. In general, unless a philosophical argument calls 
my attention to the matter, I shall verify the fact of my 
utterance of the words without verifying, 2.e. without 
consciously observing the first verification itself. That 
is, I shall verify without being aware that Ido so. Now 
not only is this the case, but to deny that our verifications, 
whatever they are, always are facts that in their turn con- 
tain more Being than we at present verify, would be to 
assert that at present we consciously verify an infinity of 
facts. For to verify the fact that we make verifications, 
and to verify again this verification, and so on, all at the 
present moment, would indeed involve a present and com- 
pleted infinite complexity of consciousness. Whoever 
asserts the thesis, however, that no fact is “accredited ” 
from my point of view unless I now verify it, asserts a 
fact, viz. the fact of my verification of facts, while not 
meaning to attribute to me the infinite present knowledge 
that would be implied in declaring that my verification 
itself is reflectively and exhaustively. verified. 

Moreover, whoever asserts this same thesis defines as 
real the fact that “I” experience. “I,” then, am a fact. 
But at this moment, unless I have completely solved the 
problem of self-consciousness, I am in some respects, yes, 
obviously in nearly all respects, ignorant of who I really 
am, or of what the true nature of the Ego is, What 


INTRODUCTION : THE RECOGNITION OF FACTS 21 


deeper human mystery is there than the Ego? On the 
other hand, if I have completely solved the problem of 
self-consciousness, and if I am aware at this instant of the 
solution, so as to verify all that, as a fact, I am, then, for 
the same reason as the one before cited, I have present to 
myself an infinity of contents of consciousness. The 
maintainer of our thesis does not intend to assert that the 
Ego of this instant, of whom he speaks, does at present 
consciously verify this infinity of facts. It is clear to me 
just now that Ido not do so. But the only alternative 
for the defender of our thesis is the assertion of a fact, 
viz. the Ego, —a fact whose Being is not wholly verified 
at present, although it is indirectly known as a fact, and 
as a fact possessed of this verified wealth of reality. And 
thus the thesis is indeed reduced to a self-contradiction. 
For the result is that there are “accredited facts,” implied 
in the very acceptance of the thesis, which are still not facts 
now verified by me. 


IV 


It is quite impossible, then, to assert that there are no 
“accredited facts” in the world, as known to us men, ex- 
cept those which have been verified, or which are verified 
in the experience of some individual man, or in the several 
experiences of various men. Human experience is logi- 
cally and inseparably bound up with elements which re- 
main for us men, in our present form of consciousness, 
metempirical. The assertion that we know the world only 
in so far as individual human experience has verified the 
facts of the world cannot be consistently stated, and is 
never consistently applied, even by the most ardent and 


22 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


most sceptical empiricists. While then philosophy is un- 
able to predict a priori the special contents of human 
experience, it is forced to insist that by the term “ human 
experience” we always mean more than the facts that are 
verified by individual men. 

It remains perfectly true, of course, that the empiristic 
thesis which has just been examined is not without its deep 
significance, and that what empiricism has intended to 
emphasize is, when its statement has been properly modi- 
fied, a truth, and one of the first importance. In the 
former series of lectures,! we had occasion, when discuss- 
ing the Third Conception of Being, to point out the sense 
in which, even in pure mathematics, “experience is the 
only guide to concrete results.” As we there indicated, 
all our transcending of experience is in a perfectly defi- 
nite sense based upon our experience. When we reason 
about the unseen, as, for instance, about the “infinite as- 
semblages” of recent mathematical theory, or about our 
idealistic Absolute, still, in all our investigations, “actual 
experience guides,” “ presented facts sustain” us, just as, 
in the passage cited, we set forth. Yet there is no incon- 
sistency between observing this truth, and still rejecting 
the thesis of the empiricist in the form in which it has 
often been stated. Our whole argument in our transition 
to the Fourth Conception of Being illustrated how it is of 
the very nature of our human experience of our Internal 
Meaning to point beyond what is presented, for the sake of 
defining the very fulfilment which our presented meanings 
demand, and without which they have neither truth nor 
Being. It is true that every exact and demonstrative 

1 See p. 253 of that series, 


INTRODUCTION: THE RECOGNITION OF FACTS 23 


proposition which does transcend the presented and verified 
data of our experience is capable, for us men, only of an 
indirect demonstration, such as we in fact gave for our 
conception of the Absolute in the Eighth Lecture of the 
foregoing course, and such as we have just given for our 
assertion that every human experience is inseparably 
bound up with elements which remain, for us men, metem- 
pirical. Yet an indirect demonstration involves precisely 
an appeal to present experience (namely to the present ex- 
perience of an incongruity in the form in which given ideas 
now present themselves to us), for our warrant and guide 
-in an undertaking whereby we transcend present expe- 
rience. In fact, then, our presented experience is indeed our 
only guide ; but it always guides us by pointing beyond itself 
to that without which it becomes self-contradictory. We 
know of no metempirical truth except by means of presenta- 
tions. But our presentations, in our present form of con- 
sciousness, get their whole sense from their reference to what, 
Sor us, remains metempirical truth. No fact gets ‘accred- 
ited” unless our experience gives it credit. But experience, 
when rationally interpreted, in the light of our indirect dem- 
onstrations, never gives credit to any facts except to those 
which, in some aspect, transcend our presentations. 

The most manifest lesson of memory, of our social 
consciousness, and of our reasonings about mathematical 
and physical truth, is that, for us men, the office of 
what is given to us, as presented fact, is to point beyond 
itself to what is not presented. Common sense generally 
makes this transition too easily, on grounds of mere habit, 
of prejudice, or of traditional faith. Philosophy has to 
criticise the grounds of the transition, and does so, 


24 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


hoping to learn to distinguish prejudice from rational 
insight, and well-grounded assurance from uncertainty. 
But while we live in presentations, and think in terms 
of them, we all constantly use them, whether rationally 
or irrationally, only to transcend them. What is given is 
indeed our guide; but what is not now given, namely, 
the whole true Being of things, is our goal. 

In still another respect, as we also saw in our former 
course, the assertion of empiricism conveys a deep truth 
in an inadequate expression. The term “ metempirical,” 
which we have just used, is only a relative term. We 
have here employed it with express reference to the 
transcending of the narrow limits of human experience. 
But of course such transcending, so far as we get our 
indirectly demonstrable right to the assertion that facts 
lie beyond these narrow limits, is not a transcending of 
all experience. What les beyond our presentations is 
still, in so far as it has true Being, presentation. For 
the world of fact exists in so far as it is presented in 
unity to the Absolute Experience. That we have 
asserted throughout. In so far as a consistent empiri- 
cism is opposed to Realism, our own argument has 
fully accepted the theses involved in such opposition. 
Every question about Being is also a question about 
the organization of experience, that is, about the organiza- 
tion of the true, the final experience, of which our own 
is always a fragment. 


Vv 


The characteristic limitation of human experience is, 
then, that it grasps, within the narrow limits of this 


INTRODUCTION: THE RECOGNITION OF FACTS 25 


or of this instant, fragments of a meaning which can 
only be conceived with consistency by regarding it as 
embodied in an experience of wider scope, of determinate 
constitution, and of united significance. That this is 
true, our general Theory of Being undertook to show. 
How in the concrete it takes place, in what special 
ways our consciousness is at once transcended, and in- 
cluded in a wider experience, it is the purpose of our 
whole present series of discussions to make clearer; 
and not until the end of the undertaking can one 
judge the degree of our success. 

We proceed next to the characterization of certain 
more special principles that consciously determine us, 
at any moment, to acknowledge as real one rather 
than another fact or system of concrete facts, such as 
the existence of our fellows, or of Nature, or our own 
past lives. Herewith we enter upon the promised study 
of some of the fundamental Categories of human ex- 
perience. We care not to write out or to defend any 
table of such Categories. We make no attempt to be 
exhaustive or systematic. But some specification of our 
general theory, in such wise as to show its application 
to our special type of human knowledge, is indeed a 
necessary preliminary to our study of Nature and of 
Man. 

As in our general discussion of Being, so here, we 
must take our starting-point from the fact that our 
knowledge always involves deeds. In so far as I now 
consciously mean anything, I am acting. But, as I find, 
I am acting at present under a twofold limitation. I 
neither know the whole of what it is that I mean to 


26 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


do; nor do I know more than the most insignificant 
fragment of the facts that express my will. In conse- 
quence, the problem of philosophy, as of life, is two- 
fold: (1) A practical problem, viz. the problem, What 
am I seeking? What is the Self whose purpose is mine, 
and whose life is the world? —and (2) A theoretical 
problem, viz. How is this purpose expressed in the facts? 
Now our discussion will throughout undertake, so far 
as that is possible, to treat these two problems in close 
connection. But they will tend, at various points, to 
fall apart in the argument. In the present lecture, in 
dealing with the most fundamental Category of Experi- 
ence, we shall indeed be able to show very explicitly 
that our acknowledgment of facts as real is determined 
by definite, and philosophically justified, practical motives. 
But when we pass on, in the next lecture, to more special 
categories, we shall be led to make a provisional sunder- 
ing of the two points of view, viz. (1) that of our appre- 
ciative or more explicitly volitional consciousness, and 
(2) that of our descriptive or more theoretical, conscious- 
ness. We shall know indeed that the sundering is pro- 
visional ; but under our human limitations, it will prove, in 
its own place, inevitable. It will be by means of a further 
definition of just these contrasted points of view that 
we shall be able to explain the relation between our 
belief in the physical world, and our belief in the minds 
of our fellow-men. We shall express the opposition 
of the two points of view by calling the realm of Being 
as our more abstractly theoretical consciousness defines it, 
the World of Description; while the world as otherwise 
interpreted is the world of Life,—the World of Appre- 


INTRODUCTION: THE RECOGNITION OF FACTS 27 


ciation.' We shall show that, while the two points of 
view are contrasted, they arise in our minds in close con- 
nection with each other. The only justification for the 
more abstractly theoretical conception of the World of 
Description is its value as a means of organizing our 
conduct, and our conception of what the will seeks. 
On the other hand, without such a definite conception 
as the World of Description furnishes, the finite will is 
left only to vague longings. The two points of view will 
first be considered (in the next lecture) as they appear 
in the individual consciousness of any one of us. Then 
they will be discussed in their social aspects in the 
lecture on our conceptions of Man and of Nature. 

For the moment, however, we begin not with the sun- 
dering of the two points of view, but with their unity. 
When I know, I am acting. My theoretical life is also 
practical. But, from my own conscious point of view, 
my acting is also a reacting. I am acting in what I 
often call “the given situation.” And the word given 
here means, not only what is strictly the given, that is, not 
only the situation as now presently verified by myself, but 
also the whole situation which I acknowledge as real. I 
am conscious that I can mean something only by pre- 
supposing something; that I can seek an end only by 
acknowledging a starting-point and a goal; that I can 
create only on the basis of a recognition of what I am 

1J made use of this terminology for expressing the contrast between 
the two aspects of Reality in 1892, in my Spirit of Modern Philosophy, 
Lecture XII. The choice of the term Description in that work was 
determined by the known usage of Kirchhoff, Mach, and others, in 
defining the purpose of natural science as the exact ‘‘ description ’’ (as 


opposed to ‘‘ explanation ’’) of facts. 


é 


28 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


not now seeking to create ; —in brief, that the fulfilment 
of my will through my present search logically depends 
upon my accepting a foundation on the basis of which I 
will, and an environment in which I work. Now what 
I thus presuppose as the hidden ground of my mean- 
ing, what I acknowledge either as the starting-point 
or as the goal of my seeking, what I thus recognize, not 
as my momentary creation, but as the condition of my 
activity, —this—the foundation of my present will— 
constitutes for me that concrete reality in which, at any 
moment, I believe as my special “ world of facts.” 

A fact, then, is at once that which my present will 
implies and presupposes, and that which, for this very 
reason, is in some aspect Other than what I find myself 
here and now producing, accomplishing, attaining. Be- 
cause of that aspect of a fact which the word Other 
very properly emphasizes, we are prone to insist that it 
is of the essence of facts to be “stubborn,” to be “ for- 
eign to the will,” to be, as facts, “beyond our power,” 
“necessary,” “forced upon us.” But it is equally im- 
portant, from our idealistic point of view, to remem- 
ber that, in so far as I purpose, intend, pursue, or find 
myself accomplishing, it is of the very essence of my 
will to demand its own Other, to set its fulfilment 
beyond its present, and so to define its own very life 
aS now in some sense also not its own, or as in some 
wise now foreign. Our rational purpose in living as 
we human beings now do, is essentially and always the 
wanderer’s purpose. We seek our home, our city out 
of sight, our lost truth. But in the very search itself 
lies the partial embodiment of what we ourselves will. 


INTRODUCTION: THE RECOGNITION OF FACTS 29 


It is, then, not merely our fate that makes our home 
far off, or the truth a lost truth. It is we ourselves 
who demand our object as the Beyond; and we are 
pilgrims and strangers in a world of seemingly foreign 
facts, not only because the facts, as such, are stub- 
bornly foreign, but also because we insist that ours 
shall be the wanderer’s portion. The very attitude of 
any questioner illustrates this truth. To question is to 
be active, to express an interest; and so it is to seek, 
as the relative fulfilment of one present purpose, a state 
of mind which also involves the dissatisfaction and 
instability of viewing something as still unknown and 
foreign. Nor can we here say that it is the compulsion 
of the foreign facts which is the sole awakener of our 
questions. Even a child’s questions often illustrate the 
free play of a consciousness that restlessly longs to 
inquire, and that seems to us deliberately to create its 
own recognition of mystery, in order that it may have 
wherewith to concern itself. Still more, however, does 
the theoretical work of pure science illustrate this 
nature of the will to inquire. What foreign “compul- 
sion” of facts is solely responsible for the astronomer’s 
inquiries into the classification of stellar spectra, or for 
the modern theory of algebraic equations? Yet our 
whole modern conception of Nature and of Man has 
been the product of just such a free activity of asking 
questions. 

Facts, then, are never merely Other, or “stubborn,” or 
“compulsory.” My will is never compelled merely by 
what is foreign to itself. It always codperates in its 
own compulsion. The disappointed lover is such, not 


30 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


merely because his mistress rejects him, but because he 
wills to love her. If he did not so will, she could not 
reject him, and would lose her “compelling” character 
altogether. She controls his will by his own conni- 
vance. All this we saw in general in our former con- 
sideration of the concept of Being. It follows, however, 
that no account of the categories of experience, which 
founds our consciousness of facts solely upon our expe- 
rience of their compulsory or foreign character, can be 
just to the nature of knowledge. What we experience is, 
in one aspect, always our own will to be compelled by facts. 

The most universal character, belonging to all the 
various types of concrete facts that we recognize, is 
accordingly a synthesis of their so-called “stubborn” or 
“foreign” character, with their equally genuine character 
as expressions of our own purpose. A fact is for me, 
at any moment, that which I ought to recognize as deter- 
mining or as limiting what I am here consciously to do 
or to attempt. For a particular fact I recognize, at any 
moment, only in connection with a particular attempt at 
action. This is the obverse aspect of what is defined, 
in Psychology, as the principle that all our cognitive 
processes accompany “responses to our environment.” 
In explaining, for psychological purposes, the natural 
history of cognition, one presupposes an environment 
whose facts already have a recognized form of existence. 
One supposes also a conscious process as an existent 
fact, whose development is to be described. The basis 
of one’s description is then the principle that the exter- 
nal facts, which are supposed directly or indirectly to 
determine the conscious process, arouse responses in the 


INTRODUCTION: THE RECOGNITION OF FACTS 81 


organism of the being whose consciousness is in ques- 
tion; and that the conscious states which constitute 
cognition accompany these responses of the organism to 
the environment. But our own theory of the categories 
of experience cannot thus base itself upon the assump- 
tion that the objective world, first existing, produces a 
series of corresponding responses in an organism, and 
consequently in the cognitive life which accompanies the 
processes of this organism. On the contrary, our pur- 
pose, in such a theory of the categories of experience, is 
to point out the principles that lead us, from within, 
i.e. from our own conscious point of view, to make any 
particular assertions whatever about the objective world. 
For us, therefore, in this theory, the objective world is 
not first known as prior to the cognitive responses, but 
is viewed as it is because the conscious process regards 
itself as meaning a response to a situation. The world 
of “accredited facts” is known to us to exist, because 
we know it to be acknowledged as existing. And 
it is thus acknowledged because the purpose of any 
instant of rational consciousness is fulfilled better by recog- 
nizing it as thus and thus existent than by viewing it other- 
wise. This assertion is the application of our general 
Theory of Being to the case of our concrete knowledge 
of any special fact or range of facts. 

I acknowledge a particular fact, then, in connection with 
a particular attempt at action. My particular action is 
willed by me under certain limitations. These limitations 
are given to me, at the moment, in the form of my sense 
of incompleteness, of dissatisfaction, of imperfect expres- 
sion of my present will. But they are not merely thus 


32 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


given to me as immediate contents of consciousness. They 
are defined for me by my consciousness that such and such 
further determination of my present actions would mean 
a completer expression of my will. The correlative of 
such completer action would be, as I hold, the experience 
of such and such, more or less completely defined, further 
contents of experience. And these further contents of ex- 
perience constitute the facts that I acknowledge as real. 
When I say to myself, “Such and such deeds, not now 
done by me, would more fully express my will,” my practi- 
cal consciousness is the one which is summoned up by 
further saying, “* Then I ought to tend, even now, towards 
such acts.” And the theoretical Ought of our judgments 
about facts, like the practical Ought of Ethics, is after all 
definable only in terms of what Kant called the Autonomy 
of the Will. I ought to do that which I even now, by 
implication, mean to do. My Ought is my own will more 
rationally expressed than, at the instant of a capricious 
activity, I as yet consciously recognize. ‘The consciousness 
of the more rational purpose, —of a purpose looming up, 
as it were, in the distance, beyond my present impulses, 
and yet even now seen as their own culmination, like a 
mountain crowning the ascent from the foothills, — the 
consciousness, I say, of such a purpose, is what we mean in 
Ethics by the Ought. This Ought may appear foreign, 
but yet it is never at once the Ought and still something 
wholly foreign to my own will. Constraint, as such, is 
never moral obligation. The Ought is another will than 
my impulse, yet it is one with my own meaning; and it 
expresses more fully and rationally what my impulse even 
now implies. Butif the practical Ought of Ethics is thus 


INTRODUCTION: THE RECOGNITION OF FACTS 33 


the fuller determination of my own will, viewed at once as 
mine and yet as superior to my present capricious and 
imperfect expression of my purpose, the theoretical Ought 
of our present discussion of the categories of Expe- 
rience is similarly related to the theoretical aspect of 
my present conscious activity. The expression of my 
Internal Meaning, as I now embody my purpose, has 
contents and a structure, has characters and relations 
within itself, and so is not only a “mere Idea,” but 
also has the correlative character of being, as we have 
all along seen, a fragment of Reality. The fuller expres- 
sion of my will, defined by the Ought, has, in the same 
way, its own correlative embodiment in the Real. This 
embodiment constitutes my world of recognized facts. In 
recognizing the Ought on its practical side, as that to 
which I should even now conform my deed, I inevitably 
recognize the embodiment of this Ought, in the world of 
my completed will, as a fact. The present deed should 
be, then, at once a conformity to the Ought, viewed as a 
mode of action, and an adjustment or response to the 
facts, as the Ought, which is embodied in them, requires 
me to recognize them. The facts, as real, are embodiments 
of my purpose, yet not of my purpose as just now it tran- 
siently seems, but as it ought to be viewed. In recognizing 
them, I limit my present expression of myself through 
deeds, by virtue of my reference to these facts themselves. 
That shall be now (namely, in my deed), which conforms 
to the whole system that I mean, viz. to the world of the 
facts. To view my present act thus is to recognize the facts 
as such. 

_ The extremely manifold and subtle implications of this 


D 


34 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


view of our consciousness of the realm of concrete facts 
can here only be indicated. Our later discussions of 
Nature and of Man must supply the details. It is plain, 
at once, that, according to our view, every concrete fact 
in the universe becomes for us, just in so far as it is 
acknowledged, the expression of a purpose, and so is 
never a mere datum of anybody’s present experience, and 
is never a mere constraining power, that from without 
simply forces our assent. A fact may be acknowledged 
while yet many aspects of it remain mysterious. In so 
far it remains a “foreign” fact. But it is also our thesis 
that no purpose in the universe either is, or can now be: 
rationaily viewed by me, as wholly foreign to my own; 
while facts, so far as I understand them, become zpso facto 
expressions of ideas, and so of purposes. All purposes 
seek the expression that even now I am consciously seek- 
ing. Thus I myself am real, and I regard nothing real as 
a me alienum. 

But, on the other hand, facts unquestionably limit me, 
and now seem to possess, at this passing instant, their 
often overwhelmingly foreign aspect. Why? In so far 
as I remain in suffering unreasonableness, no answer is 
apparent to such a question. But then, suffering un- 
reasonableness, —a merely fragmentary mood of finite 
life, —if taken by itself, asks no very definite questions. 
For definite questions are reasonable, and imply successful 
inner deeds. But the mood of the unreasoning sufferer 
is lost in its mere failure to act successfully. It expresses 
its purpose only in so far as it is now conscious of its 
suffering. The rest of the universe it finds merely 
as something negative. Its word is, “True Being is 


INTRODUCTION: THE RECOGNITION OF FACTS 85 


not here.” Whoever, on the other hand, not only suffers, 
but also asserts : “ These and these are the oljective facts : 
my disease is this or this—my enemy has won against 
me thus or thus— cruel Nature, indifferent to my will, 
has such and such a constitution” —any such more 
rational sufferer lays himself open to the question, 
“ How do you know these ideas of yours about those 
foreign facts to be true?” If the answer is, “Such is 
the verdict of human experience in general,’ —then we 
already know that this very conception involves what 
we called relatively metempirical elements. No man of 
us has ever experienced what the general verdict of 
human experience really is. But if one answers, “ This 
is what I myself now experience,” — then we reply, 
* But you do not now experience the constitution of those 
external facts which you yourself characterize as foreign 
to you. You now only experience that you are not now 
succeeding.” But if the sufferer goes on to say, “It 
would be, in view of my experience, simple folly, mere 
unreasonableness, to admit the doubt that the foreign 
facts really are such and such” —then his position, as 
far as his comprehension of the facts enables him to go, 
is at once substantially identical with ours. He recog- 
nizes that he reasonably ought to view certain facts as in 
particular ways external to the internal meanings of his 
own ideas. But a world where that is real which now 
ought to be regarded as real, is a world where explicitly 
at least a certain aspect of one’s Internal Meaning is 
already recognized as expressed by the facts. For the 
Ought, as such, is never merely foreign to my own will. 
To recognize the whole fact-world as the final embodi- 


36 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


ment of Internal Meaning is merely to carry out to the 
end this same procedure. 

Yet, as one may still insist, the question is not an- 
swered, Why do the facts often seem as foreign as they 
do? Why is their explicit conformity to our purpose, 
as defined by the Ought, joined with aspects of such 
hostility to all our purposes? In part this question is 
simply the problem of Evil, which will concern us later 
in another connection. In part our further discussion 
of the categories of experience, in our next lecture, will 
suggest its answer. In order to express the whole will 
which comes to our present consciousness in this so frag- 
mentary human form, the facts, as we shall soon see, have 
to involve aspects that must now seem to us infinitely 
remote, and consequently, beyond our detailed compre- 
hension at this instant. Thus, as we shall see, even the 
foreign aspect of the facts fulfils a purpose. 


Wal 


It should be sufficiently plain by this time that in 
regarding our acknowledgment of facts as an expression 
of the Will, we do not assert that the will acknowledges 
facts in any merely capricious way. The will, whose 
relative satisfaction in this or in that present belief, or 
undertaking, or act of acknowledgment, or acceptance 
of the Ought, we have been observing, is known to us at 
any moment as by no means an altogether free or uncon- 
strained will. Of the relative freedom of the finite will 
we shall speak hereafter. But for the present, when we 
say, “It is our own will which expresses itself in our 
interpretation of the real world,’ we are not to be 


INTRODUCTION: THE RECOGNITION OF FACTS 87 


answered by such a retort as, for example, the following : 
“Surely, you cannot help believing as you now do in these 
physical and social facts, in these rocks and hills, in these 
fellow-men, and in the rest of your well-known world. 
Therefore, it is not of your own will that you thus 
acknowledge their presence. If it were, you could cease, 
at pleasure, to believe in their existence. For if it is 
your will that causes your belief, your will could, if it 
chose, cause a change of belief, and at pleasure you could 
instead acknowledge the truth of the Arabian Nights 
tales, and believe yourself a dweller in Sirius. As a fact, 
you must believe in the facts of common sense, whether 
you will or no.” 

I reply to such an objection, first, that I do not call 
our will the cause of our present recognition of an 
external reality, and so still less the wholly free cause 
of this recognition, as if the will were a power that could 
now of a sudden change all our beliefs. What I say is 
that our present recognition of the concrete things in 
which we all believe is not a mere acceptance of any 
content of sense, but does include an intention to act, 
and does fulfil, as far as it goes, a purpose, and our own 
conscious purpose. How we came to get this purpose 
I do not here in the least care to explain by the hypoth- 
esis of any natural or supernatural causal process. Still 
less do I care now what psychological conditions enable 
the purpose to get itself expressed in our special beliefs. 
I report the observable inner facts, as the singer observes 
his own singing. Itis so. I care not now what causes 
made it so. All our doctrines about causes, and about 
causation, whatever they are, are instances of just 


38 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


such expressions of rational purposes,—not means of 
explaining the fundamental fact that rational purposes 
get expressed in our conscious life. The so-called 
axiom of causation, or even the more generally stated 
“principle of sufficient reason,” is only one of the forms 
in which the Idea gets partially embodied in our thought 
about things. And the only warrant for believing in 
such a principle at all is the Ought, whose deepest basis 
lies in our fundamental assurance that all reality embodies 
purpose. So I do not base my view on the assertion that 
the will causes our beliefs and is free to change them. 
I point out simply that to believe as we do about men 
and things seems just now more reasonable to us than 
does any other belief which we chance to have in mind 
as an alternative. But seeming reasonable means seem- 
ing to fulfil a purpose. And I prove my doctrine not 
only by this appeal to consciousness, but, indirectly, by 
letting my opponent try to refute me. If he does so, 
it soon appears that he rejects my account as something 
that seems to him unreasonable, 7.e. as something that 
ought not to be held, just as our realist, in our former 
discussion, was found appealing to the “sanity” of his 
beliefs, to their usefulness for practical human purposes, 
as part of his warrant for maintaining that the reality 
is independent of all purposes. One thus refutes our 
doctrine of the Ought only by appealing to it. All 
logical discussion is, in fact, appeal to a norm, and a 
norm is a teleological standard. 

Meanwhile, to say that my will is just now expressed 
in a given way, is by no means equivalent to denying 
that, in large measure, I must just now will thus. For 


INTRODUCTION: THE RECOGNITION OF FACTS 89 


that must be whose denial conflicts with what is already 
recognized as actual. If I am this way of willing, 
then one can express the fact in terms of a must. In 
one aspect my will may indeed possess freedom. In an- 
other aspect I am obviously as much under “constraint ” 
in willing as in any other aspect of my conscious life. 
Only the constraint is not wholly external. It is my 
own. If I were to find my hand too near the fire, I 
should will to withdraw it, and should express my will 
in struggles if another man constrained me. But my 
willing itself, my determination to struggle for my free- 
dom, would here be as clear a case of something that I 
just then must will, from the very internal nature of my 
will, as the act of my enemy who held my hand towards 
the fire would be the case of a condition externally forced 
upon my attention. In such a case I will, but to say 
that I also must will thus, is to express an aspect of 
what my will actually and consciously includes. So, too, 
it is in case of our disappointed lover, whose will gives his 
mistress power over him. His love is his will, but just 
now he must love. So our acknowledgment of the Ought 
is an act of will, but there may be a must bound up with 
this acknowledgment. Will is not mere wavering. It 
has a determinate nature. And whatever has a definite 
character, is such that you can express certain aspects 
of this character in terms of what you then call necessity. 


VII 


The category of the Ought thus has two aspects, and 
implies their unity. The aspects are those which, in our 


40 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


general ‘Theory of Being, we defined as the External and 
Internal Meaning of Ideas. Only, in that general dis- 
cussion, we were considering our relation to the universe 
as a whole. Here we are concerned to point out how 
our relations to the particular objects of experience 
result from those involved in our general theory of real- 
ity. When we define any particular object as real, we 
are indeed momentarily conscious of the aspect of exter- 
nal necessity, foreign constraint, compulsion; and this 
aspect, as a rule, is, in our present life, predominant. But 
when we were inquiring into the general metaphysical 
issues, our whole attitude was deliberately reflective, self- 
conscious, observant of the demands that our ideas con- 
sciously make. Hence the bridge that leads over from an 
idealistic metaphysic to a theory of our knowledge of 
Nature and of Man is always difficult to find. The reader 
of idealistic theory accordingly often says, “ All this seems 
plausible, but what has it to do with hard facts?” Now 
we have pointed out that the “hardness” of particular 
facts depends upon their having a more or less determi- 
nate structure. We human beings, however, never verify 
at any one moment this structure in so far as it is 
“hard,” ¢.e. stubborn, enduring, valid for all men, and 
real beyond the range of our momentary wishes and 
purposes. We can at any moment verify the fact that 
just then we do or do not find present what we seek. 
And we always do verify the fact in some respect, what 
we seek zs present, since our seeking is already an act, 
and our act is already an expression of an idea. We also 
always verify the fact that, in some respect, what we 
seek is not present, since we are always dissatisfied. But 


INTRODUCTION: THE RECOGNITION OF FACTS 41 


the “ objective facts,” in Nature or in the life of Man, 
are not thus ever to be verified, at any one instant of 
our lives. They are real for us, but they are real as the 
acknowledged objects whose structure transcends what 
is now given to us. Our question in the present dis- 
cussion being this, “ What determines us to acknowledge 
as real one rather than another system of particular 
facts ?”’ — we have here pointed out that the first deter- 
mining principle, namely, the Ought, requires us to 
acknowledge at each moment as real certain particular 
facts which, even while they are conceived as limiting, 
constraining, and so determining our acts, are also con- 
ceived as thereby enabling us even now to accomplish 
our will better than we could if we did not acknowledge 
these facts. The “constraint” to which we here refer is 
meanwhile not first known as due to a cause, but comes 
to us in the form of the fact that our will is not now 
wholly expressed. 

The Category of the Ought may thus be defined as 
implying three subordinate Categories: first, that of 
the Objectivity of all particular facts; secondly, that 
of the Subjectivity of the grounds for our acknowledg- 
ment of every particular fact ; thirdly, that of the univer- 
sal Teleology which, from our point of view, constitutes 
the essence of all facts. Odjective are the facts that our 
experience suggests to us, because they are always, in 
some respect, other than what we now consciously find 
presented to us, as the relative fulfilment of our purposes, 
within our momentary experience. In this aspect they 
appear foreign to our will, and they so appear in various 
degrees, so that many writers have maintained that our 


42 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


“sense of resistance” is the fundamental warrant for 
our belief in facts external to ourselves. Such a view 
is inadequate, because it makes use of the category of 
causation as a primitive and irreducible conception. But 
unquestionably the facts do resist our momentary de- 
sires. Subjective, however, are all the grounds for our 
present acknowledgment of the facts. For in recog- 
nizing that our present wills are limited and controlled, 
we also recognize that only through such control can 
they win their determinate embodiment. And so it is 
our own will to acknowledge these foreign and objec- 
tive limitations of our will. And thus no fact can 
furnish to us, wholly from without, the evidence that 
it exists. Nature embodies my will even in appear- 
ing foreign to my will; and thus only can I know that 
Nature exists as a system of facts defined by my ideas, 
but beyond my presentation. And, finally, the synthe- 
sis of these two characters appears in the essential Teleo- 
logical constitution of the realm of facts, —a constitution 
which we shall soon have occasion to point out in the 
region where it seems least plausible, namely, in the 
so-called “mechanical,” or better, in the seemingly non- 
teleological realm of natural law. 

Such, then, is the beginning of our account of the Or- 
ganization of Experience as human wit conceives that 
organization. 


LECTURE II 


RPsit ts) cient 
ee bat ia Whey Pion 


pais ap 


aly! 

4 { 
ic b 
} 


Att 


i. 


/ 


j 


a eee 


LECTURE II 
THE LINKAGE OF FACTS 


THAT all our acknowledgment of facts is a conscious 
submission to an Ought, is a principle which still leaves 
numerous aspects of our world of human experience very 
ill-defined. We turn to a study of some of these aspects, 
and of their corresponding most fundamental Categories. 

Let us give at once a list of the features of our experi- 
ence which are here in question. First, then, the world of 
Facts is a world of Likenesses and Differences. These 
characters we find interwoven in our world with a most 
baffling complexity. We endeavor to deal with them, in 
an elementary way, by discriminating and classifying 
facts. But secondly, as we proceed to classify our world, 
we discover, for reasons which this lecture will have to 
study somewhat minutely, that the acknowledged facts 
appear as forming Ordered Series, and so as more or less 
obviously grouped into Systems, and subject to Laws. 
These laws, which have come to characterize all our mod- 
ern views of Nature, appear to us to be universal in what 
I have called the World of Description. A decidedly 
new deduction of the most fundamental categories of this 
World of Description will be presented in this lecture. 
But thirdly, the very structure of this World of Descrip- 
tion proves, upon closer analysis, that it cannot be the 


final expression of the inmost nature of things. We are 
; 45 


46 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


led, then, in a way that profoundly concerns the interests 
of religion, to view the true world in another light. The 
genuine Facts of the universe are the facts of Life; and 
this, the necessary result of our general idealistic doctrine, 
will get a special expression in consequence of our pres- 
ent way of stating the contrast between the World of 
Description and the World of Will or of Appreciation. 
The one aspect of reality we shall later find embodied in 
the conception that nature’s laws are invariable. The other 
aspect will receive embodiment in our Social Conscious- 
ness. The two aspects will be reconciled in subsequent 
lectures, by means of our Interpretation of Nature. We 
shall maintain that all special physical laws are only 
relatively invariable, and that our deepest relations to 
Nature are social. 

To the consideration of the foregoing Categories in 
general, as leading.up to our later study of Nature and of 
Man, the present lecture is to be devoted. 


I 


And first as to the Likenesses and Differences of Facts. 
The logic of the relations of likeness and difference first 
came to our notice when we were dealing with the prob- 
lem of Realism in our former series of lectures.!1_ We be- 
came better acquainted with the bearing of the general 
concept of Being upon these relations in the course of the 
Ninth and Tenth lectures of that series. Here we have 
to deal with the topic still more at close range. Every 
student of these problems knows that likeness and differ- 
ence are two aspects of the world that simply cannot be 


1 First Series, p. 129, sqq. 


THE LINKAGE OF FACTS 47 


sundered even by the utmost efforts of abstraction. Ina 
sense, any two objects that you recognize as real, or as 
possible, have points of resemblance. In a sense, also, 
any two objects, however nearly alike, have differences. 
Moreover, if you detect a difference between two objects 
and are asked in what respect the two differ, or are asked 
for what is often called the “point of difference,” a mo- 
ment’s reflection shows you that what you name in your 
answer is not only a point of difference, but also a point of 
agreement or resemblance between the two objects. Two 
artists differ in style or in degree of skill. That is, they 
also agree in both possessing style or skill. Two solids 
differ in contour. That is, they both have contour, and in 
so far are alike. No skill of abstraction ever enables you 
to sunder the likenesses and the unlikenesses of facts, so 
as to place the two aspects of the world apart in your 
conception. Each depends upon the other. Where you 
estimate degrees of likeness and difference, and call ob- 
jects “more” or “less” different, you get further illustra- 
tions of the same principle. For two objects do not grow 
appreciably “more” different, for your usual fashion of 
estimate, merely by losing points of agreement. What 
you may often call a “very wide,” or even the “ widest 
possible” difference, comes to your consciousness in con- 
nection with contrasted or opposed objects, such as com- 
plementary colors, violent emotional changes, conflicts of 
will, and the like. But in such cases the difference is 
recognized as resting upon similarity. The complementary 
colors are more obviously contrasted than a color and an 
odor would be. Joy and grief, rage and gentleness, love 
and hate, are alike in being emotions, and the contrasted 


48 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


emotions of each pair resemble each other in being of the 
same more special types. Wills can differ or conflict by 
virtue of their relation to the same objects. On the other 
hand, where points of difference between objects multiply 
until we no longer recognize the correlative agreements, 
the objects in question become disparate for our conscious- 
ness. And disparity means at once the possession of so 
many differences that we can no longer recognize what 
they are, and a kind of secondary appearance of vague 
likenesses; since all objects whose relations we cannot 
clearly make out tend to lapse into a sort of blur in the 
background of our consciousness. There are countless 
differences amongst the miscellaneous objects that one sees 
in a crowded market-place, in case he himself is not seek- 
ing for the wares, or caring for the buyers and sellers. 
One observes that these differences are in one sense end- 
less. One also observes that all this seems much alike to 
him ; because it all means crowd and confusion, and leaves 
him ‘“ indifferent.” 

Herewith, however, we come to a point in the theory 
of our consciousness of likeness and difference which is, 
in my opinion, of critical importance for our whole 
doctrine about the particular facts of the world, and for 
our final interpretation of the problem of the individual. 
The likenesses and differences that we observe in facts 
are not merely thrust upon us without our consent or 
connivance. They are the objects of our attentive Interest. 
And they obviously vary with this interest. Nowhere 
more clearly than in case of our consciousness of likeness 
and difference do we see how significant the will is in 
determining what we shall regard as actual. 


THE LINKAGE OF FACTS 49 


To attend, namely, is to take note of differences (and 
consequently of resemblances) which, were we inatten- 
tive, we should ignore. To turn our attention from 
certain facts, is to disregard differences of which we 
were before taking account. Now we are here speaking 
of attention, not as of a causally efficacious psychological 
process (for cause’ and effect concern us not yet), but 
as of one aspect of that relative fulfilment of purpose 
in present consciousness of which I have all along spoken. 
That to which we attend interests us. In attending to 
a sound, to a color, to an abstract conception, we find 
our purpose in some degree fulfilled by the ignoring or 
observing of some specific likenesses and differences. 
And the correlated likenesses and differences which appear 
before us in the observed facts are such as the direction of 
our attentive interest in some measure favors. 

The world of facts is thus not merely given as like 
or different; it is at any moment regarded as possessing 
the correlative likenesses and differences to which we 
then and there attend. In fact, that reaction to our 
world, of which at the last time we spoke, is in great 
part an attentive attitude of the will, and is in so far 
a regarding of that to which we attend as more definitely 
different from the background of consciousness than it 
otherwise would be. It is perfectly true that we are 
not conscious of creating, z.e. of finding our purpose 
presently fulfilled in, more,than a very subordinate aspect 
of the differences and correlative likenesses that we at 
any moment observe in the facts of our world. That 
is because of that relatively “foreign” character of the 
facts of which we spoke in defining the Ought. But it is 


E 


50 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


also true that the more closely I observe, and the more 
carefully I submit myself to the requirement “to see 
the facts as they are,” the more surely it is the case 
that the attitude of my attention in all this process of 
observation does, in its own degree, determine what 
differences amongst facts shall come to my observation. 
Careful measurement, for instance, that most charac- 
teristic of the processes upon which exact empirical 
science is based, involves a typically objective, “self- 
surrendering,” submissive attitude of attention. Yet, 
on the other hand, we must insist that just this attitude, 
observant as it is of certain small differences which our 
less exact activities ignore, finds what it seeks, and what 
otherwise gets forced by outer nature upon nobody’s 
observation, viz. precisely these small differences them- 
selves, which meet our intent to be exact. What ex- 
perience shows us as to the quantitative aspect of the 
world is, not that such differences exist wholly apart 
from our own or anybody’s attention, but that the 
attentive will to measure does find a successful expres- 
sion of its purposes in experience, so that a conscious- 
ness of small differences in lengths, times, masses, etc., 
comes to be recognized, where untrained and careless 
attention had ignored every such difference. Here, too, 
then, the fact observed is the fulfilment of our intent 
to observe that kind of fact. 

In general, we may say: Likenesses and differences 
are not recognized by us as aspects of the world exist- 
ent wholly apart from any of our specific purposes, but 
as correlative to certain tendencies of our will, i.e. 
to certain interests, which are fulfilled in recognizing 


THE LINKAGE OF FACTS 51 


these specific sorts of likenesses and differences which 
we come to observe. In the concrete, then, we must 
say, our intelligent experience involves at every step 
an interest in regarding facts as like or as different. This 
interest wins its way; and herein consists one aspect 
of the expression of purpose in fact which is characteristic 
of our own view of Being. 

Most clearly this correlation of fact and purpose ap- 
pears in all our Classifications. To classify is to regard 
certain facts as different (just because we find that to us 
certain differences are important), and certain objects as 
in a specific sense alike (because our interest in their like- 
ness predominates over our interest in making certain 
possible sunderings). What classes your acknowledged 
world of fact contains, your own interest in classification 
obviously codperates in determining. Hence the possibil- 
ity of the well-known and endless disputes over whether 
our classifications in science stand for the truth of things, 
over whether our general ideas represent “external reali- 
ties,” and over the other historically significant problems 
of the theory of Universals. From our own point of 
view, these controversies get a very simple solution. Of 
course all classification is relative to the point of view, 
varies with that point of view, and has value only as 
fulfilling the purpose of whoever classifies. And, never- 
theless, the question, How ought I to classify? has an 
objective meaning in precisely the sense in which any 
question about the facts of the world has meaning. Just 
now, when I classify mankind into two groups, you who 
hear me, and the rest of humanity, the classification ful- 
fils a purpose of mine. It involves emphasizing certain 


52 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


presented or conceived differences, and regarding as 
equivalent certain facts that, from another point of view, 
could be subdivided or contrasted. The question whether 
this classification expresses anything “objective,” any- 
thing bearing on the “true nature of things,” is simply 
the question, How far is my momentary purpose in classi- 
fying thus an explicit and conscious expression of a cer- 
tain infinitely wealthy purpose? This larger purpose 
comes to my present consciousness in the form of the 
assurance that I ought to acknowledge humanity and the 
universe, together with all that infinite wealth of meaning 
which my present thought of these objects even now hints 
to me, —and hints to me as that complete expression of 
my will which at every moment I am seeking. 

The true problem about the objective validity of my 
classification is then the problem of the Ought, only here 
considered with reference to the question, What ought 
to be regarded as different or distinct, and what as equiv- 
alent, and in what respect? This is a teleological prob- 
lem. It is to be solved, if at all, upon the ground of a 
consideration of the relation of this moment’s passing 
purpose to the whole world-purpose of which it is a hint 
and a fragment. God distinguishes what it pleases him 
to distinguish. The logical as well as the moral problem 
is, Does my will accord with God’s will? 

So much, then, for Likeness, Difference, and Classifica- 
tion in general. The sum is so far this: Likeness and 
Difference are inseparable aspects of the world. Their 
recognition, and their very existence, are correlated with 
the interests which they fulfil. We express our own 
interests in them by means of our classifications, whose 


THE LINKAGE OF FACTS 53 


objective truth depends upon the significance of the will 
that makes them. 


II 


I pass next to an important special instance of likeness 
and difference, whose consideration will lead us over to 
the other categories of our list. 

The most “subjective” of our classifications, that is, 
the one most expressive of the point of view of a particular 
consciousness, is founded on the distinction which any 
one of us finds himself making between the facts that he 
just now observes, acknowledges, thinks about, and the 
“rest of the universe.” We not only recognize in the 
concrete the facts that we chance to be making the objects 
of our present and conscious consideration, but we all 
acknowledge a realm of truth beyond, whose reality we 
accept, but whose detail is unknown to us. London 
is real to us when we think of it; but our acknowl- 
edgment of its reality is far from being a concrete 
recognition of the wealth and variety of facts, social 
and physical, that we regard as being contained in what 
is meant by the name. It is so with all those distant 
facts which we found Realism using, at one stage of our 
discussion of that doctrine, as examples of independent 
facts that “make no difference” to a given knower, in a 
certain state of his knowledge. The unseen meteors of 
interplanetary space, the waves in the far-off seas, the 
craters in the moon, the ballads and legends of ancient 
_ Tartar tribes, the copper mines of Montana,—all such 
facts, and an infinity of others, equally varied, are lost, 
at any moment of our human consciousness wherein we 


o4 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


do not concretely acknowledge their reality, in the nebu- 
lous blur of what we call “the rest of the world.” 

And so, what we seem to know, at any instant, consists 
of two regions, whose contrast is of more importance, in 
many ways, than is the one upon which we insisted at the 
opening of our former lecture. There we laid stress 
upon the difference between what is presented, at any 
instant of our consciousness, and what is then recognized 
or acknowledged as the expression of the theoretical Ought 
which controls our thinking. Here we draw the line 
of our classification at another place. We distinguish 
what either is presented or else is in some detail the 
object of belief, from what is acknowledged only as a 
whole and undifferentiated. Think of Asia, and think 
of some definite belief of yours regarding Asia, and what 
you think of is an object that, as you believe in it, is 
indeed not now presented to your observation. But it 
is present to your thought. The idea of it, as an Inter- 
nal Meaning, is something of which you are definitely 
conscious. Yet, inaddition to believing this or that about 
Asia, you unquestionably do recognize, however vaguely, 
even at the moment, that Asia is but a part of the uni- 
verse whose reality you also acknowledge. Now this 
universe in its wholeness is real for you, at the moment, 
over and above Asia, because, as we have insisted, your 
idea of Asia is by itself unsatisfying, and so is inevitably 
viewed as something that cannot be expressed alone. It 
is felt to be essentially a fragment; and this feeling con- 
stantly tends to lead you to further thoughts, which still 
remain for your consciousness latent, — thoughts of the 
relation of Asia to the rest of the Eastern Continent, or 


THE LINKAGE OF FACTS 56 


of the relation of the Asiatic peoples to the British 
Empire, or to the world’s history. But in what more 
concrete sense this idea of Asia needs and gets supple- 
ment through other realities, you are not conscious, so 
long as you fix attention upon the assertions about Asia 
alone. : 

Every concrete act of knowledge, in our conscious life, 
includes, then, a more or less deliberate abstraction from 
the background of recognized reality which we conceive 
as the world, for the sake of a clearer attention to certain 
special objects of our present acknowledgment. There 
results a contrast between this foreground and_back- 
ground of knowledge, the one containing the consciously 
distinguished objects of our present beliefs, the other 
containing only what is acknowledged in the lump, as the 
single and undifferentiated whole called “the rest of the 
universe.” 

Now this classification at once arouses a question as to 
its own basis and meaning. The question takes the form 
of the inquiry, What is the true relation of those various 
real objects of which at any moment we do not think in 
the concrete, to the whole state of our knowledge at that 
moment ? 

Realistic theories of knowledge, and in fact most of 
the popularly familiar philosophical views, even where 
they are only in part under the influence of technical 
Realism, reply to this question simply: “The objects 
now thought of by us are not present to our knowledge 
at all. They are absent objects, which do not now 
affect the mind. In some other state of our conscious- 
ness they may acquire a meaning for us. Then they 


56 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


become our objects. But when they are not thought of 
as these and these objects they are not thought of at 
all.” This theory seems simple. It appeals to natural 
prejudices. But it is wholly opposed to our own analysis 
of the relation of Internal to External Meaning. We 
can entertain it no longer. It lapses with the realistic 
conception of Being. 

For if nothing that exists exists independently of 
anything else, if the nature of everything is inevitably 
bound up with the nature of all other things, then 
knowledge, in facing reality at all, faces in some wise 
the whole of it at once, and the only question is how 
this at any instant takes place. The abstractness of 
our momentary knowledge, the vastness of our momen- 
tary ignorance of all concrete facts, no theory of knowl- 
edge recognizes more sincerely than does our own. 
But that all differences rest upon an underlying unity, 
—this is the very thesis which, in our present series of 
discussions, we are trying to make more concrete. For 
us, if you say, **The objects, other than Asia, which 
the world contains while I think, with conscious definite- 
ness, only of Asia, must be objects of other acts of 
knowledge, and are in no sense present to this act,” 
then it is necessary to reply: But the other acts of 
knowledge cannot, in their own Being, be wholly other 
than this one. For were they wholly other, they would 
have nothing really in common with this act. And if 
so, they would not be acts of knowledge at all. For 
two acts of knowledge have in common the real char- 
acter of being knowledge. And this is a single char- 
acter. If common to two facts, it gives them share in 


THE LINKAGE OF FACTS 57 


one Being. Just so, if the other objects besides Asia 
were wholly other than Asia itself, there would again 
be no community ; and if Asia has Being, these other 
objects could have no Being. And so, in knowing 
Asia, I, in some sense, already know these other objects. 
And my knowledge, too, is in some sense one with the 
knowledge that more concretely possesses them. They 
are not, then, wholly absent objects. Even now, I, in 
some sense, mean them all. 

Whoever denies this, after all, by implication, affirms 
it. For he asserts that there exist various objects, and 
various states of knowledge. He implies in his very 
assertion that his own present idea of these existences, 
his present meaning, is expressed in the existence of 
these same facts. This assertion, if true, implies a gen- 
uine unity, including, and by its nature differentiated 
into, the variety, not only of his sundered facts, but of 
these facts and his own knowledge of them. 

And therefore, whoever knows any concrete object, 
knows in a sense all objects. In what sense is he then 
ignorant of any? This is for us the truly important 
problem. 

We reply at once: The objects now concretely ac- 
knowledged are related to the objects not now con- 
cretely known, in precisely the same general sense as 
is that in which, at any instant of our conscious life, 
the objects which our attention focusses are related to what, 
although present, is lost in the background of conscious- 
ness. Ignorance always means inattention to details. In 
our momentary conscious life, such ignorance, so far as 
it relates to the presented contents of sense, is often 


a 


58 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


due to a direction of attention which we can then and 
there alter by an instantaneous and voluntary shifting 
of our point of view. In such cases we speak of volun- 
tary inattention, as when, in order to listen better, we 
neglect the facts of vision, or, in order to think better, 
disregard a bodily discomfort. But even within the 
limits of our momentary consciousness, our attention and 
inattention, although expressions of our will, are not 
always just then alterable at will. And even so, our 
inattention to the countless real facts, which at any 
moment of our human existence we altogether fail con- 
cretely to acknowledge, is due to conditions of our 
attention and of our inattention which we cannot at 
present alter except by the infinitely numerous small 
steps that together make up what we call the process of 
experience. This process of experience itself, of which 
empiricism justly makes much, is not, however, something 
determined wholly from without, by the mere coming of 
the facts to us. It is determined also from within, by our 
going to meet the facts, as we actually and restlessly 
do whenever we inquire, observe, or reflect. And every 
least shifting of our conscious momentary attention is 
one of these small steps whereby we continually under- 
take to make good the original sin, as it were, with 
which our form of consciousness is beset. On the other 
hand, this narrowness of our actual attention, this limita- 
tion to a few concrete facts, and this ignoring of the 
infinite detail of a world that, at any moment, we ac- 
knowledge as real only in its vague wholeness, is a con- 
dition fixed for us, not by a power wholly external to 
our own will, but by the very Will of which our every 


THE LINKAGE OF FACTS 59 


act of attention is the passing expression, namely, by 
the Will whose embodiment is the whole world of facts. 
And this very narrowness itself therefore constitutes, 
not indeed a present momentary act, but a state of our 
own will, a character of our present interest in the 
universe. This character is that we attend to only a 
few facts at a time, while the rest is the vague back- 
ground of the world. Just as the disappointed lover 
of our former illustration is defeated, not without the 
connivance of his own will, although against his main 
conscious wish, so here, too, it is a present constitution 
of our own will that is in a genuine sense expressed in 
our very failure to know the detail of the universe, 
despite our conscious wish to know more than we do. 
For this inner conflict of the World Will with itself, 
this tragedy of satisfaction through the establishment 
and the overcoming of endless dissatisfaction, is a char- 
acter of the universal purpose which we shall learn here- 
after to appreciate, even as here we meet with an instance 
of it in the most elementary phenomena of the knowing 
process. 

Our finitude means, then, an actual inattention, —a lack 
of successful interest, at this conscious instant, in more 
than a very few of the details of the universe. But the 
infinitely numerous other details are in no wise wholly 
absent from our knowledge, even now. They do “make a 
difference to us.” Consciously we know them all at 
once, but know them abstractly, in the form of our 
acknowledgment of the “rest of the world” as real, 
over and above the few things we now recognize in 
detail. And since we are even at this instant, ourselves, 


60 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


in one aspect, a resultant of the meaning of all the “rest 
of the world,” it is true, even now, that were the facts 
which we fail to know in detail, other than they are, our 
appreciation of what we do concretely know, our present 
attentive attitude, would be other than it is. 

This is the general expression, in terms of our own 
theory, of the source of the present imperfections of our 
knowledge. Observe that we do not explain these mat- 
ters by first assuming the existence of a certain being, 
called a finite knowing Subject, an entity amongst 
others, by next pointing out how knowledge gets im- 
pressed upon him from without, say through his sense- 
organs, and by then finally referring his ignorance to 
his lack of impressions. All such views, in so far as 
they are defensible at all, belong either to psychological 
theory, or, at best, to the developed metaphysical theory 
of the many individual Selves, and not to the general 
Theory of Knowledge. But Psychology, as a special 
science, is one result only of a particular human interest 
in the natural world which we shall come to know a 
little better in our fourth lecture. That special interest 
concerns us not as yet. Nor can we here presuppose 
that theory of the many individual Selves which we 
shall hereafter develope. In our general theory of finite 
knowledge we have to do only with the fact that a 
certain state of inattention exists at a certain moment 
of time. We know here, as yet, nothing of soul-sub- 
stances, or even of metaphysical individual Subjects, 
such as, acted upon from without, come to build up 
their knowledge upon the basis of their impressions. 
Nor are there, from this point of view, separate series 


THE LINKAGE OF FACTS 61 


of “mental states,” correlated to physical processes called 
brain states, and capable of being studied as to the laws 
of association which determine their sequence. All such 
conceptions can be viewed either as relatively valid, or 
as metaphysically final, only upon the basis to be estab- 
lished by a general theory of what constitutes our own 
type of knowledge. And for such a theory, — our 
whole present concern,— experience and reality alike 
contain only fulfilment of purpose, complete or incom- 
plete, conditions of interest and attention, expressed or 
partially expressed in present consciousness, — acknowl- 
edgments of facts, and ignorance of facts, — beliefs, and 
truths related to beliefs. And of these only does the world 
of our considerations in this lecture consist. Hence we 
say, While the world in its entirety is the embodiment 
of our whole will, the fragment of that will, which this 
passing moment of human consciousness embodies, is a 
fragment that so far gets expressed in an attention to 
a few only of the world’s real facts, and in such an in- 
attention to the countless others as lets them all lapse 
into the vague background of acknowledged reality as 
“the rest of the world.” Expressing the matter wholly 
in teleological, not at all in causal terms, we can there- 
fore answer the question, “ Why do we not now con- 
sciously and explicitly know all things, since the Being 
of all things is involved in our present meaning?” by 
saying simply, Because, as we are, we do not attend to 
all things, but only to a few. Or, again, Because we 
are not duly and sufficiently interested in the “rest of 
_ things,” so that they fade into the background of knowl- 
edge, as the forests upon distant hills are lost in the 


62 NATURE, MAN AND THE MORAL ORDER 


contour of the rocky masses and become one with the 
whole. Thus simple, and in seeming no doubt paradoxi- 
cal, is our formula for what is to be finite. 


Ill 


But the simplicity of the formula will prove endlessly 
fruitful. For this theory of our relations, as finite 
knowers, to the real world, predetermines what Form 
we ascribe to the system of facts whose reality we 
acknowledge. 

We dealt at some length, in our study of the Third 
Concept of Being, with the definition of both physical 
and mathematical things as “objects of possible experi- 
ence.” But from the point of view which we have 
reached at the present stage of the inquiry, the facts that 
we acknowledge as real are for us, at any one conscious 
instant, Objects of Possible Attention. That is indeed 
not their whole Being. But it is one valid aspect of their 
Being. In the undifferentiated background of our pres- 
ent consciousness of “the rest of the world,” all those 
real facts are even now present, but not as distinct 
objects. Any one of them could now be known, if only 
we were able to attend to its actual presence. Hence its 
real relationships are such as to permit, upon occasion, its 
discrimination from other facts in the way in which con- 
scious attention discriminates. 

Here, however, we meet, in its most elementary form, 
with that abstract way of viewing the world which expresses 
itself in the categories of the World of Description. The 
situation, at the moment, is this: A certain attitude of 


THE LINKAGE OF FACTS 63 


will, just now unchangeable by us, has determined each 
of us to a stubborn present inattention to the vast totality 
which we just called, in our discussion, “the rest of the 
world.” To undertake to define the concrete facts of 
that world by a direct application of our general concept 
of Being is prevented, at the outset, by the consideration 
that the inattention in question hides from us not only 
the particular facts themselves, but the reflective knowl- 
edge of what it is that we ourselves will. For of all our 
human ignorance, our reflective ignorance as to the Self 
seems most stubborn. It is just this limitation of ours 
which requires us from moment to moment to view the 
facts in terms of the category of the Ought. We must 
submit in order to succeed, and must be conscious of sub- 
ordinating ourselves before we can hope to find ourselves 
expressed. Or, to state the matter in other terms, we are 
in a position where we can only hope to view the world 
as, in the concrete, the expression of our will, in case we 
first can learn definitely to act ; while, on the other hand, 
we can view our action, at the present stage, only as a 
reaction. We have to presuppose our facts in order to 
make concrete our purposes, while we can define our facts, 
if at all, only in terms of our purposes. This is the fatal 
circle of our finitude, from which we can indeed escape, 
as we do in some measure, at every instant, by acting, — 
more or less blindly, — more or less at haphazard, — seek- 
ing in the process of experience both our own purpose, 
and the means of executing ‘it, both our dream, and the 
interpretation thereof. 

But when we still try to give our undertaking the 
clearest definition possible at this stage, the only way 


64 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


is to repeat, deliberately, a process which, in a still 
blinder form, one sees in the early life of any being 
that is destined to win intelligence. Not knowing 
what it craves, the young creature first acts vaguely, 
driven by unconscious impulses. Its action is so far 
planless and disorganized. When trial and error have led 
to some few little successes, it then begins to organize 
its life in a more definite way—how? By watching its 
environment. By discriminating. By engaging in a 
sort of action which involves, in a sense, a temporary 
resignation of all more immediate efforts towards self- 
expression. This stage of growing intelligence surrenders 
itself to what, in us men, becomes the deliberate under- 
taking to describe the facts of experience as they come, 
and so to win indirectly a plan for what may prove to be 
the expression of the Self. 

This effort, to be sure, is still a kind of action. It 
is creative as well as passive. It involves in its least 
movement an acknowledgment of what is not given, 
as well as an observation of what 7s given; for, as we 
have seen, there is no rational conception of experience 
except by means of a linking of present and past experi- 
ence; and this act of linking is always a transcending 
of what is merely found. But then, this watchful, dis- 
criminating activity is seeking to attend to what is con- 
ceived as already there in the vast background of the 
world; and it abandons, for the time, the immediate 
effort to win the expression of any other purpose but 
the purpose to wait, and to distinguish. So (to use an 
example from what appears to us as the workings of a 
far lower form of intelligence than our own) I see, 


THE LINKAGE OF FACTS 65 


from my library window at home, sometimes, a young 
cat, despairing for the time of succeeding in her cherished 
desire to catch the gray squirrels that play about from 
branch to branch in the trees, and that occasionally tempt 
her to vain crouching and springing when they descend 
to the ground in pursuit of nuts. She has long hoped 
to find the world the expression of her Internal Meaning 
by getting her claws upon them. But these swift phe- 
nomena still baffle her finitude. They escape her sly 
approaches with a maddening agility. They scold her 
from above, and throw down bits of bark to insult her. 
At length she abandons all apparent efforts at direct 
attack. It becomes her will to lie for hours nearly 
motionless, simply watching them. She chooses, as it 
were, to pursue science rather than any more drastic 
course of action. She will learn their ways, and dis- 
criminate one of their habits from another. In her dull 
patience, she seems to give herself over to the study of 
the World of Description. It is an enlightened patience 
of a sort somewhat similar to this that has created for 
us our sciences. 

Now my purpose just here is not to define the methods 
and the tests that are used in any special science, but 
to point out the most fundamental conceptions to which 
this way of taking the world leads us, so long as we 
try to abstract it from any more deliberately creative 
fashion of viewing things. It is plain that in this way we 
can hope for no final view of the whole truth of things. 
We shall be dealing with a realm of abstractions, yet 
they will prove to be fruitful abstractions, everywhere 
founded upon final truth, although in themselves not 


r 


66 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


final. For, that the world permits us, up to a certain 
point, to describe it, does help to throw light on the 
true nature of things. For the rest, I shall of course 
attempt here no account of the psychological genesis of 
our describing intelligence, or of its categories. I am 
concerned only with the logical genesis of these ideas, 
that is, with the way in which their simpler forms deter- 
mine their more complex ones. 

We return then to the view that the real world con- 
sists of facts which are, so to speak, waiting for us to 
attend to their presence. What constitution must such 
a world possess ? 

In reply to this question, I must next point out 
certain accompaniments of the process of discrimina- 
tion which are of fundamental importance for our inter- 
pretation of the structure of any realm that we are to 
conceive as an object of possible attention. If I discrim- 
inate attentively between two facts in space, such as 
two marks on a blackboard, or two sides of the same 
coin or die, I observe, in general, that there is some- 
thing between these two discriminated objects, and also 
that there are regions of space between which these two 
distinguished objects are to be found. So that, in such 
a case, one discrimination demands, as it were, another. 
One analysis of a whole into elements calls for further 
analysis. And every union of discriminated elements 
into a new whole (as, for instance, the two sides of the 
die form, when taken together with the material between 
them, a single whole), — every such union, I say, leads 
us to distinguish only so much the more clearly between 
this new whole and the “rest of the world,” which 


THE LINKAGE OF FACTS 67 


limits the observed portion so as to set it between other 
portions. Thus, at all events in such cases as our own 
consciousness of the extended world, our process of 
attentive discrimination tends to become a Recurrent 
Process,! 7.e. a process in which every step leads to con- 
ditions which demand, or at least appear to demand, a 
repetition of the very type of act that led to the step in 
question itself. For if I have discriminated, then, at 
least in this sort of instance, I have found a basis for 
a repetition of discriminations. 

Now it is also plain, at least in case of such an object 
as the world of extended things, that this very recurrent 
character of our process of discrimination becomes to us 
a motive for interpreting what we take to be the “real 
structure ” of space itself. Because we are led, upon any 
clear distinction of positions in space, to an observation 
of an interval between two positions, while this interval 
itself becomes the basis for new discriminations between 
the positions that lie once more within that interval, 
we find ourselves started upon a process which we can 
define as recurrent, that is, as capable of repeating itself 
indefinitely ; and since we see no reason why this pro- 
cess should meet with any limit in the nature of extended 
facts, we come to the familiar postulate of the infinite 
divisibility of space. And because every such observed 
collection of spatial objects, once discriminated, and then 
viewed as a whole, turns out to be between still other 
regions of space, which its very presence leads us to 
discriminate from itself, this process of discrimination 


1See the Supplementary Essay to the First Series, p. 495, sqq., for 
the general definition of such a process. 


68 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


also becomes recurrent, and we are led to the other 
familiar postulate of the boundlessness of space. 

What such an instance shows is: (1) that, in certain 
cases at least, our tendency to discriminate two objects 
leads us by itself to discriminate a third object, m, as 
between them, and to distinguish other objects, let us say 
f and l, between which both a and 6 are; (2) that this 
observation may of itself lead to new discriminations, and 
so become, or tend to become, recurrent; and (38) that 
the result hereof may be to give us an idea of an infinitely 
complex objective structure which we are then disposed 
to ascribe to a system of facts (such as the points in 
space). So here the law of our discriminating process 
gives us a conception of a law of structure in the world 
of facts. This law may then be to any extent confirmed 
by further experience. 

That not only space, but also time, suggests similar 
recurrent processes of discrimination, is familiar. 

Now these well-known instances lead us to a more gen- 
eral question. Is this character of the process of dis- 
crimination something general in its nature, so that, 
wherever we discriminate, the conditions of such recurrent 
processes of finding new differences are present, or is the 
tendency to look for points between points, and so forth, 
a tendency determined by special conditions, such as 
those of our experience of space and time? And what 
follows with regard to the conception that we tend to 
form of the structure of the world of facts? 

At first, the answer would seem to be that we may, 
upon occasion, come to perfectly clear limits in our dis- 
criminations. In the world of our pure conceptions, we 


THE LINKAGE OF FACTS 69 


find that between successive whole numbers, such as 2 
and 3, 8 and 4, it is impossible to conceive other whole 
numbers inserted, so long as one takes the whole numbers 
in their natural order. And the same holds true, in the 
world of empirical things, regarding any simple series of 
objects whose type is that of the whole number series, 
where every object of the series is followed by a nezt one, 
with nothing between that belongs to the series. A series 
of this type we shall hereafter call, in accordance with 
recent mathematical usage, a Well-Ordered Series. But, 
on the other hand, as our Supplementary Essay showed 
at length, any collection of objects in the world is part of 
some infinite collection; and so the objects of any well- 
ordered series are themselves portions of the expression 
of a recurrent process, or of a well-ordered series of such 
processes. And in every such process, as was shown in 
the Supplementary Essay, an infinite number of dis- 
criminations are already implied. Hence, although it is 
indeed possible to find cases where we can no longer look 
for objects between a given pair of objects which have 
already been discriminated, it still appears that discrimi- 
nations which are logically completed, merely by our 
distinguishing between two objects, are not to be found. 
Discrimination seems to be not merely of pairs, but of 
triads, or of larger systems of facts.} 


1 For the sake of later use, it is proper to note here, regarding the defi- 
nition of the Well-Ordered Series just given, that, while its type is that 
of the whole-number series, in so far forth as every term has a next 
following term, recent mathematical usage has extended the concept 
to include the so-called Transfinite Well-Ordered Series of Cantor, in 
which infinite series may follow infinite series without end, but so that 
every term has its own next following term. 


70 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


It is then worth while to examine the matter a little 
more closely. For if we can find whether or no every 
discrimination logically leads to some such recurrent pro- 
cess as the empirical instance of our consciousness of 
space has just exemplified, we may come to a result of 
great importance for the formulation of the Categories in 
terms of which we conceive the structure of the world of 
facts, so far as we view them merely as objects of possible 
discrimination. 

And may I venture already to anticipate something of 
what this result will prove to be? Matters of this kind 
are not to be studied, except by a consideration of very 
subtle and abstract logical relationships. The inquiry, 
even in the fragmentary form here adopted, can be toler- 
able, in this context, only by virtue of its bearings on 
more concrete issues. May I, therefore, say, at once, 
regarding the outcome, simply this? I hold that by 
studying more closely what the process of discrimination 
logically implies, we shall be led to see something regarding 
what enables us to view all acknowledged facts as linked in a 
single Ordered System, in which countless definable Series 
of real facts are interwoven; and hereby we shall be led to 
a more definite idea of what is meant by the acknowledg- 
ment of Law in the natural, in the social, and in the moral 
order of the world. Thus our notions of the Unity of the 
world will become, in one aspect at least, more concrete. 

How come we to the recognition of Law as an aspect of 
the real world? By means of some primal “intuition,” 
which (despite its name) inflicts itself upon us as an 
opaque assurance? Our Idealism knows of no such 
primal assurances. Every assertion must bear criticism. 


THE LINKAGE OF FACTS val 


No assertions can escape such a test by pleading that they 
are “primal.” Or again, has the Creator, in making our 
souls, stamped upon them a system of principles which is 
in preéstablished harmony with the real order, so that our 
metaphysical theory, if true, will teach us that our ideas 
of order must correspond to an order present in the facts 
beyond us? With Kant we reject such a Prdformations- 
System der Menschlichen Vernunft. Our special reason 
for rejecting it is contained in our thesis, so fully set 
forth in Lecture VII of the previous Series, to the effect 
that correspondence is never the most fundamental rela- 
tion between Idea and Object, and that, accordingly, the 
world is not merely a world of facts to which our knowl- 
edge conforms. Our own view has in common with Kant 
(from whom we, of course, derive this portion of our funda- 
mental doctrine) the thesis that the laws of the objective 
world are the expression of Categories which the nature 
of every subjective process, and the Unity of Appercep- 
tion wherein all truth is embraced, together determine. 
Only, for us, the Categories are not stamped, as Kant’s 
Categories were, upon a foreign matter, but are in some 
measure, z.e. as far as they are really valid at all, at once 
objective and subjective. This last thesis we have in 
common with many forms of recent Idealism. But our 
own doctrine is not wholly identical with any of these 
forms. The differentia of our doctrine will be found, 
however, in the method whereby we define the special 
Categories, and in the special form that we accordingly 
give to them. Our logical genesis of the concept of real 
Law will determine the definition that we shall give to 
the term. It will also determine the limits of the subjec- 


72 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


tion of fact to law in the universe. It will free us from 
that bugbear of popular metaphysic, the superstition that 
whatever is, is somehow subject to an absolutely rigid 
Necessity. We shall see that necessity is only one aspect 
of the fact-world, and the more abstract one, which is a 
valid aspect only in so far as it serves to make possible 
Individuality and Freedom. 

To my mind, as I may at once say, our best single word 
for expressing what is essential to a lawful order in the 
world of facts is the term Series. Facts are subject to 
law in so far as they are arranged in definable series, or in 
systems of interwoven serial orders. The relation of 
physical cause and effect, whose consideration we have so 
often postponed in our previous discussions, becomes a 
definite relation at all only when it is viewed as an in- 
stance (and by no means the most important instance) of 
the existence of series of facts in the universe. All com- 
prehension of particular facts which goes beyond a bare 
abstract classification of them, and which still falls short 
of a satisfactory teleological view of their meaning, de- 
pends upon conceiving them as in the same series, or sys- 
tem of series, with other facts. This is the essential 
nature of the categories that have to do with Law. As 
we shall see, the general concept of Series is common to 
the World of Description and to the world of the actual 
life of the Will. Only the types of Series differ in these 
two worlds, the Well-Ordered Series being characteristic 
of the life of the Will just in so far as it is self-conscious, 
and consequently always knows what next to do, while the 
World of Description is characterized, in general, by 
another and less perfect type of serial order. 


THE LINKAGE OF FACTS 73 


To illustrate empirically of what wide application the 
concept of Series is, and how it is present wherever the 
concept of Law is present, and vice versa, is useful in 
beginning a discussion of this category, although any- 
thing like present completeness in such illustrations is 
hopeless. You find serial order wherever you look in 
the world of definitely conceived or of exactly describable 
fact. Space and Time illustrate our principle in their 
every detail. They and the Number-Series are the most 
familiar of the forms in which serial order appears to us. 
As for more special classes of instances, I conceive my 
own life as a particular and connected series of events, 
and yours in the same way. All the more significant 
social relations involve, directly or indirectly, the estab- 
lishment of serial order-systems such as those of debtors 
and creditors, of friends and neighbors, of fellow-citizens, 
of teachers and pupils, of official superiors and inferiors, 
of the various grades of relationships in families, and so 
on indefinitely. For a social relationship of the type of 
debtor, friend, neighbor, fellow-citizen, teacher, superior, 
ancestor, cousin, has the logical character illustrated by 
saying that if A stands in this relation to B, B may, and 
frequently does, stand in the same relationship to C, C to 
D, and so on, —the collection of social individuals A, B, 
C, constituting in this way an ordered series, sometimes 
of a very limited, but more often of a very widely ex- 
tended scope. In natural history, the classification of liv- 
ing forms, the study of the structures and functions of 
organisms, the accounts of the evolution and decay of all 
types of life, involve the conception of ordered series. 
Geology, on its descriptive side, is similarly a science of 


74 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


serial order-systems of rocks, fossils, formations. Nor 
does this character cease to mark the conceptions of sci- 
ence when one passes to chemistry, to physics, to astron- 
omy, or to mechanics. ‘The serial system of the chemical 
elements, which forms so important a topic of considera- 
tion in recent chemistry, is a notable example of how 
various masses of facts which once seemed in certain 
respects ultimate and mutually sundered, tend, upon fur- 
ther examination, to assume their places as stages of a 
single, though highly complex, order-system. Any natu- 
ral process which is capable of a mechanical description, 
—such as the processes studied in the more exact regions 
of physical science, — is made comprehensible by conceiv- 
ing all of its occurrences as stages in a single series, or 
system of series, of what the mathematicians call “ trans- 
formations.” Such a series of transformations is exempli- 
fied by the successive states of a body cooling under 
definable physical conditions, or by the successive configu- 
rations of a system of bodies moving under the influence 
of definable forces. In astronomy, the apparent places of 
the stars are reduced to order by the use of a system of 
astronomical codrdinates, just as we reduce to order our 
knowledge of geographical positions on the earth’s sur- 
face by the conceptions of latitude and longitude. But 
such ways of viewing facts are conceptions of definitely 
complex order-systems of places. In recent astronomy, 
moreover, the classification of the stellar spectra has led 
to a still tentative arrangement of stars in order-systems 
whose bearing on problems of evolution seems to be 
important. At all events, one thus finds a new sort 
of definable relation between the physical processes 


THE LINKAGE OF FACTS (6s 


occurring in the very bodies that would appear, from 
one point of view, to be amongst the most discon- 
nected and mutually sundered objects of the visible 
universe.! 

And now, as to the more universal meaning of this 
serial structure of our world of facts, we may note 
in passing still one further consideration. It is a com- 
monplace that the exact sciences of Nature have owed 
their exactness, up to the present time, and in the main, 
to their quantitative treatment of facts. The logic of the 
conception of Quantity has its own very complex prob- 
lems; but thus much is clear: Any system of quan- 
tities, such as distances, times, masses, temperatures, 
pressures, is a serial order-system of facts, or is a complex 
of such serial order-systems. For the relationships, Equal, 
Greater, and Less, which mark systems of quantities, in- 
volve arrangements in serial order-systems. Therefore, 
one has much to say for the thesis that the whole logical 
value of the quantitative conceptions in science is due, 
not to any peculiar advantage of the concept of quantity, 
as such, but to the exactness of the forms of serial order 
which are discoverable in case of any quantitative realm 
of facts. From this point of view it is not, then, the 
quantitative character of exact science which is its most 
essential feature, but the precision and relative exhaustive- 
ness of its reduction of its own ranges of fact to serial 


1 That plans of action, reflective systems of Ideas, and the structure of 
the Self in general, illustrate the concept of Series in the form of the 
Well-Ordered, or self-representative Series, we have shown in the Sup- 
plementary Essay, and we shall have occasion to return to that fact 
soon. 


76 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


order-systems. Not Quantity, but Order, is the funda- 
mental category of exact thought about facts.? 

Now what is the logical derivation of the category of 
serial Order? The answer to this question requires us to 
return to the study of what is logically implied in coming 
to discriminate between any two objects. To sucha study 
I must devote a little space, despite the painfully abstract 
nature of the topic.? 


LY, 


In certain cases, as we have seen, to compare attentively 
two objects, as to their differences and likenesses, is to 
observe a situation which implies that something is between 
the two, and that the two themselves are again between 
another pair of objects. The process of discrimination 
and of synthesis thus initiated proves, at least in some 
such cases, recurrent, or self-repeating, and leads us to 
form postulates about the objective structure of the sys- 
tem of facts to which the things in question belong. In 
order to estimate more carefully the meaning and the uni- 


1T am principally indebted for the substance of this remark to Mr. 
Charles Peirce, and to the study of Dedekind and Cantor. See the 
article on the Logic of Relatives in the Monist, Vol. VII, p. 205, sqq., 
by Mr. Peirce. 

2 The best way of forming, from a psychological point of view, a 
general sense of the practical importance of the process of conceiving 
facts in series, is to read the brilliant passages on the topic in Profes- 
sor James’s larger Psychology (Vol. I, p. 490; Vol. II, pp. 644-669). 
What Professor James there takes as a fundamental psychological feature 
of the process of comparison, I here try to analyze in certain of its logi- 
cal aspects. The discussion in the Supplementary Essay in our First 
Series has already dealt in full with that primary form, the Number- 
Series. Here we deal mainly with a derived type of Order. 


THE LINKAGE OF FACTS (i 


versality of such processes, we next need a generalization 
of the relation expressed by the word between. 

Such a logical generalization has been suggested, 
although for a purpose decidedly different from that of 
my present inquiry, by Mr. A. B. Kempe, in a very re- 
markable paper on “The Relation between the Logical 
Theory of Classes and the Geometrical Theory of Points.” } 
If I venture to follow out the suggestion of Mr. Kempe’s 
work, it is in my own way, and his discussion must not be 
viewed as responsible either for the intent or for the out- 
come of my speculations. In Mr. Kempe’s research, what 
is most important for us at the moment is that a relation 
of a logically identical character is shown to exist in two 
apparently very different cases. When three points are 
on the same line, one of them is said to be between the two 
others. But when two logical classes of objects, a and 4, 
are so related to a third class, m, that this class includes 
all the objects which are common to both a and 6, and at 
the same time 7s included within the class of the objects 
which are ezther a or 6, then Mr. Kempe defines the class 
m as a class between a and 6. ‘The interest of the identifi- 
cation of the relation between in the geometrical and in 
the logical realms, lies in the proof, given at length by Mr. 
Kempe, that the exactly definable properties of any com- 
plete system of logical classes, or “‘ Universe of Discourse,” 
are, up to a certain limit, cdentical with the properties of 


1 Published in the Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, 
Vol. XXI, for the year 1890. Another statement of his main results was 
printed by Mr. Kempe in Nature, Vol. XLIII, pp. 156-162. These papers 
have been far too much neglected by the students of exact logic to whom 
they were addressed. Their interest goes far beyond that of the special 
idea which I here borrow from them. 


78 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


a geometrical system of points. Mr. Kempe shows, in fact, 
that the system of points possible in a space of any number 
of dimensions differs from the system of logical classes 
possible in any “ Universe of Discourse,” merely by the 
addition of a single new property, viz. that which is 
geometrically expressed by saying that two straight lines 
have only one point in common. This very striking iden- 
tification of laws belonging to the kinds of orderly arrange- 
ment present in such different realms as a system of ideal 
logical classes and a system of points in space is associ- 
ated, in Mr. Kempe’s discussion, with an observation 
regarding the nature of the generalized relation between, 
which I here propose to use, although I have no time to 
state either fully or very exactly the reasoning that I 
found upon this observation. 

If one visible point were between two others on a line, 
and if all three were (to fix our ideas) luminous points, 
and if you went just far enough away from the line 
to be unable longer to observe the place of the point a 
as diverse from that of the point 6, so that the two 
blended to your eye in one luminous point, then ob- 
viously m, the intermediate point, would blend with 
both of them. Just so, however, if you abstract from 
the difference between the classes a and 6, while still 
recognizing, in a measure, the possibility of objects 
that, as a fact, belong to one or to another of them, 
then, so long as you thus regard the two classes as 
equivalent, it makes no conscious difference to you 
whether an object is in the class a, or in the class 8, or 
both at once. So that you do not observe, in that 
case, Mr. Kempe’s intermediate class m as a class different 


THE LINKAGE OF FACTS 79 


from either a or 6. The same result follows if you not 
merely neglect or abstract from the difference of the two 
classes, but positively know them to be identical classes. 
For in that case both a and 6 become identical with m. 

Generalizing from these cases, one may go quite beyond 
Mr. Kempe’s instances of the classes and the points and 
say, Let there be any system or collection of objects 
such that, if they are really different, these objects can 
be discriminated by an attention once properly directed. 
Let it be also possible for a given intelligence not to 
discriminate two objects belonging to that collection. 
Or again, let it be possible for this intelligence, although 
discriminating them, still to regard two of them at will 
as “equivalent,” that is, as such that their difference 
does not count for a given purpose. Then let an object 
m of the system in question be so related to a and 
to 6 that 7 you, either by inattention, neglect, or 
deliberate choice, disregard their difference, so that in 
any way they blend or become equivalent, m thereupon 
of necessity blends with both, or becomes equivalent to 
both. In this case we shall say that, in the generalized 
sense, m is such a member of the system in question as to 
lie between a and b. The mathematical way of sym- 
bolizing this relation would be briefer. It would take 
the form of merely saying: ‘“m is such that, if a=6, then 
m=a=b. And if this is the case, m is regarded as 
between a and 6.” 

Now the advantage of this formal generalization is the 
power that it here gives us of facing an important logical 
aspect of all discrimination, comparison, and differentia- 
tion. We usually say that the relation between a and 


80 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


6, where we discriminate them, or regard them as un- 
equal, is a relation of the pair of them, a dual relation. 
The generalization here founded upon Mr. Kempe’s paper 
will show us that contrast and comparison involve, in 
general, a relation of at least three objects, viz. a and 6, 
and something else that helps us to keep them apart, or 
that <dlustrates the point wherein they differ, or that 
helps to determine the sort, degree, or direction of their 
difference. ‘This something may be an object of the 
exact character here ascribed to m. That is, it may 
be conceived as an object such that, 7f a and 6 were to 
blend, or were to be viewed as equivalent, it would 
blend with both, or be viewed as equivalent to both. 
In such a case, the relationship emphasized by the con- 
trast belongs not to the pair, a and 6, but to the triad, 
a, b, and m. In other words, it is what one may tech- 
nically name a triadic relation. The possibility of observ- 
ing this relation is due to the fact that, since our 
discriminating attention is a voluntary act, possessed of 
its own internal meaning, we are able to see, by reflection, 
how one discrimination follows from another. 

Let us look yet a little more closely at the considera- 
tions which come into view whenever we make any defi- 
nite discrimination. I attend toa and to 6. I note that 
they are different. It follows, as we saw at the outset, 
that they differ im some character, and that they also, 
although of course in another respect, agree as to this 
same character. It may be color in which they differ. 
Then they agree also in having color. In magnitude, — 
then they agree in having magnitude. Tell me the 
character in which they differ, and I will at once under- 


THE LINKAGE OF FACTS ro) 


take to show you the sense in which, in respect to this 
same character, they also agree. I inevitably note, 
then, if I look closer, the “common nature” of a and 6. 
Of course I can never, in any realistic sense, so abstract 
this “common nature” as to make it appear by itself 
as an object existing independently of their difference. 
Yet it is there, and arouses my interest. Otherwise I 
should not be comparing a and b. They, as they come 
to me, appear as specifications of this “common nature.” 

Now when I view them as such specifications, the 
problem of the One and the Many arises afresh. How 
can this One Nature be the same in these two? This 
ancient question is here a question of fact. It is a 
question about what I actually observe when I discrim- 
inate. As it comes to me, it is already a question about 
a Triad, not as yet of objects, but of aspects of the whole 
situation before me. There is an unity here. There is 
also the diversity of these two objects ; and this unity 
is not something merely glued to this diversity in an 
external way. The situation is this: That a certain One 
(viz. the “common nature” of these two objects) is 
observed, not as something over and above these two, 
but as in them, —as thetr nature, diversified into their 
differences. Yet this one is itself, nevertheless, con- 
trasted with these two; for neither of the two, a or 8, 
is by itself the other member of the pair; while the 
“common nature” is expressed in them both. How 
this can be, I so far am led to inquire. But that this is 
so, the discrimination implies. Here, then, I have one 
of those “bare external conjunctions” of the One and 
the Many of which Mr. Bradley, in his Appearance and 


G 


82 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


Reality, has so much to say, and which, for him, constitute 
the insoluble problem of our finitude. 

Now the effort to answer the question thus raised is 
not merely an idle subtlety of the philosophers. As a 
fact, all the sciences are full of specific contributions 
towards the answers to just such questions. Yes, even 
unreflective common sense daily undertakes to do some- 
thing towards answering problems of the sort. Common 
sense and science, however, go about the matter more 
concretely than the philosophers have usually done. In 
ordinary life we recognize the problem of the presence of 
One in a pair of discriminated objects only by proceed- 
ing at once to look for still another instance of the same 
kind of likeness and difference. Baffled by the so formal 
triad just named, viz. the triad of the One nature and 
the two expressions, we help ourselves by searching out 
a more concrete triad. We compare, if possible, both 
objects with a third object, as concrete as themselves, which 
serves us as a “common standard.” This third object 
is preferably an already known one, whose choice sums 
up the results of a long course of previous experience. 
To help us at all, however, it must obviously possess 
something of the “common nature” that interests us in 
6 and ec. It will, of course, differ from both of them. 
But most of all it helps us when it is so much like a and 
b, and yet so definitely unlike them, that the triad, a, 6, ¢, 
leads us to definite observations of the sort characterized 
in the foregoing exact definition of the relationship 
between. If one of the triad is such that upon reflection 
we observe a particular order of dependence amongst the 
acts whereby we distinguish the three objects, ze. if one 


THE LINKAGE OF FACTS 83 


object appears, as in our present sense, between the two 
others, then we have the first beginning of a single series 
of distinctions. And the rule of our discriminating intel- 
ligence is that, while the problem of the One and the 
Many is hopelessly baffling if we deal merely with two 
terms, and while it is equally hopeless so long as we deal 
with an indefinite number of objects not arranged in 
series, we begin to see the light so soon as we get one 
of our objects between the two others, and so begin to form 
a series possessing a definite character and direction. 
And by “direction” we here mean, not spatial or temporal 
direction, but direction of logical dependence. 

And now why does this getting of one object between 
two others help us? I point out that the generalized 
definition of the relation between, which we owe to Mr. 
Kempe, suggests at once the answer to this question. I 
can comprehend the relation of One and Many just in so 
far, and only in so far, as I observe the unity of my own 
purpose demanding, itself of itself, a variety of expres- 
sion.t Now, when I discriminate, I at first find the fact 


1As our Supplementary Essay showed at length, the precise under- 
standing of the relations of One and Many which we get in case of the 
Number-Series, or of any ‘‘ self-representative system,’’ is due to the fact 
that there our own purpose in creating the system is just such a con- 
sciously self-differentiating Unity. Hence, as I there said, the order of 
the number-system is the original type of all order in heayen and upon 
earth. But we are here following out a process that leads us to a con- 
ception of order-systems very different from the number-system. For in 
the latter, each term has a next following term. In the system that we 
shall now be led to conceive, no term has a next term. Yet we reach 
these other systems by means of the first form of order, since, as we shall 
see, the recurrent character of our discriminations is the source of these 

_ derived order-systems. 


d 


84 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


of difference as something that is indeed an expression of 
my attentive purpose, but that is still more an instance 
of the limitations of my insight. I look for light, and 
so far I find a problem. The object a differs from 6. 
How? I cannot so far tell; for I do not yet see the 
structure of the difference as the expression of any one 
plan. But when I conceive, and then am able to find 
in experience, some third object ec, which behaves like the 
m of my former definition, then, while my insight is still 
infinitely limited, I see the differences of a, 6, and ¢, or, 
(as we may now say, in case ¢ is the intermediate object 
of the triad), I see the differences of a, 6, and m, as such 
that the recognition of the difference of 6 from a follows 
for me inevitably upon the recognition of the difference, 
either of a and m, or of 6 and m, or of both. I make this 
fact clear to myself by trying the ideal experiment of 
annulling or disregarding the difference of a and m, and 
of 6 and m. I can try this experiment with exactness, 
because, in making it, I am observing my own voluntary 
acts. I observe hereupon that the difference between a 
and 6 vanishes. In convincing myself of this fact, in 
seeing how the distinction of 6 from a follows from first 
distinguishing one of them from m, I gradually begin to 
find that the nature expressed in a is such that I am led 
over from a to b by a single definable process of drawing 
distinctions. Or again, I thus conceive the nature of a not 
as static and as merely given to me, but as a stage in a 
process that now has an actively appreciated and logically 
significant direction, —a direction determined by my own 
purposes, and also by the facts. Hereupon I can pro- 
ceed in the direction of 6 by passing, in the course of 


THE LINKAGE OF FACTS 85 


this process, through m. For the very discovery of m, 
and of the dependence now in question, constitutes for 
me the direction of this ideal process. I now begin to 
construct the Many by one sort of activity. And in 
doing so, I also find what structure my objects themselves, 
as so far known to me, appear to possess. 

It is perfectly true that such a process as this is far 
from answering all my questions about the One and the 
Many. On the contrary, it constantly arouses new ones. 
But it also suggests a systematic plan for attempting to 
move towards an answer to every such question. Let me 
find, if possible, by means of further experience, not only 
the triad, a, m, 6, but also yet other objects similarly dis- 
posed,—a whole series of further intermediaries (m, 
between a and m, m, between mand 6, and so on). If I 
succeed ih my search, I then gradually get, by means of a 
well-ordered series of acts of my own, a series resembling 
a collection of points in order on one line, thus : 


Creer Hla otro Vis ot cla Ml #6 oo Oe 


But there is room, in this series, for the conception of 
new intermediate terms indefinitely ; and I can continue 
the search for such in my experience. The objects of the 
series are such that any three form a triad, with one of 
the triad between the two others (in our present sense of 
between), while all the triads are thus linked in one series, 
beginning with a, ending with 6, and having interme- 
diaries such as are determined by a recurrent process of 
conceiving, and, if possible, of finding in experience, ever 
new triads within the series. ‘The whole series, so far as 
I can conceive and verify it at all, will define stages 


86 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


of a single process of ideal construction, which I can 
conceive in volitional terms, as a process that expresses 
how one can pass from a to 6, or (to borrow a mathe- 
matical term, again) can transform a into 6. And the 
unity of this series, as the expression of a single voli- 
tional process, will be due to the fact that I can every- 
where see, as I pass along the series, how one distinction, 
or act of holding apart two objects, depends for its very 
existence on another and previous distinction. For in this 
way my ideal process, going from distinction to distinc- 
tion, establishes between every pair of distinct objects, an 
intermediary, which is viewed by me as making their dis- 
tinction possible, or as holding them apart. Yet the inter- 
mediary terms, while they hold apart, also link. 


Vv 


This is, then, our general statement of how it is that 
every discrimination tends to lead us to the definition of 
series of objects, observed or conceived. At the same 
time we begin to see how and why every such series helps 
us to comprehend the structure of the world that we are 
to acknowledge as real. Now my main thesis here is 
that, in the World of Description, all understanding of 
facts in terms of general laws depends upon the conception 
and verification of such serial order in facts as I have 
been characterizing. The whole logic of our conception 
of general law in this World of Description turns, 
in my view, upon the single question, What for us 
is implied in discriminating a from b? For the world 
acknowledged as beyond is presented to us at every 


THE LINKAGE OF FACTS 87 


moment as a single whole, within which the facts are 
present. These facts are for us, in one aspect of their 
nature, oljects of possible attention. Attention begins to 
succeed when we discriminate. And so we have for one 
postulate about the acknowledged facts this: They are 
such that any pair of them could be known together through 
a single possible act of discrimination and comparison. 
This is the primal notion of linkage. Any pair of real 
objects are thus linked. But this postulate leads to 
others. Whatever pair of objects there may be in that 
world, since both members of the pair could be the 
object of a single act of discriminating attention, those 
two objects are already like each other and different from 
each other. Hence the single discrimination of the two 
presents a new problem, that of the union of One and 
Many. What is the unity, what the variety of this pair ? 
The only way that we have of proceeding towards a solu- 
tion of this problem, so long as we are still ignorant in 
the concrete of what One Will is expressed in these 
objects, is by passing from the pair to the triad, and defin- 
ing an object that lies between the members of the first 
pair, in the sense of Mr. Kempe’s generalized definition 
of this relation. We then seek for this fact in experience. 
If we find it we are helped towards an understanding of 
the One and the Many. For in so far as we define such 
a triad, we discover how we could conceive one member 
of our original pair as transformed into the other, by 
means of a process that involves first distinguishing the 
intermediary between the two from one of the extremes, 
and then the other member from the object thus distin- 
guished. The direction of the process of transformation 


88 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


thus defined is determined by the logical sequence, accord- 
ing to which one distinction is observed to follow from an- 
other. But because we are thus led better to comprehend 
what the objects discriminated are, we now make still a 
further and provisional postulate: Between any two objects 
of the world there is always another to be found. Our 
power to illustrate tis postulate in our empirical investi- 
gations is very wide, but is also always limited. And the 
postulate itself would indeed fail wholly to receive appli- 
cation beyond a certain definite point, if we could only 
come to understand all the objects of our world as a sin- 
gle ordered series of the type of the whole number-series. 
For then any pair of directly successive objects would 
have no object between them. But, then, to be sure, the 
objects of the world, if so understood, would no longer 
need to be discriminated merely in pairs. They would 
be logically given, all at a stroke (like the whole num- 
bers), as an expression of a single self-representative Pur- 
pose,! and we should have to look no further than this 
purpose for the transparent definition of all our facts. 
But in discriminating pairs and then triads of facts, we 
come as yet upon no purpose, but our own descriptive 
purpose, of trying to find the One in the midst of this 
given Many. Our own process of discriminating proves 
indeed to be recurrent, but it looks always for yet another 
object between any two objects already distinguished. 
Hence, while the process of defining the intermediate 
terms is a Well-Ordered Process, that leads us from each 
stage to the next one, it tends to make us conceive a 
series of facts in which no term has any next neighbor, 


1 See once more the Supplementary Essay, p. 501, sqq. 


THE LINKAGE OF FACTS 89 


because, as we conceive, there is always another between. 

So the postulate: Between any two there is a third, is the 
working postulate of our process of comprehending things 
through our successive discriminations. And this is the 
process upon which all scientific description of given 
facts depends. 

Now the definition of between suggested by Mr. Kempe’s 
papers has quite freed us from the need of limiting the 
application of this postulate to the extended world, or to 
the numerical and quantitative aspects of things. The 
points on a line, as conceived by the geometer, the series 
of rational fractions arranged in order as greater and less, 
and the series of the real numbers, all indeed illustrate 
our postulate.! They are conceptual systems of objects 
especially wrought out by the mathematician in such wise 
as to conform to the postulate. And every homogeneous 
system of measurable and continuous quantities (masses, 
distances, durations, forces, temperatures, etc.) is con- 
ceived by our exact science as also to illustrate this postu- 
late. Yet the formation of series has application to 
qualities as well as to quantities,—2in fact, to whatever 
we can undertake to discriminate. Hence there is no 
obvious limit to the variety of objects that we can under- 
take to deal with in this way. We can compare colors 
and shades as well as points and magnitudes. Europe 
and America, compared geographically, or socially, or 
politically, lead us to attempt the formation of series of 


1 All these systems are so ordered that no term is conceived to have a 
next neighbor. Yet the process whereby we reach the conception of each 
is always a Well-Ordered Process, in which each of our own acts leads 
- to the next one. 


90 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


objects. Feelings, deeds, persons, lives, stellar spectra, 
chemical elements, processes of evolution, types of doc- 
trine, modes of conduct, «esthetic values, in brief, beings 
of all grades, invite serial treatment as soon as they are 
compared. Various series, already conceived, can be 
combined in the most varied ways, so as to give us sys- 
tems of objects that no longer can be arranged in any 
single serial order. We thus get Systems whose series 
are interwoven and interrelated in most manifold fashions. 
Mr. Kempe’s example of the classes in a single “ Universe 
of Discourse,” while it by no means exhausts the com- 
plexity of the relations that are definable through con- 
ceiving various systems of series connected together, is 
so complex that the space of the geometer, we have seen, 
corresponds to one only of the special forms definable 
within that system. 

The conception of systems of facts such that any two 
members of the system may be viewed as linked by series 
of intermediaries, is thus indeed capable of application in 


1Mr. Kempe’s system illustrates, amongst other things, very definitely 
the fact that the generalized conception of a series of intermediaries, 
linking two given objects, @ and b, is an infinitely variable concept. 
If two objects can be linked by one series, they can, in general, be 
linked by an infinity of other series of intermediaries. Thus all the 
classes in any Universe of Discourse are, by Mr. Kempe’s definition, con- 
tained between any class @ and the negative of that class, not-a. Again 
between any class a and a class ¢ included within a, you can establish 
an infinite number of different series of intermediate classes. It is thus 
also in space, if you consider the various curves by which two points can 
be connected. But the spatial relation of points on a line is inadequate 
to express all the possibilities of the generalized relation of between. In 
Mr. Kempe’s system the same object « can be defined as between a and 
b, b and c, and c and a, and can yet be different from all three. 


THE LINKAGE OF FACTS 91 


the most widely sundered regions of our experience. If 
we disregard the empirical limitations that we constantly 
meet with in our attempts to find the desired intermedi- 
ary terms, and if we consider only the foregoing postu- 
lates as defining for us how we are to conceive our world 
of acknowledged facts, we hereupon get a view of this 
world which may be summed up as follows: We may 
omit, for the time, from our notice, the before-mentioned 
possibility of a knowledge of the world that would reduce 
it to a single serial order of the general type of the Well- 
Ordered Series of whole numbers, where every term has 
one coming neat after it. If we abstract from that possi- 
bility, we are left to the conception that Between any two 
facts there are to be found various series of intermediaries 
of the type now defined. The world thus regarded will 
consist for us of all these interwoven series, and will con- 
stitute a single System. The work of our knowledge, if 
we were to grow in knowledge indefinitely, on just these 
lines, would consist in the Description of this system. 
But this description would have the same general char- 
acter that geometry illustrates in case of the space-world, 
which is only a particular example of such a linked sys- 
tem of interwoven series. Any such system would be 
capable of description in terms of Laws. The laws would 
express features common to various of the series present 
in this world. And the method of discovering laws 
would be, in its most general outlines, this : — 

The whole system of the world may be viewed as made 
up of various different systems. For whole systems of 
facts can be discriminated from one another, and then 
linked by series of intermediate systems, precisely as a and 


92 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


b have been in our discussion of series in general. If, 
comparing two of these subordinate systems (let us say 
A and B), we conceive also, in some comprehensive 
fashion, a series of intermediary systems that link A and 
B together, we conceive what the mathematicians would 
call the “series of transformations,” whereby we can, at 
least in our conceptions, if not in our observations, pass 
from one of these systems to the other. Thus, let A be, 
no longer, as in one of our earlier illustrations, a point in 
space, but a large solid body. And let B be this same 
body viewed by us at another time in another place, or 
else let it be another body of precisely the same shape 
and size as A, occupying another place. Let us suppose 
A and B compared together in one act of attention. Then 
we can conceive of a system of movements (consisting of 
translations from place to place, of rotations about one or 
another axis, or of a single translation followed by a 
single rotation), —a system whereby A could be brought 
to take precisely the place that B now occupies. Some- 
times this serial system of movements can be actually 
observed. Or again, let A be the system of the characters, 
habits, and dispositions of the people of England just 
before the colonization of America; let B be the system 
of characters and habits and dispositions of the people of 
the North American Colonies at the middle of the Eigh- 
teenth Century. Then we can follow (although, in this 
case, only very inexactly) the series of transformations that 
English civilization early underwent in its passage to 
American soil. Other instances without limit could be 
named. 


Between any two systems, A and B, there thus lie 


THE LINKAGE OF FACTS 93 


intermediate systems of conceived, or, on occasion, of 
observed transformations, whereby one passes, in idea or 
in experience, from A to B. Now because of the gen- 
eral character of the relation between, as defined in the 
foregoing, all the intermediate transformations in any 
one system will be capable of being viewed as stages in 
a single definable process of passing from A to B. This 
process tends to acquire the unity of a single volitional 
act. And this process (if we abstract from certain 
complications that we need not here consider) may 
always be viewed as having one general direction, that 
leads from A to B, through the intermediary stages. 
But A and B will, as systems, resemble one another as 
well as differ. That depends upon the very nature of 
discrimination. And by virtue of the nature of the 
between relationship (just in so far as the intermediate 
process has one type and direction), all the intermedi- 
ate stages will resemble each other in the very features 
in which A and B resemble each other. For all the 
stages between A and B are, by definition, facts that 
would not be viewed as different from either A or B, 
unless A and B were viewed as different each from the 
other. Hence all the intermediate stages must have in 
common the features that A and B have in common. 
These features then remain unvarying throughout the 
series of transformations in question. Denote these 
unvarying features (or, in the more technical way of 
stating the case), the “invariant characters of this sys- 
tem of transformations,” by the letter I. Then the 
whole process here in question, whether it is merely 
conceived, or is observed, will be definable as “a series 


94 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


of transformations, beginning in A, ending (so far) in 
B, and leaving invariant the characters I.” 

Now all that we mean by the laws governing a sys- 
tem of facts is that within this system certain series of 
observed or of validly conceived “ transformations ” can 
be defined, such that throughout the whole series of 
transformations some definable characters of the objects 
that are undergoing the transformation do not vary. 
Wherever I can say that, in passing from A to B, through 
a series of stages which I have a right to view as real 
facts in the world, I observe, or validly conceive, that 
all the stages have certain uniform or “invariant” char- 
acters, I then have discovered a law which, in this way 
of interpreting the world, I conceive as expressing the 
nature and structure of the facts that I acknowledge as 
real. 

Thus, moving a body from one part of space to an- 
other leaves, of itself, the shape of the body unchanged. 
Whoever discovers that, discovers the property of space 
defined by the so-called “axiom” or law of “free mo- 
bility.” All physical and chemical changes, so far as 
known, leave the mass of matter unaltered. This is 
another example of law. All the transformations which 
a gravitating system of bodies undergoes are such as to 
leave invariant the precise system of relationships which 
that law defines. And so one could continue indefinitely. 
What laws our discriminating intelligence and our dis- 
covery of the serial linkages shall lead us to define, this 
view of our world leaves us unable to predict. But 
that some laws will come to be acknowledged, this is as 
certain as that the serial method of interpreting the 


THE LINKAGE OF FACTS 95 


structure of our world has, within its own limits, 
validity.} 


VI 


But what are the limits of this way of viewing things ? 
What is the precise nature and range of its validity? 

We have followed the logical genesis of the categories 
of what we may now call The World of Description, 
from their simplest forms to the point where we must 
abandon the attempt to develope here more fully their 
detail.? 

The most fundamental of these categories is that of 
Likeness and Difference. Upon the basis of a consid- 
eration of the nature of this primal conception, we come 
to view the Objective World as, in one aspect of its 
Being, a realm of Objects of Possible Attention. The 
Categories of Relation, which have to do with the con- 
nections existing amongst these Objects, we could not 


1 The first systematic attempt to classify the laws present in a sys- 
tem by regarding these laws as the ‘‘ invariants ”’ of ‘‘systems of trans- 
formations’? was, so far as I know, stated in Klein’s Hrlanger 
Programm of 1872: Vergleichende Betrachtungen iiber Neuere Geomet- 
rische Forschungen. Klein regarded the types of laws demonstrable in 
the various different sorts of geometry (Projective Geometry, Analysis 
Situs, etc.) as so many species, each definable in terms of the invariants 
of a Group of Transformations. The conception has since been extended 
to other fields of science. Owing to the irreversible character of many of 
the serial processes present in our experience, the ‘‘ Group”’ character, 
in the narrower sense of that term, will be absent from many of the 
systems of transformations with which science has to deal. But a law 
will still be the expression of the ‘‘invariants’’ of a system of trans- 
formations. 

2 We shall return, in our Fourth Lecture, to the consideration of these 
categories as they appear when applied to our actual study of nature. 


96 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


exhaustively study. Only the fundamental relation Be- 
tween, in the generalized sense, attracted our closer 
attention, and has represented for us, in this discussion, 
all the Categories of Relation, although, of course, the 
very nature of serial order implies also the existence of 
countless other relations. On the basis of this concep- 
tion we reached the Category of Ordered Series, although 
not in its only form. For the Category of Number, and 
of the Self-Representative System, or Well-Ordered 
Series, was fully discussed in our Supplementary Essay, 
and is here presupposed. Nor have we attempted to 
discuss the Category of Continuity, which would find 
a place in a full treatment of the Ordered Series. On 
the basis, however, of the Concept of Series, we indicated 
the nature of the more complex Category of the Ordered 
System, in which many series are interwoven. And thus 
we were led to an indication of the scope of the Category 
of Law as it appears in the World of Description. 

So much for the mere list of concepts. Plainly these 
are indeed fundamental notions regarding the realm of 
the facts that we ought to acknowledge. But are they 
exhaustive? Has our world of fact no other aspect than 
this ? 

I answer at once, the world of the objects of my pres- 
ent possible Attention, where attention means simply 
the discrimination of what is already assumed to be there, 
is by no means the final or determinate world that the 
Will seeks. For, first, it is on its face a world of 
abstract aspects, and not of finality. It is a world of 
Validity, and not explicitly a world of Individuals such 
as our Fourth Conception demands. It is, moreover, 


THE LINKAGE OF FACTS 97 


defined in terms of a fundamental postulate that always 
has an alternative over against it, the alternative ex- 
pressed by saying that were the world concretely viewed 
as a Self-Representative System, then, for one who 
grasped the facts in the order of that system, the recur- 
rent process of the interpolation of intermediate terms in 
series already recognized would no longer express the 
final truth. And finally, this conception of the World 
of Description, although it is constantly suggested by 
certain aspects of experience, meets constantly its empiri- 
cal limitations. We frequently make discriminations 
that we have to accept as final, without being able to 
comprehend them any further through discovering, in 
our experience, new intermediate terms. So it is when 
we find a limit to our power to observe finer distinctions 
of shades lying between two shades of gray. So it is, 
still more markedly, when we fail to find definite signs 
that between two individuals whom we believe to be 
real (as, for example, between two men), there are all 
the possible intermediate grades of individual men. Our 
empirical world appears to us often discrete. The prob- 
lem of the “missing link” is not confined to the well- 
known instances that the theory of evolution brings to 
our notice. And it is, above all, individuality, wher- 
ever experience suggests it to us, that seems associated 
with a certain discreteness. 

Now it is perfectly sure that, so long as we view the 
world merely as the field of possible discriminations, of 
consequent series, and of intended abstract descriptions, 
we deal with all these empirical failures by noting that 


to discriminate two objects and yet to be unable to find 
H 


98 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


an intermediary, is, so far, to be baffled as to the rela- 
tion of the One and the Many. Hence, so long as we 
are trying merely to describe what we find, and possess 
no other clew, we postulate, where we do not observe, 
the intermediaries. Our thinking, under the influence 
of such postulates, moves in the direction of conceiving 
every discrete series as a mere fragment of a continuum. 
And to “understand” the world, in terms of ideal con- 
tinuity, is often our provisional goal. But the deepest 
principle of our procedure, even in this case, is the 
assurance that the One and the Many can be reconciled, 
and that the real world is the expression of our Purpose. 
In conceiving the World of Description, we view the 
facts, however, as if the only purpose that they could 
fulfil was the purpose of being discriminable. But per- 
haps even this purpose can be reached better in some 
other way. Perhaps the real world forms in its whole- 
ness a Well-Ordered Series of a discrete type. For such, 
as we saw in the Supplementary Essay, is the charac- 
teristic form in which Selfhood is expressed. 

Let us look, however, a little more closely at the 
sense in which this World of Description is also a world 
of abstraction. Here our attention is at once attracted 
by a consideration that I have so far kept in the back- 
ground. Our principle has so far been this, “ The real 
world is even now virtually present to my thought at 
every moment, as that whole which I acknowledge. My 
task in trying to come to clearer consciousness about 
the world is to discriminate what it is that I acknowl- 
edge.” It is indifferent, from this point of view, where 
I begin. Any aand 6 will do to start my investigation. 


THE LINKAGE OF FACTS 99 


Observe facts, and then look for their linkages. That 
is the one maxim of my procedure, —the maxim of de- 
scriptive science stated in its most abstract form. The 
choice of a specialty is indeed a personal matter ; and 
because of human narrowness any one man has to confine 
himself to his own specialty. But all specialties have, 
from this point of view, their place in the endless task 
of describing the world. Was haben Ste neues gefunden ? 
— this is the question which they ask of the laboratory spe- 
cialist in Germany. Anything will do, if only it belongs 
to the range of one’s specialty. The great world is there 
in the background all the time, awaiting the discriminat- 
ing attention, now of this and now of that specialist. 
What you find must indeed be new, and, nevertheless, 
capable of being linked to the old. For, after all, even 
mere discrimination is an expression of the will, which 
seeks novelty. But the plan of one’s discriminating 
procedure is indeed a self-surrendering plan. There is 
a heroism of sacrifice about it. I will give myself up 
to the facts so far as in me lies. I will find myself, only 
by losing myself in attentive observation of what is 
already there. My construction shall always be merely 
an acknowledgment of what I find. 

But now, for such a method of work, not only any fact 
will do to begin with ; but any point of view from which 
I set out will lead me to the same ideal result if only I 
continue this process of description. This world of facts, 
arranged in these abstractly conceived series, is anybody’s 
world. All of us start from different points of view. 
We all, if we find this sort of truth, shall come in the 
end to define our results in terms of corresponding series. 


Oe Ae 


100 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


And this variety of possible points of view is not merely 
a chance accompaniment of description, but a necessary 
consequence of the way in which this series-forming- 
process of looking for what lies between any two objects 
proceeds. For from this point of view there is nothing 
about the objects, as thus discriminated, which makes itt 
necessary to take them up in your investigation in one order 
rather than in another. Projective geometry deals with 
the facts of space in one way. Metrical geometry deals 
with them in another way. A higher development of 
mathematical thought shows how, by the addition of cer- 
tain conceptions, one can pass from the series of con- 
ceived objects and relations of objects that projective 
geometry finds in space, to the series of the metrical 
geometer, and vice versa. And now there seem to be 
two equally justified ways of portraying the metrical 
properties of space. Or, in another field, in preparing 
the way for the description of the process of evolution, 
the historians and the geologists, the botanists, the 
zoologists, the astronomers, —all contribute their vari- 
ous series of facts to be linked together in the larger 
generalization ; and it is a mere historical accident in 
what order, or by what specialty, the particular series 
are brought to light. Hence, in general, since the 
discriminations upon which the formation of series 
depends might be made in any order, beginning with 
any a and 6, the World of Description is, even apart 
from our human social conceptions, a world where the 
same results are valid for various methods of approaching 
and so of expressing these results. It is a world, therefore, 
where truth is never discovered in its complete and final 


& 


THE LINKAGE OF FACTS 101 


individual form. For the various possible ways of defining 
series of facts are all equally justified. But to say this is 
to admit that they are all equally abstract and inadequate. 

When you count eggs, it “makes no difference” in 
what order you count them. But when you are to enjoy 
a Symphony, a great deal depends on the precise order 
in which the notes are played. When the astronomer 
makes a catalogue of stars, the stars appear indifferent 
to the order in which their positions are set down. But 
when you undertake to perform any rational task, such 
as getting through your day’s duties, or serving your 
country, or growing in a sense of your relations to God, 
everything turns upon the order in which you do your 
work. Whatever expresses a single purpose has, as the 
expression of that purpose, an irreversible succession. 
One deed comes first, another next, and so on forever. 

And now this holds true as to precisely the personal, 
the truly volitional aspect, of even those very processes 
of a descriptive sort (counting eggs, cataloguing stars, 
discriminating facts in their series), — such as I have 
here used to exemplify the apparent indifference of the 
serial systems of the world of description to the order 
in which you, or other observers, take note of their 
presence. The eggs and the stars appear unconcerned 
about the order in which you chance to take up your 
task of describing their serial variety. But in your life, 
that is, or ought to be, as orderly as the symphony or as 
serving God and your country, it makes a great differ- 
ence to you, when you count the eggs, whether or no 
you count “six” after having counted “five,” or skip 
in counting one or more of your well-ordered number- 


% 


102 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


names. And in the life of the astronomer, considered as 
a man codperating in a social task with other astronomers, 
the order in which the catalogue is made may be as sacred 
as any other moral task. Now the Reality is not the world 
apart from the activity of knowing beings, —it is the 
world of the fact and the knowledge in one organic whole. 

It follows that we simply do not tell the whole story 
of our live relations to the world when we report the 
results of our formation, through successive discrimina- 
tions, of series of facts. The world is unquestionably 
there to be known. Its facts are objects of possible 
attention. They can be discriminated. They do form 
series. But that is not the whole truth about them. 
The world is also there to express a perfectly determinate 
and absolute purpose. Its facts are incidents in a life, 
—yes, in a life of many lives, —a rationally connected 
social system of beings that embody purposes in deeds. 
The facts can therefore not only be discriminated, but, 
in so far as we ever come to be conscious of their true 
sense, they are linked in a teleological unity. And this 
unity determines not merely what is the same for many 
points of view, but what is uniquely present, once for 
all, from the divine point of view, as the one true Order 
of things. And the true Series is that of the Self, and 
of its expression in life. The true variety is that of 
various individual Selves, who together constitute, in 
their unity, the Individual of Individuals, the absolute. 
Beyond our own circle of concretely known facts, there are 
not merely series of data to be discriminated, but volitional 
processes to be estimated, appreciated, and conceived in 
their true serial order, as the stages of the world’s life. 


THE LINKAGE OF FACTS 103 


Now this conclusion is suggested, apart from our own 
special Theory of Being, by any fair reflection upon 
what happens when discriminations are made, when 
series of facts are found and described, when various 
observers, proceeding from different starting-points, 
reach, like the projective and the metrical geometer, 
or like two students of an experimental science, the 
same abstract results. For, as a fact, one has only to 
reflect in order to see, as we just saw in the case of 
counting the eggs, or of cataloguing the stars, that the 
process of discrimination, or of forming series, is itself 
an incident in a life whose Internal Meaning lies not 
merely in the acknowledgment of facts, but also in the 
creation of novelties. Our interest in discriminating 
is expressed in the joyous “I see” of the discoverer. 
But this is the joy of living, of creating, as well as find- 
ing, a world. For in merely acknowledging facts one 
may indeed be said to find (in the sense that I here 
have in mind) something that, as one conceives, another 
might have found as well. But one is conscious of 
creating, only in so far as one believes that the expres- 
sion of one’s purpose is an unique and individual fact, 
that has nowhere else in the world of Being its likeness.! 
In consequence, the whole truth is that one discriminates, 
indeed, at every step, and in doing so acknowledges what 
one does not regard as one’s present creation. But this 
very act of discrimination is, in the life of one who sees, 
a present, an individual, and in so far a creative expres- 
sion of purpose. And the world, in permitting this ex- 


1 See the discussion of the relations between freedom, activity, and 
individuality in the First Series of these lectures, p. 466, sqq. 


104 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


pression, reveals its true essence better than the mere 
description of the serially arranged data reveals the 
final truth of things. Whoever observes merely the 
series of linked and discriminated facts, has therefore 
but to reflect in order further to observe that one’s dis- 
erimination and linking of facts ts itself also a fact, yet 
not a fact in the series discriminated, — but rather one 
stage in a life of self-expression. Thinking, also, is 
living. Science is justified as a type of action. And 
this is why we never can be content with discovering 
that the world is describable, but must note that all 
description is valuable as a process occurring in a life. 
That is why, moreover, we must always hold that the 
very facts themselves which we can at present interpret 
only in terms of Description, are the incidents of an 
orderly life of divine Self-Expression. 


Vil 


All then that we said at the outset about the presence 
of the world in the background, as the acknowledged 
reality in which we are to discover all the facts that 
ever we are to come to acknowledge in the concrete, 
was, as far as it went, valid. And the conclusion that 
we drew as to the way in which we, from our point of 
view, must undertake to solve the problem of the One 
and the Many by the serial discrimination and linkage 
of facts, expresses a significant, although partial, aspect 
of our search for truth. But the other aspect of the 
truth returns of itself whenever we reflect. The world 
is indeed there in the background. But it is there as 


THE LINKAGE OF FACTS 105 


embodiment of Life, and not merely as the object of 
discrimination. It is a world with which we stand in 
Social Relations. Its life codperates with ours. 

And now, as to the true serial order of this world of 
Life, we have, from the outset of our exposition of our 
Fourth Concept, recognized that, whatever the world con- 
tains, it contains in the form of a Self-Conscious Being. 
In our Supplementary Essay we showed at length that 
a Self, as a real being, has a certain form of expression, 
which inevitably involves a serial structure, but that this 
serial structure, in its main outline, is most truly repre- 
sented by the form of the series of whole numbers, rather 
than by the form of a series between any two of whose 
terms, further terms without end are interpolated. A 
series of the latter type is indeed describable. Nor is it in 
the least objectionable by reason of the infinite complexity 
of its conceived structure. For, as the Supplementary 
Essay showed us, the real world is certainly infinitely 
complex in structure, and there is no contradiction in con- 
ceiving an infinitely complex object as real. But, from 
our point of view, the world of a Self, whatever conti- 
nuity of internal structure it may in some aspects possess, 
is in its principal form of expression embodied in a diserete 
series of acts, of individual expressions, of stages of self- 
representation and of self-revelation. We cannot here 
repeat the argument by which this result was reached in 
the Essay in question. But experience at any moment 
shows how I am conscious of my own deeds, of my prog- 
ress, of my acts of attention, and of my approaches to 
selfhood in any way, in the form of a discrete series, in 
which one stage or act of life is followed by the neat. The 


106 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


principle of my life, as I come to myself, and, knowing 
what I want, proceed to do it,is a principle winning 
novelty through Recurrence. Again and again, I proceed, 
from one act to the next, and so always to new acts. But 
neither an interpolation of deeds between my own deeds, 
nor yet a consciousness of unbroken continuity in my 
own acts, would help me to understand myself. My 
order, then, so far as I grasp it at all, is, like the order 
of the number-series, discrete. That is shown in my very 
process of discriminating something between any two 
accepted facts, so far as it is my own process. For that 
process, as we saw, is a recurrent one. I find that a is 
not next to 6, but has m between. Then I conceive m1, 
inserted, then m?, and soon. But as I do this, my act of 
conceiving the new intermediaries comes next after a 
former act ; and another act of conceiving intermediaries 
between a and 6 comes, in my life, next after this one. 
Now if, with this fact in mind, I look back on the 
world which I attempted thus to describe, I find that the 
limitation which experience often seems to set to my pos- 
tulates about the discrimination of facts, may well be 
founded in the deepest nature of things. The true world, 
the World of Values or of Appreciation, as rightly viewed 
by an absolute insight, would be a world of Selves, form- 
ing in the unity of their systems One Self. This world 
would appear to such an insight asa Social Order. For 
the categories of the World of Appreciation, as we shall 
later more fully see, when we come to the study of our 
human Social consciousness, are the categories of the Self 
in Social form and expression. But as I discriminate the 
world, taking account now of a and now of 8, my discrimi- 


THE LINKAGE OF FACTS 107 


nation, determined as it is by the interest of my individ- 
ual development, does not seize upon the facts in the 
order in which they are actually determined by the Will 
whose expression is the world. As I take the facts, they 
come to me as incidents in my individual life. Since I 
fail to grasp the One in the Many in these cases, I postu- 
late the intermediaries, and have a right to do so in so far 
as that can further my own purpose of comprehension, 
which itself is a part of the world-purpose, and which is 
accordingly sure, within its limits, of representing one 
aspect of the truth. The true world, however, is not the 
world of description, but the world of socially inter- 
related Selves. And the world as we describe it, is the 
world viewed in the order of our own processes of de- 
scription, which as incident in our human life, have their 
value, but are expressions of the true world order, only in 
so far as they reveal to us the life of things. Our con- 
clusion is that the true series of facts in the world must 
be a Well-Ordered Series, in which every fact has its 
next-following fact. The series discoverable by us in the 
World of Description are characterized by the prevalence, 
for our view, of the relation Between. Hence they do not 
appear to us as Well-Ordered Series. But just in so far 
they are inadequate expressions of the truth. 

We are now prepared to consider the more special form 
which these general categories will take when we come to 
study our human experience of Nature and of our fellows. 
But before we make that transition, there is still some- 
thing to be said regarding one further fundamental con- 
ception, — that of Time. 


LECTURE III 


i 


u 


a 


LECTURE III 
THE TEMPORAL AND THE ETERNAL 


THE world of the facts that we ought to acknowledge 
is, in one of its aspects, present (so we have maintained) 
as the Object of Possible Attention, in every act of finite 
insight. Finitude means inattention to the wealth and 
organization of the world’s detail. 

An obvious objection to this thesis is furnished by the 
nature of Time. Howcan Past and Future, which “ do not 
exist,” be in any sense “ present,” in the undistinguished 
unity of the facts which any finite thinker at any instant 
acknowledges ? 

In the Ninth Lecture of the First Series, we briefly 
considered the topic of temporal Being.! We have to 
return to it here with more detail. There is an ancient 
distinction of the philosophers between the Temporal and 
the Eternal. It must be plain at this point, that we 
ascribe to the true world a certain eternal type of Being. 
Yet how shall we reconcile this with our equally obvious 
treatment of the world as existing in time? Plainly we 
have here a question that is of great importance for any 
understanding of the categories of experience. It 
belongs, then, in the context of these earlier discussions 
of our present series of lectures. Moreover, it is one that 
will constantly meet us later. The relation of Time to 


1p. 407, sqq., pp. 420-421. 
111 


112 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


Nature will be of central concern to us. When we come 
to deal with the individual Self, we shall again have to 
face the question: In what sense has the Self of the 
individual a purely Temporal, and in what sense an 
Eternal type of reality? And before we can answer this 
question we must be more precise than we have yet been 
in defining the terms Time and Eternity. The issue 
here involved has a significance not only theoretical, but 
also intensely practical. It will need therefore a close and 
deliberate scrutiny. Time, as we shall soon see, is a con- 
cept of fundamentally practical meaning. The definition 
of the Eternal, on the other hand, has very close relations 
to the question as to the ultimate significance of all that 
is practical. Any rational decision as between a pessi- 
mistic and an optimistic view of the world, any account 
of the relations between God and Man, any view of the 
sense in which the evils and imperfections of the Uni- 
verse can be comprehended or justified, any account of 
our ethical consciousness in terms reconcilable with our 
Idealism, —in brief, any philosophical reconciliation with 
religion and life, must turn in part upon a distinction 
between the Temporal and the Eternal, and upon an 
insight into their unity in the midst of their contrast. 
The problem at issue is one of the most delicate and, at 
the same time, one of the simplest of the great issues of 
philosophy. I shall here have to deal with it at first in a 
purely theoretical fashion, and shall then proceed to its 
practical applications. For both aspects of the question 
we are now fully prepared. 


THE TEMPORAL AND THE ETERNAL 113 


A 


Time is known to us, both perceptually, as the psy- 
chologists would say, and conceptually. That is, we have 
a relatively direct experience of time at any moment, and 
we acknowledge the truth of a relatively indirect con- 
ception that we possess of the temporal order of the 
world. But our conception of time far outstrips in its 
development and in its organization anything that we are 
able directly to find in the time that is known to our 
perceptions. Much of the difficulty that appears in 
our metaphysical views about time is, however, due to lack 
of naiveté and directness in viewing the temporal aspects 
of reality. We first emphasize highly artificial aspects of 
our conception of time. Then we wonder how these 
various aspects can be brought into relation with the rest 
of the real world. Our efforts to solve our problem lead 
very easily to contradictions. We fail to observe how, in 
case of our more direct experience of time and of its 
meaning, various elements are woven into a certain 
wholeness, —the very elements which, when our artificial 
conception of time has sundered them, we are prone to 
view as irreconcilable with one another and with reality. 

Our more direct perceptions of time form a complex 
sort of consciousness, wherein it is not difficult to distin- 
guish several aspects. For the first, some Change is 
always occurring in our experience. This change may 
belong to the facts of any sense, or to our emotions, or 
to our ideas; but for us to be conscious is to be aware of 
change. Now this changing character of our experience 
is never the whole story of any of our clearer and more 


I 


114 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


definite kinds of consciousness. The next aspect of the 
matter lies in the fact that our consciousness of change, 
wherever it is definite and wherever it accompanies defi- 
nite successive acts of attention, goes along with the 
consciousness that for us something comes first, and 
something next, or that there is what we call a Succes- 
sion of events. Of such successions, melodies, rhythms, 
and series of words or of other simple acts form familiar 
and typical examples. An elementary consciousness of 
change without such definite successions we can indeed 
have; but where we observe clearly what a particular 
change is, it is a change wherein one fact succeeds an- 
other. 

A succession, as thus more directly experienced by us, 
involves a certain well-known relation amongst the events 
that make up the succession. Together these events 
form a temporal sequence or order. Each one of them 
is over and past when the next one comes. And this 
order of the experienced time-series has a determinate 
direction. The succession passes from each event to its 
successor, and not in the reverse direction; so that herein 
the observed time relations notoriously differ from what 
we view as space relations. For if in space 6 is next to 
a, we can read the relation equally well as a coexistence 
of a with 6, and as a coexistence of 6 with a. But in case 
6 succeeds a, as one word succeeds another in a spoken 
sentence, then the relation is experienced as a passing 
from a to b, or as a passing over of a into 3, in such wise 
that a is past, as an event, before 6 comes. This direc- 
tion of the stream of time forms one of its most notable 
empirical characters. It is obviously related to that 


THE TEMPORAL AND THE ETERNAL 115 


direction of the acts of the will whose logical aspect 
interested us in connection with the consideration of our 
discriminating consciousness. 

But side by side with this aspect of the temporal order, 
as we experience this order, stands still another aspect, 
whose relation to the former has been persistently pointed 
out by many psychological writers, and as persistently 
ignored by many of the metaphysical interpreters of the 
temporal aspect of the universe. When we more directly 
experience succession, —as, for instance, when we listen 
to a musical phrase or to a rhythmic series of drum- 
beats, — we not only observe that any antecedent member 
of the series is over and past before the next number comes, 
but also, and without the least contradiction between these 
two aspects of our total experience, we observe that this 
whole succession, with both its former and later mem- 
bers, so far as with relative directness we apprehend 
the series of drum-beats or of other simple events, is 
present at once to our consciousness, in precisely the sense 
in which the unity of our knowing mental life always 
finds present at once many facts. It is, as I must insist, 
true that for my consciousness 6 is experienced as follow- 
ing a, and also that both a and 6 are together experienced 
as in this relation of sequence. To say this is no more con- 
tradictory than to say that while I experience two parts of 
a surface as, by virtue of their spatial position, mutually 
exclusive each of the other, I also may experience the fact 
that both these mutually exclusive parts go together to 
form one whole surface. The sense in which they form 
one surface is, of course, not the sense in which, as parts, 
they exclude each other, and form different surfaces. 


116 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


Well, just so, the sense in which 6, as successor of a, is 
such, in the series of events in question, that a@ is over 
and gone when 6 comes, is not the sense in which a and 
6 are together elements in the whole experienced succes- 
sion. But that, in both of these senses, the relation of 6 
to its predecessor a is an experienced fact, is a truth that 
any one can observe for himself. 
If I utter a line of verse, such as 


“ The curfew tolls the knell of parting day,” 


the sound of the word day succeeds the sound of the 
word parting, and I unquestionably experience the fact 
that, for me, every earlier word of the line is over and 
past before the succeeding word or the last word, day, 
comes to be uttered or to be heard. Yet this is unques- 
tionably not my whole consciousness about the succes- 
sion. For I am certainly also aware that the whole line 
of poetry, as a succession of uttered sounds (or, at all 
events, a considerable portion of the line), is present to 
me at once, and as this one succession, when I speak the 
line. For only by virtue of experiencing this wholeness 
do I observe the rhythm, the music, and the meaning of 
the line. The sense in which the word parting is over 
before the word day comes, is like the sense in which one 
object in space is where any other object is not, so that 
the spatial presence of one object excludes the presence of 
another at that same part of space. Precisely so the pres- 
ence of the word day excludes the presence of the word 
parting from its own place in the temporal succession. 
And, in our experience of succession, each element is pres- 
ent in a particular point of the series, in so far as, with 


THE TEMPORAL AND THE ETERNAL 117 


reference to that point, other events of the series are 
either past, that is, over and done with, or are future, that 
is, are later in the series, or are not yet when this one point 
of the series is in this sense present. Every word of the 
uttered line of poetry, viewed in its reference to the 
other words, or to previous and later experiences, is pres- 
ent in its own place in the series, is over and done with 
before later events can come, or when they are present, 
and is not yet when the former events of the succession 
are present. And that all this is true, certainly is a mat- 
ter of our experience of succession. 

But the sense in which, nevertheless, the whole series of 
the uttered words of the line, or of some considerable 
portion of the line, is presented to our consciousness at 
once, is precisely the sense in which we apprehend this 
line as one line, and this succession as one succession. 
The whole series of words has for us its rhythmic unity, 
and forms an instance of conscious experience, whose 
unity we overlook at one glance. And unless we could 
thus overlook a succession and view at once its serially 
related and mutually exclusive events, we should never 
know anything whatever about the existence of succession, 
and should have no problem about time upon our hands. 

This extremely simple and familiar character of our 
consciousness of succession, — this essentially double aspect 
of every experience of a present series of events, — this 
inevitably twofold sense in which the term present can be 
used in regard to our perception of temporal happenings, 
—this is a matter of the most fundamental importance 
for our whole conception of Time, and, as I may at once 
add, for our conception of Eternity. Yet this is also a 


118 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


matter very frequently obscured, in discussion, by various 
devices often used to express the nature of the facts here 
in question. Sometimes, for the sake of a laudable attempt 
to define the term present in a wholly unambiguous way, 
those who are giving an account of our experience of time 
are led to assert that, since every part or element of any 
series of temporal events can be present only when all the 
other elements of the series are temporally non-existent, 
t.e. are either past or future, it must therefore be quite 
impossible for us to be conscious, at once, of a present 
succession involving a series of such elements. For how, 
they say, can I be conscious of the presence of all the 
successive words of the verse of poetry, when only one 
word is actually and temporally present at any one time? 
To comprehend how I can become in any sense aware of 
the series of successive words that constitutes the line of 
verse, such students of our problem are accustomed to say 
that when any one word as passing, or day, is present to my 
mind, the other words, even of the same line, can be pres- 
ent to consciousness only as coexistent memories or images 
of the former words, or as images of the expected coming 
words. From this point of view, I never really observe 
any sequence of conscious events as a sequence at all. I 
merely apprehend each element by itself; and I directly 
conclude from the images which in my experience are 
coexistent with this element, that there have been ante- 
cedent, and will be subsequent events in the series. 

This interpretation of our consciousness of time is, how- 
ever, directly counter to our time-experience, as any one 
may observe it for himself. For we do experience succes- 
sion, and at once we do take note of facts that are in dif- 


THE TEMPORAL AND THE ETERNAL 119 


ferent times. For, I ask you, What word of mine is it 
that, as this single present word, you just now hear me 
speaking? If I pause a little, you perhaps dwell upon 
the last word that I utter before pausing, and call that the 
one present word. Otherwise, however, as I speak to you, 
you are conscious of series of successive words, of whole 
phrases, of word groups, of clauses. Within each one of 
these groups of words, you are indeed more or less clearly 
aware that every element has its own temporal place ; and 
that, 7 so far as each element is taken by itself as present, 
the other elements either precede or succeed it, and in 
this sense are not in one time with it. But this very fact 
itself you know merely in so far as you actually experience 
series, each of which contains several successive words. 
These series come to you not merely by virtue of remem- 
bered facts, but also as experienced facts. 

And in truth, were this not so, you could indeed 
have no experience of succession at all. You would 
then experience, at any one moment, merely the single 
word, or something less than any single word, together 
with the supposed coexistent and contemporaneous images 
of actually past or of coming words. But how, in that 
case, would your experience of time-sequences come to 
seem to you different from any experience whatever of 
coexistence? Nor is even this the only difficulty about 
the doctrine which supposes you to be unable to view a 
series of successive events as all at once presented to 
your consciousness. A still deeper difficulty results from 
such an effort to evade the double sense in which the 
facts of succession are known in your experience. If you 
can have present to you only one event at a time in a 


120 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


series of successive events, how long, or rather how short, 
must an event be to contain within itself no succession 
at all, or no difference between former and latter con- 
tents? In vain do you suppose that, at any time, you 
have directly present to your consciousness only one of 
the successive words that you hear me speak. Not 
thus do you escape our difficulty. For a spoken word 
is itself a series of temporally successive sounds. Can 
you hear at once the whole spoken word, or can you 
grasp at once this whole series? If so, my own fore- 
going account is in principle admitted. For then, in 
this presence of the facts of succession to your con- 
sciousness, there are our two former aspects, both of 
them, involved. Hach element of the succession (namely, 
in this case, the elementary sounds that to your con- 
sciousness make up the word) is temporally present 
just when it occurs, but not before or afterwards, in so 
far as it follows previous elements and succeeds later 
elements ; and also all the elements are, in the other 
sense of the term, present at once to consciousness, as 
constituting this whole succession which you call the 
word. If, however, you deny that you actually hear, 
apart from memory or from imagery, any single whole 
word at once, I shall only the more continue to ask 
you, What is the least or the simplest element of suc- 
cession that is such as to constitute a merely present 
experience, with no former or latter contents within it? 
What apart from any memory or any imagery, and 
wholly apart from ideas of the past or the future of 
your experience, is present to you, in an indivisible 
time instant, just Mow? The question is obviously un- 


THE TEMPORAL AND THE ETERNAL 121 


answerable, just because an absolutely indivisible instant 
of mathematical time, with no former and latter con- 
tained within it, neither constitutes nor contains any 
temporal event, nor presents to you any fact of tem- 
poral experience whatever, just as an indivisible point in 
space could contain no matter, nor itself ever become, 
in isolation, an object of spatial experience. On the 
other hand, an event such that in it you were unable to 
perceive any succession, would help you in no whit to 
get the idea of time until you experienced it along 
with other events. What is now before you is a suc- 
cession, within which are parts; and of these parts 
each, when and in so far as once your attention fixes 
it, and takes it in its time relations, is found as a 
present that in time both precedes and succeeds other 
facts, while these other facts are .also just as truly 
before you as the observed element called the tem- 
porally present one is itself before you. And thus you 
cannot escape from our twofold interpretation of the 
experience of temporal succession. You are conscious 
of a series of successive states presented to you as a 
whole. You are also aware that each element of the 
succession excludes the others from its own place in 
time. 

There is, to be sure, another frequent way of describ- 
ing our consciousness of succession, —and a way that 
on the whole I find unsatisfactory. According to this 
view, events come to us in succession in our experience, 
—let us say the words of a spoken verse,—and then 
something often called the synthetic activity of the 
mind supervenes, and later binds together into unity, 


122 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


these successive facts, so that when this binding has 
taken place we then recognize the whole fagot of ex- 
perience as a single succession. This account of the 
temporal facts, in terms of an activity called a syn- 
thesis, helps me, as I must confess, no whit. What I 
find in consciousness is that a succession, such as a 
rhythm of drum-beats, a musical phrase, a verse of poetry, 
comes to me as one present whole, present in the sense 
that I know it all at once. And I also find that this 
succession is such that it has within it a temporal dis- 
tinction, or order, of earlier and later elements. While 
these elements are at once known, they are also known 
as such that at the briefer instant within the succession 
when any one of them is to be temporally viewed as a 
present fact, none of the others are contemporaneous 
with that fact, but all are either no longer or not yet 
when, and in so far as, that element is taken as the 
present one. And I cannot make this datum of expe- 
rience any more definite by calling it a synthesis, or 
the mere result of a synthesis. 

I have now characterized the more directly given 
features in our consciousness of succession. You see, 
as a result, that we men experience what Professor 
James, and others, have called our “specious present,” 
as a serial whole, within which there are observed tem- 
poral differences of former and latter. And this our 
‘“‘specious present” has, when measured by a reference 
to time-keepers, a length which varies with circum- 
stances, but which appears to be never any very small 
fraction of a second, and never more than a very few 
seconds in length. I have earlier referred to this 


THE TEMPORAL AND THE ETERNAL 123 


length of our present moments as our characteristic 
“time-span” of consciousness, and have pointed out 
how arbitrary a feature and limitation of our con- 
sciousness it is. We shall return soon to the question 
regarding the possible metaphysical significance of this 
time-span of our own special kind of consciousness. 
But it remains here to call closer attention to certain 
other equally important features of our more direct expe- 
rience of time-succession. So far, we have spoken, in 
the main, as if succession were to us a mere matter of 
given facts, as colors and sounds are given. But all our 
experience also has relation to the interests whose play 
and whose success or defeat constitute the life of our 
will. Every serial succession of which we are conscious 
therefore has for us some sort of meaning. In it we find 
our success or our failure. In it our internal meanings 
are expressed, or hindered, thwarted or furthered. We 
are interested in life, even if it be, in idle moments, 
only the dreary interest of wondering what will happen 
next, or, in distressed moments, the interest in flying 
from our present fortune, or, in despairing moments, of 
wishing for the end; still more then if, in strenuous 
moments, our interest is in pursuing our ideal. And our 
interest in life means our conscious concern in passing on 
from any temporal present towards its richer fulfilment, 
or away from its relative insignificance. Now that Direc- 
tion of temporal succession of which I before made men- 
tion, has the most intimate relations to this our interest in 
our experience. What is earlier in a given succession is 
related to what is later as being that from which we pass 
towards a desired fulfilment, or in search of a more com- 


< 


124 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


plete expression of our purpose. We are never content 
in the temporal present in so far as we view it as tem- 
poral, that is, as an event in a series. For such a present 
has its meaning as a transition from its predecessors 
towards its successors. 

Our temporal form of experience is thus peculiarly the 
form of the Will as such. Space often seems to spread 
out before us what we take to be the mere contents of our 
world; but time gives the form for the expression of all 
our meanings. Facts, in so far as, with an abstractly 
false Realism, we sunder them from their meanings, there- 
fore tend to be viewed as merely in relations of coexist- 
ence; and the space-world is the favorite region of 
Realism. But ideas, when conscious, assume the con- 
sciously temporal form of inner existence, and appear to 
us as constructive processes. The visible world, when 
viewed as at rest, therefore interests us little in compari- 
son with the same world when we take note of its move- 
ments, changes, successions. As the kitten ignores the 
dead leaves until the wind stirs them, but then chases 
them — so facts in general tend to appear to us all dead 
and indifferent when we disregard their processes. But 
in the movements of things lies for us, just as truly as in 
her small way for the kitten, all the glory and the trag- 
edy, all the life and the meaning of our observed universe. 
This concern, this interest in the changing, binds us then 
to the lower animals, as it doubtless also binds us to 
beings of far higher than human grade. We watch the 
moving and tend to neglect the apparently changeless 
objects about us. And that is why narrative is so much 
more easily effective than description in the poetic arts; 


THE TEMPORAL AND THE ETERNAL 125 


and why, if you want to win the attention of the child or 
of the general public, you must tell the story rather than 
portray coexistent truths, and must fill time with series 
of events, rather than merely crowd the space of experi- 
ence or of imagination with manifold but undramatic 
details. For space furnishes indeed the stage and the 
scenery of the universe, but the world’s play occurs in 
time. 

Now all these familiar considerations remind us of cer- 
tain of the most essential characters of our experience of 
time. Time, whatever else it is, is given to us as that 
within whose successions, in so far as for us they have a 
direct interest and meaning, every event, springing from, 
yet forsaking, its predecessors, aims on, towards its own 
fulfilment and extinction in the coming of its successors. 
Our experience of time is thus for us essentially an expe- 
rience of longing, of pursuit, of restlessness. And this is 
the aspect which Schopenhauer and the Buddhists have 
found so intolerable about the very nature of our finite 
experience. Upon this dissatisfied aspect of finite con- 
sciousness we ourselves dwelt when, in the former series 
of lectures, we were first learning to view the world, for 
the moment, from the mystic’s point of view. As for the 
higher justification of this aspect of our experience, that 
indeed belongs elsewhere. But as to the facts, every part 
of a succession is present in so far as when it is, that 
which is no longer and that which is not yet both of them 
stand in essentially significant, or, if you will, in essen- 
tially practical relations to this present. It is true, of 
course, that when we view relatively indifferent time- 
series, such as the ticking of a watch or the dropping 


a 


126 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


of rain upon the roof, we can disregard this more signifi- 
cant aspect of succession; and speak of the endless 
flight of time as an incomprehensible brute fact of expe- 
rience, and as in so far seemingly meaningless. But no 
series of experiences upon which attention is fixed is 
wholly indifferent to us; and the temporal aspect of such 
series always involves some element of expectancy and 
some sense of something that no longer is; and both 
these conscious attitudes color our interest in the pre- 
sented succession, and give the whole the meaning of life. 
Time is thus indeed the form of practical activity; and 
its whole character, and especially that direction of its 
succession of which we have spoken, are determined 
accordingly. 


II 


I have dwelt long upon the time consciousness of our 
relatively direct experience, because here lies the basis 
for every deeper comprehension of the metaphysics both 
of time and of eternity. Our ordinary conception of 
time as an universal form of existence in the external 
world, is altogether founded upon a generalization, whose 
origin is in us men largely and obviously social, but 
whose materials are derived from our inner experience of 
the succession of significant events. The conceived rela- 
tions of Past, Present, and Future in the real world of 
common-sense metaphysics, appear indeed, at first sight, 
vastly to transcend anything that we ourselves have ever 
observed in our inner experience. The infinite and ir- 
revocable past that no longer is, the expected infinite future 
that has as yet no existence, how remote these ideal con- 


THE TEMPORAL AND THE ETERNAL 127 


structions, supposed to be valid for all gods and men 
and things, seem at first sight from the brief and sig- 
nificant series of successive events that occur within 
the brief span of our actual human consciousness. Yet, 
as we saw in the ninth lecture of our former Series, 
common sense, aS soon as questioned about special cases, 
actually conceives the Being of both the past and the 
future as so intimately related to the Being of the present 
that every definite conception of the real processes of 
the world, whether these processes are viewed as physi- 
eal or as historical or explicitly as ethical, depends 
upon taking the past, the present, and the future as 
constituting a single whole, whose parts have no true 
Being except in their linkage. As a fact, moreover, 
the term present, when applied to characterize a moment 
or an event in the time-stream of the real world, never 
means, in any significant application, the indivisible 
present of an ideal mathematical time. The present 
time, in case of the world at large, has an unity altogether 
similar to that of the present moment of our inner 
consciousness. We may speak of the present minute, 
hour, day, year, century. If we use the term present 
regarding any one of these divisions of time, but regard 
this time not as the experienced form of the inner 
succession of our own mental events, but as the time 
of the real world in which we ourselves form a part, 
then we indeed conceive that this present is world- 
embracing, and that suns move, light radiates between 
stars, the deeds of all men occur, and the minds of all 
“men are conscious, in this same present time of which 
we thus make mention. Moreover, we usually view 


a 


128 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


the world-time in question in terms of the conceptions 
of the World of Description, and so we conceive it as 
infinitely divisible, as measurable by various mathemati- 
cal and physical devices, and as a continuous stream 
of occurrence. Yet in whatever sense we speak of 
the real present time of the world, this present, whether 
it is the present second, or the present century, or the 
present geological period, it is, for our conception, as 
truly a divisible and connected whole region of time, 
within which a succession of events takes place, as it 
is a world-embracing and connected time, within whose 
span the whole universe of present events is com- 
prised. A mathematically indivisible present time, pos- 
sessing no length, is simply no time at all. Whoever 
says, “In the universe at large only the present state 
of things is real, only the present movement of the 
stars, the present streamings of radiant light, the present 
deeds and thoughts of men are real; the whole past is 
dead; the whole future is not yet,” — any such reporter 
of the temporal existence of the universe may be invited 
to state how long his real present of the time-world is. 
If he replies, “ The present moment is the absolutely indi- 
visible and ideal boundary between present and future,” — 
then one may rejoin at once that in a mathematically in- 
divisible instant, having no length, no event happens, 
nothing endures, no thought or deed takes place, — in 
brief, nothing whatever temporally exists, —and that, 
too, whatever conception you may have of Being. But 
if the real present is a divisible portion of time, then 
it contains within itself succession, precisely as the 
“specious present” of psychological time contains such 


THE TEMPORAL AND THE ETERNAL 129 


internal succession. But in that case, within the real 
present of the time-world, there are already contained 
the distinctions that, in case of the time of experience, 
we have heretofore observed. If, in what you choose 
to call the present moment of the world’s history, deeds 
are accomplished, suns actually move from place to place, 
light waves traverse the ether, and men’s lives pass 
from stage to stage, then within what you thus call 
the present there are distinguishable and more ele- 
mentary events, arranged in series, such that when any 
conceived element, or mere elementary portion of any 
series is taken in relation to its predecessors and suc- 
cessors, it is not yet when its antecedents are taken as 
temporally present, and is past and gone when its 
successors are viewed as present. The world’s time is 
thus in all respects a generalized and extended image 
and correspondent of the observed time of our inner 
experience. In the time of our more direct experience, 
we find a twofold way in which we can significantly 
call a portion of time a present moment. The present, 
in our inner experience, means a whole series of events 
grasped by somebody as having some unity for his 
consciousness, and as having its own single internal 
meaning. This was what we meant by the present 
experience of this musical phrase, this spoken line of 
verse, this series of rhythmic beats. But, in the other 
sense of the word, an element within any such whole 
is present in so far as this element has antecedents and 
successors, so that they are no longer or not yet when 
it is temporally viewed as present, while in turn, in so 
far as any one of them is viewed as the present element, 
K 


130 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


this element itself is either not yet or no longer. But pre- 
cisely so, in the conceptual time of our real world, the 
Present means any section of the time-stream in so far as, 
with reference to anybody’s consciousness, it is viewed as 
having relation to this unity of consciousness, and as in 
a single whole of meaning with this unity. Usually 
by “our time,” or “the real time in which we now 
live,” we mean no very long period of the conceived 
time-stream of the real world. But we never mean 
the indivisible now of an ideal mathematical time, 
because, in such an indivisible time-instant, nothing 
could happen, or endure, or genuinely exist. But 
within the present, if conceived as a section of the 
time-stream, there are internal differences of present, 
past, and future. 

For, in a similar fashion, as the actual or supposed 
length of the “specious present” of our perceptual 
time is something arbitrary, determined by our peculiar 
human type of consciousness, so the length of the por- 
tion of conceptual time which we call the present, in 
the first sense of that term, namely, in the sense in 
which we speak of the “present age,” is an arbitrary 
length, determined in this case, however, by our more 
freely chosen interest in some unity which gives rela- 
tive wholeness and meaning to this present. If usually 
the “present age” is no very long time, still, at our 
pleasure, or in the service of some such unity of meaning 
as the history of civilization, or the study of geology, 
may suggest, we may conceive the present as extend- 
ing over many centuries, or over a hundred thousand 
years. On the other hand, within the unity of this 


THE TEMPORAL AND THE ETERNAL 131 


first present, any distinguishable event or element of 
an event is present, in the second, and more strictly 
temporal sense in so far as it has predecessors and suc- 
cessors, whereof the first are no longer, and the latter 
not yet, when this more elementary event is viewed as 
happening. 

Nor does the parallelism between the perceptual and 
the conceptual time cease here. The perceptual time 
was the form in which meaning, and the practically sig- 
nificant aspects of consciousness, get their expression. 
The same is true of the conceptual time, when viewed 
in its relations to the real world. Not only is the time 
of human history, or of any explicitly teleological series 
of events, obviously the form in which the facts win 
their particular type of conceived meaning; but even 
the time of physical science gets its essential charac- 
ters, as a conception, through considerations that can. 
only be interpreted in terms of the Will, or of our in- 
terest in the meaning of the world’s happenings. 

For the conceived time-series, even when viewed in re- 
lation to the World of Description, still differs in consti- 
tution from the constitution of a line in space, or from 
the characters belonging to a mathematically describable 
physical movement of a body, in ways which can only be 
expressed in terms of significance. Notoriously, concep- 
tual time has often been described as correspondent in 
structure to the structure of a line, or as correspondent 
again, in character, to the character of an uniformly flow- 
ing stream, or of some other uniform movement. But a 
line can be traversed in either direction, while concep- 
tual time is supposed to permit but one way of pass- 


132 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


ing from one instant to another in its course. An 
uniform flow, or other motion, has, like time, a fixed 
direction, but might be conceived as returning into it- 
self without detriment to its uniformity. Thus an 
ideally regular watch “keeps time,” as we say, by 
virtue of the uniformity of its motion; but its hands 
return ever again to the same places on the face; while 
the years of conceptual time return not again. And 
finally, if one supposed an ideally uniform physical flow 
or streaming in one rectilinear direction only, and in 
an infinite Euclidean space, the character of this move- 
ment might so far be supposed to correspond to that 
of an ideally conceived mathematical time; except for 
one thing. The uniformity and unchangeableness of 
the conceived physical flow would be a merely given 
character, dependent, perhaps, upon the fact that the 
physical movement in question was conceived as meet- 
ing with no obstacle or external hindrance; but the 
direction of the flow of time is a character essential to 
the very conception of time. And this direction of the 
flow of time can only be expressed in its true neces- 
sity by saying that in case of the world’s time, as in 
the case of the time of our inner experience, we con- 
ceive the past as leading towards, as aiming in the 
direction of the future, in such wise that the future 
depends for its meaning upon the past, and the past in 
its turn has its meaning as a process expectant of the 
future. In brief, only in terms of Will, and only by 
virtue of the significant relations of the stages of a 
teleological process, has time, whether in our inner ex- 
perience, or in the conceived world order as a whole, 


THE TEMPORAL AND THE ETERNAL 133 


any meaning. Time is the form of the Will; and the 
real world is a temporal world in so far as, in various 
regions of that world, seeking differs from attainment, 
pursuit is external to its own goal, the imperfect tends 
towards its own perfection, or in brief, the internal 
meanings of finite life gradually win, in successive stages, 
their union with their own External Meaning. The 
general justification for this whole view of the time 
of the real world is furnished by our idealistic inter- 
pretation of Being. The special grounds for regarding 
the particular Being of time itself as in this special 
way teleological, are furnished by the foregoing analy- 
sis of our own experience of time, and by the fact that 
the conceptual time in terms of which we interpret the 
order of the world at large, is fashioned, so to speak, 
after the model of the time of our own experience. 


pula 


Having thus defined the way in which the conceptual 
time of the real world of common sense corresponds in its 
structure to the structure of the time known to our inner 
perception, we are prepared to sketch our theory both of 
the sense in which the world of our idealistic doctrine 
appears to be capable of interpretation as a Temporal 
order, and of the sense in which, for this same theory, 
this world is to be viewed as an Eternal order. For, as 
a fact, in defining time we have already, and inevitably, 
defined eternity ; and a temporal world must needs be, 
when viewed in its wholeness, an eternal world. We 
have only to review the structure of Reality in the light 


134 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


of the foregoing analysis in order to bring to our con- 
sciousness this result. 

And so, first, the real world of our Idealism has to be 
viewed by us men as a temporal order. For it is a world 
where purposes are fulfilled, or where finite internal mean- 
ings reach their final expression, and attain unity with 
external meanings. Now in so far as any idea, as a finite 
Internal Meaning, still seeks its own Other, and con- 
sciously pursues that Other, in the way in which, as we 
have all along seen, every finite idea does pursue its Other, 
this Other is in part viewed as something beyond, towards 
which the striving is directed. But our human experi- 
ence of temporal succession is, as we have seen, just such 
an experience of a pursuit directed towards a goal. And 
such pursuit demands, as an essential part or aspect of the 
striving in question, a consciousness that agrees in its 
most essential respect with our own experience of time. 
Hence, our only way of expressing the general structure 
of our idealistic realm of Being is to say that wherever an 
idea exists as a finite idea, still in pursuit of its goal, there 
appears to be some essentially temporal aspect belonging 
to the consciousness in question. To my mind, therefore, 
time, as the form of the will, is (in so far as we can under- 
take to define at all the detailed structure of finite real- 
ity) to be viewed as the most pervasive form of all finite 
experience, whether human or extra-human. In pursuing 
its goals, the Self lives in time. And, to our view, every 
real being in the universe, in so far as it has not won 
union with the ideal, is pursuing that ideal; and, accord- 
ingly, so far as we can see, is living in time. Whoever, 
then, is finite, says, “not yet,” and in part seeks his Other 


THE TEMPORAL AND THE ETERNAL 135 


as involving what, to the seeker, is still future. For the 
finite world in general, then, as for us human beings, the 
distinction of past and future appears to be coextensive 
with life and meaning. 

I have advisedly used, however, the phrase that the 
time-consciousness is a “part” or “aspect” of the striv- 
ing. For from our point of view, the Other, the comple- 
tion that our finite being seeks, is not merely something 
beyond the present, and is not merely a future experience, 
but is also inclusive of the very process of the striving 
itself. For the goal of every finite life is simply the 
totality whereof this life, in its finitude, is a fragment. 
When I seek my own goal, I am looking for the whole of 
myself. In so far as my aim is the absolute completion 
of my Selfhood, my goal is identical with the whole life 
of God. But, in so far as, by my whole individual Self, 
I mean my whole Self in contrast with the Selves of my 
fellows, — then the completion of my individual expres- 
sion, in so far as I am this individual and no other, —7.e. 
my goal, as this Self, is still not any one point or experi- 
ence in my life, nor any one stage of my life, but the 
totality of my individual life viewed as in contrast with 
the lives of other individuals. Consequently, while it is 
quite true that every incomplete being, every finite striv- 
ing, regards itself as aiming towards a future, because its 
own goal is not yet attained ; we have, nevertheless, to 
remember that the attainment of the goal involves more 
than any future moment, taken by itself, could ever fur- 
nish. For the Self in its entirety is the whole of a self- 
representative or recurrent process, and not the mere last 
moment or stage of that process. As we shall see, there is 


1386 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


in fact no last moment. A life seeking its goal is, there- 
fore, indeed, essentially temporal, — but is so just as music 
is temporal, — except indeed that music is not only tempo- 
ral, but temporally finite. For every work of musical art 
involves significant temporal series, wherein there is pro- 
gression, and passage from chord to chord, from phrase to 
phrase, and from movement to movement. But just as 
any one musical composition has its value not only by vir- 
tue of its attainment of its final chord, but also at every 
stage of the process that leads towards this conclusion ; 
and just as the whole musical composition is, as a whole, 
an end in itself; so every finite Internal Meaning wins 
final expression, not merely through the last stage of its 
life Cif it has a last stage), but through its whole em- 
bodiment. And, nevertheless, as the music attains whole- 
ness only through succession; so every idea that is to 
win its complete expression, does so through temporal 
sequences. 

Since, at all events, no other than such a temporal 
expression of meaning in life is in any wise definable for 
our consciousness, our Idealism can only express its view 
of the relation of finite and absolute life by viewing the 
whole world, and in particular the whole existence of any 
individual Self, as such a temporal process, wherein there 
is expressed, by means of a Well-Ordered Series of stages, 
a meaning that finally belongs to the whole life, but that 
at every temporal stage of the process in question appears 
to involve, in part, a beyond, —a something not yet won, 
—and so a distinction both of the past and the future of 
this Self from the content of any one stage of the process 
when that stage is viewed as the present one. 


THE TEMPORAL AND THE ETERNAL 137 


In this sense, therefore, our doctrine is obliged to con- 
ceive the entire world-life as including a temporal series 
of events. When considered with reference to any one 
of these events, the rest of the events that belong to the 
series of which any one finite Self takes account, are past 
and future, that is, they are no longer and not yet; just 
as, when viewed with reference to any one chord or 
phrase in the musical composition, all the other successive 
elements of the composition are either past or future. 

The infinite divisibility of the time of our ordinary 
scientific conceptions is indeed due to that tendency of 
our own discriminating attention to an endless interpola- 
tion of intermediary stages, — a tendency which we studied 
in connection with our general account of the World of 
Description. We have, however, seen reasons, which, ap- 
plied to time, would lead us to declare that an absolute 
insight would view the temporal order as a discrete series 
of facts ordered as any succession of facts expressing one 
purpose would be ordered, viz. like the whole numbers. 
On the other hand, we have no reason to suppose that our 
human consciousness distinctly observes intervals of time 
that in brevity anywhere nearly approach to the final truth 
about the temporal order. Within what is for us the 
least observable happening, a larger insight may indeed 
discriminate multitudes of events. In dealing with the 
concept of Nature, we shall see what significant use may 
be made of the hypothesis that there exists or may exist, 
finite consciousness for which the series of events that we 
regard as no longer distinguishable from merely element- 
ary and indivisible happenings, are distinguished so 
minutely as to furnish content as rich as those which, 


138 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


from our point of view, occupy eons of the world’s 
history. Our right to such hypotheses is incontestable, 
provided only that they help us to conceive the true 
unity of experience. Nevertheless, in the last analysis, 
the Absolute Will must be viewed as expressed in a well- 
ordered and discrete series of facts, which from our point 
of view may indeed appear, as we shall still further see, 
capable of discrimination ad infinitum. 

But now secondly, and without the least conflict with 
the foregoing theses, I declare that this same temporal 
world is, when regarded in its wholeness, an Eternal 
order. And J mean by this assertion nothing whatever 
but that the whole real content of this temporal order, 
whether it is viewed from any one temporal instant as 
past or as present or as future, is at once known, Ze. is 
consciously experienced as a whole, by the Absolute. 
And I use this expression at once in the very sense in 
which we before used it when we pointed out that to 
your own consciousness, the whole musical phrase 
may be and often is known at once, despite the fact 
that each element of the musical succession, when 
taken as the temporally present one, excludes from its 
own temporal instant the other members of the sequence, 
so that they are either no longer or not yet, at the instant 
when this element is temporally the present one. As we 
saw before, it is true that, in one sense, each one of the 
elements or partial events of a sequence excludes the 
former and the latter elements from being at the time 
when this particular element exists. But that, in another 
and equally obvious and empirical sense, all the members 
of an actually experienced succession are at once to any 


THE TEMPORAL AND THE ETERNAL 139 


consciousness which observes the whole succession as a 
whole, is equally true. The term present, as we saw, is 
naturally used both to name the temporally present when 
it is opposed to whatever precedes or succeeds this 
present, and also to name the observed facts of a succes- 
sion in so far as they are experienced as constituting one 
whole succession. In so far the term is indeed ambigu- 
ous. But even this ambiguity itself is due to the before- 
mentioned fact that, if you try to find an absolutely 
simple present temporal fact of consciousness, and still to 
view it as an event in time, you are still always led, in 
the World of Description, to observe or to conceive that 
this temporal fact is a complex event, having a true 
succession within itself. So that the now of temporal 
expression is never a mere now, unless indeed it be viewed 
either as the ideal mathematical instant within which 
nothing takes place, or else as one of the finally simple 
stages of the discrete series of facts which the absolute 
insight views as the expression of its Will. 

As to the one hypothesis, an absolute instant in the 
mathematical sense is like a point, an ideal limit, and 
never appears as any isolated fact of temporal experience. 
Every now within which something happens is therefore 
also a succession; so that every temporal fact, every 
event, so far as we men can observe it, has to be viewed 
as present to experience in both the senses of the term 
present ; since this fact when present may be contrasted 
with predecessors that are no longer and with successors 
that are not yet, while this same fact, when taken as an 
event occupying time, is viewed as a presented succession 
with former and latter members contained within it. 


140 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


As to the other hypothesis, it seems clear that we human 
beings observe no such ultimate and indivisible facts of 
experience just because, so far as we observe and discrimi- 
nate facts, we are more or less under the bondage of the 
categories of the World of Description. 

But, in view of the correspondence between the uni- 
versal time of the world-order, as we conceive it, and 
the time of our internal experience, as we observe it, 
the temporal sequences must be viewed as having in the 
real world, and for the Absolute, the same twofold 
character that our temporal experiences have for our- 
selves. Present, in what we may call the inclusive 
sense of the term, is any portion of real time with all 
its included events, in so far as there is any reason’ to 
view it as a whole, and as known in this wholeness 
by a single experience. Present, in what we may by 
contrast call the exclusive sense, is any one temporal 
event, in so far as it is contrasted with antecedent and 
subsequent events, and in so far as it excludes them 
from coexistence with itself in the same portion of any 
succession. ‘These two senses of the term present do not 
contradict each other in case of the world-order any 
more than they do in case of our own inner experience. 
Both senses express inevitably distinct and yet insepara- 
ble connected aspects of the significant life of the con- 
scious will, whether in us, or in the universe at large. 
Our view declares that all the life of the world, and 
therefore all temporal sequences, are present at once to 
the Absolute. Our view also maintains that, without 
the least conflict with this sense in which the whole tem- 
poral order is known at once to the Absolute, there is 


THE TEMPORAL AND THE ETERNAL 141 


another sense in which any portion of the temporal 
sequence of the world may be taken as present, when 
viewed with reference to the experience of any finite 
Self whose present it is, and when contrasted with what 
for this same point of view is the past and the future 
of the world. Now the events of the temporal order, 
when viewed in this latter way, are divided, with refer- 
ence to the point of view of any finite Self, into what now 
is, and what no longer is, and what is to be, but is not yet. 
These same events, however, in so far as they are viewed 
at once by the Absolute, are for such view, all equally 
present. And this their presence is the presence of 
all time, as a totum simul, to the Absolute. And the 
presence in this sense, of all time at once to the Absolute, 
constitutes the Eternal order of the world, — eternal, 
since it is inclusive of all distinctions of temporal past 
and temporal future,—eternal, since, for this very rea- 
son, the totality of temporal events thus present at once 
to the Absolute has no events that precede, or that 
follow it, but contains all sequences within it, — eternal, 
finally, because this view of the world does not, like 
our partial glimpses of this or of that relative whole 
of sequence, pass away and give place to some other 
view, but includes an observation of every passing away, 
of every sequence, of every event and of whatever in 
time succeeds and follows that event, and includes all 
the views that are taken by the various finite Selves. 
In order to conceive what, in general, such an eternal 
view of the temporal order involves, or to conceive in 
what sense the temporal order of the real world is also 
an eternal order, we have, therefore, but to remember 


142 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


the sense in which the melody, or other sequence, is 
known at once to our own consciousness, despite the fact 
that its elements when viewed merely in their temporal 
succession are, in so far, not at once. As we saw before, 
the brief span of our consciousness, the small range of 
succession, that we can grasp at once, constitutes a per- 
fectly arbitrary limitation of our own special type of 
consciousness. But in principle a time-sequence, how- 
ever brief, is already viewed in a way that is not 
merely temporal, when, despite its sequence, it is grasped 
at once, and is thus grasped not through mere memory, 
but by virtue of actual experience. A consciousness 
related to the whole of the world’s events, and to 
the whole of time, precisely as our human conscious- 
ness is related to a single melody or rhythm, and 
to the brief but still extended interval of time which 
this melody or rhythm occupies, — such a consciousness, 
I say, is an Eternal Consciousness. In principle we 
already possess and are acquainted with the nature of 
such a consciousness, whenever we do experience any 
succession as one whole. The only thing needed to 
complete our idea of what an actually eternal conscious- 
ness is, is the conceived removal of that arbitrary limi- 
tation which permits us men to observe indeed at once 
a succession, but forbids us to observe a succession at 
once in case it occupies more than a very few seconds. 


IV 


This definition of the relations of the Temporal and 
the Eternal accomplishes all the purposes that are us- 


THE TEMPORAL AND THE ETERNAL 143 


ually in mind when we speak of the divine knowledge 
as eternal. That eternity is a totwm simul, the scholas- 
tics were well aware; and St. Thomas developes our 
present concept with a clearness that is only limited by 
the consequences of his dualistic view of the relation of 
God and the world. For after he has indeed well de- 
fined and beautifully illustrated the inclusive eternity of 
the divine knowledge, he afterwards conceives the tem- 
poral existence of the created world as sundered from 
the eternal life which belongs to God. And hereby the 
advantages of an accurate definition of the eternal are 
sacrificed for the sake of a special dogmatic interest. 
Less subtle forms of speculation have led to uses of the 
word eternal, whose meaning is often felt to be far deeper 
than such usages can render explicit. But as these subtle 
usages are often stated, they are indeed open to the 
most obvious objections. An eternal knowledge is often 
spoken of as if it were one for which there is no dis- 
tinction whatever between past, and present, and future. 
But such a definition is as absurd as if one should speak of 
our knowledge of a whole musical phrase or rhythm, when 
we grasped such a whole at once, as if the at once im- 
plied that there were for us no temporal distinction 
between the first and the last beat or note of the succes- 
sion in question. To observe the succession at once is 
to have present with perfect clearness all the time-ele- 
ments of the rhythm or of the phrase just as they are, — 
the succession, the tempo, the intervals, the pauses, — 
and yet, without losing any of their variety, to view 
them at once as one present musical idea. Now for our 
theory, that is precisely the way in which the eternal 


144 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


consciousness views the temporal order, —not ignoring 
one jot or tittle of its sharp distinctions of past or of 
future, of succession or of duration, — but still viewing 
the whole time-process as the expression of a single In- 
ternal Meaning. What we now call past and future are 
not merely the same for God; and, nevertheless, they 
are viewed at once, precisely as the beginning and the 
end of the rhythm are not the same for our experience, 
but are yet at once seen as belonging to one and the 
same whole succession. 

Or again, an eternal knowledge is often supposed to 
be one that abstracts from time, or that takes no account 
of time; so that, for an eternal point of view it is as 
if time were not at all. But to say this is as if one were 
to speak of observing at once the meaning or character 
of the whole phrase or rhythm by simply failing to take 
any note at all of the succession as such. The mean- 
ing is the meaning of the succession; and is grasped 
only by observing this succession as something that in- 
volves former and latter elements, while these elements 
in time exclude one another, and therefore follow, each 
one after its predecessor has temporally ceased, and 
before its successor temporally appears. Just so, we 
assert that the eternal insight observes the whole of 
time, and all that happens therein, and is eternal only by 
virtue of the fact that it does know the whole of time. 

Or again, some doctrines often speak of an eternal 
insight as something wholly and inexplicably dzfferent 
from any temporal type of consciousness, so that how 
God views His truth as eternal truth, no man can say. 
But our theory regards the essential relation of an eternal 


THE TEMPORAL AND THE ETERNAL 145 


to a temporal type of consciousness as one of the simplest 
of the relations that are of primal importance for the 
definition of the Absolute. Listen to any musical phrase 
or rhythm, and grasp it as a whole, and you thereupon 
have present in you the image, so to speak, of the divine 
knowledge of the temporal order. To view all the course 
of time just as you then and there view the whole of 
that sequence,—this is to be possessed of an eternal 
type of insight. 

“But,” so many hereupon object,—“it appears im- 
possible to see how this sort of eternal insight is possible, 
since just now, in time, the infinite past, — including, 
say, the geological periods and the Persian invasion of 
Greece, is no longer, while the future is not yet. How 
then for God shall this difference of past and future be 
transcended, and all be seen at once?” I reply, In 
precisely the same sense all the notes of the melody 
except this note are not when this note sounds, but are 
either no longer or not yet. Yet you may know a series of 
these notes at once. Now precisely so God knows the 
whole time-sequence of the world at once. The difference 
is merely one of span. You now exemplify the eternal 
type of knowledge, even as you listen to any briefest 
sequence of my words. For you, too, know time even by 
sharing the image of the Eternal. 

Or again, a common wonder appears regarding how the 
divine knowledge can be in such wise eternal as to suffer 
no change to occur in it. How God should be unchange- 
able, yet express His will in a changing world, is an 
ancient problem. Our doctrine answers the question at 
a stroke. The knowledge of all change is itself indeed 


L 


146 . NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


unchangeable, just because any change that occurs or that 
can occur to any being is already included amongst the 
objects known to the eternal point of view. The knowl- 
edge of this melody as one whole does not itself consist 
in an adding of other notes to the melody. The knowl- 
edge of all sequences does not itself follow as another 
sequence. Hence it is indeed not subject to the fate of 
sequence. 

And finally, a mystery is very generally made of the 
fact that since time appears to us as inevitably infinite, 
and as therefore not, like the melody or the rhythm, capa- 
ble of completion, an eternal knowledge, if it involves a 
knowledge of the whole of time, must be something that 
has to appear to us self-contradictory and impossible. 
Any complete answer to this objection involves, of course, 
a theory of the infinite. Such a theory I have set forth 
in the Supplementary Essay, published with the First 
Series of these lectures. The issue involved, that of the 
positive concept of an infinite whole, is indeed no simple 
one, and is not capable of any brief presentation. I can 
here only report that the considerations set forth in that 
Supplementary Essay have led me to the thesis that a 
Well-Ordered Infinite Series, under the sole condition 
that it embodies a single plan, may be rightly viewed as 
forming a totality, and as an individual whole, precisely 
as a musical theme or a rhythm is viewed by our expe- 
rience as such a whole. That the universe itself is such 
an infinite series, I have endeavored, in that paper, to 
show in great detail. If you view the temporal order of 
the world as also forming such an endless whole, express- 
ing a single plan and Will (as I think you have a right 


THE TEMPORAL AND THE ETERNAL 147 


to do), then the argument of the Supplementary Essay 
in question will apply to our present problem. The whole 
of time will contain a single expression of the divine Will, 
and therefore, despite its endlessness, the time-world will 
be present as such a single whole to the Absolute whose 
Will this is, and whose life all this sequence embodies. 


Vv 


In order to refer, as I close, to the practical interest 
which has guided me through all the abstract considera- 
tions even of this present lecture, I may be permitted to 
anticipate some of our later results about the Self, and, 
for the sake of illustration, to point out that from our 
point of view, as we shall later explain it more fully, your 
life, your Self, your will, your individuality, your deeds, 
can be and are present at once to the eternal insight of 
God; while, nevertheless, it is equally true that not only 
for you, but for God, your life is a genuine temporal 
sequence of deeds and strivings, whereof, when you view 
this life at the present temporal instant, the past is just 
now no longer, while the future is not yet. This twofold 
view of your nature, as a temporal process and as an 
eternal system of fact, is precisely as valid and as obvious 
as the twofold view of the melody or of the rhythm. 
Your temporal present looks back, as Will, upon your now 
irrevocable past. That past is irrevocable because it is 
the basis of your seeking for the future, and is the so far 
finished expression of your unique individual Will. Your 
future is the not yet temporally expressed region wherein 
you, as finite being, seek your own further expression. 


148 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


That future is still, in one aspect, as we shall see, causally 
undetermined, precisely in so far as therein something 
unique, that is yours and yours only, is to appear in the 
form of various individually designed expressions of your 
life-purpose, — various individual deeds. Therefore, as 
we shall be able to maintain, despite all your unquestion- 
able causal and moral determinations, there will be an 
aspect of your future life that will be free, and yours, 
and such as no causation can predetermine, and such as 
even God possesses only in so far as your unique indi- 
viduality furnishes it as a fact in His world. 

And nevertheless, your future and your past, your 
aspect of individuality, and of freedom, and the various 
aspects wherein you are dependent upon the rest of the 
world, your whole life of deeds, and your attainment 
of your individual goal through your deeds, —all these 
manifold facts that are yours and that constitute you, 
are present at once to the Absolute, —as facts in the 
world, as temporal contents eternally viewed, — as a 
process eternally finished,— but eternally finished pre- 
cisely by virtue of the temporal sequence of your deeds. 
And when you wonder how these aspects can be at 
once the aspects of your one life,—-remember what is 
implied in the consciousness at once of the melody or 
the rhythm as a sequence,—and you will be in posses- 
sion of the essential principle whereby the whole mys- 
tery is explained. 

It is this view, once grasped in its various aspects, 
that will enable us to define in what sense man is one 
with God, and in what sense he is to be viewed as at 
present out of harmony with his own relation to God, 


THE TEMPORAL AND THE ETERNAL 149 


and in that sense alienated from his true place in the 
eternal world. And so, in discussing this most element- 
ary category, we are preparing the way for a most sig- 
nificant result as to the whole life of any man. 

The temporal man, viewed just now in time, appears, 
at first, to be sundered even from his own past and 
future, and still more from God. He is a seeker even 
for to-morrow’s bread,—still more for his salvation. 
He knows not just at this instant even his own indi- 
viduality ; still less should he immediately observe his 
relation to the Absolute in his present deed and in his 
fleeting experience. Only when he laboriously reflects 
upon his inmost meaning, or by faith anticipates the 
result of such reflection, does he become aware of how 
intimately his life is bound up with an Absolute life. 
This our finite isolation is, however, especially and char- 
acteristically a temporal isolation. That inattention of 
which we spoke in the last lecture, is especially an in- 
attention to all but this act, as it now appears to me. 
I am not one with my own eternal individuality, espe- 
cially and peculiarly because this passing temporal in- 
stant is not the whole of time, and because the rest of 
time is no longer or else not yet when this instant passes. 
Herein lies my peculiarly insurmountable human limita- 
tion. This is my present form of consciousness. To be 
sure, I am not wholly thus bound in the chains of my 
finitude. Within my present form and span of con- 
sciousness there is already exemplified an eternal type 
of insight, whereby the totwm simul is in many cases and 
in brief span won. But beyond this my span of pres- 
entation, time escapes me as a past and future that is 


150 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


at once real and still either no longer or else not yet. 
From the eternal point of view, however, just this my 
life is at once present, in its Individuality and its whole- 
ness. And because of this fact, just in so far as I am 
the eternal or true Individual, I stand in the presence 
of God, with all my life open before Him, and its mean- 
ing revealed to Him and to me. Yet this my whole 
meaning, while one with His meaning, remains, in the 
eternal world, still this unique and individual meaning, 
which the life of no other individual Self possesses. So 
that in my eternal expression I lose not my individuality, 
but rather win my only genuine individual expression, 
even while I find my oneness with God. 

Now, in time, I seek, as if it were far beyond me, 
that goal of my Selfhood, that complete expression of 
my will, which in God, and for God, my whole life at 
once possesses. I seek this goal as a far-off divine 
event, —as my future fortune and success. I do well 
to seek. Seek and ye shall find. Yet the finding, — it 
does not occur merely as an event in time. It occurs 
as an eternal experience of this my whole striving. 
Every struggle, every tear, every misery, every failure, 
and repentance, and every rising again, every strenuous 
pursuit, every glimpse of God’s truth, —all these are not 
mere incidents of the search for that which is beyond. 
They are all events in the life; they too are part of the 
fulfilment. In eternity all this is seen, and hereby, — 
even in and through these temporal failures, I win, in 
God’s presence and by virtue of His fulfilment, the goal 
of life, which is the whole of life. What no temporal 
instant ever brings, —what all temporal efforts fail to 


THE TEMPORAL AND THE ETERNAL 151 


win, that my true Self in its eternity, and in its oneness 
with the divine, possesses. 

So much it has seemed that I might here venture to 
anticipate of later results, in order that the true sig- 
nificance of our elementary categories might be, how- 
ever imperfectly, defined for us from the outset. For 
all the questions as to our deeper relations to the uni- 
verse are bound up with this problem of Time and 
Eternity. 


LECTURE IV 


LECTURE IV 
PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL REALITY 


WE have now learned something concerning the general 
Forms in which we conceive the facts that we acknowl- 
edge as real. No psychological account of the genesis of 
these forms in the history of the individual mind has been 
attempted. We have considered only the logical signifi- 
cance of certain fundamental motives that guide us, from 
moment to moment, and from stage to stage of our intel- 
lectual development, in the interpretation of our world 
and of our relations to this world. 

These motives are twofold: (1) The motives that lead 
us to the concepts of one type of Serial Order, of Law, 
and of the World of Description; (2) The motives 
that lead us to conceive Reality as a Well-Ordered 
Series, and as a realm of Appreciation, that is of 
values, of Selfhood, of life other than the life that is 
directly revealed to us, by our present conscious purposes, 
and so as a realm of various Selves. These twofold 
motives correspond to our own twofold limitations as 
finite beings. For we know, just now, neither the whole 
of what this will of ours, in its present dissatisfaction, 
really intends and means, nor do we know how this will is 
expressed in the facts of universal experience. The World 
of Description, as a conceived objective order, is the result of 


our attempting, through a process of serial discrimination, 
155 


156 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


to make good the second of these aspects of our ignorance. 
The World of Appreciation we learn to recognize by 
coming to a better definition of what it is that our will 
even now seeks. For then we learn that our present will 
demands for its full expression, not merely contents or 
facts that are yet to be discriminated, but other wills than 
this present conscious will of ours, other purposes than we 
as yet observe within the limits of this instant’s conscious- 
ness. Our reaction in presence of the world can become 
definite and rational, and in accordance with the Ought, 
only when we acknowledge, not merely data other than 
those now consciously present, but lives, selves, other than 
our own finite selfhood. Hence the World of Description, 
taken by itself, is never the whole truth. It needs to be 
interpreted in terms of the World of Appreciation. 

What the criticism of fundamental categories has en- 
abled us to see in general, is concretely exemplified by our 
knowledge of the Physical World and of Human Society. 
We proceed accordingly to apply our general theory to 
these special cases. We shall find motives that lead us to 
interpret the physical world as a World of Description, 
where, as we then conceive, series of phenomena are linked 
according to rigidly invariable laws. These laws enable 
us indeed to see how the One and the Many are in certain 
ways related, but do not appear as expressions of Purpose. 
On the contrary, the Social World, the realm of our human 
fellow-beings, is for us all primarily a World of Apprecia- 
tion, that is, a world where other wills than our own pres- 
ent conscious will seem to be expressing themselves, in 
accordance with their own choices. Hence our customary 
interpretation of the world as known to men is profoundly 


PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL REALITY 157 


dualistic. On the one hand we find in experience motives 
that seem to lead to Materialism. For Materialism is due 
simply to a one-sided emphasis laid upon certain aspects of 
the World of Description. On the other hand we are 
driven, by equally obvious empirical considerations, to 
interpret the social world as a realm of conscious volun- 
tary processes, which occur because somebody finds it worth 
while that they should occur. Our ordinary common- 
sense view of things sets these two doctrines about the 
knowable world side by side, and in general despairs of 
seeing any comprehensible link between the two orders, 
viz. between the mental and the material, the social and 
the physical, the necessary and the free, the describable 
and the spiritual. Our own general criticism of the cate- 
gories has prepared us, however, to understand, in terms 
of our Idealism, both the contrast and the unity of these 
two realms. In the present and in the subsequent lecture, 
I propose therefore to undertake a discussion of the con- 
cept of Nature, and to show its relation to our concept of 
Mind. We shall have to explain, in the first place, what 
are the main motives for our acknowledgment of the 
existence of the physical world; and secondly, we shall 
have to set forth in some detail the relations between our 
idealistic Theory of Being on the one hand and the em- 
pirical facts that men acknowledge on the other hand, 
in dealing with one another and with Nature. 


I 


No precise definition of the scope covered by the term 
Nature can be givenin advance of a Theory of Nature. 


158 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


It is easy to say that, by Nature, we mean the portion 
of the universe that our senses make known to us and 
that our special empirical sciences study. But the 
region of Being marked out by such a definition is no 
very precise one. What our senses make known to us 
means little enough until the data of sense have been 
organized through our conduct, and interpreted in the 
light of theory. Nature has therefore always been con- 
ceived by men very largely in supersensuous terms, from 
the days of magic lore down to the latest geological or 
physical or biological theories. And what our empirical 
sciences actually study is, according to all our beliefs 
about Nature, the mere fringe of a world that exists, 
but that we have not yet learned how to study with 
success. Nature is also often contrasted with Mind ; 
but for the psychologist mental processes are a portion 
of the natural processes; while, for our own idealistic 
view, all Nature is an expression of Mind. In our own 
phraseology as used in these lectures, Nature has so far 
been contrasted several times with Man. But we of 
course all recognize a sense in which Man is to be 
conceived as a part of Nature ; while on the other hand, 
nothing is clearer than that, for us, all our beliefs about 
Nature are determined by conditions which belong, in 
one aspect, to the mind of Man. A confessedly vague 
way of stating the definition of the term is to say that 
by Nature we mean a realm external to our own private 
experience, and yet this side, so to speak, of the ultimate 
Reality, a realm, as it were, between the divine, 
viewed as the Absolute, and the knowing finite human 
Subject. But all of these expressions, while they are 


PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL REALITY 159 


indeed in their various ways valid, indicate a problem 
rather than define its precise limits. 

More to the point, at this stage of our inquiry, than 
a formally precise definition of Nature, is a consideration 
of the motives which lead us to acknowledge as real the 
facts that we all call physical,— viz. to acknowledge the 
existence of matter, the laws of natural processes, and 
the dependence of our own mental life upon these pro- 
cesses. To this aspect of the problem of Nature we 
accordingly at once proceed. 

After all that we have now seen regarding the nature 
of human knowledge, it would be vain to assert that 
we perceive directly, through our senses, the existence 
of that which we call matter. The senses never show 
us, by themselves, the true Being of anything whatever. 
All truth is the object of acknowledgment, and not 
merely of immediate experience. Moreover, what has 
Being is, in itself, something Individual. And the 
senses never show us individuality, but only the pres- 
ence of sense-qualities,—colors, sounds, odors, touch, 
impressions, and the like. On the other hand it is per- 
fectly indubitable that the senses show, now to one and 
now to another of us men, all the data that, after com- 
paring our various human experiences, we interpret as the 
signs of the existence of matter. The question is, however, 
this: In what way do we come by this interpretation? 

We cannot say, at this point, that some innate con- 
viction, some first and fundamental axiom, or some 
opaque “law” of -the intellect mysteriously requires 
us to believe that matter is real. This we cannot now 
assert, just because our Idealism knows nothing what- 


160 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


ever about a collection of principles called fundamental 
or innate assurances. Nor yet can we here, appealing 
to our more thoughtful and scientifically organized expe- 
rience, assert that even the success of science, by itself, 
sufficiently warrants us in attributing to matter a valid 
Being, which, just because it is independent of our 
caprices, must remain valid in a realm wholly beyond 
that of the minds of men. For we know, from our 
former criticisms of Critical Rationalism, that a merely 
valid Being, taken by itself, is not yet a real Being. 
And the philosophical inquiry into the reality that lies 
at the basis of our experience of Nature, is only begun 
when we point out that, for our experience, the laws of 
Nature are valid. For the question at once arises, in 
what form of life, in what expression of the Absolute, 
in what Being of our own fourth or idealistic type, are 
our valid laws of Nature founded ? 

It follows that for us, at this stage, when once we 
raise the question regarding the Reality of Nature, the 
most ordinary conventional answers will in no sense serve. 
We must undertake the whole problem afresh. 

As we do so, we next meet an account of the founda- 
tions of our belief in the external and natural world 
which is so frequently defended, and so familiar, that 
we cannot here pass it over in silence. It involves look- 
ing deeper into the nature of our idea of Being, than 
those look who simply say that we directly perceive by 
our senses the external existence of natural objects. 
And while it indeed appeals to a certain axiom, namely, 
to the supposed axiom of causality, it is usually more 
critical in its statement than are most of the views that 


PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL REALITY 161 


make the whole issue depend upon irreducible innate 
convictions. And, furthermore, it has been urged by 
many noted thinkers who otherwise are of the most 
various philosophical tendency. 

According to this view, we come by our belief in the 
physical world simply upon the ground of the Resistance 
which the solid material objects offer to our touch, to 
our movement, and especially to our muscular sense, and 
upon the basis of the various other ways in which Nature 
sets limits to our activity. And we reason from such 
experiences of resistance and of limitation to the ex- 
ternal existence of things, upon the ground that there 
must indeed be a cause for every effect, and therefore, 
in this case, a cause which resists and sets limits to our 
will. As this cause is not found within ourselves, we 
assume it as external. 

No theory of our belief in an external world seems to 
have had better fortune than this one in popular phi- 
losophy, or even in more serious metaphysical inquiry. 
And yet I regard it as precisely such a mingling of true 
and of false analysis as is especially adapted hopelessly 
to confuse our whole view of nature. 

This view, as I hold, is indeed sound in laying stress 
upon a deep connection between our observation of the 
significant inner life of our own will, and our assurance 
that the universe in which we live has true Being. But, 
as I have maintained in developing our Fourth Concep- 
tion of Being, while our finitude always shows us that 
we have not won the whole of Being, it is the fulfil- 
ment, —the always relative and imperfect fulfilment, — 
but still the fulfilment of our internal meanings, and not 


M 


162 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


the opaque resistance which the world offers to these 
meanings, which both defines our warrant for finding 
that the universe has Being, and gives us, in the form 
of the Internal Meaning of our Ideas, our only and our 
valid means for defining wherein that Being consists. 
Our limitations do, indeed, send us beyond themselves 
for the truth. But the proof that a real world is here 
about us, is never the mere opaqueness of fact, the 
blind presence of something which besets and hinders 
us; but rather it is the relative transparency of our 
inner life, the observed manifestation of meaning in 
our experience, which constantly tells us that we are in 
an universe where, in view of our present incomplete- 
ness, rational truth beyond us is to be found. What is, 
is the completion of our incompleteness, and not any fate 
that merely overcomes us. This we have fully illus- 
trated in the foregoing discussion of the Categories. 

Furthermore, the view that we here criticise makes 
the whole case depend upon an appeal to the principle of 
causation. The resistance that my will meets, needs 
explanation. It is explained by the hypothesis of a 
material cause which resists us. But hereupon I re- 
spond to the defender of this theory, What is, then, 
your principle of causation? Is it not this, namely: 
that whatever happens needs, from your point of view, 
to be explained, and finds, as a fact, its explanation in 
its relation to other facts? And if this be your belief, 
as it doubtless is, is not your principle of causation for 
you a principle somehow first known to govern the real 
world which your experience of resistance is said to make 
manifest to your senses, before you can use the principle to 


PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL REALITY 163 


prove the existence of matter? But if this be true, is not 
your principle of causation, your assurance that the 
real world is one where facts stand in rational relations, 
and where what happens is explicable, already presup- 
posed not only as valid, but as valid for a real world 
beyond you, from the very outset of your whole inquiry ? 
Is there not here, then, a belief deeper than your mere 
experience that your will is at any time resisted? For 
unless you had this principle of causation in your pos- 
session, and unless you first believed the principle to be 
applicable to a realm beyond your private experience, 
your will would be resisted in vain, so far as your power 
to learn about a real world would then go. For you 
would then learn nothing thereby but the blind fact 
that you felt limitations, as an infant feels them when 
he hungers. But if you already possess your principle, 
and believe it applicable to Reality in general, then in- 
deed you can apply it to explain, after a fashion, any 
fact that you please. Already, however, in assuming 
that you are somehow able to know that the principle 
of causation applies to a realm beyond your own present 
will, you have found out, apart from all experience of 
resistance, that there is the real external world within 
which the principle of causation is valid. And, in that 
case, you have not discovered the reality of the physical 
world through the fact that it resists your will, but 
have presumed, in advance of all feeling of resistance, 
that there is a real world, beyond yourself, whose facts, 
whatever they are, are linked by a law of causation to 
your own experience. For surely you do not mean 
that the principle of causation itself, by resisting your 


164 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


will, forces you to believe in its reality as the cause of 
such resistance. 

If you look closer you soon see, however, as to our 
belief in causation, that somehow or other it helps us 
more clearly to grasp the internal sense, the observed 
inner significance, of some of our conscious states, to 
observe what we call their causal connections. In 
observing these connections, so far as they fall within 
our own range of experience, we there find somehow our 
own rational Will better expressed, or embodied, than 
it would be without this idea, and thereby we better 
win our own inner clearness. In assuming, now, that 
some such connection as this has validity beyond us, 
in a realm external to ourselves, we have begun by 
defining this outer realm, not as a realm that pri- 
marily resists or thwarts our Will, but as a realm that 
first of all embodies one of our own deepest and most 
rational purposes. If the external world, said to be 
material, is, as this view holds, above all causal, and is 
such as to explain the particular facts which are found 
in our experience, then, that world is above all a real 
embodiment of the very purpose which, in us, appears 
as our purpose of explanation. 

Properly examined, then, the view here in question 
becomes only a form of Idealism,—a sort of primary 
assurance that the nature of things is rational, and fulfils 
our purposes. And so the problem about our belief in 
the existence of Nature must be solved in explicit rela- 
tion to our Fourth Conception of Being. If we are to 
understand what we mean by Material Nature, and why 
we believe it to be real, we must ask, What internal 


PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL REALITY 165 


meaning of ours seeks and demands an embodiment such 
that, to our minds, only outer Nature can furnish this 
embodiment? But so far, indeed, we have not seen what 
grounds distinguish our belief in matter from our belief 
in any other sort of Reality. What we are seeking, how- 
ever, is an account of how our belief in the material world, 
as distinct from any other realm of acknowledged facts, is 
to be explained and defended. 

Moreover, as has occasionally been pointed out, in the 
course of various recent discussions of this view, the natu- 
ral truths which are of the most theoretical importance to 
us, are often truths that result from an indirect interpre- 
tation of facts with which the sense of resistance in any 
direct muscular sense has very little todo. Do the geo- 
metrical laws force themselves upon us by resisting our 
will (except, to be sure, our will exhaustively to know 
them)? The heavens have long been a type of the appar- 
ently everlasting character of Nature. When did the 
stars show themselves to be real by resisting our will, 
except indeed by arousing questions that we cannot 
at present answer? 


II 


In proceeding to suggest what I regard as a more ade- 
quate account of the warrant for our belief in the physical 
world, I must call attention to a plain fact which, as I 
conceive, has far too often been wholly neglected in the 
discussion of this subject. Our belief in the reality of 
Nature, when Nature is taken to mean the realm of physi- 
cal phenomena known to common sense and to science, 7s 
inseparably bound up with our belief in the existence of our 


166 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


fellow-men. The one belief cannot be understood apart 
from the other. Whatever the deeper reality behind 
Nature may turn out to be,—our Nature, the realm of 
matter and of laws with which our science and our popu- 
lar opinions have to do, is a realm which we conceive as 
known or as knowable to various men, in precisely the same 
general sense in which we regard it as known or as know- 
able to our private selves. Take away the social factor 
in our present view of Nature, and you would alter the 
most essential of the characters possessed, for us, by that 
physical realm in which we all believe. 

How significant this aspect of our belief in Nature is, 
you may see if you will look a little more closely at the 
facts. There is much, indeed, in the realm of Reality in 
general, apart from Nature, which a man need not view 
as accessible to all men, in so far as they are men. Asa 
matter of religious faith, one might well believe, for in- 
stance, that upon a given occasion God had revealed his 
will to a single prophet, or other inspired person, and that 
this revelation not only remained, but had to remain, by 
God’s will, a secret quite inaccessible to all other men. 
In the reality of the revelation in question one might 
nevertheless believe, simply because, by hypothesis, God 
would be conceived, by a believer in such a revelation, as 
a real person, and the prophet as also a real person. 
And whatever occurs to one person, as a fact of his inner 
life, and whatever passes between two persons, may re- 
main a secret inaccessible to all other persons, in so far as 
these persons are finite individuals. Or again, I now 
believe in your mind as a reality, external to mine; yet I 
also view your mental life as, in its own direct presence 


PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL REALITY 167 


to you, something inaccessible to all human beings besides 
yourself. But while Reality as such does not imply that 
what is real is directly accessible, in its details, to the pri- 
vate and finite experience of any or of all men, it is differ- 
ent with the sort of reality which we ascribe to what we 
usually regard as the material world. 

Suppose that I told you that I was well acquainted with 
the existence and the properties of a material object which 
I had now and here before me. Suppose that I assured 
you that I could see, touch, weigh, and otherwise test the 
reality of this material object, but that I was quite sure 
that neither you nor any other man could conceivably see 
it or touch it, or otherwise get the least experience of its 
presence. Suppose, as a fact, that nobody else ever did 
verify my report; but that I continued to insist upon the 
reality, observable for me, of my material object. What 
would you say of that object of mine? The answer is 
plain. You would say that my object might indeed be 
real, but was real solely as a physical phenomenon, to wit, 
as a collection of states in my mind, in other words, as a 
certain fixed hallucination of mine. And now I, myself, 
if indeed I remained sane while I asserted all this, should 
not hesitate to agree with you, just as surely as I retained 
my present definition of my material world. For by my 
material world, I certainly mean a collection of actual and 
possible experiences of mine such that you too can agree 
with me about the presence and the describable charac- 
ters of these experiences, precisely in so far as you have 
equal opportunities with me to verify their presence and 
to test with me their peculiar type of Being. The fact 
that we men find Nature here, implies for us, then, that we 


168 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


are so constituted as to find the same sort of natural phe- 
nomena. The realm of the physical phenomena, whatever 
inner Being may be behind it, is, for us, primarily thes 
common realm of human experience. Upon this considera- 
tion the very definition of what we call Nature depends. 

It is, of course, true that any one of us, when alone, 
supposes himself to be still in the presence of Nature. It 
is also true that this supposition would lose its present 
meaning just as soon as we supposed not only that we were 
alone with Nature, but that, even if our fellows had the 
same opportunities as ourselves, they would still be wholly 
unable to verify our observations. A nature that is not 
only by accident observable just now to me alone, but 
that also is such that nobody else amongst all men be- 
sides myself can observe it, becomes, at once, to my mind, 
either one of two things, viz. either something that is 
explicitly my own dream, or fancy, or hallucination, or 
other mental state, or else something that I should view, 
if I continued to believe in it, as a reality belonging to 
a realm of spirits, whom I might then suppose to exist 
apart from men. In either case, such fact, observable by 
me alone, is no longer to be conceived as belonging to 
the well-known material world of common sense and of 
science. 


Il 


Our belief in Man, then, is logically prior to our inter- 
pretation of Nature. And any theory of Nature must 
undertake to explain, not merely how these data of sense 
appear to any one of us in this order, and subject to 
these valid laws, but how all men come to possess this 


PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL REALITY 169 


connectedness and interrelated unity of their common 
experience, despite the apparent separateness of their in- 
dividual states of mind. 

But what then is the source of our belief in the reality 
of our fellow-men? To this question the customary an- 
swer is quite the reverse of the answer which I mentioned 
a few moments since, when I began to speak about the 
physical world. If it is common to say that we believe 
in external Nature as something that thwarts or hinders 
or resists our will, it is usual, on the other hand, to assert 
that we believe in our fellow-men because we detect in 
their conduct expressive fashions of behavior, which are 
analogous to those whereby we express and accomplish 
our own will. Ido various things, and know what they 
mean. The present theory supposes that I observe in 
my fellow-men deeds similar to those whose meaning is 
already known to me. By analogy, one continues, I 
attribute to these deeds an inner meaning of their own, 
analogous to my own inner meaning. Here, as you see, 
it is no longer the thwarting of my will, which is said to 
prove the reality of external things, but the positive ex- 
pression of something analogous to my will in the deeds 
of my fellows, —it is this, I say, which is believed to be 
an evidence that, beyond my life, there is another life ful- 
filling ends analogous to my own. 

This view of the reason why we believe our fellow-men 
to be real is, therefore, more in harmony with our own 
Fourth Conception of Being than is the ordinary account 
of our belief in material Nature. For what I learn to 
view as real is here defined rather as what is in harmony 
with my Internal Meaning than as what thwarts my mean- 


170 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


ings. Yet even this customary way of explaining our 
belief that our fellow-men exist is still, to my mind, in- 
adequate. It is not the analogy with ourselves which is 
our principal guide to our belief in our fellows. The 
view that analogy mainly guides us is defective as an 
account of the psychology of our social consciousness, and 
is inadequate as a statement of the reasons why our social 
consciousness is well founded in the truth of things. Here 
too, then, we shall have to alter the conventional theory. 

As a matter of psychology, ¢.e. of the natural history of 
our beliefs, a vague belief in the existence of our fellows 
seems to antedate, to a considerable extent, the definite 
formation of any consciousness of ourselves. This thesis, 
which will later prove important for our whole theory of 
the individual human Self, will be again illustrated in 
connection with that theory. We are social beings first 
of all by virtue of our inherited instincts, and we love, 
fear, and closely watch our fellows, in advance of any 
definite ideas about what our fellows really are. Our 
more explicit consciousness that our fellows exist is due 
to a gradual interpretation of these our deepest social 
instincts. Our belief in the existence of our fellows, 
therefore, does not come to our consciousness, through 
a mere argument from analogy, whereby we use the 
previously developed observation of our own nature and 
powers as a basis for the estimate of the inner life of other 
men. Our assurance about our fellows arises by means 
of those very interests whereby we gradually come to our 
own self-consciousness. It is nearer to the truth to say 
that we first learn about ourselves from and through our 
fellows, than that we learn about our fellows by using the 


PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL REALITY Biya: 


analogy of ourselves. Not even now do we mainly trust 
to analogy to guide us in interpreting what we most want 
at any instant to know about the inner life of our fellows. 
In an excited crowd, or in any assembly of the type of a 
mob, even the mature man is often much more aware of 
the feelings of other people than he is of his own. He 
often, in such cases, loses sight of himself in a certain 
passion of sympathy. And again, when at present we 
converse with people, we become conscious of their inner 
life rather in terms of their contrast with ourselves, than 
by means of their analogy with us. A man who expresses 
himself in a way that is new to me, seems to me often all 
the more a real person, with an inner life of his own, just 
because I fail to trace any close analogy between his 
meanings or his expressions and my own. His difference 
from me makes him seem more real to me. Thus the 
truly original poet, the Shakespeare or the Goethe, seems 
to us, as we study him, to possess his own wondrous inner 
life, just because, while we read him, we meet novelty. 
Wonder arouses the social sense more vigorously than 
does recognition. The child’s period of liveliest growth 
in social insight is his questioning age, when every new 
mind is a mysterious realm to be explored by inquiries. 

And now as to the logic of our social consciousness, the 
simplest way to express the whole sense of the evidence 
that impresses upon us, at every moment, the reality of 
our fellows, is to say, Our fellows are known to be real, 
and to have their own inner life, because they are for 
each of us the endless treasury of more ideas. They 
answer our questions; they tell us news; they make com- 
ments; they pass judgments; they express novel com- 


172 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


binations of feelings; they relate to us stories; they argue 
with us, and take counsel with us. Or, to put the matter 
in a form still nearer to that demanded by our Fourth 
Conception of Being: Our fellows furnish us the con- 
stantly needed supplement to our own fragmentary mean- 
ings. That is, they help us to find out what our own 
true meaning is. Hence, since Reality is through and 
through what completes our incompleteness, our fellows 
are indeed real. Wondering, in a doubtful case, what to 
do, we wait to see what other people do. Here we use no 
analogy with our own deeds as the basis of our inter- 
pretation of their inner life. While we wait for the 
social verdict, we stand halting, — our ideas fragmentary, 
our meanings in search of their own wholeness, our fini- 
tude desiring its own Other. Our fellows act, and we 
perhaps follow suit. Vow our doubts are all set at rest. 
We have won the desired decision. But where did we 
look for that decision? The answer is, We looked to our 
fellows. Now, in general, the Real, as our Fourth Con- 
ception has asserted, is precisely our own whole meaning, 
which we seek as beyond ourselves, even because we know 
it in advance as ours, but have not yet won it in fulness 
as a present conscious fact. This our fuller meaning, 
however, our hidden Reality, the object sought when we 
turn to our fellows for help, we find as something im- 
parted to us by their deeds. We therefore afterwards 
view this meaning as having been real beyond us, namely, 
in the minds of our fellows, before it became present in 
us, namely, as our own conscious meaning. And this is 
why we ought to acknowledge our fellows to be real. 
This is the way in which the general category of the 


PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL REALITY is 


Ought gets, in the World of Appreciation, the special 
motives that warrant us in acknowledging particular 
facts that embody will. 

Just so it is, too, when we ask a question, and get an 
answer, or inquire the way in the street, or look in the 
paper for the news, or read a book, or listen to another 
man’s arguments, or in any way learn our fellows’ ideas. 
All these ideas, just in so far as they interest us, are 
sought as some meaning not yet consciously our own, but 
needed as a supplement to what so far is consciously our 
own. As a needed supplement to our own meaning, these 
meanings which we seek have their place in Reality before 
we consciously find them. That they have such a place 
is a consequence of that whole conception of Reality 
which our own former series of lectures so fully ana- 
lyzed. The only question is, What place have they ? 
Our whole social experience, in case of our ideas of our 
fellows, tends to give such ideas their more precise locali- 
zation in our finite world, as the ideas which our fellows 
express, by voice, by gesture, by writing, and by count- 
less other significant deeds. Our fellow-man, when he is 
genuinely alive to us at all, is therefore precisely such a 
storehouse of meanings,—such a thesaurus of needed 
ideas. The Internal Meaning of which his Being is the 
outward embodiment, is, in general, our own conscious aim 
to have our questions answered, and to win novelty by in- 
sight into our world. That he exists at all we can there- 
fore logically know only upon the basis of an essentially 
idealistic interpretation of the universe. In a world 
where all true meaning is eternally embodied, the only 
question that arises about a particular finite meaning 


174 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


which I just now seek, but do not consciously possess, 
is the question, Where and how is it embodied? To this 
question my social experience answers whenever my fel- 
low speaks to me, or acts expressively. 

That my fellow is also far more than a mere storehouse 
of opinions and plans, that he is, as a human Individual, 
the proper object of countless unique interests, such as 
win our love, or move our hostility or our rivalry, —all 
this is indeed true. But all this too is secondary to our 
empirical ground for believing that, whatever as Individual 
or as Self he further may prove to be, he is in any case 
something real, and something other than any conscious 
life of our own. This ground is found in the fact that he 
is a local centre for the imparting to us of meanings, —a 
dynamo of ideas. That all his ideas have their fulfilment 
in the Reality, our general Idealism assures us. What our 
fellow empirically shows us is the way in which certain 
more or less imperfect expressions of meaning find their 
place in Being. This, then, is the particular shape which 
the World of Appreciation, discussed in its general form 
in a previous lecture, takes when interpreted in the light 
of our special human experiences. 

But now, with the life of this my fellow, when he is 
viewed in his relations to me, there is bound up the fact 
that, as our social intercourse constantly shows, we can 
treat certain facts which each of us for himself expe- 
riences, as if they were facts common to both of us. And 
herewith we are prepared to return to the conception of 
material Nature. 


PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL REALITY 175 


IV 


The organism of my fellow-man is directly known to 
me as a phenomenal object, moving about in what my ex- 
perience presents to me as space, and in time. But side 
by side with my experience of my fellow, I experience the 
presence of countless other objects, which also interest me, 
but which I do not primarily interpret as expressions 
either of his life, or of the life of any other comrade. 
Now the notable feature of all these objects, in so far as 
they are normally to be found in the realm of sight and of 
touch, is, that my whole social intercourse with other men 
confirms me in my belief that these objects somehow exist 
for my fellows as well as for myself. My fellow points 
out to me these objects, and I find them in company with 
him ; he expresses in these objects interests similar to 
those which I too share. Our discriminating intelligence 
also wins in all of us the same success in dealing with 
them. That is, my fellow describes these objects as I do ; 
our science makes them topics of investigations in which 
we all share; and our civilization depends upon using 
these objects together, and upon finding the same laws 
present in those series of them which interest us. In the 
same realm in which I see my fellow expressing his mean- 
ings, I observe many of these objects passed from hand to 
hand, or otherwise made the instruments of our common 
human tasks, enjoyments, inquiries, and contests. These 
objects then, and above all, the objects of my combined senses 
of sight and touch, become for me through and through 
saturated with a meaning that I also can never completely 
find embodied in my private experience, and that only my 


176 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


fellow’s experience of these objects can aid me to interpret 
in harmony with my own socially colored ideas. These 
objects then, as from infancy I learn to hold, are in their 
true meaning common to my fellow and to myself. 

As my experience of the problems of life grows, I learn 
to view my fellow’s inner life more and more as a realm 
remote from my direct observation. Under the influence 
of the tendency to discriminate facts more and more 
sharply I become increasingly individualistic in my inter- 
pretation of my own social presuppositions. I learn to con- 
ceive of my fellow and myself as falsely sundered, or even 
as Independent Beings, whose isolation from one another 
becomes emphasized by well-known social motives, — for 
example, by the conflicts of social rivalry, by the class 
distinctions and estrangements of a complex social order, 
— in brief, by all that makes man forget that he and his 
fellow together are empirically known as fragmentary 
hints of the real unity in variety of the life of the Abso- 
lute. Childhood, whenever the capricious fears of its 
bashfulness are not in question, easily accepts all minds in 
whose expressions of meaning it chances to be interested, 
as akin to itself. Adult life, under civilized conditions, 
exaggerates the mystery of our apparent sundering from 
one another, and forgets that only the community of our 
meanings, and the fact that we are local centres wherein 
the ideal unity of the world gets various and contrasted 
expressions, enables us to communicate with each other at 
all. 

But, however far we seem to grow remote from one 
another, and to be independent centres of life and of 
meaning, there remains a realm that, in the sense discussed 


PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL REALITY 177 


in our Second Lecture, appears as between us; that is, it 
is such that our sharp distinction from one another de- 
pends upon our distinguishing it from every Self. 
The realm of the objects that each of us experiences for 
himself, but believes to be also objects for the other men, 
remains thus as a link which seems to bind our actual lives, 
in a relatively external way, together. Our individual 
minds come to seem sundered ; but all of us together seem 
to be in relation to matter. But in order that this our 
common relation to the physical phenomena should remain 
conceivable, in spite of our apparent isolation from one 
another, common sense has to learn to regard matter as 
something outside of all our minds, and as therefore capa- 
ble of coming into an equally close, and also equally 
remote, relation to all of us. Here then, is a special in- 
stance of the application of the category of the between. 
It leads to the triad: My fellow and Myself, with Nature 
between us.? 

I see the sun shining. My fellow, as I learn, sees the 
sun shining also. This I first learn as a part of my inter- 
pretation, not of external nature, but of my fellow’s inner 
life. Now the shining of the sun is hereby shown to be 
not a fact for me alone, but for other minds. Other men, 
however, see the sun, as I learn, when I do not see it. 
Hence its existence goes wholly beyond that of my private 


1 Only from the special point of view here in question is this relation- 
ship especially characteristic of Nature. In the further growth of dualism 
Nature very generally loses this character, and is regarded not as between 
two minds, but as foreign to all minds, in a way that we shall later follow. 
But in ordinary social dealings of various men with the same material 
objects, the conception of the material object commonly involves the triad 
here noted. 

N 


178 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


consciousness, and persists in my absence. While I sleep 
in darkness, men in other lands, as social communications 
teach me, observe the sun. Various men die; yet the sun 
is still seen by the survivors. I learn, by common report, 
that it shone for men long before I was born. I come to 
believe that it will shine for future generations after we are 
all dead. Such knowledge, all of it socially derived, goes to 
show that the sun shines apart from the experience of any 
particular man, while the shining of the sun is still some- 
thing which every man can verify. It is ina sense common 
to all of us. It is in a sense relatively independent of 
each of us. It is a part of a vast realm of phenomena 
all of which have this same general character, — that of 
needing no particular human experience to verify their 
presence, while all men alike can under suitable condi- 
tions agree in such a verification. 

A confirmation of this theory of the reason why we 
regard certain of our experiences as indications of the 
existence of material objects, is furnished by the well- 
known fact that not all our sensory perceptions, but 
especially those of sight and touch, are regarded by us 
as showing to us the presence of the external physical 
world. We may well ask, then, why it is that, as I 
observed a moment since, the sight-touch world of 
extended objects seems to be most of all the world where 
material reality is at home. Why do we so readily 
reject as not revealing the true nature of material things, 
the tastes and odors, although these latter, in the mind 
of many an animal, and even in our own childhood, 
would seem to have been the most interesting characters 
of nature? At the age of six months, the child is 


PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL REALITY 179 


frequently fond of investigating the taste of things. 
Yet taste, despite its importance as a possibility of 
experience, goes far into the background of our inter- 
pretation of nature, and does so very early. If one asks 
as to the real reason of all this, I should point out that 
precisely all those socially significant experiences of our 
common dealings with natural objects occur most defi- 
nitely when we deal with the world of the visible and 
tangible things. Hearing is indeed the most important 
sense of social communication in all the more abstract 
regions of our intercourse. But, on the other hand, in 
case you and I are together dealing with natural 
objects, the field which is common to the senses of 
sight and touch has the very important character that 
in this field one observes one’s fellows’ dealings with 
objects. I can see you touching an object. I can even, 
in the ordinary social sense, be said, by virtue of familiar 
interpretations, to see you looking at an object. And, 
just so, if we grasp a pole or a rope together, or lift a 
weight together, I feel your grasp of the object, just as 
truly as I feel the object. But in no corresponding sense 
can I be said to hear that you hear an object, nor can I 
taste your tasting of an object, nor can I smell your smell- 
ing of an object; while I can both see and touch pro- 
cesses which I interpret as your seeing and touching 
of the object. Hence it is that the objects with which 
you and I at once deal, as well as the objects which on 
occasion can exist independently for either of us, come 
to be viewed as the objects of the field of sight and touch. 
The later developments of our describing consciousness 
confirm this tendency. What is seen and touched can 


180 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


be described more exactly than can the objects of other 
senses. And Nature, as we shall still further see very 
soon, comes to be viewed as, above all, a World of 
Description. 


Vv 


Our assurance that outer nature exists apart from any 
man’s private experience, is thus inseparably bound up 
with our social consciousness. But now, what shall we 
say of our ordinary modern interpretation of the principal 
characters that are to belong to this material world, when 
once the existence of Nature has been admitted? This 
interpretation is in general, to the effect that the material 
world is, indeed, the classic instance of the application of 
the categories of Description. Whatever its inmost 
essence may be, it is regarded by us as something wholly 
unlike our own minds. Nature we no longer ordinarily 
view as sentient, or as conscious, or as a direct result or 
expression of purpose. It appears to us as something 
very like a mechanism. Its laws are describable, but are 
not such as seem to embody will, or any moral or es- 
thetic meaning. We, therefore, often call it lifeless ; 
and the generalizations of the doctrine of Evolution, 
which show us that, despite this apparent lifelessness of 
Nature, our own lives have come into Being, as an out- 
growth from Nature, seem to us only the more to show 
the impenetrable mystery of our place in the Universe. 
“Dead matter” seems to us the extreme opposite of 
mind. ‘ Nature’s mechanism” appears to be hopelessly 
opposed in its essence to the interests of our will and of 
our emotion. And now whence this idea of a vast sepa- 


PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL REALITY 181 


ration between material nature and the significant inner 
life of our fellows ? 

I answer, here too, it is first the way in which mate- 
rial nature enters into our common social life together 
which fixes our attention upon this contrast between per- 
sons and things, and which, when certain dualistic motives 
grow more prominent, makes the contrast seem ultimate. 
The difference between minds and material objects is 
for the civilized man so vast, not by virtue of any 
experience which gives him a right to assert, positively, 
that Nature is utterly opposed in its essence to Mind, 
but by virtue of the fact that our practical and hu- 
man relations to the material world have a social sig- 
nificance which becomes more and more contrasted with 
our practical relations with living men, the more our 
ethical consciousness becomes organized, and the more our 
power to mould natural phenomena to our human pur- 
poses becomes prominent in our minds. Man becomes, as 
we grow wiser in practical affairs, more and more our live 
fellow-being. By contrast, Nature grows more and more 
our socially significant tool. We appreciate Man more 
and more sensitively as we grow more civilized ; but we 
describe certain of the more important phenomena of 
Nature more and more carefully as we grow more skilful. 
Our interest in both aspects of this process is pro- 
foundly human and social. The nature that our indus- 
trial art controls is just Man’s Nature ; and our science is 
an extension into the realms of theory of precisely the 
control over Nature that we seek when we use tools. And 
the very interests that make our science and our art grow 
are interests in Man, in his life, in his wisdom, and in his 


a 


182 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


power. But because the Nature that we describe and control 
permits our science and our art to succeed by virtue of 
whatever is rigid, uniform, predictable, explicable, and in a 
measure, mechanical, about our experience of Nature, we 
come to lay exclusive stress upon just these aspects of the 
material world, and to conceive them as the deepest and 
most essential aspects of that world. And because our 
science and our art in their turn humanize our life, and 
enrich our civilization, they lead to a constant increase of 
our sense that all men are live and sentient beings, whose 
will and whose interests are related to our own, despite 
all our social estrangements. In consequence, our civ- 
ilization leads to a contrast of the mental and the 
material worlds in a fashion which is distinctly due 
to a perspective effect. The narrow clearness of our 
civilized consciousness tends to make us materialists when 
we view the world apart from man, and sensitive appre- 
ciators of life whenever we consider our fellows. And 
that is why, in our own age, theoretical Materialism has 
flourished side by side with the growth of a wide Human- 
ity of sentiment. Both are expressions of social motives. 
Neither is sufficiently broad in its view to express to us 
the whole of our true relations to Being. 

As to the social aspect of the process of growth in 
civilization which we have thus summarized, there can 
be, of course, no doubt. It is for us a growth of our 
concrete World of Appreciation. The civilized man lives 
in spiritual relations to his fellow-men, — relations, many 
of which are wholly unintelligible to the savage. It is 
not merely that the civilized man has sympathy with 
more men, but that his conduct involves an organized 


PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL REALITY 183 


system of responses to a human environment that he 
acknowledges as mental, conceives in terms of its values 
and purposes, and views as a more or less clearly con- 
nected whole, —a social order, such as is one’s own coun- 
try, or humanity. Such an environment is conceived, so 
far as one gives the notion of it any clearness at all, in 
idealistic terms. For the social order itself is no indepen- 
dent realistic entity, since it is the very breath of life for 
me, the social being. Nor does it consist of mutually 
independent selves. It is an organism. Nor is it a mys- 
tical entity, since it has articulation and differentiation of 
structure within it. It is no merely Valid Being, since 
in the social consciousness of us men it is consciously alive. 
It can be adequately conceived only in terms such as our 
Fourth Conception has defined, although it is indeed not 
the Absolute, but itself only a fragment of a larger whole. 

On the other hand, the natural world, as the civilized 
man comes to conceive it, bears the same general rela- 
tion to the social world which, in our second lecture, 
we found the World of Description bearing to the 
World of Appreciation. Men have always been trying to 
find out how to codperate with one another. Their only 
way of finding out has been to seek to unify the One 
and the Many in their experience, by discriminating, in 
their common realm of physical phenomena, what objects, 
what series of objects, and what unvarying laws of these 
series of objects they could agree upon as the common 
basis of definite acts of codperation. For only by means 
of their common relations to the natural phenomena 
are the men able to give, one to another, definite signals 
as to what their intentions are, or to define extensive 


184 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


plans of action in socially intelligible terms. Taken by 
themselves, however, and apart from their relations to 
the men, the natural phenomena fail to furnish a basis 
for any definite interpretation of their order as the expres- 
sion of a Will such as men can concretely understand. 
And this proves to be more and more the case as men 
grow critical, and define their own social purposes and 
plans in more definite and rational ways. For the ani- 
mistic savage all nature was vaguely alive. The civilized 
man has too definite a life of his own to tolerate this 
vagueness. In consequence our civilized view of Nature 
has tended, in many ways, towards Dualism. Nature is 
no longer conceived as between the various socially related 
pairs of conscious beings, in the sense discussed above. It 
is viewed, more and more, as foreign to them all. There 
remains, in case of the natural phenomena, then, the one 
rational resource of undertaking to describe them, by the 
use of precisely the categories which, in their most general 
form, we discussed in our second lecture. Discrimina- 
tion, an effort towards a comprehension of the One and 
the Many in Nature through a discovery of the between, 
a watchful search for Series of phenomena, a socially 
critical comparison of the experience of many men in 
order to find out what series of natural phenomena are 
verifiable in our common human experience, a constant 
disposition to the hypothetical construction of conceptual 
series, whereby what we cannot yet observe is defined 
as ideally observable 7 men only possessed sufficiently 
keen sense-discrimination : such are the familiar devices 
by which the special sciences constantly undertake to 
extend our descriptive knowledge of Nature. 


PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL REALITY 185 


All these processes are indeed kept under rigid con- 
trol by means of a conception whose origin is social, 
but whose application to natural phenomena gives us 
a definite critical standard for distinguishing between 
the natural facts that we acknowledge, and the fables or 
errors that we reject. This conception is the one already 
discussed at the outset of the present series of lectures, — 
the conception of Human Experience as an organized 
totality. As we saw, no one of us ever verifies the 
fact that there exists any such totality. Yet, upon an 
obviously social basis, we tend to make a constantly 
sharper distinction between what ought to be recognized 
as confirmed by this common experience of humanity, 
and what cannot be thus confirmed. Now what this 
ideal totality called Human Experience is conceived to 
have discriminated, to have recognized as the orderly 
series of phenomena, to have reduced to definable 
laws by the discovery of the “invariants” of a given 
order-system of phenomena,—this we are accustomed 
to view as the one accessible revelation of what 
Nature is. The “necessity” which is often said to 
“force” upon us the recognition of particular facts 
and series, and laws as belonging to this realm of 
human experience, unquestionably exists; but it is to 
but a small extent, in the case of any one of us, even 
if he be the most earnest empirical investigator, a 
necessity of present sense-experience. It is a necessity 
expressible in terms of the Ought; and the most deeply 
rational warrant for this necessity is social rather than 
sensuous. Not to accept the “verdict of human expe- 
rience” would be to cut ourselves off from definite 


a 


186 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


social relations. To accept this verdict, not blindly, 
but with constantly renewed criticism, and with a fre- 
quent addition of personal verification, so far as that 
is possible,—this is to keep ourselves in touch with 
the civilized social consciousness. 


VI 


But now we come to the point where it is necessary 
to deal with the precise sense in which the physical 
world, when conceived as the object of such common 
description and verification, is also conceived as subject 
to rigid and unchangeable Laws of Causation. This 
conception, as I hold, is one of only a relative validity. 
Human experience, as we shall see in the next lecture, 
cannot be said actually to have verified it, even when 
we take the term human experience to mean the totality 
of the verifications that all the various men have ever 
made. What we verify, are more or less permanent 
rules relating to the routine of nature phenomena. In 
other words, our common experience discovers states, 
more or less persistent, of what our American philosopher 
Chauncey Wright used to call “ cosmic weather,” habits, 
more or less enduring, of the behavior of phenomena. 
Yet we are indeed accustomed to conceive that our 
common human experience ought to show us, were it 
broad enough and discriminating enough, rigidly uni- 
form natural laws, whose general character may be 
summed up in the well-known thesis that, “The same 
antecedents (when the truly causal antecedents are taken 
into account) are invariably followed by the same conse- 


PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL REALITY 187 


quents.” Now, why do we conceive nature as subject 
to such invariable laws, when our common experience, 
however wide you conceive its range to be, can only 
show us particular instances of persistent behavior on 
the part of Nature? 

If one answers by generalizing the foregoing thesis 
into the axiom that “ Whatever is must have a cause which 
determines, of necessity, what it is,” — then, at this stage 
of our inquiry, we have no difficulty in saying that this 
principle, unless made more specific, is so hopelessly am- 
biguous, as to be merely trivial. From our own point 
of view, the realm of Being is indeed such an unity that 
the Many, whatever they are, must in some sense be the 
resultant and expression of the One. But the true ra- 
tional link between the One and the Many, between the 
universal and the particular, or between the World and 
the Individual, may be very different from a link of rigid 
necessity. We shall hereafter expound more fully that 
doctrine of the freedom of the Individual which we 
briefly stated in the closing lecture of the former series, 
and shall show that our unity in God actually demands 
our individual freedom in a limited, but perfectly defi- 
nite sense. Or again, from our own point of view, the 
Internal Meaning of every idea demands as its com- 
plete expression the whole universe, containing infinitely 
numerous other Internal Meanings. But here the link 
between this instant’s passing meaning and the universe is 
a causal one, only in the most trivially abstract sense of 
the term cause. And in fact, when one merely asserts 
in general that whatever is must have a cause, one may 
mean only that nothing finite can be understood by itself 


188 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


alone, or that some kind of explanation, relation or tie, 
binds every particular in the world to every other. But 
since the explanations and ties which may interest a 
given inquirer may be of any sort, teleological or mathe- 
matical, esthetic or mechanical, — according to the sort 
of conception that happens to be in question, and since, 
in the most general logical sense, even what at first 
appeared as the absence of ties or of relations between two 
objects would be itself only a new kind of tie and re- 
lation, the general principle, “ Whatever is, is somehow 
linked to others,’ so far amounts to the assertion that 
whatever is, is in the world with others. Over such an 
axiom one need not dispute; but it needs specification 
before it can give light as to the linkage of facts. 

A Cause, in the narrower sense of physical cause, 
means, however, a certain group of antecedents linked 
in a certain way, with a consequent. The term, as 
thus defined, applies to series of events. The question 
about the validity of the principle is the question why 
we conceive every natural event as preceded by a group of 
events such that whenever that group as a whole recurs, 
that same consequent must follow. 

The answer to this question depends, as I conceive, 
upon two considerations. The first I discussed briefly 
in our second lecture. Conceive any ordered series of 
describable systems of events, such as, in the passage 
referred to,! we exemplified. Such a series, if once 
clearly discriminated by an observer, and then carefully 
considered in its whole sequence, would possess some 
features that would remain unvarying throughout the 


1See above, p. 89, sqq. 


PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL REALITY 189 


set of “transformations” of which just that ordered 
series consists. This, so far, is due to the very condi- 
tions of the discrimination of serial order. The more 
careful the discriminations, the more minute the exami- 
nation of the series in question, the more certain it is 
that a rational observer of any such connected series of 
events could, if he chose a sufficiently large range of 
phenomena for his observation, find some “invariant” 
of the “system of transformations” in question. So far 
the result is that: Any series of events which you can 
exactly describe, exemplifies a law of succession which re- 
mains invariant at least throughout this series. This is a 
consequence merely of the conditions of description. For 
I do not define any series of events as connected unless 
I find all the members of this series between a chosen 
beginning and a chosen end of the series, and can dis- 
criminate the precise order of succession of the events 
thus between. But so to find the facts is to find certain 
relations persistent throughout the series. For upon 
such persistence the recognition of the serial order de- 
pends. The persistent relations, as we earlier saw, are 
those involved in the very definition of between. For 
the whole process of discovering these relations is a 
finding of the One in the Many. Moreover, if I con- 
ceive the series (as, in the World of Description one 
does conceive it) as in its nature either altogether con- 
tinuous, or at least composed of stages between stages 
that I discover by continuing to interpolate indefinitely, 
—then all the more my conception of the continuous, 
or at all events “compact” whole of the series, gives 
me grounds which enable me to define the series as 


190 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


possessing throughout “invariant” characters. So far, 
then, wherever there is an exactly described series of 
natural events there is a law of that series. 

But the assertion of the existence of causal connections 
does indeed go much further than this. If one says, 
“Whenever certain given antecedents recur, certain con- 


’ one declares that, at various times, or 


sequents follow,’ 
in various parts of the universe, which may themselves 
be as disconnected with one another as is possible, there 
are, or may be found, series of natural phenomena which 
follow the same describable laws, or possess the same 
“invariants.” But thus one indeed goes beyond the 
mere observation that every describable series inevitably 
illustrates its own law, within its own limits. One goes 
far beyond the individual series to assert that if you 
conceived it transported to other regions of space or 
of time, it would still retain the same “invariants.” As 
has often been noted, this assertion amounts simply to 
saying that the true laws of nature are independent of 
particular places and times. The independence here 
in question is of course not the independence that 
Realism ascribed to its Independent Beings, but is 
merely the relative independence of an “invariant.” 
For we are here dealing with what one might call an 
“invariant” character of the second degree. The 
assertion is that in any series of natural events you 
can find not merely something “invariant” within that 
individual series, but also some character such that 
if you passed to other places and times, this charac- 
ter would remain unchanged in the series that were 
there to be found. Our principle, as thus inter- 


PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL REALITY 191 


preted, while applicable to the various parts of the 
world in space, refers especially to the temporal invari- 
ance of natural law, and we may confine our attention 
to that aspect. There are then, so one asserts, laws of 
nature, or “invariants” of any given series of changes 
of natural phenomena, which do not change with time. 
These, then, are not only the “invariants” of the series 
of phenomena originally considered. They are also the 
“invariants” of any such conceived series of substitutions 
or of transformations as enables you in mind to transfer 
the original series into some other part of time, and to 
study its behavior there. This is the meaning of the 
principle now in question. This principle is consistent, 
as everybody knows, with very vast changes in the aspect 
of nature, and is rather ill defined as the principle of 
the mere “uniformity” of nature. For, as one con- 
ceives the case, if the sun collided with another large 
cosmic body, the aspect of nature, so far as our senses 
now take account of it, would hereabouts be unrecog- 
nizably altered in an instant of time; yet the conceived 
“invariants” of thermodynamics would, as we suppose, 
find application to the transformed system after the 
collision as well as before. 

After these further definitions of .our principle, the 
inquiry reduces to this: Why should we conceive 
that, The lapse of time, or a transfer to another part of 
time, makes no difference to what we call the “ true” laws of 
nature? We are aided in answering this question by the 
perfectly obvious consideration that, in a World of Appre- 
ciation, in the life of a Self, in a realm where what is 
done at any time is founded upon what has been done 


192 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


before, in brief, in any Well-Ordered Series of events, 
the thesis just stated, far from being an axiom, is simply 
not universally true at all. Countless aspects of a Well- 
Ordered Series of voluntary acts, due to some Self, may, 
and in all sufficiently complex and important instances of 
the sort must, indeed remain “invariant” either through- 
out the whole life of this Self, or else from some one point 
onwards ; but these “invariants” are never all the “true” 
laws of the series; for the essence of a Well-Ordered 
Series (such as the number-series, or any more concrete 
instance of a self-representative process), is that, just by 
means of recurrence (that is, of the reapplication of unvary- 
ing principles in new cases), new events, new objects, are 
constantly produced ; and these new objects are in some 
respects such as to exemplify new laws. A Self is always 
passing to new tasks even by virtue of the recurrent 
nature of its activities. For while it carries out the 
“same plan,” it continually applies this “same plan” in 
new ways, because its new creations are founded upon its 
former deeds, and take up what went before in order to 
give it new significance. 

It occurs to us, however, to remember that, just because 
our social life belongs to the World of Appreciation, its 
endless novelties in life and activity can only be organized 
in definite ways, in case many people agree to codperate by 
adopting the same plans. If they adopt these same plans, 
and persist in them, a basis of customs, of social habits, is 
found. But these habits, applied in recurrent fashion in 
the lives of rational beings, will lead to constantly novel 
results, just because, in the conscious life of social beings, 
each new act will be founded upon the results of former 


PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL REALITY 193 


acts, and each new social agent will join his act to what 
has been done by others. The mason’s habits in laying 
down each brick, and in applying the mortar, are, for 
instance, relatively unvarying. But just thereby, since 
he lays each brick upon the former one, each of his deeds 
has an individual value, and he passes constantly to new 
stages of constructions. And even so, just in order that 
any Well-Ordered Series of socially planned deeds should 
involve, at every stage, significant novelties, and still retain 
definite relations to what has gone before, there must 
indeed be unvarying aspects belonging to all the social 
customs that lead to such rationally planned results. 
These unvarying aspects are the more permanent laws, 
customs, habits, of the social order. 

But, if you look closer, you see that such definite social 
habits, or plans of action as can be communicated by one 
man to another or passed down, like the industrial arts of 
early peoples, from generation to generation, depend upon 
discovering, and fixing by our attention, such uniformities 
of natural law as enable men to conceive, and to describe to 
one another, definite plans of action. 

Hence, in the history of mankind, the discovery of 
seemingly unvarying laws of Nature, has been the condi- 
tion for the organization of definite customs. And just 
because Nature has thus come to be conceived as the 
socially significant tool, that aspect of Nature which sug- 
_ gests such unvarying laws has come to be looked upon 
as the most characteristic of the aspects of the objective 
physical world. 

Irregularities in our experience of Nature either have 
no interest for the social order, and remain neglected, or 


o 


194 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


else, like the irregularities of the weather, or of our 
own bodily health, they are practically so important as to 
fix in our minds the thought that only by finding, through 
further experience, laws which shall remain invariant 
through successive periods of time, can we hope to organ- 
ize our conduct in definite ways in response to these phe- 
nomena. We make the effort to find such regularities, 
our ideal. We conceive it as the goal that our common 
human experience may be able to reach. But, observe, 
whenever we reach that goal, then one man can describe 
a given uniformity to his fellow, or can make exact 
predictions (as the astronomers predict the eclipses); 
and many men together can verify the prediction. 
In such cases then, the social test of what constitutes 
an externally real physical fact can be applied with 
a peculiarly impressive exactness ; and the natural uni- 
formity can be verified as belonging to our common 
objects. On the other hand, where natural phenomena 
remain baffling and irregular, our descriptions of series of 
events remain either less definite, or else less widely veri- 
fiable by the social test. We are accordingly able, in such 
cases, to assume that it is our individual ignorance, or our 
subjective bias, or the lack of socially verifiable definition 
of facts, which so far hinders us from finding out what the 
natural order really is. Hence we form the general con- 
ception that in so far as laws that remain temporally 
“invariant,” have not yet been found, our subjective igno- 
rance may be responsible for the result, while in so far as 
definite laws that do not vary with time have been discovered, 
exactly described, and repeatedly verified, we are dealing 
with the objective constitution of Nature. Our reason for 


PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL REALITY 195 


this view is then simply the principle, that the more we 
know of unvarying natural laws, the more widely can 
our social tests be applied, and the better can the physical 
phenomena bear the scrutiny which depends upon think- 
ing that they must be the same for all of us. 

Hence the so-called axiom of the unvarying character 
of the laws of nature is no self-evident truth, is not even 
at once an empirically established and an universal gen- 
eralization, and possesses its present authority because 
of the emphasis that our social interests give to the dis- 
covery of uniform laws where we can discover them.! 
That we do discover and verify them over a very wide 
range of our experience of Nature, is an unquestionable — 
fact, and one of which every Philosophy of Nature must 
take account. But it is much to know that this dis- 
covery is not due to any innate idea, or to any first 
principle of the reason, but is an empirical, although 
by no means an universal generalization, which we have 
been led by social motives to emphasize and to extend 
as far as possible, and so to conceive as if it were 
universally characteristic of Objective Nature. 

In the history of human thought about Nature it is 
easy to follow the influence of the social motives here 
in question. The savage certainly had no innate idea 
of absolutely uniform natural laws. Industrial art, com- 
merce, and social custom, were the three early sources 
of interest in the uniformities of natural phenomena. 


1(Cf, the admirable paper of Mr. Charles Peirce on ‘‘ The Doctrine 
of Necessity,’? in the Monist, Vol. II, p. 321. Mr. Peirce’s doctrine 
as to natural law is not the one here discussed; but I owe much to his 
keen criticism of the ‘‘dogma of Necessity.” 


196 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


The arts needed uniform and persistently plastic mate- 
rials to work upon,—clay, stone, metals. Otherwise 
the arts themselves could not be definitely taught and 
traditionally handed down; and no sufficiently definite 
social activities could be founded upon the use of the 
products of these arts. Men sought, at first uncon- 
sciously, then deliberately, for materials whose behavior, 
while plastic for the purposes of their arts, still remained 
unchanging through time. Men found such materials, 
although never with perfect success. For the pottery 
and the stones broke or wore out, and the tools and 
the weapons lost their edges, or were in time shattered. 
But the discovery of such relatively unvarying, socially 
common, objects and natural laws, first made the uni- 
formity of nature something consciously recognized as an 
objective fact, —a fact for all. Commerce, for its part, 
led to disputes which the processes of weighing and 
measuring could either prevent or decide. Human inge- 
nuity was thus led to observe the unvarying laws of 
measurable objects, and so, out of the search for such 
social community of conduct as commerce made men 
anxious to win, there grew a new idea about Nature. 
And thus the bases for all Quantitative Science were 
laid. Moreover, various social customs of a complex 
social type, relating to recurrent religious ceremonies, 
or to seed-time and harvest, led men to search for com- 
mon natural phenomena whereby to organize such activi- 
ties, and to fix their times; and from such motives men 
were led to a recognition of natural law in the heavens. 
The special sciences later sprang as much from the indus- 
trial and commercial arts, as from early philosophical 


PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL REALITY oo 


speculations. The concept of the unvarying character 
of the laws of Nature, freed at length from its practical 
motives, became universal, and has inflicted itself as a 
dogma upon more recent thought. Yet its origin was 
social. 


Vil 


The value of this dogma, as of all the concepts of 
the World of Description, is relative. It reveals no 
absolute truth. From our own point of view, there can 
indeed be no doubt that our experience of the objects 
of Nature does prove to us that there exists, in the uni- 
verse, a vast realm of fact other than what human minds 
consciously find present within their own circles of indi- 
vidual or private apprehension. And so, for us, Nature 
is indeed a part of Reality, and the social tests do indeed 
prove that this is true. But when we ask what reality 
Nature possesses, we must beware of letting our social 
interests, and the general motives that lead us to conceive 
the World of Description, blind us to the true princi- 
ples upon which an interpretation of experience should 
be founded. The sharp contrast between Matter and 
Mind, the sharp dualism between the World of Descrip- 
tion and the World of Appreciation, — we have seen 
from what motives in our own lives all such contrasts 
result. We shall no longer take this dualism too 
seriously. We have seen its relative justification, and 
its limitations. 

In any case, in viewing Nature as a realm of law, we 
must distinguish between what our common experience 
permits us to verify, in the way of our own conceptual 


198 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


constructions of Nature, and what our experience of 
Nature warrants us in asserting as the truth regard- 
ing a realm external to man’s consciousness. It is 
with our more modern sciences as it was with early 
industrial arts. If an industrial art succeeds, that is 
because Nature actually furnishes us with empirical 
materials that are plastic for the purposes of this art. 
We have, however, no right to assert, upon that 
account, that all natural phenomena, viewed in them- 
selves, and apart from man, already must be so con- 
stituted a priort as to be adaptable to the purposes of 
our human art. The primitive artists who produced 
the pottery of our American Pueblo Indians, were 
skilful in finding out just the right sort of clay for 
their purposes. But had they formed a theory that 
Nature is in itself essentially a storehouse of good potter’s 
clay, they would have generalized quite as ill as did 
primitive Animism when it conceived all Nature as 
alive in the same sense in which our capricious wills 
are alive, and are in us subject to our moods and to our 
senses. 

Now, as I have said, our science is a sort of theoretical 
extension of our industrial art. What the arts do with 
their tools, the student of science does with his concep- 
tions. That is, he wins over the phenomena of our 
experience to the service of our human purposes. He 
does this by processes of selection, of construction, and 
of an endless process of trial and error. A conception 
used by any empirical science is an ideal tool, or a sort 
of mechanical contrivance. Using it, we work over 
the data of our common experience until these data 


PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL REALITY 199 


become subject to our purposes of prediction and of 
description. With the successful conception in the mind, 
we can pass from fact to fact, from prediction to exe- 
cution, from expectation to observation, with ease, ex- 
actness, and socially verifiable success. Precisely so, 
however, with the good material tool, or with any other 
mechanical contrivance, we can adjust our material 
objects to our common ends. Just as the railway may 
carry me from an experience of London to your presence 
in Aberdeen, so a good scientific conception enables the 
worker in any science to pass from the experience of 
one set of facts, through definite processes of prediction, 
of experiment, and of observation, to the presence of 
certain other facts, which he calculates in advance of 
finding them, precisely as the traveller purchases in 
advance his railway ticket for a certain destination. 
And now, not only are the conceptual constructions 
of science thus similar to the contrivances of an indus- 
trial art; but the processes involved in the one case 
are actually continuous with those which are used in 
the other. Amongst the contrivances of any industrial 
art, none are successful except when guided by minds 
whose ideas are adjusted to their tools. Amongst the 
constructions of empirical science, the internal processes 
of scientific theory are inseparable from the diagrams, 
laboratories, and other contrivances, in which scientific 
plans of action get expressed. All industrial art, upon 
its intelligent side, implies scientific conceptions of cer- 
tain objects in material nature. -All science, in so far 
as it is concerned with natural objects, expresses. its 
conceptions in the form of certain processes of classifi- 


200 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


cation, of description, of experiment, and of prediction, 
which are as material in their embodiment as the works 
of an industrial art. While science deals with natural 
facts in a far more universal way than does any indus- 
trial art, its purposes are no less human than are those 
of its fellow. Both codperate to the end of man’s mas- 
tery over Nature. Both succeed by selection from the 
mass of materials offered, by rearrangement of what is 
found, and by skill in adjustment. 

And, therefore, both give us much the same sort of 
right to speculate as to Nature’s inner constitution. 
Both involve the same sort of relatively narrow clear- 
ness as to just our human place in the mists of finite 
experience. Both indicate a truth that is in some sense 
valid beyond ourselves. Both have essentially the same 
kind of limitation when we undertake to view them as 
revelations of what that truth in itself is and implies. 

But we have long since given up assuming that 
the success of our industrial art is, by itself, any suffi- 
cient revelation of the innermost nature of things. It 
does not now occur to us to say that Nature exists, 
apart from man, as a mere storehouse of materials for 
the contrivances of our industrial art, —for example, as 
a collection of banks of good clay for the potters, or (to 
use the example that Hegel cited) as a storehouse 
of good corks for our bottles. A certain simple-minded 
teleology used indeed often to view Nature in very much 
this trivial) way. Thé coal measures were especially 
prepared for'man’s use. The metals were preordained 
for his forges and furnaces, for his machines, and for 
his ornaments and his money. The animals grew to 


7 


PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL REALITY 201 


provide him with food and with furs and with feathers. 
Even the heavens moved regularly in order to equip 
him with time-pieces. We have abandoned such simple 
views. We observe that Nature indeed is such as to 
permit man not only to live, but to give his life con- 
stantly richer meaning through his arts. But we also 
know that man wins his arts by his own struggle and 
skill, and that it is as nearly right to speak of his 
ceaseless conflict with hostile Nature as it is to lay 
stress upon Nature’s kindness in furnishing him the 
instruments for his success in the conflict. Not thus, 
however, is our deeper insight into man’s unity with 
Nature to be won or expressed. 

And yet, despite this our emancipation from the trivi- 
alities of a simple teleology, there are those who even 
now would laugh at regarding Nature as predestined to 
be man’s storehouse of clay and coal and corks and furs 
and metals, and who, nevertheless, view Nature, because 
of the actual success of our empirical science, as in it- 
self, and by its inmost constitution, a treasure-house of 
purely mechanical laws,—as a thesaurus of concepts, of 
calculable relations, of rigid necessities, or as a realm 
of mathematical formulas. 

Now the one of these two views of nature—the 
ancient view of a trivial teleology, and the other, the so- 
called mechanical conception of nature — is as crudely an- 
thropomorphic as the other. Man’s insight into the known 
laws of Nature is precisely as much due to a struggle 
with the complexities and irregularities of his experi- 
ence of Nature, as his industrial arts are due to a con- 
flict with Nature’s seeming chaos of climates and of 


202 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


materials. A rigid selection, a long search, and a delib- 
erate rearrangement of the facts offered to us by raw 
experience, wins, in the one case as in the other, not 
with any @ priori certainty, but at times, and to a lim- 
ited extent, and by virtue of our skill and patience. 
Nature, as we empirically know it, just as truly seems 
to resist our efforts to explain the phenomena, as in 
certain regions it permits us to win. When we win, 
when we explain and predict, doubtless that is indeed 
because external Nature is in itself such as to permit 
us to do so. But the same Nature permits us to find 
the clay and the coals and the metals. 

Neither by our empirical science nor by our art do we 
then directly discover anything but this: Namely, that 
our human Internal Meanings do indeed possess some refer- 
ence to a vast finite realm beyond ourselves, within which we 
men find our place. Out of this realm we ourselves have 
proceeded through the processes of evolution. Into this 
realm, at death, we seem to return. This realm is called 
Nature. It doubtless has its own meaning. This mean- 
ing is doubtless in itself deeply linked to ours. And this 
meaning is such as to permit us with varying, but on the 
whole, with vastly increasing success, both to develope 
our human arts, and to work out the relatively successful, 
but also distinctly human and social, descriptions and 
predictions of our science. Both our art and our sci- 
ences are due, however, quite as much to our conflict 
with the facts that our experience directly furnishes, as 
to any essential plasticity of these facts, either to the 
practical purposes of our art, or to the ideal purposes of 
our science. Nature permits us to mine metals and to 


PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL REALITY 2038 


construct our railways. Just so Nature permits us to 
form our mechanical conceptions, to make our computa- 
tions, and, upon occasion, to predict thereby future facts. 
Nature could permit our success in neither case unless, 
indeed, Nature had some actual and inner relation to the 
existence of our own life and meaning. But what this 
relation is, is not directly to be read from a mere enu- 
meration of these our successes. For we also fail as well 
as succeed; and Nature is sometimes as stubborn to our 
art and to our science as, at other times, Nature seems 
plastic to both. 

Where we, indeed, succeed, the success is at least as 
much due to our skill in selection and in conception as to 
the essential plasticity of Nature. As a great work of in- 
dustrial art remains a monument rather to the engineer’s 
skill than to Nature’s kindliness, so, as Auguste Comte well 
said, the heavens declare the glory of Newton and of 
Kepler, whenever successful prediction shows how skilful 
were the astronomical tools that these thinkers invented, 
and the theoretical structures that they built upon the 
basis of these conceptions. That Kepler was thinking 
God’s thoughts after him, is, indeed, also true; but the 
divine thoughts in question were at least quite as much 
God’s thoughts regarding man’s skill, as any divine plan 
present in outer nature. 

My conclusion, then, is this: It is especially through 
the success of certain of our scientific conceptions that 
we have been led to a mechanical view of Nature, and to 
the consequent doctrine that Mind and Matter are utterly 
contrasted entities. Therefore, this very contrast is one 
whose origin lies in our human way of viewing the facts 


a 


204 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


of our experience. It is our interest in social organiza- 
tion that has given us both industrial art and empirical 
science. As industrial art regards its facts as mere con- 
trivances that have no life of their own, but that merely 
express their human artificer’s intents, so a philosophy of 
Nature, founded solely upon our special sciences, tends 
to treat the facts of Nature (regarded in the light of 
our cunningly contrived conceptions) as having no inner 
meaning, and as being mere embodiments of our formu- 
las. Both doctrines are perfectly justified as expressions 
of the perspective view of Nature which we men natu- 
rally take. Neither view can stand against any deeper 
reason that we may have for interpreting our experiences 
of Nature as a hint of a vaster realm of life and of mean- 
ing of which we men form a part, and of which the final 
unity is in God’s life. 


LECTURE V 


LECTURE V 
THE INTERPRETATION OF NATURE 


WE reach at length, after perhaps too lengthy a 
study of the problem of man’s knowledge of Nature, 
our own attempt to bring our theory of Nature into 
explicit harmony with our Fourth Conception of Being. 

In the foregoing lecture we have seen how man comes 
by his belief in the material world, and how he has 
come to set that world in sharp contrast with the realm 
of Mind. We have seen how this contrast is made to 
seem especially hopeless by reason of the mechanical 
view of Nature upon which our more developed con- 
sciousness of natural law has led many thinkers to 
insist. At the last lecture, we also saw that this very 
view of Nature is a product of distinctly human and 
social motives. These motives have great value as bases 
for the conceptual constructions of our science. They 
have no right to pretend to reveal to us essential truth 
about the ultimate nature of things. Perhaps, then (so 
we reasoned), at bottom, the contrast between Mind 
and Matter is not as ultimate as it seems. Perhaps a 
deeper view may annul the apparent contrast, and may 
show how closely linked to Nature this life of ours is, 
and how akin to our own inner consciousness is much 
that we take to be most remote and foreign in the 
life of Nature. 


d 


207 


208 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


Now what at the last time we approached from the 
side of the social origin and the human motives that 
have determined our conceptions of Nature, we now 
need to approach from another side. Whatever the 
origin of our ideas about Nature, these ideas unques- 
tionably have a basis in extra-human truth. This is 
what all our previous analysis has shown us. More- 
over, these ideas, however they have grown up in us, 
are very certainly a combination of two factors. In 
part they are due to an observation of the facts of our 
common experience. These facts many men have veri- 
fied, both separately and together, until we can be 
reasonably sure that such facts are not matters of any 
man’s private experience, but that they have a basis 
in what is beyond the inner life of any or of all men. 
These facts form what we might call our relatively 
literal knowledge of Nature. Examples of such facts are: 
the existence of a world that now appears to us as material, 
and the occurrence in this world of the more or less regu- 
lar routine of Nature’s phenomena, such as the tides, the 
weather, and the moon’s phases. In part, however, our 
ideas about Nature take the form of more recondite 
and ideal theoretical constructions, such as experience 
only indirectly verifies. All our more mechanical theo- 
ries of Nature as a whole belong to this class of ideas. 
These ideas are of such sort that Nature, whatever it 
really is, permits us to use them successfully, within 
certain limits, as the tools of our science. So much, 
then, we may here premise. We now propose to lay 
aside inquiry as to how all these ideas came to grow 
up in our minds. We accept them, for the moment, 


THE INTERPRETATION OF NATURE 209 


as they come to us, and with them in hand, and with 
the mere memory that the two sorts of ideas in ques- 
tion are not of equal value as evidences of the ultimate 
truth of things, we turn back to Nature itself, and try 
once more the task of interpreting, more in detail, the 
problem set us by what we have already called the 
greatest apparent contrast in Nature, namely, the con- 
trast between Consciousness and what seems to us to be 
unconscious Matter. 


I 


At one extreme of Nature, we find a world which we 
are accustomed to conceive as a world of inwardly 
changeless substances, of material particles, whose chang- 
ing external relations are determined by rigid and 
relatively mechanical laws. These laws the sciences of 
physics and of chemistry define. At the other extreme 
we find a world with whose inner character we are 
well acquainted, little as we know many of its laws. 
In that world, the world of our consciousness, all the 
stream of fact flows, and nothing abides but the mean- 
ings. This world is indeed not lawless, but its facts 
seem to bear no resemblance to those of inorganic 
matter. I need not further dwell on the apparent con- 
trast of these two worlds. It has now been enough 
discussed. 

What I here wish first to bring to notice is the fact 
that the doctrine of Evolution, in its modern form, 
is our largest generalization of all our human view of 
Nature, and that this doctrine seems to show, that, if 
the extremes are in seeming here endlessly far apart, 


P 


210 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


yet somehow, in Nature, the gulf is bridged. Between 
what seems to us, from our ordinary social point of view, 
the highest of accessible mental life, and what we take to 
be the manifestation of lifeless matter, there is, in the 
process of mental evolution apparently no breach of 
continuity anywhere. And upon numerous recent think- 
ers the question has therefore been forced constantly 
afresh, What, then, is the real link that thus unites these 
uttermost extremes? What we call the manifestation of 
dead matter can certainly pass over into states where 
Nature, as embodied in the organisms of our fellow-men, 
shows to us all the signs of mind. The transition can be 
and constantly is made in the reverse order. Nor is the 
transition such as any longer to suggest to us miraculous 
extranatural interferences. Its manifold exemplification, 
through ages of natural evolution, seems to make clear that 
in this transition we have simply a normal indication of 
the true nature of things. And I must repeat, it is 
precisely this apparent continuity which is the most 
impressive of all the inductions that the study of evo- 
lution has lately forced upon the attention of all who 
have taken Nature at all seriously. Now, if man’s expe- 
rience of Nature has any sound basis at all, the modern 
doctrine of Evolution seems to be an account of a 
process that has a real basis in the essence of things. 
I shall here assume as known the general outlines of 
this doctrine, and the general sort of evidence upon 
which it rests. I shall ask, What light does this 
doctrine tend to throw upon our problem ? 

When two objects A and B, say a mass of inorganic 
matter and an organism with a rational mind, seem to 


THE INTERPRETATION OF NATURE 211 


differ as widely as possible, and when, nevertheless, 
things of the type of A seem pretty obviously to pass 
by a nearly continuous series of changes into objects of 
the type of B, that is, when from inorganic matter beings 
with minds evolve, and when B seems with even greater 
ease to pass back into A, the first presumption very 
naturally is that you are dealing with somewhat decep- 
tive appearances. And, if you are sure, as the students of 
evolution are now for their own purposes rightfully sure, 
that the approximate continuity itself is not the deceptive 
appearance, and that A does really pass by nearly continu- 
ous gradations into B and vice versa, then the next natu- 
ral presumption about A and B is that it is their wide 
difference which actually constitutes the deceptive ap- 
pearance, and that A and B are really at heart very 
much alike. Now this is what a great many thinkers 
have supposed about the appearances called Mind and 
Matter. The continuous transition from the one of 
these appearances to the other is precisely what con- 
stitutes the most fascinating part of the seeming his- 
tory called evolution. One may say that this approximate 
continuity is nowadays, at least, as sure as anything that 
we know about Matter itself, the more distant and 
really the more mysterious of the appearances. 

Yet, singularly enough, when thinkers have proceeded 
to define the way in which these two apparent extremes 
could be identified, or could be regarded as mere appear- 
ances of some truth which lay deeper than at least one of 
the extremes, many such thinkers have undertaken the task 
of regarding Mind as a mere appearance of Matter, rather 
than that of conceiving material nature as a mere appear- 


212 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


ance behind which lies Mind. That is, they have said: 
Matter is very probably, in the main, what we take it to be, 
viz. permanent, rigid in its laws, naturally unconscious, 
mechanical in its processes. But it is Mind that we 
fail to know. Of the extremes A and B, Matter and 
Mind, such thinkers, regarding matter as fairly well 
known, have chosen to conceive B, namely Mind, as a 
curiously confused phenomenon, a mere resultant or 
show of certain of the properties of A, which we call 
Matter. Yet the result of such efforts to interpret 
evolution — efforts which have been very frequent — is, 
as any student of evolution knows, rather unpromising. 
Meanwhile it is easy to see why such efforts should 
often have been preferred. Matter is actually the more 
mysterious of the two extremes. But it does not always 
seem so; for Mind, as we know it in men, is an unstable 
process, which all sorts of physical conditions appear to 
derange. But Matter, as a physical science conceives it, is, 
for the reasons mentioned at the last time, viewed by us 
as subject to stable laws and to definite predictions. 
Minds pass away from our ken. Material phenomena 
persist. Minds, capable of intelligibly communicating 
with us, are rare exceptions in the natural order. But 
the natural world seems full of the physical appearances 
called masses of matter. It is natural then for men to 
try to explain the unusual by the usual, to regard the 
unstable as the mere appearance of the stable, and to 
view the stable itself as the really better known of the 
two. Yet the persistent hopelessness of the whole 
undertaking, the absolute impossibility of explaining 
how mental life, whose appearance at least we know 


THE INTERPRETATION OF NATURE 213 


so well in its fleeting beauties, should be a mere show 
of the properties of that which, when we take its 
mere appearance as true, seems to be the permanent 
substance now conceived as Matter, —the persistent hope- 
lessness, I say, of this whole undertaking, has led many 
to reflect afresh, and to ask, Do we so well know the 
mere appearance called by us Matter as to be sure that 
its apparent properties, its stability, its mechanical rigid- 
ity of lawful behavior, are its ultimately real charac- 
ters? Suppose, after all, that this stable appearance 
were a delusion. Suppose that even material nature 
were internally full of the live and fleeting processes 
that we know as those of conscious mental life. Sup- 
pose that these processes constituted: the inmost essence 
and foundation of what seems to us to be Matter. 
Would that be wholly inconsistent with what we know 
of the natural world? In that case, however, what we 
call matter would be a mere external appearance of the 
very sort of fact that we ourselves better know as Mind. 
And then the true secret of the evolution of mind would 
get an entirely different reading. 

In order to judge what may be the true worth of 
such speculations, it is well to go still a little deeper 
than we have yet done into special problems of the 
Philosophy of Nature. Yet, as I do so, I shall, for 
the time, keep my Idealistic Theory of Being in reserve. 
That theory furnishes a deep warrant for the speculations 
here in question. But let us next give these speculations 
a merely empirical basis. Then, when our Idealism 
returns upon the scene, it will find the facts ready to 


accept its authority. 


214 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


II 


And first, let us for the moment, merely assume as true 
the ordinary presuppositions of science. Let us ask our- 
selves how much, in that case, we can really pretend to 
know of the inner nature of things when they are judged 
upon a purely empirical basis, as science judges them. We 
are by this time well aware that no empirical science pre- 
tends really to know what the inner nature of things is at 
all, and least of all, to know the ultimate nature of 
Matter. What empirical science can try to tell you 
is not what things are in themselves, but how they 
behave, and to what laws they are apparently subject. 
The question as to how deep into the truth of Nature 
our empirical science goes is then the question: How 
far do the laws of Nature that science makes out agree 
with any natural truth that is valid wholly beyond the 
range of the human point of view, and that can be 
said to hold more or less apart from our mere human 
appearances? And when, with this inquiry in mind, 
we pass in review our natural sciences, we have already 
had good reason to assert that the most exactly stated 
of the laws of the World of Description, explicitly repre- 
sent not directly observed facts, or any immediately veri- 
fiable and literally true statement about things as we men 
can experience them, but rather only extremely ideal ways 
in which science finds it convenient to conceive facts 
for the purposes of a brief theoretical description of 
vast ranges of experience. 

In order to adapt this, our former general result, to 
the present inquiry, let us, for instance, consider our 


THE INTERPRETATION OF NATURE 215 


very valuable scientific theories of atomic and of ethereal 
processes. Nobody has observed atoms, or ether waves. 
These are interpolated series of ideal objects conceived 
as between the systems of facts that we can observe. 
The laws of atomic and of ethereal processes are very 
ideal constructions, whereby we are able to summarize, 
after a fashion, vast numbers of facts, or to construct 
in an abstract way the relation of One and Many. Even 
the law of gravitation, one of the most exact of material 
laws, is an extremely ideal statement of a formula whose 
direct truth nobody precisely verifies at any time. What 
we observe, and what, by the aid of the formula of 
gravitation, we can predict and verify, are planets mov- 
ing, stones falling, and the rest of gravitative phenomena. 
Nobody ever directly observes any force, such as the 
ideal force called gravitation. A very ideal statement 
about the conceived mutual attractions of particles of 
matter enables us to summarize all the observed facts 
of the realm of gravitation in one formula. The truth 
of the formula lies in its summary application to vast 
ranges of phenomena. Nobody can pretend that this 
formula is known to express directly the observed inner 
nature, or even the directly observed genuine behavior 
of anything. The science of the future may come to 
observe phenomena which will explain gravitation as 
a mere appearance of some much more genuine natural 
process. Many of our most exact laws of Nature are 
thus, as it were, explicitly ideal constructions, products, 
so to speak, of the present methods of bookkeeping 
used by science in keeping our accounts of facts. Such 
laws are true enough as convenient conceptions whereby 


216 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


we summarize observed facts. They are true as ledger 
entries and balances are true summaries of business 
transactions. But they are not laws which are known to 
express anything final even about the observed behavior 
of things. Nobody can doubt the value of such summary 
theories of physical things. Nobody can doubt that they 
are ideal constructions. The science of the future may 
enter its accounts by other methods of bookkeeping. 

In strong contrast, however, with such more ideal laws 
of Nature stand certain other generalizations of science 
and even of common sense. These other generalizations 
are often perfectly literal statements of how the facts of 
Nature are known to behave. For instance, there is the 
law that an organism grows old, but never grows young. 
But the Nature that we all acknowledge is full of just 
such irreversible processes as is the process of growing 
old. Science knows many more of such processes than 
does common sense. When in winter the heat of your 
chimney radiates into space and comes not back, when 
the spilt milk is wept over in vain, when china once 
broken refuses to mend, common sense observes a set of 
processes which science, in great measure, generalizes in 
the principles (1) of the tendency of energy to pass from 
available to unavailable forms, and (2) of the tendency 
of matter to pass through similarly irreversible series of 
changing configurations. In all such irreversible pro- 
cesses of nature, you are dealing with profoundly instruc- 
tive ways of behavior of the natural world. These ways 
of the world’s behavior are certainly just as real as is 
Nature herself. Here surely you touch “hard fact,” 
that is, fact that you ought to acknowledge in case you 


THE INTERPRETATION OF NATURE 217 


accept the verdict of our social experience at all. Here 
then we get not, perchance, at the inmost nature, but 
certainly at the real behavior of things. The most 
widely generalizing science recognizes such processes and 
dwells long over them. They constitute one of the most 
interesting problems of the general theory of energy. 
The most simple-minded common sense algo feels them. 
These, as far as they go, are thus literally true laws of 
Nature’s behavior. 

But now observe that, for this very reason, the laws of 
these processes differ in a very marked way from those 
ideal laws such as science states in the theory of ethereal 
or of atomic processes. The latter laws, the exactly ideal 
laws, are convenient hypothetical summaries of vast 
ranges of experience, — but in a highly conceptual, in a 
mathematically artificial form. They are laws that explic- 
itly stand for the way in which it is just now convenient 
to keep the books of science. They are typical examples 
of formulas of the World of Description. They are true, 
but they are verifiably true only from a certain point of 
view. They conceive the physical world as if tt were so, 
or so observable when it is not so observable. The science 
of the future may, therefore, substitute other theories for 
them. But the laws of the other sort, the laws about 
the irreversible processes, tell you, in a much more literal 
fashion, how Nature actually behaves. 

And now, closely connected with this contrast is 
another. The ideal laws, of the type of the laws about 
the ethereal processes, are laws which are valid, so far as 
they are valid at all, only for Matter as such. They 
serve by their very exactness to make Matter seem very 


218 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


remote from Mind. But the other laws, the laws of the 
irreversible processes, are in their most general type, com- 
mon to Matter and to Mind, to the physical and to the moral 
world. ‘They tend to be, in some measure, applicable 
everywhere, to conscious as to apparently unconscious 
processes, to the dissipation of energy as to the facts of 
the moral world. Your beloved dreams, that slip away 
while you wake, are shattered like china, are dissipated 
like radiant energy, — in brief, are cases of the law of the 
irreversibility of certain natural processes. The poets, too, 
sing of precisely the principle that the students of energy 
report to us, namely, of this very irreversibility of certain 
processes of nature. ‘“ When the lamp is shattered,” 
sings Shelley ; and Tennyson tells of the “tender grace 
of a day that is dead.” Both poets reporting not mere 
feelings, but laws of nature. They are telling of the 
tendency of natural energy to pass from available to 
unavailable forms, as heat passes according to the second 
law of thermodynamics; and the poets are observing 
that certain inner conscious processes have a tendency, 
just because these processes are in connection with all 
Nature, to follow a precisely similar, but often extremely 
inconvenient course, often, namely, a course from the 
irrevocable to the mere memory thereof. So, then, it is 
precisely the more literally actual, the more directly 
observable of our two sorts of natural processes, that is, 
apparently, a sort of process common to material and to 
mental phenomena. But these more ideal laws of nature, 
like the laws of the conceived ethereal processes, are at 
once peculiar to what science conceives as Matter, and 
are also laws which need not, in literal fact, represent 


THE INTERPRETATION OF NATURE 219 


any ultimately actual or directly observable behavior of 
Matter at all. One sees thus that, if we are not deceived 
by the mere book-keeping of science, if we distinguish 
between the ideal constructions of scientific theory, and 
the directly verifiable behavior of natural facts, we begin 
to see less contrast between Matter and Mind. 


Ill 


Taking a very broad view of the laws of Nature, in the 
rough, we can as a fact say that conscious Nature shares 
with what we regard as apparently unconscious and 
material Nature four great and characteristic types of 
processes. (1) Both regions of Nature are subject, as 
we have just seen, to some condition that demands the 
irreversibility of great numbers of their processes. In 
both realms, namely, there are numberless sorts of facts 
that return not again, so that an irrevocable passing away 
of states once reached, pervades the stream of experience 
in both realms alike. This is a very deep principle of 
universal Nature. It is certainly as genuinely real as is 
Nature herself. The irreversibility of many of Nature’s 
processes, so far as it exists, suggests, therefore, some very 
genuine, if hidden, inner fluency about material Nature 
itself ; and the hypothesis at once occurs that very pos- 
sibly material Nature is a show of a process that is 
inwardly fluent, just as the mental process in us is fluent, 
only at some very different rate. 

Here, then, is our first very instructive relation be- 
tween the most remote and the nearest regions of Nature. 
It is an analogy that has attracted considerable attention. 


220 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


I do not think that it has received, however, enough 
attention. But it is not the only pervasive analogy. 

For (2): Both regions of Nature, the apparently mental 
and the apparently material region, are subject to pro- 
cesses which involve in general a tendency of one part 
of Nature to communicate, as it were, with another part, 
influencing what occurs at one place through what has 
already occurred at another place. Ideas in the same 
consciousness tend to assimilate other ideas, to communi- 
cate their own nature to these other ideas, to win the 
latter over to agreement with the first. Minds tend, 
in social intercourse, to be influenced by other minds. 
Now these vast and pervasive processes of conscious 
communication possess both a close similarity to, and a 
continuity with, certain still more vast and pervasive 
series of natural processes which, described indeed as 
so-called wave-movements, are amongst the phenomena 
best known to science. In both cases the tendency is 
one towards the mutual assimilation of the regions of Na- 
ture involved in the process. In both cases, the process 
of communication has, in general, an at least partially 
irreversible character. This second sort of analogy 
between the material and the mental worlds is again not 
exceptional, but of universal type. I cannot dwell upon 
it at length here. It has attracted some attention. It 
has been noticed by M. Tarde, and has been especially 
insisted upon by Mr. Charles Peirce as a basis for a 
remarkable hypothesis regarding evolution. 

But (8): Both the material and the mental worlds show 
a tendency, under favorable conditions, to the appear- 
ances of processes resembling those which, in the life 


THE INTERPRETATION OF NATURE papa 


of a mind, we call Habits. Here again both Mr. Charles 
Peirce and Mr. Cope, as well as other students of evolu- 
tion, have pointed out the analogy of Matter and Mind 
thus involved. The tendency can of course be stated 
in terms of descriptive concepts. Fechner, a generation 
ago, developed the principle of the “tendency to stabil- 
ity” in material systems. Let a complex material sys- 
tem, subject to certain general restrictions, once begin 
a series of movements. Then, in the long run, as Fech- 
ner showed, this system, if let alone, will tend to assume 
a somewhat stable series of rhythmically repeated 
movements, the more irregular movements being elimi- 
nated by a sort of natural selection. Spencer attracted 
attention to a somewhat similar character of Nature in 
his famous chapters on the “Rhythm of Motion” and 
“ Equilibration.” But whether or no one undertakes 
to conceive such phenomena as results of absolutely 
unvarying laws, certain it is that physical Nature is 
full of approximate rhythms. Now an _ approximate 
rhythm is a temporary law of Nature. It is a law to 
the effect that a given observable process tends to repeat 
itself over and over, as, for example, the rhythm of day 
and night or of the seasons is repeated. Such laws, I 
say, may be amongst the literally true accounts of what 
actually happens in the world. But laws of this sort 
may be, and often are, mere empirical generalizations 
whose validity is indeed temporary. For at all events 
most of Nature’s apparent rhythms are mingled with 
processes of irreversible change, and of such change as 
runs in one direction, and as accordingly tends, in the 
long run, to disturb and destroy the rhythm. 


223 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


The interest of science in ideally complete theories 
| leads, indeed, to an effort to conceive the literally true, 
but usually only imperfect rhythms of Nature as special 
cases of those more ideal laws which we mentioned be- 
fore. But the more ideal laws remain, as we said, 
matters of the book-keeping methods of our present 
science. Nature, as actually observed, shows us rhythms 
that tend, within limits, to be pretty constant. Take them 
in long periods, and these rhythms tend to pass away and 
to be lost in irrevocable decay. The rhythm of a man’s 
heart-beat is a typical case. It has its normal varia- 
tions, its normal regularity, and its long-continued 
but still limited persistence. Just so the rhythm of 
the earth’s rotation on its axis, or of the now relatively 
stable movement of the planets, is a genuine, but not 
an everlasting process of Nature. The tides retard the 
one rhythm. The meteors, not to mention other dis- 
turbances, will, in the long run, ruin the planetary 
rhythm. Such observable and approximate routine in 
Nature is closely analogous to what constitutes a great 
deal of the life of habit in the internal processes of a 
mind. Habits are just such tendencies to routine, 
to rhythm, in conscious life. They are only approxi- 
mate rhythms. They are mixed up with all sorts of irre- 
versible tendencies, which in the end tend to overwhelm 
them one and all. But while they last they are in- 
stances of natural law. Like the rhythms of external 
Nature, they arise, last awhile, and seem to pass away ; 
but so far as they go they are certainly genuine fashions 
of the behavior of Nature. 

Our interest here lies in the fact that while those 


THE INTERPRETATION OF NATURE 223 


ideally constant laws of Matter, which scientific book- 
keeping demands, but which are not literally and directly 
verifiable, seem to establish an ultimate contrast between 
Mind and Matter, these literally verifiable but not lit- 
erally constant laws of observable Nature, these approxi- 
mate rhythms, are common to conscious and to unconscious 
Nature, and when taken together, form a graded series 
of truths about the routine of Nature. The graded 
series suggests that the inner nature of things is not 
so much ideally constant, as merely relatively stable, so 
that in the fluent life of our consciousness, we directly 
know a process of which the apparently absolute stability 
of the conceived material processes is really only another 
instance, whose inner fluency is concealed from us by 
the longer intervals of time demanded for important 
changes to take place. 

The fourth class of processes apparently common to 
unconscious and to conscious Nature are the very pro- 
cesses of evolution themselves. And we now see that 
these evolutionary processes, which seem so continuous 
from inorganic to organic and finally to conscious Nature, 
do not stand alone, but are only one instance, amongst 
many, of the processes whose type is common to conscious 
and to apparently unconscious Nature. 

Taking all four of these types of processes together, 
what general impression of Nature do they give to us? 
I confess that, wholly apart from any more meta- 
physical consideration of the deeper nature of Reality, 
they suggest to me, as they have more or less suggested 
to others, who have considered one or other of them, 
an impression which I may as well briefly summarize 


224 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


for what, as a mere result of a rough induction, and as a 
mere hypothesis for further testing, it may so far be worth. 


IV 


My impression and my hypothesis are as follows: (1) The 
vast contrast which we have been taught to make between 
material and conscious processes really depends merely 
upon the accidents of the human point of view, and in 
particular upon an exaggeration of the literal accuracy 
of those admirable theories of atomic and ethereal pro- 
cesses which, as I have said, belong to the mere book- 
keeping of the sciences. Many of the processes of 
Nature can be conceptually described by very exact 
formulas whose value as conceptions nobody can ques- 
tion, but whose literal accuracy nobody verifies. Take 
those formulas as literally true, and then, indeed, the 
material world seems to become one of absolutely rigid 
substances, of absolutely permanent mathematical formu- 
las, and of a type such that a transition from material to 
conscious Nature looks perfectly unintelligible. The 
only resort would then be that, if one still accepted the 
continuity of evolution, one would conceive conscious- 
ness as a chance resultant, as a show, as an illusory affair, 
whose true essence is not known to us; or as a sort of 
delirium to which the world of the atoms is occasionally 
subject, —a delirium wherein the world forgets that it 
is nothing but an embodied system of differential equa- 
tions, and takes itself to be — well, let us say : — 

“ An infant crying in the night, 


An infant crying for the light, 
And with no language but a cry.” 


THE INTERPRETATION OF NATURE 225 


For just some such incorporated system of differential 
equations gone mad would be, according to such a theory, 
any conscious being, even if, for instance, he chanced to 
be that dignified and considerate speculative and mathe- 
matical physicist who, by hypothesis, is to be aware that 
all this account of Nature is true. But then this account 
is not true; nor does science, rightly viewed, in the least 
demand or desire that it shall be true. The mathemati- 
cal formulas are conceptions. They constitute admirable 
and, for their purpose, invaluable ledger entries in our 
accounts with Nature. For they help us to compute, to 
predict, to describe, and to classify phenomena. But they 
do not as literally express the directly observable behav- 
ior of any independent facts of Nature as does many a 
much humbler empirical observation, such as a man makes 
when he observes himself growing old, or as an evolution- 
ist makes when he observes the growth and division of a 
cell. We know that Nature, as it were, tolerates our 
mathematical formulas. We do not know that she would 
not equally well tolerate many other such formulas in- 
stead of these. But we do know, meanwhile, that the 
processes called by us growth and decay are facts as gen- 
uinely real as any natural facts whatever. For one does 
grow old; and the cells do grow and divide. 
Abandoning, then, the ideal contrast of Mind and Mat- 
ter, and coming to their continuity and analogy, my pres- 
ent hypothesis runs: (2) That we have no right whatever 
to speak of really unconscious Nature, but only of uncom- 
municative Nature, or of Nature whose mental processes 
go on at such different time-rates from ours that we can- 
not adjust ourselves to a live appreciation of their inward 
Q 


226 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


fluency, although our consciousness does make us aware 
of their presence. And (8): My hypothesis is that, in 
case of Nature in general, as in case of the particular por- 
tions of Nature known as our fellow-men, we are dealing 
with phenomenal signs of a vast conscious process, whose 
relation to Time varies vastly, but whose general charac- 
ters are throughout the same. From this point of view, 
evolution would be a series of processes suggesting to us 
various degrees and types of conscious processes. These 
processes, in case of so-called inorganic matter, are very 
remote from us; while, in case of the processes which 
appear to us as the expressive movements of the bodies of 
our human fellows, they are so near to our own inner 
processes that we understand what they mean. I sup- 
pose, then, that when you deal with Nature, you deal with 
a vast realm of finite consciousness of which your own is 
at once a part and an example. All this finite conscious- 
ness shares with yours the character of being full of fluent 
processes whose tendency is twofold,—din one direction 
towards the formation of relatively stable habits of repeti- 
tion, in the other direction towards the irrevocable leay- 
ing of certain events, situations, and types of experience 
behind. I suppose that this play between the irrevocable 
and the repeated, between habit and novelty, between 
rhythm and the destruction of rhythm, is everywhere in 
Nature, as it is in us, something significant, something of 
interest, something that means a struggle for ideals. I 
suppose that this something constitutes a process wherein 
goals, ideals, are sought in a seemingly endless pursuit, 
and where new realms of sentient experience are con- 
stantly coming into view and into relation to former 


THE INTERPRETATION OF NATURE 227 


experiences. I suppose that the field of Nature’s experi- 
ence is everywhere leading slowly or rapidly to the differ- 
entiation of new types of conscious unity. I suppose that 
this process goes on with very vast slowness in inorganic 
Nature, as for instance in the nebule, but with great 
speed in you and me. But, meanwhile, I do not suppose 
that slowness means a lower type of consciousness. 

For next, to complete my hypothesis in this direction, 
I observe that the relation of our own consciousness to 
Time is something very arbitrary. Our consciousness, for 
its special characters, is dependent upon a certain fact 
which we might well call our particular Time-Span. If 
we are to be inwardly conscious of anything, there must 
occur some change in the contents of our feelings, but 
this change must not be too fast or too slow. What hap- 
pens within what we describe as the millionth or the 
thousandth of a second necessarily escapes us. We can 
note, at best, only the mere enduring after-effects of such 
a happening. So it is when an electric spark or a 
dynamite explosion occurs. For us the event itself is 
then no separate matter of experience. We confuse 
the event with its after-effects. On the other hand, 
whatever lasts longer than a very few moments no 
longer can form part of one conscious moment for us. 
But suppose that our consciousness had to a thousand 
millionth of a second, or to a million years of time, 
the same relation that it now has to the arbitrary length 
in seconds of a typical present moment. Then, in the 
one case, we might say: “ What a slow affair this dyna- 
mite explosion is.” In the other case, events, such as the 
wearing of the Niagara gorge, would be to us what a 


228 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


single musical phrase now is, namely, something instan- 
taneously present, and grasped within the arbitrary present 
moment. Such relations to time would be no more arbi- 
trary, no less conscious, no more or less fluent, and no 
more or less full of possible meaning, than is now our 
conscious life. In our lecture on Time and Eternity we 
considered such relations in their more general forms. 
Here we simply apply the general considerations to 
special cases. 

Well, applying this simple consideration to our 
hypothesis, we should at once suppose that the actually 
fluent inner experience, which our hypothesis attributes 
to inorganic Nature, would be a finite experience 
of an extremely august temporal span, so that a mate- 
rial region of the inorganic world would be to us the 
phenomenal sign of the presence of at least one fellow- 
creature who took, perhaps, a billion years to complete 
a moment of his consciousness, so that where we saw, in 
the signs given us of his presence, only monotonous per- 
manence of fact, he, in his inner life, faced momentarily 
significant change. Nature would be thus the sign of the 
presence of other finite consciousness than our own, 
whose time-span was in general very different from ours, 
but whose rationality, whose dignity, whose significance, 
whose power to will, whose aptness to pursue ideals, might 
be equal to or far above our own without any relation to 
whether the appearance of this consciousness, in the facts 
of outer Nature, seemed to us like an inorganic process or 
not. Common to all these conscious processes would be 
their fluency, their inner significance, and their constant 
intercommunication, whereby more or less novel facts were 


THE INTERPRETATION OF NATURE 229 


transferred all the time from one to another region of this 
conscious world. How this world was individuated, in 
what sense its minds, so intimately linked by universal 
intercommunication, were still in a sense sundered into 
the lives of relatively separate Selves, our hypothesis 
would leave for a deeper consideration elsewhere. But 
we should thus already be prepared for a general, if 
extremely hypothetical, view of evolution. 

Evolution, we should now say, is due to the constant 
intercommunication of a vast number of relatively sepa- 
rate regions of this world of conscious life.! This inter- 
communication takes place as a simply universal process 
of finite experience. As it takes place, new and signifi- 
cant realms of conscious experience arise within the 
already existing temporal world of finite consciousness. 
If you wish to see how this can be, turn to the world of 
your social intercourse, where the communications of one 
being, or of a group of fellow-beings, can so enter into 
another’s preéxistent, but still undeveloped consciousness, 
as to awaken there new ideals, a new selfhood, a rela- 
tively novel individuality. If, as I myself suppose, per- 
sonal individuality is an essentially ethical category, then 
a new person exists whenever, within a conscious process 
of a given time-span, intercommunication with the rest 
of Nature results in the appearance of processes signifi- 
cant enough to express themselves in new ideals, and in a 
new unification of experience in terms of these ideals. 


1 In a later lecture, after our study of the problem of the Self, we shall 
be able to interpret this ‘‘intercommunication’’ as a process occurring 
not wholly between various beings, but rather in one aspect, within the 
life of an inclusive Self. 


230 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


Meanwhile the evolutionary changes of the whole con- 
scious world would be based upon processes whose basis 
would be viewed as threefold. First, they would be flu- 
ent processes, full of significant change, more or less obvi- 
ously governed by the pursuit of ideal goals. Secondly, 
they would be processes determined, as our own are, by a 
constant communication with processes going on in other 
regions. Thirdly, they would be processes that, amidst 
all the changes, tended, as far as the novelty and the 
irrevocable passing of life’s facts permitted, to the acqui- 
sition of definite habits. As these definite habits, so far 
as acquired at all, would be established under the influ- 
ence of intercommunication from the whole of the finite 
world, and as the habits, whenever they appeared, would 
tend to take the form of repeated rhythms, which, if once 
more observed from without, would communicate their 
own nature in the form of an appearance of rhythmic 
monotony, we should expect to get, in a summary search 
through Nature, precisely that superficial impression of an 
endless repetition of the same types which inorganic 
Nature, in the uniformity of its Matter, seems to show us. 
The conceived atoms, all of the same size, the vibrations 
of the molecules of incandescent hydrogen, all of the 
same pitch,—these would be appearances of what, in 
their inner essence, are only extreme cases of habits ren- 
dered uniform by intercommunication, like the customs 
of a nation, or like the sounds of a given language ap- 
pearing in many men’s speech. The apparently absolute 
monotony in such cases would, of course, be itself, in 
great part, illusory, just as it is illusion when foreigners 
say that we who speak English merely hiss monotonously, 


THE INTERPRETATION OF NATURE 231 


like snakes or like geese. Just so, our spectroscopes find 
the hydrogen vibrations monotonous. But our time-span 
is very short, and our spectroscopes do not interpret to 
us the foreign tongues of Nature.! 

Meanwhile, in one respect, evolution would indeed be 
in part what we before called a perspective effect, due 
to the limitations of human experience. It would 
not be true that Nature sometimes, in an exceptional 
way, pursues ideal goals. On the contrary, every natu- 
ral process, if rightly viewed from within, would be the 
pursuit of an ideal. There would be no dead Nature 
at all,—nothing really inorganic or unconscious, — only 
life, striving, onflow, ideality, significance, rationality. 
Only for us Nature appears to be growing from death 
to life as the processes grow more like our own, and so 
more intelligible. But we should have to unlearn that 
atrocious Philistinism of our whole race which supposes 
that Nature has no worthier goal than producing a man. 
Perhaps experiences of longer time-span are far higher 
in rational type than ours. The evolution of Man 
would be but the appearance of a type of individuality 
whose time-span is short, and whose grade of rationality 
is doubtful, but presumably at least a little lower than 
that of the angels, and whose degree of significance 
depends partly, of course, upon our fatally determined 
place in Nature, but partly upon the use that we make 
of the countless communications that we receive from 


1 The relations of the formation and the persistence of habits to the 
two conceptions of the Well-Ordered Series and the series formed by the 
interpolation of new intermediaries between former terms, we shall con- 
sider later, in the lecture on the Place of the Self in Being. 


232 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


our brethren of all grades, and of all time-spans. For 
my hypothesis would leave ample room for supposing 
that, whatever part of the total field of finite conscious- 
ness you choose, what happens there depends not merely 
upon the communications sent in, or upon the fatal on- 
flow of experience, but upon the significant choices there 
made. For every region of this universally conscious 
world may be, in some sense, a centre whence issues new 
conscious life, for communication to all the worlds. 
Meanwhile, our hypothesis supposes that, in case of 
the animals, we may well be dealing not with beings 
who are rational in our own time-span, nor yet with 
beings who are irrational. The rational being with 
whom you deal when you observe an animal’s dimmer 
hints of rationality, may be phenomenally represented 
rather by the race as a whole than by any one indi- 
vidual. In that case, this individual animal is no 
rational person, but he may well be, so to speak, a tem- 
porally brief section of a person, whose time-span of 
consciousness is far longer than ours. Just as one word 
of a sentence represents a part of a meaning but not 
the whole, so an animal may represent phenomenally 
real conscious life, that in a longer time-span has a 
definite, an ideal, yes, — in its own way,—an ethical ration- 
ality, however noxious or unethical or irrational the 
animal, who is not himself a person, but a fragment of 
a person, may seem to us to be. Hence our theory at 
once justifies, but does not exaggerate, the meaning 
of our human companionship with animals. In general, 
our hypothesis holds that we can never know how much 
of Nature constitutes the life of a finite conscious indi- 


THE INTERPRETATION OF NATURE 233 


vidual, unless we are in intelligent communication with 
that individual’s inner life. Hence, I do not suppose 
that any individual thing, say this house, or yonder 
table, is a conscious being, but only that it is part of 
a conscious process. 

Finally, as to the origin and as to the end of human 
individuals, our theory suggests that we are differentia- 
tions from a finite conscious experience of presumably 
a much longer time-span than our present one. This 
finite consciousness of longer time-span, indicated to us 
in the phenomena of memory and of race-instinct, is 
individuated, is rational, is a live being, and is con- 
tinuous in some sense with our own individuality. The 
birth and death of an individual man, from the point of 
view of the longer span, mean changes of time-span, 
or the occurrence of something interesting in a shorter 
or longer time-span. We might, if we chose, speak of 
death in those terms, — not as a relapse into unconscious 
Nature, but as merely a change in time-span of the life 
here involved. In what sense such a change could still 
preserve in fact our individuality, is a problem that 
this lecture still leaves open for later consideration.1 


Vv 


The hypothesis now roughly put before you belongs 
to a type nowadays not infrequent. As it stands, it 
pretends to be nothing but an hypothesis that takes 
account of a considerable range of real and verifiable 


1 Compare the further considerations in the lecture on the Place of the 
Self in Being. 


234 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


natural facts, but that does not pretend to exclusive 
possession of the field. It is related, partly by deriva- 
tion, partly by resemblance, to several other cosmical 
hypotheses, amongst which that of Mr. Charles Peirce? is, 
in my own mind, rather prominent. Yet this hypothesis 
is not identical with any of these others. Why I prefer 
‘it, I have not had time in any complete way to tell 
you. I have preferred so far to let the hypothesis stand 
as such. What we most of us need, in this field, is a 
breaking up of our traditional sundering of Mind and 
Matter, and a certain freedom from conventional phrases. 
Meanwhile, as I must remind you, the real reasons why 
I hold that some such hypothesis must be near the 
truth are general philosophical reasons. For here at 
length you have a first statement of the way in which 
the Nature empirically known to us can be so in general 
conceived as to reconcile its principal features with our 
Fourth Conception of Being. 

This hypothesis may naturally be contrasted, as we 
close, with two or three somewhat related hypotheses. 

In the first place, as you see, our hypothesis differs 
strongly from the view of Nature which is due to 
Bishop Berkeley. Berkeley was, with regard to the 
material world, an idealist, although he viewed the 
existence and the relations of individual minds in a 
fashion which seems to me to be essentially realistic, 
since the Spirits of his world are entities apparently 
conceived as, in their essence, logically independent of 


1 See his series of papers in the Monist for 1891 and the immediately 
subsequent years. The marked differences between the two hypotheses 
I have here no space to point out. 


THE INTERPRETATION OF NATURE 235 


one another, and as linked merely through laws of causa- 
tion, and through Over-ruling Providence. But Berkeley 
agrees with the general view of Idealism in asserting 
that Material substance exists not independently of 
minds. In particular, however, Berkeley holds that 
Matter appears to Minds only in and through the order 
of their ideas, as God ordains this order. And, as a 
consequence, Berkeley’s hypothesis reduces Matter to an 
appearance having no basis except (1) the experiences 
and ideas of men; and (2) the direct influence of the 
power and providence of God upon these human experi- 
ences and ideas. Were men otherwise organized, and 
were the direct influence of God’s Will upon men’s 
minds other than it is, what we now call the material 
world would simply cease to be. As it is, according to 
Berkeley, you can say that Matter has a valid reality of 
the type of our own Third Conception of Being, and 
has, in addition, a more concrete foundation merely in 
what men experience and what God intends to have 
them experience. There is, then, for Berkeley, first 
the valid fact that the experience of approaching too 
near the seen fire, is inevitably followed by the experi- 
ence of a burn. But, in the second place, the basis of 
this validity is Divine Providence, as evidenced in the 
actual occurrence which men observe. 

Now our hypothesis agrees with Berkeley’s view in 
asserting that no substance, and especially no material 
substance, exists independently of all Mind. But just 
as we ascribe some sort of Being beyond our own indi- 
vidual minds, to the minds of our fellow-men, so the 
hypothesis here in question ascribes an existence, beyond 


236 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


that of man’s mind, to the finite mental life which we 
here suppose to be indicated to us by our experience of 
Nature. And we do not suppose with Berkeley that 
Nature has existence solely in our human experience, 
in the valid laws of succession which govern our 
experiences, and in the purpose of a Providence which 
is directly producing in us the experience in question. 
We suppose that there is a vast range of extra-human 
life, limited in its nature, like the life of man, and 
identical with the Absolute Life only in that universal 
sense in which, according to our theory, every life, 
however minute or however vast, is in relation to the 
whole organism of the Absolute. To this life, whose 
presence is hinted to us by our experience of Nature, 
our theory assigns an existence as concrete and essentially 
conscious as that of man himself. And we suppose that 
our human life is itself a differentiation from this larger 
life of Nature. Our deeper relations with the Nature- 
life we suppose to be, despite all the vast differences, 
essentially similar to the relations upon which our human 
social life is founded. They are relations of communi- 
cation, and of an intimate linkage between the hap- 
penings that occur in various realms and provinces of 
the whole life of Nature. Hence, unlike Berkeley, we 
do not reduce our experience of Nature to anything 
that could plausibly be called illusory, or unfounded, 
or founded only in an arbitrary divine intervention. 
Nature for us is real in precisely the sense in which our 
fellow-men are real. Only we, of course, maintain that 
our present experience gives us very imperfect hints as 
to what the inner life of Nature contains; just as, even 


THE INTERPRETATION OF NATURE 237 


in case of men, our social experience of the doings of 
people whose language is not ours, and whose customs 
are very remote, leaves us long in ignorance of what 
they mean. 

In the second place, our hypothesis stands in a strong 
contrast to the one associated with the name of Leibniz. 
Leibniz conceived the natural world as an infinite multi- 
tude of mutually independent Monads. While, even in 
case of Leibniz, many genuinely idealistic motives enter 
into his conception of the organism of this realm of the 
Monads, the primary character ascribed by him to this 
realm depends upon an essentially realistic conception of 
Being. ‘The Monads are souls. Each one of them, to be 
sure, is in a preéstablished harmony with all the others. 
But they do not communicate. Their relations are wholly 
ideal. Each, in idea, mirrors the reality of all the other 
Monads, but this ideal link is not a genuine tie. For 
what happens within each Monad is determined solely by 
its own nature, and by nothing external. The creation 
of the Monads is indeed asserted to have been a fact. 
But it is a fact wholly inexpressible in terms of any links 
or ties such as now bind the various states of each Monad 
to the inner nature of that individual soul itself. Taken 
in itself, a Monad is an ultimate fact of Being, whose 
nature needs not the real nature of any other Monad to 
explain it, and whose essential independence of all that 
is external to itself is the first and the central fact about 
its form of Being. In strong contrast to this view of the 
Monads as real beings, stands, indeed, the assumed and 
preéstablished harmony of all the Monads. And when 
Leibniz emphasizes this aspect, his theory tends to lose 


238 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


its realistic hardness of outlines, and to lapse into a view 
for which the ideal relationships of the Monads, their sig- 
nificant unity as members of the one City of God, becomes 
the innermost truth of the universe. If Leibniz had 
given this aspect of his doctrine due emphasis, he would 
have recognized his own latent Idealism. As a fact, how- 
ever, he remains on the whole a realist, whose Monads are 
in essence sundered and self-centred, and whose world is 
in fact shattered into a spray of infinitely numerous Inde- 
pendent Beings, while their asserted unity, as merely 
ideal, remains an appearance, manifest only to an external 
observer. 

Our theory, I say, is in strong contrast to this Monad- 
ology of Leibniz. In Nature, as in man, we find 
individuality linked in the closest fashion with inter- 
communication, with the mutual interdependence of 
individuals, and with a genuine identity of meaning 
and of Being in various individuals. For us, as we 
shall later more fully see, it is perfectly possible that an 
ethical individual should have, in time, a natural origin, 
should result from processes that have previously taken 
place in other individuals, and should exist subject to a 
constant support received from other individuals. For 
us, a soul is no Monad, but a life individuated solely by 
its purpose, t.e. by the significant and unique meaning 
which its experience may embody. Our whole theory 
presupposes that individuals may be included within 
other individuals; that one life, despite its unique ethical 
significance, may form part of a larger life; and that the 
ties which bind various finite individuals together are 
but hints of the unity of all individuals in the Absolute 


THE INTERPRETATION OF NATURE 239 


Individual. Hence we do not assume the variety of 
individuals within the natural world to be a wholly orig- 
inal fact, temporally predetermined by a single creative 
act. Nor do we suppose that, from its creation, Nature is 
thenceforth to be regarded as a realm whose harmony is 
preéstablished. For us no natural fact is more obvious 
than that every individual life is temporally dependent 
for its every act and state upon relations of direct com- 
munication with other individuals. And individuals are 
not kept asunder by chasms, but are made distinct 
through their various meanings, z.e. through the variety 
of the purposes of which their lives are the expression. 
In another direction, our theory differs very deeply 
from all hypotheses of the type of Clifford’s “ Mind 
Stuff” doctrine. It is customary, in recent thought, for 
many who appreciate the importance of the natural pro- 
cesses summed up in the word Evolution, to attempt to 
conceive that inorganic Nature consists of a vast collec- 
tion of elements of the type of our own sensations, or of 
our simplest feelings. The process of Evolution itself is 
regarded by such views as a gradual coming together and 
organization of such originally atomic elements of feeling 
into complex unities, which, viewed externally, appear 
as more and more organized bodies, while the same 
masses of content, internally viewed, come to take on, 
more and more, the character of conscious and, in the 
end, of rational lives. Our hypothesis, by virtue of its 
idealistic basis, rejects altogether the possibility of any 
such separate elements of Mind-Stuff. Nor do we admit 
that such elements, through any process of Evolution, 
could come to be interrelated after they had once sepa- 


240 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


rately existed. An element of physical life, a simple 
sensation of feeling, can neither be nor be conceived in 
isolation. Our very definition of Being forces upon us 
this result. And, if an isolated physical element could 
once exist, it would be like any other realistic entity. 
As an Independent Being, it could never come to be 
linked to any other Being. It would remain forever in 
the darkness of its atomic separation from all real life. 
For us, however, if all Nature is an expression of mental 
life, all mental life has Internal Meaning, and therefore 
conscious unity of purpose in every pulse of its existence. 

And for the same reason, we reject every form of doc- 
trine that regards Nature as in any sense a realm of the 
genuinely Unconscious, or that supposes the Absolute to 
come to self-consciousness first in man, or that conceives 
the process of Evolution as one wherein the life of the 
natural world, as a whole, grows from the darkness of 
obscure and unconscious purpose to the daylight of self- 
possessed Reason. Our general Theory of Being simply 
forbids every such interpretation of Nature. All life, 
everywhere, in so far as it is life, has conscious meaning, 
and accomplishes a rational end. This is the necessary 
consequence of our Idealism. Where we see inorganic 
Nature seemingly dead, there is, in fact, conscious life, 
just as surely as there is any Being present in Nature at 
all. And I insist, meanwhile, that no empirical warrant 
can be found for affirming the existence of dead material 
substance anywhere. What we find, in inorganic Nature, 
are processes whose time-rate is slower or faster than 
those which our consciousness is adapted to read or to 
appreciate. And we have no empirical evidence of the 


THE INTERPRETATION OF NATURE 241 


existence of any, relatively whole, conscious process, 
which is less intelligent or less rational than our own 
human processes are. For the psychical life which we 
refer to the lower animals is, according to my interpreta- 
tion, merely a fragment and a hint of a larger rationality 
which gets its fuller individual expression in the evolu- 
tion of a species or genus or order, or other relative 
whole of animal existence. And of this whole life, what 
we chance to view as the individual animal constitutes a 
mere fragment, brought within our observation by con- 
ditions whose relation to the innermost facts of Nature 
is doubtless very arbitrary. 

As all these comments and comparisons indicate, the 
general character of our hypothesis about Nature is de- 
termined for us by our Fourth Conception of Being, and 
stands or falls therewith. It is the detail of our hypothe- 
sis, and its special adaptation to our experience of Nature, 
which we regard as tentative, and so as subject to correc- 
tion. But in rejecting the Mind-Stuff theory of Clifford, 
our grounds are general and positive. That theory im- 
plies an essentially realistic conception of Being, and falls 
with Realism. The same is true of Leibniz’s Monadol- 
ogy. The Unconscious we reject, because our Fourth 
Conception of Being forbids all recognition of uncon- 
scious realities. It follows that any hypothesis about 
Nature, which is just to the demands of a sound Meta- 
physic, must, like ours, conceive the natural world as 
directly bound up with the experiences of actually con- 
scious beings. That, in addition to all these considera- 
tions, we should be led to reject Berkeley’s cosmological 
hypothesis, is due, in part, to our own special form of 

R 


242 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


Idealism ; but, in part, also to the fact that our theory 
about Nature ought to be just to the empirical inductions 
which have now been summed up in the modern Doctrine 
of Evolution. The essence of this Doctrine of Evolution 
lies in the fact that it recognizes the continuity of man’s 
life with that of an extra-human realm, whose existence 
is hinted to us by our experience of Nature. Accepting, 
as we are obliged to do, the objective significance of this 
modern doctrine, we find ourselves forced to interpret 
Nature, not as an arbitrarily determined realm of valid 
experiences founded only in God’s creative will and 
man’s sensory life, but as an orderly realm of genuine 
conscious life, one of whose products, expressions, and 
examples we find in the mind of Man. 


LECTURE VI 


{ ’ 
' 
} i 
7 
} 
a= 
oo 
Ci 
‘ 
— 


ry 


/ i . <a a 
- a, Sp OE, ep Oi nas -re oe 
- Mi <a ale Mga tl Ne 
\ : aa ene ee ene , 
f pt heed lg earl ay i, ao 
At hase. of. 
a ry 7 


at | 
rn Sete =” etieias sain. — 


LECTURE VI 
THE HUMAN SELF 


THE contrast between Matter and Mind is usually 
regarded as a serious obstacle in the way of any inter- 
pretation of the world of experience in terms of a 
philosophical Idealism. In the last two lectures we 
have seen that this contrast is not empirically known 
to be as absolute as our customary fashions of concep- 
tion often make it seem. The hypothesis concerning 
Nature which we suggested was partly intended to illus- 
trate precisely this possibility of reconciling Idealism 
with the generalizations of our ordinary study of Nature. 
The hypothesis itself, like any other effort towards a 
Cosmology, is, in its details, provisional and tentative. 
Only its general type, as an idealistic hypothesis about 
Nature, seems to me to be a sure representative of the 
truth. In its special features it is to be subject to the 
control of further experience. But it provides in its 
very terms for such further control. The hypothesis 
asserts, in fact, that all the theories of the special 
sciences, together with the general theory of Nature 
suggested by this very hypothesis itself, must be viewed 
as incidents in the history of man’s effort gradually 
to comprehend the organization of a realm of Mind, 
of which man himself is a member. Now every idealist 
holds that there is no dead matter anywhere in the 

245 


246 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


world, and that all that is is the expression of the 
Spirit. But in what way this thesis is to be applied 
to the detailed interpretation of Nature, cannot be de- 
cided in advance of a careful scrutiny of the facts. 
And the special way suggested at the last time is the 
one which to me personally seems to promise most. I 
am sure that in its most general outlines, this hypothesis 
is sound. But all its details are subject to correction. 


I 


Herewith, however, we are led to the threshold of a new 
enterprise. We have so far stated a general hypothesis 
regarding Nature. But in forming this hypothesis, I 
myself have been especially interested in its bearing 
upon the conception of the place in Nature that is 
occupied by Man. Now as we know Man, he first of 
all appears to us as a being whose inner life is that 
of an individual Self. The Self of each man apparently 
bas had an origin in time, and a development such as 
makes it dependent, for its contents and its character, 
upon natural conditions. In its turn, our self-conscious- 
ness, when once it has developed, furnishes to us the 
sort of insight by means of which we may hope for a 
comprehension of some of the mysteries of Nature. Any 
deeper criticism of our hypothesis about Nature must 
therefore depend upon a more exact account of what 
we mean by the human Self. We must know how we 
are able, both to conceive this Self as in any sense the 
outcome of the processes of Nature, and to apply our 
view of the Self to an explanation of Nature. 


THE HUMAN SELF 247 


My next task must therefore be to state, in outline, 
a theory of the human Self. 

What a man means by himself is notoriously a ques- 
tion to which common sense gives various and ambigu- 
ous answers. That by the Self one means a real being, 
common sense indeed insists. But the nature of this 
real being forms the topic of the greatest vacillation 
in all popular metaphysics. The most frequently men- 
tioned doubt is that as to whether the Self is, or at 
least essentially includes, the bodily organism, or whether 
the Self is essentially an incorporeal entity. But this 
is but a single instance of the doubts and _ hesitancies 
of the popular doctrine concerning the Ego. And this 
indefiniteness of customary opinion regarding our prob- 
lem most of all appears in the practical aspect of the 
current notions of the Self. If we ask, What is the 
value of the Self, and what do we gain by cultivating, 
by knowing, by observing, and by satisfying the Self? 
—common sense gives contradictory answers which at 
once show that the very idea of what the Self is, is 
subject to the most momentous changes as we alter 
our point of view. Ask the teacher of the people 
about the value and dignity of the Self at a moment 
when he is insisting upon the significance and the 
rights of individuality, and upon the duty of conscious 
reasonableness, and of moral independence. He will 
reply, perhaps, in the terms that Burns has made so 
familiar. “The man of independent mind” knows, 
asserts, expresses, preserves, glorifies the true Self, the 
moral individual. And the Self which he thus makes 
central in his moral world is an essentially honorable 


248 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


Self, the determiner of all true values, the despiser of 
mere externals, the freeman to whom fortune is nothing 
compared with inner dignity. When one views the 
moral Self thus, one conceives that the root of all evil 
and of all baseness must always lie without and beyond 
the Self. The Self sins not through self-assertion but 
through self-abandonment. The lost soul is the man 
who is the slave of fortune. Pleasure, worldly honor, 
external good,— these may harm the Self, just because 
they are foreign to its true independence. The ideal 
lies where the Stoics sought it, in casting off the external 
bondage. For such a view, every man’s Self, if you 
could only get at the heart of it, and get it to express 
itself, would appear as essentially good. What corrupts 
and enchains men is not their innermost selfhood, but the 
power of an external world of temptations. To assert 
the true Self, is to be saved. 

But even more familiar than this ethical individualism, 
which so often thrills the hearts of noble youth, and 
which inspires so many to heroism, is another ancient 
and, as its history shows, profoundly religious doctrine. 
This latter doctrine equally appeals to the moral common 
sense of mankind; it is crystallized, so to speak, in 
some of the most familiar of our customary phrases ; 
it inspires numerous effective moral appeals; it comes 
to us with all the weight of the authority of the faith of 
the fathers. This view is that the Self of man is pre- 
cisely that which in its original nature is evil, so that 
it is just our salvation which must to us come from 
without, and be won through self-abnegation. “By 
grace ye are saved, and that not of yourselves.” Self- 


THE HUMAN SELF 249 


denial is, for this view, the cardinal virtue. Self-con- 
sciousness is even a vice. A man ought to think little 
of himself, and much of God, of the world, and of his 
own external business. The central evil of our life is 
selfishness. Virtue is definable as altruism, 7.e. as 
forgetting ourselves in the thought of others. The 
best eulogy that one can make over the grave of the 
departed saint is: “He had no thought of Self; he 
served ; he sacrificed himself; he gave himself as an 
offering for the good of mankind ; he lived for others ; 
he never even observed his own virtues; he forsook 
himself; he asked for nothing but bondage to his 
duty.” And George Eliot sings in praise of the “scorn 
for miserable aims that end in Self.” 

Now the opposition just suggested between two views 
of the value of Self, is so familiar that common sense 
not only uses these apparently conflicting phrases, but 
has its own lore regarding various devices by which 
they are to be reconciled. A man has, as we some- 
times learn, two Selves, —the inner and the outer, the 
nobler and the baser. There is the natural man, who 
is by his very essence evil; and the spiritual man, who is 
by nature good. It is to the natural man that the advice 
about self-abnegation is given; it is to the spiritual 
Self that the well-known words of Burns make their 
stirring appeal. The fleshly Self is the root of all evil. 
The spiritual Self belongs, by origin and by destiny, to 
a higher realm. 

This dualistic way of stating the case, and of attempt- 
ing to solve the practical problem here at issue, would be 
more nearly final were it not that in the very effort to carry 


250 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


it out to its consequences, the former ambiguity only 
arises afresh, in a slightly altered form. The higher 
Self, the deeper spiritual nature, the individuality which 
ought to be,—to whom does it originally belong? To 
the man who finally wins a consciousness that this has 
become to him his true Self? Or does this higher 
Self come, as Aristotle said of the Nous, @vpafev, from 
without, into the natural man? Does it create for him 
or in him a new selfhood, so that before the higher 
selfhood appears in this man, it exists perhaps merely 
as the intent of God to save this man, or as a selfhood em- 
bodied in other men, the teachers, inspirers, guides, of the 
man who is to be thus brought to the possession of the 
higher Self in his own person? This question may 
indeed at first appear an idle subtlety. But as a fact, 
both common sense and religion, both the teacher’s art 
and the inner consciousness of those who have in any 
sense passed from death unto life, give this question a 
very living and practical significance. Our models and 
our inspirations, the mysterious grace that saves us and 
the visible social order that moulds us,—these lie at 
first without the Self. Yet they in such wise determine 
whatever is best about us that we are all accustomed 
to nourish the higher selfhood by means of what we find 
as no creation of the original Self, but as the free gift of 
the world. And the two doctrines which, in European 
history, have most insisted upon the duality of our 
higher and our lower selfhood, viz. the ethical teaching of 
Plato and the Gospel of the Christian Church, have agreed 
in insisting that the higher Self isa resultant of influences 
which belong to the eternal world, and which the indi- 


THE HUMAN SELF 251 


vidual man himself is powerless to initiate. In Plato’s 
account of the process of the soul’s release from its own 
lower nature, the eternal Ideas appear as the super- 
natural source of truth and of goodness. In the myth- 
ical state of preéxistence, the Ideas guided the soul by 
their visible presence; and the soul’s higher nature 
meant nothing but the contemplation of their uncreated 
perfection. In this foreign authority the soul found all 
that was good. And in the present life our higher nature 
means only our memory of the former presence of the 
all-powerful truth. This memory guides our awaken- 
ing reason, controls our irrational passions, binds the 
lower Self with the might of the eternal, and conducts 
us back towards that renewed and direct intercourse with 
the ideal world wherein consists our only higher Self- 
hood. Christianity, in all its essential teachings, has 
emphasized a similar source and meaning in speaking of 
the higher Self. The Divine Spirit enters a man in ways 
that its own wisdom predetermines, and without the 
work of God in preparing and accomplishing the plan of 
salvation, in revealing the truth to man by outward 
means, and in preparing the heart within for the recep- 
tion of the truth, the nobler Self of each man not only is 
unable to win control of the baser Self, but never could 
come effectively to exist at all. In this sense, then, it 
is not I who win salvation, but it is God who works in 
me. The higher Self is originally not myself at all, 
but the Spirit warring against the Flesh. This spirit is 
essentially from God. It comes into the man like Aris- 
totle’s Creative Nous, and is precisely so much of a man 
as is not his own, but God’s. 


252 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


Now this well-known ambiguity of the traditional doc- 
trines concerning the source and meaning of the higher 
Self in man, is not, as some have unwisely maintained, a 
mere consequence of theological and philosophical specu- 
lation. On the contrary, it is an expression, in terms of 
faith, of empirical facts about the Self which common 
sense everywhere recognizes. The same problems, in 
other formulation, exist in Hindoo philosophy as well as 
in Plato’s; and they are recognized by Buddhism as well 
as by Christianity. Every watchful parent, and every 
conscientious teacher, is perfectly well acquainted with 
facts that illustrate the doctrines of saving grace and of 
the apparently external source of the higher selfhood, in 
case of every plastic child. We all of us know, or ought 
to recognize, how powerless we are, or should have been, 
to win any higher selfhood, unless influences from with- 
out, — whether you know them as mother love, or con- 
ceive them as the promptings of the divine Spirit, or view 
them as the influences of friends and of country, — have 
brought into us a truth and an ideality that is in 
no ordinary sense our own private creation. And 
every man who knows what the wiser humility is, has 
sometime said: “Of myself I am nothing. It is the 
truth alone that, coming from without, works in me.” 

But if you lay aside the problem as to the source of the 
higher Self, and consider merely the supposed duality of 
the lower and the higher Self as a given fact, have you in 
that case even begun to solve the problem as to what the 
Self of a man actually is? For the Self was to be some- 
thing unique and individual. But the account here in 
question makes of it something disintegrated and inter- 


THE HUMAN SELF 953 


nally manifold, and threatens to cause the name Self to 
mean, in case of every individual, a mere general term, 
applicable to various groups of different facts. For by 
the same principle whereby you distinguish the lower and 
the higher Self of a man, you might distinguish, and 
upon occasion, even in common life, do distinguish, many 
various selves, all clustered together in what we call the 
life of a single individual. 

For if we are internally in any sense more than one 
Self, then we consist not merely of the lower and the 
higher self, but have, in some sense, as many selves as we 
have decidedly various offices, duties, types of training 
and of intellectual activity, or momentous variations of 
mood and condition. Of the man who is once seriously 
ill, common sense often says that he is no longer himself. 
If you ask, who then is he, if not himself, you may get 
the answer that he is another,—a deeply changed, — 
a strange Self. And if the change has at all the character 
of a mental derangement, common sense, ever since the 
savage stage of our social life, has been disposed to con- 
ceive the alteration in question as the appearance of an 
actually foreign and other Self, a new and invading indi- 
viduality, which the superstitious view as a possession of 
the man’s body by an evil spirit. Such instances are 
extreme ; but health furnishes to us similar, if less un- 
happy variations, with whose mystery the popular imag- 
ination is constantly busy. Deep emotional experiences 
give the sense of a new or of a wavering selfhood. 
There are many people, of a fine social sensibility, who 
are conscious of a strong tendency to assume, temporarily, 
the behavior, the moods, and in a measure, both the 


954 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


bearing and the accent, both the customs and the opinions 
of people in whose company they spend any considerable 
time. I have known amongst such people those who 
were oppressed by a sense of insincerity in consequence 
of their own social plasticity. “I almost seem to have no 
true Self at all,” such a sensitive person may say. “I 
am involuntarily compelled to change my whole attitude 
towards the most important things whenever I change my 
company. I find myself helplessly thinking and believ- 
ing and speaking as the present company want me to do. 
I feel humiliated by my own lack of moral independence. 
But I cannot help this fickleness. And the saddest is 
that I do not know where my true Self lies, or what one 
amongst all these various selves is the genuine one.” 

Now such confessions stand again for rather extreme 
types of variability of the mere sense of selfhood. Yet 
the experiences of which such less stable souls complain, 
exist in various degrees in many of us who are merely not 
sensitive enough, or perhaps not reflective enough, to 
notice our own actual variations of self-consciousness. I 
have known very obstinate men, who were full of a con- 
sciousness of their own independence and absolute stability 
of will and character. Yet, as a fact, they were people of 
very various and complex selfhood, who were, far more 
than they themselves supposed, the slaves of circum- 
stances and of social influences. Only they regarded 
themselves as both independent and resolutely fixed in 
their individuality, merely because their one type of reac- 
tion in presence of any other man’s opinion was to disa- 
gree with that opinion, and their one way of asserting 
their independence was to insist that their neighbors 


THE HUMAN SELF 255 


were wrong, while their fixed device for preserving their 
independence was to refuse to do whatever external au- 
thority desired them to do. But now such resolute oppo- 
nents of their fellows are as much without a fixed and 
rational conscious principle of selfhood as their brothers, 
the self-accused slaves of the passing social situation. 
For it is as fickle to disagree with everybody as to agree 
with everybody. And the man who always opposes is as 
much the slave of external fortune as the man who always 
agrees. The simply obstinate man, who is said to be set 
in his own way, but who, in fact, is always set in the 
way that is opposed to the ways of whoever is just now 
his fellow, — such a man changes his doctrine whenever his 
opponent changes; and his teachings, his ideals, and his 
selfhood play, as it were, puss-in-the-corner with those of 
his neighbors. 

But enough of familiar illustrations of how the mere 
sense of selfhood may vary, or of how its outer and inner 
expression may seem dual or multiple. What these facts 
give us, is not any decision as to the true nature of the 
Self, but some specification of our problem, and some ex- 
planation of the reason why common sense is so uncertain 
about how to define the true unity of the Self. The in- 
consistencies of common sense in regard to the Self are, 
upon their practical side, well summed up in the familiar 
advice which we are accustomed to give the young. 
“Forget yourself,’ we say, “all true success depends 
upon freedom from yourself.” But to the careless youth 
we sternly say, “ What! you have forgotten yourself.” 
One sees, it is hard for the poor Self to please common 
sense. And the reason is that common sense does not in 


256 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


the least know, when it appeals to the Self, whom it is 
addressing, nor, when it talks of the Self, what object it 
is meaning. 


II 


Such considerations ought once for all to give pause to 
those who have regarded the problem of the true nature of 
the Self as a matter of direct inner knowledge, or as some- 
thing to be settled by an appeal to the plain man. But of 
course these considerations merely indicate a problem, and 
are by no means decisive as against any metaphysical view 
which insists upon a true and deeper unity of Selfhood at 
the basis of all these variations of the apparent Self. But 
wherein shall our own metaphysical doctrine seek for 
guidance in this world of complexities? 

I reply, The concept of the human Self, like the con- 
cept of Nature, comes to us, first, as an empirical concept, 
founded upon a certain class of experiences. But like 
the concept of Nature, the concept of the human Self 
tends far to outrun any directly observable present facts 
of human experience, and to assume forms which define 
the Self as having a nature and destiny which no man 
directly observes or as yet can himself verify. If we con- 
sider first the empirical basis of the conception of the Self, 
and then the motives which lead us beyond our direct 
experience in our efforts to interpret the Self, we find, as 
a result of a general survey, three different kinds of con- 
ceptions of what it is that one means or ought to mean by 
the term Self as applied to the individual man. Each of 
these sorts of conception of the human Self is once more 
capable of a wide range of variation. Each can be used as 


THE HUMAN SELF 257 


a basis of different and, on occasion, of conflicting notions 
of what the Self is. But the three have their strong con- 
trasts with one another, and each lays stress upon its own 
aspect of the facts. 

First then, there is the more directly empirical way of 
conceiving the Self. In this sense, by a man’s Self, you 
mean a certain totality of facts, viewed as more or less 
immediately given, and as distinguished from the rest of 
the world of Being. These facts may be predominantly 
corporeal facts, such as not only the man himself but also 
his neighbors may observe and comment upon. In this 
sense my countenance and my physical deeds, my body 
and my clothing, —all these may be regarded as more or 
less a part of myself. My neighbor so views them. I 
may and very generally do so view them myself. If you 
changed or wholly removed such facts, my view of what 
I am would unquestionably alter. For to my neighbor 
as to myself, I am this man with these acts, this body, 
this presence. I cannot see these facts as my neighbor 
does, nor can he take my view of them. But we all 
regard such facts, not only as belonging to the Self, but 
as constituting, in a measure, what we regard as the Self 
of the present life. In addition to the external or corpo- 
real Self of the phenomenal world, there is the equally 
empirical and phenomenal Self of the inner life, the series 
of states of consciousness, the feelings, thoughts, desires, 
memories, emotions, moods. These, again, both my 
neighbor and myself regard as belonging to me, and as 
going to make up what I am. To be sure, within this 
inner empirical Self, we all make distinctions, now so 
freely illustrated, between what does and what does not 

Lr 


258 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


essentially belong to the Self. When a man tells me a 
piece of interesting news, or expounds to me his opinions, 
I naturally regard the ideas which then arise in my mind 
as his and not as mine. I have to reflect in order to ob- 
serve the somewhat recondite fact that the ideas which he 
seems to convey to me are in one sense ideas of my own, 
aroused in me according to laws of association. On the 
other hand, when I think alone by myself, the ideas which 
occur to me seem to be primarily mine. I have to reflect 
in order to remember how largely they have been derived 
from books, from nature, or from conversation, and how 
little I can call originally my own. And everywhere in the 
inner life, as it flits by, I observe a constantly shifting play 
of what I distinguish as more truly myself, from what I 
regard as relatively foreign. This feeling or purpose, 
this mood or this choice, is my own. That other emotion 
or idea is alien to me. It belongs to another. I do not 
recognize it as mine. The distinctions, thus empirically 
made, have no one rational principle. They are often 
founded upon the most arbitrary and unstable motives. 
The vacillation of common sense regarding the Self is 
endlessly repeated in my own inner life. I am con- 
stantly sure that there exists a Self, and that there I am, 
present to my own consciousness as the one whose expe- 
riences all these are, and who set myself over against the 
foreign non-Ego at every moment. But in distinguishing 
my empirical non-Ego from the Ego, I follow no stateable 
rule in my inner life from moment to moment. I even vol- 
untarily play with the distinctions of Self and not-Self, — 
dramatically address myself as if I were another, criticise 
and condemn myself, and upon occasion observe myself in 


THE HUMAN SELF 259 


a relatively impersonal fashion, as if I were a wholly alien 
personality. On the other hand, there are countless auto- 
matic processes that alter or that diminish the immediately 
given distinctions between Ego and non-Ego. The lover 
in Locksley Hall somewhat unobservantly tells us how: — 
“Love took up the harp of life, and smote on all the chords with 
might ; 
Smote the chord of Self that trembling, passed in music out of 
sight.” 


The lover admits that in the state which he thus de- 
scribes, the Self, if invisible in the inner experience, was 
still able, most decidedly, to make itself heard. And, as 
a fact, one may well question whether, in view of what 
the lover in Locksley Hall tells us, the Self of this lover 
ever passed beyond his own range of vision at all, or was 
in the least out of sight. But the happy emotional con- 
fusion of self-consciousness here in question is familiar 
indeed to all who know joyous emotion. And in the 
sadder emotions one also has endless varieties in the in- 
tensity, clearness, and outlines which in our empirical 
consciousness characterize, from moment to moment, the 
relations of Self and not-Self. 


III 


But one may now ask, still dwelling upon the empirical 
Self, what manner of unity is left, in the midst of all 
these variations, as the unity that the concept of the Self 
can still be said to possess in our ordinary experience? 
And by what marks is the Self to be distinguished from 
the rest of the world? I reply, by pointing out a fact of 


260 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


central importance for the whole understanding of the 
empirical Ego. The variations of our experience and of 
our opinion concerning the empirical Self are count- 
less in number. And no purely rational principle guides 
us in defining the Self from moment to moment in 
the world of common sense, or in distinguishing it from 
the not-Self. But there still does remain one psychological 
principle running through all these countless facts, and 
explaining, in general, both why they vary, and why yet 
we always suppose, despite the chaos of experiences, that 
the Self of our inner and outer life preserves a genuine, 
although to us hidden unity. This psychological princi- 
ple is the simple one that, in us men, the distinction 
between Self and not-Self has a predominantly Social 
origin, and implies a more or less obviously present con- 
trast between what we at any moment view as the life of 
another person, a fellow-being, or, as you may for short 
in general call him, an Alter, and the life, which, by con- 
trast with that of the Alter, is just then viewed as the 
life of the present Ego. To state the case more briefly, I 
affirm that our empirical self-consciousness, from moment 
to moment, depends upon a series of contrast-effects, 
whose psychological origin lies in our literal social life, 
and whose continuance in our present conscious life, 
whenever we are alone, is due to habit, to our memory of 
literal social relations, and to an imaginative idealization 
of these relations. Herein lies a large part of the explana- 
tion of those ambiguities of common sense upon which I 
have so far insisted. 

My proof for this view I cannot here give at length. I 
have stated the psychological aspects of the whole case 


THE HUMAN SELF 261 


pretty extensively elsewhere.1 My friend, Professor 
Baldwin of Princeton University, has independently 
worked out a theory of the psychological origin of Self- 
Consciousness, and a doctrine about the evolution of the 
relations of Ego and Alter, —a theory which I am on the 
whole prepared to accept, and which agrees with the con- 
siderations that I myself have been led to develope, 
and, in the places now referred to, to set forth. Here 
there is time only for a brief indication of what I mean 
by this theory of the empirical Ego, of its unity in 
variety, and of its distinction from the world of the 
non-Ego. 

Nobody amongst us men comes to self-consciousness, 
so far as I know, except under the persistent influence 
of his social fellows. A child in the earlier stages of 
his social development,—say from the end of the first 
to the beginning of the fifth year of life, shows you, 
as you observe him, a process of the development of 
self-consciousness in which, at every stage, the Self of 
the child grows and forms itself through Imitation, and 
through functions that cluster about the Imitation of 
others, and that are secondary thereto. In consequence, 
the child is in general conscious of what expresses the 
life of somebody else, before he is conscious of himself. 
And his self-consciousness, as it grows, feeds upon social 
models, so that at every stage of his awakening life 


1See my Studies of Good and Evil, especially the essay on the Anoma- 
lies of Self-consciousness, op. cit., pp. 169-197. Professor Baldwin’s 
very complete treatment of the topic is to be found in the second volume 
of his well-known work: Mental Development in the Child and the Race, 
where it dominates the entire discussion. 


262 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


his consciousness of the Alter is a step in advance of 
his consciousness of the Ego. His playmates, his nurse, 
or mother, or the workmen whose occupations he sees, 
and whose power fascinates him, appeal to his imita- 
tiveness, and set him the copies for his activities. He 
learns his little arts, and as he does so, he contrasts his 
own deeds with those of his models, and of other chil- 
dren. Now contrast is, in our conscious life, the mother 
of clearness. What the child does instinctively, and 
without comparison with the deeds of others, may never 
come to his clear consciousness as his own deed at all. 
What he learns imitatively, and then reproduces, per- 
haps in joyous obstinacy, as an act that enables him to 
display himself over against others,—this constitutes 
the beginning of his self-conscious life. And in gen- 
eral, thenceforth, social situations, social emotions, the 
process of peering into the contents of other minds 
during the child’s questioning period, the conflicts of 
childish sport, the social devices for winning approval, 
—in brief, the whole life of social harmony and rivalry, 
—all these things mean an endless series of contrasts 
between two sets of contents, which retain, amidst all 
their varieties, one psychologically important character. 
Upon this character the empirical unity and the general 
continuity of our adult self-consciousness depend. 

In any literal social situation, namely, one is aware 
of ideas, designs, interests, beliefs, or judgments, whose 
expression is observed in the form of acts, words, looks, 
and the like, belonging to the perceived organisms of 
one’s fellow-men. In strong contrast, both in the way 
in which they appear in the field of our sense-percep- 


THE HUMAN SELF 263 


tions, and in the current interests and feelings with 
which they are accompanied and blended, are the acts, 
words, and other expressions, of our own organism, 
together with the ideas, designs, and beliefs which ac- 
company these acts. Now these two contrasting masses 
of mental contents simply constitute the Alter and the 
Ego, the neighbor and the Self, of any empirical instant 
of our literal social life together. That these sets of 
contents stand in strong contrast to each other is, for 
the first, a mere fact of sense and of feeling. One 
does not reason about this fact from instant to instant. 
One finds it so. Nor does one appeal to any intuition 
of an ultimate or of a spiritual Ego, in order to observe 
the presented fact that my neighbor’s words, as he speaks 
to me, do not sound or feel as my words do when I speak 
to him, and that the ideas which my neighbor’s words 
at once bring to my consciousness, stand in a strong 
and presented contrast to the ideas which receive ex- 
pression in my words as I reply to him. Alter and 
Ego, in such cases, are found as facts of our direct 
observation. Were no difference observed between the 
contents which constitute the observed presence of my 
neighbor, and the contents which constitute my own 
life in the same moment, then my sense of my neigh- 
bor’s presence, and my idea of myself, would blend in 
my consciousness, and there would be so far neither 
Alter nor Ego observed. 

Now just such social contrast-effects have been occur- 
ring in our experience since childhood. The contrasts 
in question have always retained a certain general simi- 
larity, despite wide and countless differences. Just as 


264 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


all color contrasts are in a measure alike, so too are 
all social contrasts. Always the contents which con- 
stitute the Ego, at the very moment of their contrast 
with the remaining contents present during the social 
contrast-effect, have been associated with certain rela- 
tively warm and enduring organic sensations, viz. sen- 
sations coming from within our own bodies. Always 
the contents belonging to our consciousness of our 
neighbors have been relatively free from these accom- 
paniments, and have had the characters belonging to 
external sense-perceptions. And there are still other 
empirical similarities present in all social relations. 
Hence, despite all other changes, the Ego and the 
Alter have tended to keep apart, as facts of our em- 
pirical observation, and each of the two has tended 
towards its own sort of organization as a mass of observed 
and remembered empirical facts. The Alter, viewed 
as a mass of experienced facts,—the words, looks, and 
deeds and ideas of other people, — differentiates and in- 
tegrates into all that I call my experience of mankind; 
the Ego, centred about the relatively constant organic 
sensations, but receiving its type of unity especially 
through the social contrast-effects, stands as that total- 
ity of inner and outer experience which I recognize as 
my own, just because it sharply differs from my expe- 
rience of any of the rest of mankind, and stands in a 
certain permanent sort of contrast thereto. 

In origin, then, the empirical Ego is secondary to our 
social experience. In literal social life, the Ego is always 
known as in contrast to the Alter. And while the per- 
manent character of our organic sensations aids us in 


THE HUMAN SELF 265 


identifying the empirical Ego, this character becomes of 
importance mainly because hereby we find ourselves 
always in a certain inwardly observable type of contrast 
to the whole of our social world. 

Now what literal social life thus trains us to observe, 
the inner psychological processes of memory and imagina- 
tion enable us indefinitely to extend and to diversify. 
The child soon carries over his plays into more or less 
ideal realms, lives in the company of imaginary persons, 
and thus, idealizing his social relations, idealizes also the 
type of his self-consciousness. In my inner life, I in the 
end learn ideally to repeat, to vary, to reorganize, and to 
epitomize in countless ways, the situations which I first 
learned to observe and estimate in literal social relations. 
Hereby the contrast between Ego and Alter, no longer 
confined to the relations between my literal neighbor and 
myself, can be refined into the conscious contrasts be- 
tween present and past Self, between my self-critical and 
my naive Self, between my higher and lower Self, or 
between my Conscience and my impulses. My reflec- 
tive life, as it empirically occurs in me from moment to 
moment, is a sort of abstract and epitome of my whole 
social life, viewed as to those aspects which I find pecul- 
iarly significant. And thus my experience of myself gets 
a certain provisional unity. But never do I observe my 
Self as any single and unambiguous fact of consciousness. 


LV: 


The empirical Ego has now been, in outline, charac- 
terized. The source of its endless varieties has been 


266 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


sketched. Its unity has been found to be not, in our 
present form of existence, a fact that gets anywhere fully 
presented, as a rationally determined whole of life or of 
meaning. The empirical unity of the Ego depends 
merely upon a certain continuity of our social and of 
our inner life of experience and memory. The most 
stable feature about the empirical Ego, is that sort of con- 
trast in which it stands to the social world, literal and ideal, 
in which we live. But precisely as here upon earth we 
have no abiding city, just so, in our present human form 
of consciousness, the Self is never presented except as a 
more or less imperfectly organized series of experiences, 
whose contrast with those of all other men fascinates us 
intensely, but whose final meaning can simply never be 
expressed in the type of experience which we men now 
have at our disposal. Were our life not hid in an infi- 
nitely richer and more significant life behind the veil, we 
who have once observed the essential fragmentariness of 
the empirical Ego would indeed have parted with our 
hope of a true Selfhood. 

But the two other types of conception of the Self re- 
main to be characterized. The one of these types, the 
second in our list of three, need detain us at this stage 
but little. The third type we shall at once so sketch as 
to define the momentous task that yet lies before us in 
our later lectures. 

The second type of the conceptions of the Ego consists 
of all those views which regard the Self as in some meta- 
physical sense a real being, without defining the true 
Being of this Self in strictly idealistic terms. Such con- 
ceptions of the human Self as an entity are numerous in 


THE HUMAN SELF 267 


the history of philosophy. Their classification and fur- 
ther characterization will receive attention in the next 
lecture. For the moment I may exemplify them by men- 
tioning as their most familiar examples, those views 
which conceive the human Self as, in some realistic sense, a 
distinct and independent entity. For such views the true 
Self is often essentially a Substance. Its individuality 
means that in essence it is separable, not only from the 
body, but from other souls. It preserves its unity despite 
the chaos of our experiences, just because in itself, and 
apart from all experience, it 7s One. It lies at the basis 
of our psychical life; and it must be sharply distin- 
guished from the series of the states of consciousness, 
and even from their empirical organization. It is the 
source of all the order of our mental life; and all our 
self-consciousness is a more or less imperfect indication 
of its nature. 

Such realistic views are well known to you. And 
you also know now why, without showing the least dis- 
respect to their historical dignity, I can and must simply 
decline to follow them into their details in these lec- 
tures. They are all founded upon the realistic concep- 
tion of Being. They must therefore all fall with that 
conception. Their true spirit indeed is often of far 
deeper moment than their mere letter. What doctrines 
of Soul-Substance have often meant to express, namely, 
a respect for human individuality, and an appreciation 
of its eternal worth in the life of the Universe, our own 
theory of the human individual will erelong develope 
in its own fashion. But taken literally, the doctrine 
that beneath or behind our conscious life there is a 


é 


268 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


permanent substance, itself never either presented or 
presentable in consciousness, but real, and real in such 
wise that its Being is independent of any knowledge 
that from without refers to it, —this whole doctrine, I 
say, simply perishes, for the purposes of our argument, 
together with Realism, and only its revised and purified 
inner meaning can reappear, in quite another guise, in 
the world of Idealism. Whatever the Self is, it is not 
a Thing. It is not, in Aristotle’s or in Des Cartes’ 
sense, a Substance. It is not a realistic entity of any 
type. Whether we men ever rightly come to know it 
or not, it exists only as somewhere known, and as a part 
of the fulfilment of meaning in the divine life. We 
are spared the trouble of proving this thesis here in 
detail, simply because our general proof of Idealism 
has discounted the entire issue. We are not comdemn- 
ing Realism unheard; but only after the most careful 
analysis of its claims. But with Realism passes away 
every view which regards the real Self as anything but 
what every real fact in the universe is: A Meaning 
embodied in a conscious life, present as a relative whole 
within the unity of the Absolute life. 

Well, there remains the third type of conception of 
the Self, namely, the strictly idealistic type. And pre- 
cisely this type it was that I exemplified before, when 
I spoke of the way in which the Self has been distin- 
guished, even by common sense, into a higher and a 
lower, a nobler and a baser Self. As stated in ordinary 
fashion, such concepts, as we saw, remain crude, and 
lead to frequent inconsistency. Revised with reference 
to the demands of our Idealism, the concept of the 


THE HUMAN SELF 269 


Self will assume a form which will reduce to unity 
these apparent inconsistencies of ethical common sense, 
and will also escape from bondage to those empirical 
complexities forced upon us by the Ego of the passing 
moment. We shall then see that the concept of the indi- 
vidual Self is, in its higher forms, in large measure an 
essentially Ethical Conception. And the third type of 
conceptions of the Ego consists of definitions which 
have always laid stress upon just this aspect. From 
this point of view, the Self is not a Thing, but a 
Meaning embodied in a conscious life. Its individual- 
ity, in case of any human being, implies the essential 
uniqueness of this life. Its unity, transcending as it 
does what we ever find presented in our present type 
of consciousness, implies that the true individual Self 
of any man gets its final expression in some form of 
consciousness different from that which we men now 
possess. The empirical variety, complexity, ambiguity, 
and inconsistency of our present consciousness of the 
Self, is to be explained as due to the fact that, in the 
moral order of the universe, no individual Self is or 
can be isolated, or in any sense sundered from other 
Selves, or from the whole realm of the inner life of 
Nature itself. Consequently, even what is most indi- 
vidual about the Self never appears except in the closest 
connection with what transcends both the meaning and 
the life of the finite individual. Now, in our present 
form of conscious existence, we catch mere glimpses of 
the true meaning of the individual Self, as this meaning 
gets expressed in our deeds and in our ideals, and we 
also obtain equally fragmentary glimpses of the way in 


270 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


which this Self is linked to the lives of its fellows, 
or is dependent for its expression upon its relations to 
Nature, or is subject to the general moral order of the 
universe. These various transient flashes of insight 
constitute our present type of human experience. And 
it is their variety, their manifoldness, and their frag- 
mentariness, which together are responsible for all those 
inconsistencies in our accounts of the Self, — incon- 
sistencies which our present discussion has been illus- 
trating. But if you want to free yourself from hopeless 
bondage to such inconsistencies, you must look, not to 
some realistic conception of a Soul-Substance, but to 
some deeper account of the ethical meaning of our 
present life than we have yet formulated. And from 
this point of view we get a notion of Selfhood and of 
individuality which may be summarized at the present 
stage much as follows. 

Our general idealistic theory asserts that the universe 
in its wholeness is the expression of a meaning in a life. 
What this view implies about every fragment and aspect 
of life that your attention may chance to select, or that 
your human experience may bring before you as the topic 
of inquiry, we have in former lectures repeatedly pointed 
out. Any instant of finite consciousness partially embod- 
ies a purpose, and so possesses its own Internal Meaning. 
Any such instant of finite consciousness also seeks, how- 
ever, for other expression, for other objects, than are now 
present to just that instant, and so possesses what we 
have called its External Meaning. Our Idealism has de- 
pended, from the first, upon the thesis that the Internal 
and the External meaning of any finite process of experi- 


THE HUMAN SELF 271 


ence are dependent each upon the other, so that if the 
whole meaning and intent of any finite instant of life is 
fully developed, and perfectly embodied, this Whole 
Meaning of the instant becomes identical with the Uni- 
verse, with the Absolute, with the life of God. Even 
now, whatever you are or seek, the implied whole mean- 
ing of even your blindest striving is identical with the 
entire expression of the divine Will. And it is in this 
aspect of the world that we have found the unity of 
Being. On the other hand, as we have also seen, this 
unity of the world-life is no simple unity, such as the 
mystic sought. It is an infinitely complex unity. And 
of this complexity, of this wealth of life that the com- 
plete expression of even your most transient and finite 
glimpses of meaning implies, — the foregoing facts about 
the Self are merely instances. If you are in company 
with a friend, the whole meaning of your thoughts and 
of your interests while you speak with him, not only 
requires for its complete expression his inner life as well 
as yours, and not only requires the genuine and conscious 
unity of his life and of yours by virtue of the ties of 
your friendship; but this same meaning also demands 
that, despite this unity of your life as friends, — yes, even 
because of this unity, your friend and yourself shall 
remain also contrasted lives, whose unity includes and 
presupposes your variety as these two friends. For a 
friendship is not a simple unity of conscious life, but the 
unity of two conscious lives each of which contrasts itself 
with the other, and feels in the other’s relative indepen- 
dence the fulfilment of its own purpose. And just so, 
when your meaning is not friendly but hostile, and when 


272 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


you stand in presence of your opponent, your rival, your 
enemy, your finite conscious meaning still implies, even 
in the midst of all its confused illusions, the demand that 
the very life of your enemy shall exist as the expression 
of your hostile intent to hold him as your real enemy, 
while nevertheless this life of his, other than your 
present conscious experience, and linked with your expe- 
rience through the ties of meaning, is contrasted with 
your own life as the life that yours opposes and in so far 
seeks either to win over to your purposes, or to annul. 
Finite love and finite hate, and human experience of life 
in any form, always imply, therefore, that the will now 
present, but imperfectly expressed, in this passing instant, 
is genuinely expressed through other conscious life that, 
from the Absolute point of view, is at once in conscious 
unity with this instant’s purpose, and also in conscious 
contrast with this instant’s purpose. 

Primarily then, the contrast of Self and not-Self comes 
to us as the contrast between the Internal and the Exter- 
nal meaning of this present moment’s purpose. In the 
narrowest sense, the Self is just your own present im- 
perfectly expressed pulsation of meaning and purpose, — 
this striving, this love, this hate, this hope, this fear, 
this inquiry, this inner speech of the instant’s will, this 
thought, this deed, this desire, —in brief, this idea taken 
as an Internal Meaning. In the widest sense, the not-Self 
is all the rest of the divine whole of conscious life, — the 
Other, the outer World of expressed meaning taken as in 
contrast with what, just at this instant of our human form 
of consciousness, is observed, and, relatively speaking, pos- 
sessed. Any finite idea is so far a Self; and I can, if you 


THE HUMAN SELF 273 


please, contrast my present Self with my past or my 
future Self, with yesterday’s hopes or with to-morrow’s 
deeds, quite as genuinely as with your inner life or with 
the whole society of which I am a member, or with the 
whole life of which our experience of Nature is a hint, 
or, finally, with the life of God in its entirety. In every 
such case, I take account of a true contrast between Self 
and not-Self. All such contrasts have a common charac- 
ter, namely, that in them an imperfectly expressed will is 
set over against its own richer expression, while stress is 
laid upon the fact, —a perfectly genuine fact of Being, — 
the fact that the whole expression always retains, and does 
not merely absorb or transmute, the very contrast between 
the finite Self and its desired or presupposed Other, — its 
world of External Meanings. But if you ask how many 
such contrasts can be made, I reply, An infinite number. 
In countless ways can the Self of this instant’s glimpse of 
conscious meaning be set into contrast with the not-Self, 
whose content may be the life of past and future, of 
friends and of enemies, of the social order and of Nature, 
of finite life in general, and of God’s life in its wholeness. 

But if the contrast of Self and not-Self can thus be 
defined with an infinite variety of emphasis, the unity of 
each of the two, Self and not-Self, can be emphasized 
in an equally infinite number of ways, whose depth and 
whose extent of meaning will vary with the range of 
life of which one takes account, and with the sort of 
contrast between Self and not-Self which one leaves still 
prominent over against the unity. Thus, in the familiar 
case of our ordinary social self-consciousness, I first view 
a certain realm of past and future experience as so bound 


T 


274 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


up with the internal meaning of this instant’s conscious 
experience, that I call this temporal whole of life the life 
of my own human Self, while I contrast this private 
existence of mine with that of my friends, my opponents, 
or of my other fellows, or with that of human society in 
general. The motives that lead to such an identification 
of the Self of the instant with a certain portion of that 
which is the instant’s not-Self, namely, with a certain 
portion of past and future experience, are, as we have 
seen, extremely various, and in our empirical existence, 
both fickle and transitory. Whoever believes that he 
has any one rational principle for his usual identification 
of his past and future with the Self of this instant, has 
only to consider the psychological variations of self- 
consciousness before enumerated to discover his error. 
What will remain, after such an examination of the Self 
of common sense, will be the really deep and important 
persuasion that he ought to possess or to create for himself, 
despite this chaos, some one principle, some finally signifi- 
cant contrast, whereby he should be able, with an united 
and permanent meaning, to identify that portion of the 
world’s life which is to be, in the larger sense, his own, 
and whereby he should become able to contrast with this, 
his larger Self, all the rest of the world of life. 

And now this very consideration, this fact that one 
ought to be able to select from all the universe a certain 
portion of remembered and expected, of conceived and of 
intended life as that of his own true and individual Self, 
and that one ought to contrast with this whole of life, 
with this one’s larger or truer individuality, the life of all 
other individual Selves, amd the life of the Absolute in 


THE HUMAN SELF Zio 


its wholeness, —this consideration, I say, shows us at 
once the sense in which the Self is an Ethical Category. 
At this instant, as I have said, you can indeed identify 
the Self, if you please, with just the instant’s passing 
glimpse of Internal Meaning ; and in that case you can 
call all else the not-Self. To do this is to leave the 
Self a mere thrill of transient life, —a fragment whose 
deeper meaning is wholly external to itself. But you 
can, and in general you do, first identify a remembered 
past, and an intended future, with the Self whose indi- 
viduality is just now hinted to you; and this enlarged 
self of memory and purpose you then oppose to a not- 
Self whose content is first the world of your fellow-men, 
and then the world of Nature and of the Absolute in its 
wholeness. Now what justification have you for this 
view of your larger Self? Apart from the capricious 
and shifting views of common sense, you can have, I 
reply, but one justification, namely this: You regard this 
present moment’s life and striving as a glimpse of a 
certain task now assigned to you, the task of your life as 
friend, as worker, as loyal citizen, or in general as man, 
z.e. as one of God’s expressions in human form. You 
conceive that, however far you might proceed towards the 
fulfilment of this task, however rich this individual life of 
yours might become, it would always remain, despite its 
unity with the world-life, in some true sense contrasted 
with the lives of your fellows, and with the life of God, 
just as now you stand in contrast to both. While your 
whole meaning is now, and will always remain one with the 
entire life of God, you conceive that this whole meaning 
expresses itself in the form of an articulate system of 


276 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


contrasting and codperating lives, of which one, namely 
your own individual life, is more closely linked, in 
purpose, in task, in meaning, with the life of this in- 
stant, than is the life of any other individual. Or as you 
can say: “At this instant I am indeed one with God, in 
the sense that in him my own absolute Selfhood is ex- 
pressed. But God’s will is expressed in a manifold life. 
And this life is a system of contrasted lives that are 
various even by virtue of their significant union. For 
true unity of meaning is best manifested in variety, just 
as the most intimate and wealthy friendship is that of 
strongly contrasting friends. And in the manifold lives 
that the world in its unity embodies, there is one, and 
only one, whose task is here hinted to me as my task, my 
life-plan, —an ideal whose expression needs indeed the 
cooperation of countless other Selves, of a social order, of 
Nature, and of the whole universe, but whose individual 
significance remains contrasted with all other individual 
significance. If this is my task, if this is what my past 
life has meant, if this is what my future is to fulfil, if it is 
in this way that I do God’s work, if my true relation to 
the Absolute is only to be won through the realization of 
this life-plan, and through the accomplishment of this 
unique task, then indeed I am a Self, and a Self who is 
nobody else, just precisely in so far as my life has this 
purpose and no other. By this meaning of my life-plan, 
by this possession of an ideal, by this Intent always to re- 
main another than my fellows despite my divinely planned 
unity with them, — by this, and not by the possession of any 
Soul-Substance, I am defined and created a Self.” 

Such, Tsay, will be your confession, if once you come 


THE HUMAN SELF DAT T 


to define the Self in the only genuine terms, — namely, 
in ethical terms. If once you choose this definition, 
then the endless empirical varieties of self-consciousness, 
and the caprices of common sense, will not confuse 
you. You will know that since now we see through a 
glass darkly, you cannot expect at present to experience 
your human selfhood in any one consistent and final 
expression. But, too, you will know that you are a 
Self precisely in so far as you intend to accomplish 
God’s will by becoming one; and that you are an indi- 
vidual precisely in so far as you purpose to do your 
Father’s business in unique fashion, so that in this instant 
shall begin a work that can be finished only in eternity, 
—a work that, however closely bound up it may be 
with all the rest of the divine life, still remains in 
its expression distinguishable from all this other life. 
You will indeed recognize that at every moment you 
receive from without, and from other Selves, the very 
experiences that give your Selfhood a chance to possess 
its meaning. You will know that of yourself alone 
you would be nothing. You will also know that as 
co-worker with your fellows, and as servant of God, 
you have a destiny of which our present life gives us 
but the dimmest hint. 

This is in outline, the doctrine of the ethical Self, to 
whose development and defence our later lectures shall 
be devoted. 


LECTURE VII 


ee a ee 


—s 


<= * 


ek ee 


> ae, 


LECTURE VII 
THE PLACE OF THE SELF IN BEING 


In the last lecture, after a study of the various forms 
which our empirical self-consciousness assumes, we reached 
an idealistic definition of what we mean by an individual 
human Self, regarded as a Real Being. During the 
present lecture I shall, by the term Self, denote, unless 
I expressly declare to the contrary, the human Self, as 
thus defined, and not the Absolute Self as the Absolute. 

In the present lecture I propose, first, to make some 
further comparison of our theory of the Self with doc- 
trines that have been maintained in the history of 
thought, and in this connection to develope our own 
thesis more fully. Secondly, I shall undertake to 
consider the relation of our theory of the individual 
to that Interpretation of Nature which we expounded 
in our Fourth Lecture, and to discuss the sense 
in which, from our point of view, new individuals 
can appear in the course of natural evolution. Thirdly, 
I intend to consider briefly the question as to the 
degree to which the Self is causally determined, as 
to its experience and its will, by its relations to the 
natural order. Finally, I shall discuss the sense in 
which the individual Self can possess ethical Freedom, 


in view of its relation to the divine Will. 
281 


» 


282 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


I 


Historically, there are theories of the Self which cor- 
respond to each of the four conceptions of Being. 
And in the first place, ever since the doctrine of the 
Sankhya, that classic instance of early Realism, realistic 
Metaphysic has been an especially wealthy source of 
various theories of the Self. Not always has Realism 
taken the form of the Soul-Substance theory, although, 
as we saw at the last time, that theory itself is a typical 
instance of Realism, and is an especially frequent in- 
stance of the realistic view of the Self. But any theory 
of the Self uses the realist’s conception of Being, in 
case this theory views the Self as logically or essentially 
independent, in its innermost nature, of the fact that 
other Selves exist, so that you could conceive other 
Selves vanishing, while this Self still remained, in 
some innermost core of its Being, unaltered. Leibniz’s 
Monads are realistic selves; and very frequently the 
extremer forms of ethical individualism, in order to 
preserve the dignity, or the freedom, or the rights of 
the Self, have chosen to use a realistic formulation. 
When thus defined by the more ethical types of indi- 
vidualistic Realism, the Self seems to stand, within its 
own realm, as a sort of absolute authority, over against 
any external will or knowledge that pretends to deter- 
mine its nature, or its precise limits, or its meaning. 
It is merely what its own substantial nature determines 
it to be. It is thus a separate entity, in its essence 
unapproachable, in some sense, by God or man, uncon- 
querable, possessing perhaps its own inalienable rights, 


THE PLACE OF THE SELF iN BEING 283 


the unit of all ethical order, the centre of its own uni- 
verse. From this point of view, the principal problem, 
for any such realistic Individualism, always becomes the 
question how this Self, whose interests are essentially 
its own, can rationally come to recognize any responsi- 
bility to other Selves or to God, or to any absolute 
Ought, beyond its own caprice. Just because, within 
its own realm, it is whatever it is in entire indifference 
to whether you from without know it or not; or to 
whether your external will approves it or not; the 
problem at once arises as to why this Self should, in 
its turn, recognize any authority. In its knowl- 
edge of Being, the independent Self of any theoreti- 
cal form of Realism, when once the independence of 
this individual Self has come to be recognized, tends 
to become, in extreme cases, solipsistic. But in its 
morality, this same Self, in equally extreme forms of 
ethical Realism, tends to become an anarchist.! If, in 
such extreme and less common forms, Realism, untrue 
to its usual historical tendencies, throws off its usual 
and respectable conservatism, that is merely because, 
in general, extremes easily meet, and because, in the 
special case of the theory of the Self, Realism deals 
with a test problem which is peculiarly apt to bring 
out its deeper inconsistencies. About the world ex- 
ternal to all our human Selves, Realism, as it appears 


1 Max Stirner’s Der Hinzige und Sein Higenthum is in the main an 
example of this type of treatment of the Self. Nietzsche’s conception, 
however, cannot properly be placed here in view of the idealistic element 
which, as I think, can justly be recognized in his conception of the 
individual. 


we 


284 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


in history, is typically submissive, respectable, and con- 
servative, just because it is dealing unreflectively with 
an unapproachable and absolute Reality beyond our own 
life. But so soon as Realism attempts to apply its 
categories to the realm within, where its unreflective 
methods are decidedly not at home, it does not, indeed, 
become less dogmatic than usual, and not the less dis- 
posed to cite tradition, and to hurl its customary patho- 
logical epithets at its opponents, but it becomes more 
manifestly unable, when once it has defined any one 
of its Independent Beings, to say what link or tie, what 
law or reason, what obligation or responsibility, can 
ever bind this Independent Being to any other. Hence 
the dogmatic anarchists of the history of ethics are 
often realists in their theory of the Self. 

As to the Mystical theory of the Self, we have 
already followed to the end its account of the problem 
of life. The Self is the Absolute, the Absolute is simple, 
and there is neither variety of individuals, nor form nor 
law of life left. The only word as to the true Self is 
the Hindoo’s Netz, Neti. Consequently Mysticism simply 
condemns all finite individuality as an evil dream. 

Modern Critical Rationalism also has its own accounts 
of the Self. These again are manifold. But the Third 
Conception of Being in general, as we have all along 
seen, is both reflective and widely observant; and _ its 
theories of the Self have, in most cases, their large 
measure of truth. For Critical Rationalism the Self is 
no independent entity, nor any mere experience, but a 
being whose reality involves the validity of a system 
of laws and relationships. These laws may be viewed 


THE PLACE OF THE SELF IN BEING 285 


in their psychological aspect. In this sense my Self 
extends as far as my possible memories, or expectations, 
or definable plans hold valid for the empirical region 
called my human life. And my existence as a Self 
means merely that these laws of my memory, of my 
will, and of my personal experience are valid as long 
as I live. Or the laws in question may be viewed as 
those of an ethical interpretation of life. In this case, 
by the Self, Critical Rationalism means a being defined 
in the terms of a certain valid system of laws about 
the rights and the duties of persons. The Self, in the 
view of such theories, does not first exist as an Inde- 
pendent Being and then either originate, or else acquire, 
as an external addition, its system of rights and of 
duties. But, for Critical Rationalism, the ethical Self 
is defined and exists only through the prior recognition 
of these valid rights and duties themselves. Whoever 
has not learned to recognize his office in the world, as 
a subject of the moral law, or as a member of a social 
order, is therefore no ethical Self at all. But whoever 
is a Self, is such by virtue of this recognized validity 
of law. In the history of recent thought the Kantian 
conception of the Self, apart from its realistic elements, 
is, in its consequences, essentially of this third type. 
Kant’s knowing Self exists, from our human point of 
view, precisely in so far as the Categories, which express 
its unity in the realm of experience, are valid. Its 
existence as the Subject of Knowledge, so far as we 
can know it, thus becomes coextensive with the range 
of such validity. Kant’s ethical Self exists as the free 
recognizer of the Moral Law. And in Fichte, who 


986 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


purged Kant’s doctrine of its realistic elements, this 
view of the Self especially comes to light, and contends 
with the purely idealistic tendencies of Fichte. For 
Fichte, the Self, although the very principle of Being, 
rather ought to be than is. 

Now the truth, and the practical value of every such 
doctrine, lies in the fact that it recognizes the valid rela- 
tions of the Self, and the laws which bind the Self to its 
fellows, as conditions without which the Self can neither 
exist nor be conceived. The defect of Critical Rational- 
ism lies in the consequences of its essentially abstract and 
impersonal view of Being. ‘The Self, in this sense, is a law 
rather than a life; and a type of existence rather than an 
Individual. It is precisely the restoration of individual- 
ity to the Self which constitutes the essential deed of 
our Idealism. For us the Self has indeed no Independent 
Being; but it is a life, and not a mere valid law. It 
gains its very individuality through its relation to God ; 
but in God it still dwells as an individual; for it is an 
unique expression of the divine purpose. And since the 
Self is precisely, in its wholeness, the conscious and 
intentional fulfilment of this divine purpose, in its own 
unique way, the individual will of the Self is not wholly 
determined by a power that fashions it as clay is fashioned 
and that is called God’s will; but, on the contrary, what 
the Self in its wholeness wills is, just in so far, God’s will, 
and is identical with one of the many expressions implied 
by a single divine purpose, so that, for the reasons already 
set forth, in general, in the closing lecture of the fore- 
going series, the Self is in its innermost individuality, not 
an independent, but still a Free Will, which in so far 


THE PLACE OF THE SELF IN BEING 287 


owns no external Master, despite its unity with the whole 
life of God, and despite its dependence in countless ways 
upon Nature and upon its fellows, for everything except 
the individuality and uniqueness of its life. 

Meanwhile, I cannot too strongly insist that, in our 
present form of human consciousness, the true Self of any 
individual man is not a datum, but an ideal. It is true 
that people at first very naturally, and often very resent- 
fully, reject this interpretation. “Do I not directly 
know,” one insists, “that I am and who I am?” [I 
answer : You indeed know, although never in a merely 
direct way, that you exist. But in the present life you 
never find out, in terms of any direct experience, what 
you are. I know that I am, as this individual human 
Self, only in so far as every Internal Meaning, that of my 
present experience included, sends me elsewhere, or to 
some Other, for its complete interpretation, while this 
particular sort of Internal Meaning, such as gets expressed 
in the Cartesian cogito ergo sum, the meaning whereby I 
come to be aware of myself as this individual different 
from the rest of the world, implies and demands, for its 
complete embodiment, some sort of contrast between Self 
and not-Self. Iam assured of myself, then, only in so far 
as I am assured of the Nature of Being in general. I am 
indeed right in thus contrasting Self and not-Self; but 
my certainty regarding the Being of this contrast depends 
upon the same general assurances that lead to my whole 
metaphysical view of the nature of Reality. 

And now as to the finding out what I am, the answer 
to this question involves, upon its empirical side, all the 
complications and inconsistencies of common sense which 


288 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


we set forth at the last time. If you take me merely as 
common sense views me, I am, from moment to moment, 
whatever social experience or lonely reflection makes me 
seem. Iam, so far, whatever my empirical contrast with 
you, with society in general, with those whom I love, or 
with those against whom I contend,—I am, in brief, 
whatever my remembered or anticipated powers, fortunes, 
and plans, cause me to regard with emphasis as myself in 
contrast with the rest of the world. There is no instant 
in our human experience when I can say, Here I have not 
merely assumed, or presupposed, or conceived, but actu- 
ally found in experience the Self, so that I here observe 
what I finally am. 

In what way then can I just now rationally define my- 
self as this actually unique and real person? Already 
we have seen, in general, the answer to this question. 
The Self can be defined in terms of an Ideal. If we ask 
a man to observe once for all what he now is, we call his 
attention to various empirical accidents of his life, — to 
his bodily presence, to his organic sensations, to his name, 
to his social status, and to his memories of the past. But 
none of these are of any uniquely determined significance; 
and not thus can we show a man what he is. But when, 
in vexation at the moral ineffectiveness of a man, we sig- 
nificantly use the imperative mood and say, “ Whatever 
you know or do not know about yourself, at all events be 
somebody,” — we lay stress upon what is, after all, the 
essential point. What we mean by our words is the ex- 
hortation: “Have a plan; give unity to your aims; 
intend something definite by your life; set before your- 
self one ideal.”” We conceive, in such cases, that the 


THE PLACE OF THE SELF IN BEING 289 


Self is definable in terms of purpose, of continuity of life- 
plan, and of voluntary subordination of chance experi- 
ences to a persistently emphasized ideal. If this ideal 
keeps the individual contrasted with other individuals, as 
the servant of these masters, or again as the servant, in 
some unique fashion, of God,—as the friend of these 
friends, as the teacher of these pupils, as the fellow- 
worker with these comrades, then the Self which we have 
defined is the Self of an individual man. It is in so far 
not to be confounded with their selves just because the 
ideal, if expressed in a life, would be expressed in con- 
stant contrast with these other lives. Our idealistic 
theory teaches that all individual lives and plans and ex- 
periences win their unity in God, in such wise that there 
is, indeed, but one absolutely final and integrated Self, 
that of the Absolute. But our idealism also recognizes 
that in the one life of the divine there is, indeed, articu- 
lation, contrast, and variety. So that, while it is, indeed, 
true that for every one of us the Absolute Self is God, we 
still retain our individuality, and our distinction from one 
another, just in so far as our life-plans, by the very ne- 
cessity of their social basis, are mutually contrasting life- 
plans, each one of which can reach its own fulfilment only 
by recognizing other life-plans as different from its own. 
And if from the Absolute point of view, as well as from 
our own, every individual life that has the unity of a 
plan, takes its own unique place in the world’s life, 
then for God, as for ourselves, we various human beings 
live related lives, but still contrasting and various lives, 
each one of which is an individual life, connected 
within itself, but distinguishable from all the other lives, 


U 


290 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


precisely as our normal social consciousness makes us 
seem. 

But now, if my human Self can be defined in a single 
and connected fashion only in terms of such an ideal, we 
see at once that, in our present human life, no one life- 
plan ever gets both a precise definition and a complete 
embodiment; and, therefore, we can say, Never in the 
present life do we find the Self as a given and realized 
fact. It is for us an ideal. Its true place is in the eter- 
nal world, where all plans are fulfilled. In God alone do 
we fully come to ourselves. There alone do we know 
even as we are known. 

The conception of the Self thus sketched involves diffi- 
culties, and leaves special questions still to be answered, 
such as I should be the last to ignore. It was for the 
sake of meeting just such difficulties that our whole pre- 
vious discussion of the Theory of Being was required as 
a beginning of our enterprise; and that our Theory of 
Nature has also been needed as a preliminary to the 
study of the Self. In general we stated both these diffi- 
culties and their answers in dealing with the general 
problems of Being. But in defining the Self we have 
already recognized these general problems in a case where, 
owing to the complex natural relations of the Self, they 
possess peculiar significance. Nobody can deal with the 
problem of the Self upon the basis of the empirical facts 
about human selfhood without seeing, as we saw at the 
last time, that the Self is in the most intimate relation of 
dependence upon both natural and social conditions, for 
every one amongst its attributes that can be defined in 
general terms. It has an origin in time. It has an 


THE PLACE OF THE SELF IN BEING 291 


hereditary temperament. It is helpless to become any- 
thing apart from social training. And, if you remove 
from its inner consciousness the recognition of its rela- 
tions of contrast to its literal and to its more or less 
ideally conceived comrades, rivals, and authorities, it 
loses at any moment all that makes self-consciousness 
either worth having, or conceivable. Its whole ethical 
significance thus depends upon relations to God and to 
man which, in its capacity as finite being, it can only 
accept and cannot create. In all these senses the Self 
temporally appears as a product, a result, a determined 
creature of destiny. Remove from it the support of the 
world, and it instantly becomes nothing. Moreover, you 
in vain endeavor to save the independence of the Self by 
defining it as a Substance. For all the independence 
that it ever can even desire to have is a conscious inde- 
pendence, and to this a Soul-Substance contributes noth- 
ing. And if your consciousness is merely based upon an 
existence which lies beneath the consciousness, and which 
never comes to light as your own present will and mean- 
ing, you gain nothing but a name when this unobserved 
substratum of your personality is called your Soul. The 
Cartesian res cogitans is significant precisely in so far as 
it is the name for a rational thinking process, but not in 
so far as it isa res. What you want, however, for your 
Self, is conscious meaning, conscious individuality, and 
conscious freedom. And the problem is, in view of your 
unquestionable dependence upon the world for all your 
endowments, How shall you win this conscious mean- 
ing and freedom and individuality ; and how is it possi- 
ble that in any sense you should possess them? Now it 


292 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


is precisely these questions that our Idealism undertakes 
to answer. 

From our point of view, your distinction from the 
rest of the universe, your contrast with other selves, 
your uniqueness, your freedom, your individuality, all 
depend upon one essential principle. This world that 
we live in is, in its wholeness, the expression of one 
determinate and absolute purpose, the fulfilment of the 
divine will. This fulfilment is unique, just because, in 
the world as a whole, the divine accomplishes its pur- 
pose, attains its goal, finds in absolute dominateness 
what it seeks, and therefore will have no other world 
than this. Now for this very reason, since the world in 
its wholeness is unique, every portion of this whole life, 
every fragment of experience, every pulsation of will 
in the universe, every intent anywhere partially em- 
bodied, is, by virtue of its relation to this unique 
whole, also unique, — but unique precisely in so far as 
it is related to the whole, and not in so far as you 
abstract its various features and endowments from their 
relation to God, and view them in finite relations. 
Taken apart from its relation to the whole, the finite 
fragment appears as something more or less incompre- 
hensible, and therefore as something more or less vaguely 
general, —a mere case of a type, a member of a series — 
a temporal expression of dissatisfied will, —a fact that 
seeks for other facts to explain it,—a bit of experience 
subject to various psychological laws,—a sort of life 
that can be interpreted now in this way, and now in 
that, just as, at the last time, we found the Self subject 
to the most varying interpretations and estimates. 


THE PLACE OF THE SELF IN BEING 293 


Yet fear not to find in what manifold ways your 
life depends upon Nature and Society. It depends 
upon them for absolutely all of its general characters. 
That is, whatever character it shares with others, implies 
dependence upon others. If it did not so depend, it 
would have no intimate share in the common life. 
But its dependence means precisely that it derives 
from the other lives everything except its uniqueness, 
— everything except its individual fashion of acknowledg- 
ing and taking interest in this its very dependence, and of 
responding thereto by its deeds. When, as man, you take 
your place amongst men, you thus derive all of your 
life from elsewhere, except in so far as your life becomes 
for you your own way of viewing your relation to the 
whole, and of actively expressing your own ideal re- 
garding this relation. This your own way of expressing 
God’s will is not derived. It is yourself. And it is 
yours because God worketh in you. The Spirit of God 
in its wholeness compels you,—the individual, the 
Self, the unique personality, in the sense that it com- 
pels you to be an individual, and to be free. Or it 
compels your individual will only in so far as you 
consciously compel yourself. 

You indeed find then, as Goethe found in his well- 
known verses about heredity, that your dependence on 
the rest of the world extends to every character of 
your nature, precisely in so far as you can define such 
a character in general terms. Your temperament you 
derived from your ancestors, your training from your 
social order. Your opinions, as definable ideas, belong 
to many of your neighbors also. Your consciousness 


294 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


of yourself, from moment to moment, depends upon 
social contrast effects, and varies with them. But your 
purpose, your life-plan, just so far as it possesses true 
rationality of aim, is the purpose to find for yourself 
just your own place in God’s world, and to fill that 
place, as nobody else can fill it. Now this purpose, I 
maintain, is indeed your own. As nobody else can 
share it, so nobody else can create it; and from no 
source external to yourself have you derived it. And 
this I say on the sole ground that in you, precisely in 
so far as you know the world as one world, and intend 
your place in that one world to be unique, God's will is 
consciously expressed. And his will is one, and in that 
will every life finds its own unique meaning. Hence 
our theory of the Self assigns to it the character of the 
Free Individual but maintains that this character belongs 
to it in its true relation to God, and cannot be observed, 
at any one instant of time, as an obvious and independent 
fact. 


II 


But herewith, having defined what general Form of 
Being the Self possesses, we come to a question that in 
the former lecture was kept in the background, although 
it lay very near tous. This is the question as to the 
precise relation of our present doctrine about the indi- 
vidual human Self to our general theory of the process 
of Evolution in Nature. If the individual is, within the 
range of our experience, already known as a product of 
Nature, and of his social relations, by so much the more 
must his temporal origin, in those aspects of it which 


THE PLACE OF THE SELF IN BEING 295 


escape our direct observation, be viewed as a portion of 
the vast activities that are hinted to us by our experience 
of Nature in general. Therefore an effort to bring our 
theory of the Self into closer relation to our former 
interpretation of the process of evolution, must form at 
once the culmination of our doctrine about Nature and 
a sort of test of our views as to the Self. To such an 
effort we are now ready to proceed. 

As has now been sufficiently shown, a frank admission 
of the natural origin of the Self, and a study of its rela- 
tions to the physical world, in no sense involves an aban- 
donment of the idealistic point of view. That the world 
is the expression of my will, and that nevertheless there 
has been an infinite past time in which I, the human 
individual, did not exist may indeed seem at first a 
hard saying. But our discussion of the general Categories 
of Experience, our idealistic theory of Time, and our por- 
trayal of the contrast between the private Self of the 
human individual and the Absolute Self in its wholeness, — 
all these preliminaries have cleared the way for an under- 
standing of every such difficulty. In dealing with the 
categories of the Ought, we saw how and why it is always 
my will as this human being to acknowledge what is 
other than the present temporal expression of my will. 
In our doctrine of Time, we reconciled the fact of our 
acknowledgment of a remote past time with our assur- 
ance that all temporal facts are at once present to the 
Absolute. In our development of the concept of the 
human Self, we have shown that we ourselves demand 
the other individuals, as the very condition of our ex- 
istence in the Absolute, and that through a wealth of 


296 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


individuality other than our own, and only through such 
variety, is our own life-purpose to be attained. Just as 
my opponent in a game embodies my will to play with 
him by opposing me, and gives me an opportunity to be 
myself through the very fact that he expresses my will 
in the form of a selfhood whose particular plans are uncon- 
trolled by my private will, while mine are in part uncon- 
trolled by his, —so in general, the private Self is this 
Self only through contrast with and dependence upon 
others ; and finds its complete Selfhood embodied in other 
individual life than its own. Moreover, in order that my 
private will should at this temporal instant form a definite 
plan, I must always presuppose some world of completed 
fact as the basis of my present deed; and the realm of 
that which is viewed as the so far completed expression of 
the Will, is the temporally Past. The Past too, in its 
own way, embodies my present will, but embodies it by 
virtue of the very fact that the Past is the realm of the 
irrevocable, which I am therefore able to presuppose as a 
fixed starting-point in forming every new plan. The 
manifold dependence of my present will upon the social, 
natural, and temporal order, is thus not only matter of 
fact, but also a requirement of our idealism. 


III 


Meanwhile, in order to give full expression to our 
hypothesis regarding the temporal evolution of new forms. 
of individual selfhood, it will be necessary first to recall 
some features of our doctrine of the sense in which the 
Absolute includes a variety of lives, and possesses a 


THE PLACE OF THE SELF IN BEING 297 


temporal expression at all. Only then can we see in 
detail how what we call novel forms of life can arise in 
time. 

In our criticism of Mysticism, in the former Series of 
these lectures) we pointed out that a goal which is “a 
goal of no real process, has as little value as it has con- 
tent, as little Being as it has finitude.” Ever since, in 
defining the Absolute from our own point of view, we have 
indeed declared it to be a goal, —i.e. a fulfilment of pur- 
pose, but have also insisted that, corresponding to each 
result that is attained in the Absolute, there must also be, 
in the real world of the Absolute itself, a corresponding 
purpose or intent, which, just because it is fulfilled in the 
whole, is at the same time consciously distinguished, as a 
longing, — a pursuit, a finite idea, —from its own fulfil- 
ment. This consideration has constituted, throughout, 
the ground of our deduction of finitude,— our means of 
conceiving the union of the One and the Many in the 
unity of the Absolute Consciousness. or, as a con- 
sequence of this principle, the Absolute Life is definable, 
in the terms of our Supplementary Essay, as a Self-Rep- 
resentative System. Every fact in this system, namely, 
fulfils a purpose. The consciousness of this purpose is, 
however, a fact distinct from the fulfilment, and yet cor- 
respondent thereto; while, on the other hand, this con- 
sciousness itself, as a fact, belonging to the system of the 
Absolute, is in its own turn the fulfilment of another pur- 
pose, which is the consequence, in some degree, of another 
act that has led up to it; and so on ad infinitum. A con- 
sciousness of purpose, distinct from fulfilment, is, how- 

1Lecture V, p. 193. 


298 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


ever, when viewed by itself, a longing, a dissatisfaction, 
an incompleteness. Hence the Absolute Life includes an 
infinity of longings, each one of which, in so far as it is 
taken in itself, is a consciousness of imperfection and 
finitude seeking its relative fulfilment in some other finite 
act or state. Only through such consciousness is perfec- 
tion attainable. The only alternative here is Mysticism, 
and that is Nothingness. But, as our Supplementary 
Essay also showed,} any system that is self-representative 
in one way, is self-representative in countless other ways, 
and the consciousness of the system involved in each one 
of these ways of self-representation is therefore distinct 
from the consciousness involved in any of the others, since 
each way involves a series of voluntary strivings after a 
goal. In consequence, as the Supplementary Essay ? also 
pointed out, whoever conceives the Absolute as a Self, 
conceives it as in its form inclusive of an infinity of vari- 
ous, but interwoven and so of intercommunicating Selves, 
each one of which represents the totality of the Absolute 
in its own way, and with its own unity, so that the sim- 
plest conceivable structure of the Absolute Life would be 
stateable only in terms of an infinitely great variety of 
types of purpose and of fulfilment, intertwined in the 
most complex fashions. Apart from any doctrine of 
evolution, then, we have to regard the Absolute in its 
wholeness as comprising many Selves, in the most various 
interrelations. 

Now we must urgently insist that, when once we have 
recognized this variety of finite purposes, and of infinite sys- 


1See the former Series of these lectures, p. 515, sqq. 
2p, 546, 


THE PLACE OF THE SELF IN BEING 299 


tems consisting of finite purposes, within the Absolute, we 
are not at all obliged to assume, as many more or less ideal- 
istic systems have done, some further principle of blind 
self-differentiation within the Absolute as the ground of 
the separation or falling away of the finite beings from 
their divine source. Longing, considered as a fact other 
than fulfilment, is, indeed, in its own already distinguished 
nature, to any extent blind. But, by our hypothesis, long- 
ing exists 7m the Absolute Life, and as a significant portion 
thereof. Any temporal present, taking that word in the 
“inclusive” sense that was defined in our Third lecture 
of the present Series, contains, as we saw in discussing 
Time, just such an experience of finitude and of dissatis- 
faction. Now longing, in itself, means non-possession of 
the goal ; and the temporal instance shows us that the 
proposition: ‘To-day the ideal is sought for and not 
found,” is perfectly consistent with the proposition: ‘In 
eternity the ideal 7s found.” Nor is it necessary in the 
least to suppose that if the Absolute is possessed of the 
eternal point of view, and so is acquainted with the find- 
ing of the ideal which to-day is sought in vain, the Absolute 
is therefore not directly acquainted with the vain seeking , 
of to-day, or is no sharer therein. Rather, from our point 
of view, is the very reverse the necessary conclusion. In 
order to be possessed of the eternal knowledge of the attain- 
ment of the goal, the Absolute insight will actually include 
all that we experience when to-day we seek the goal in vain. 
For the Absolute insight then, as for our own, the seeking 
of the goal to-day will not be successful. Just this ill- 
success of the temporal instant will be the very condition 
of the success of the eternally expressed Will. For, as we 


300 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


have insisted, without longing, no attainment. Therefore 
the larger consciousness does not lose the conscious 
incompleteness of the lesser, but gives that, just as it is, 
its place in the completed whole. 

The unity of consciousness, even in our own narrow 
experience, gives us many instances where consciousness 
either spans in one moment the conflict between two 
opposing internal tendencies, or embraces in one act the 
contrasts of longing and fulfilment, of ignorance and 
knowledge, of defeat and victory. One who, to take a 
trivial instance, ‘expects the unexpected” (as a sensible 
man should in dealing with fortune), combines in one con- 
sciousness, at the moment when the surprising event 
occurs, the shock of knowing that event as surprising, and 
the little triumph of observing that, just because of its 
surprising character, it meets, in one aspect, his expecta- 
tions, because he had expected a surprise. Just such 
expectation of surprises constitutes one of the most cher- 
ished joys of the Christmas holidays ; and the children, as 
they fall upon the parcels which contain their presents 
and open these, have also an instant wherein their tem- 
poral span of consciousness, brief as it is, is long enough 
to embrace “ at once” (in the sense discussed in our third 
lecture) the contrast between ignorant suspense and 
delighted discovery. Now for them, just that is the 
supreme moment. And it is so because consciousness 
spans at once the suspense and the solution. Or again, if 
I have wandered long, thirsty, in a dry land, and find the 
spring, the most perfect experience is that in which, even 
while I still am full of thirst, I also drink the water for 
which I have soagonized and wandered. Or still again, 


THE PLACE OF THE SELF IN BEING 801 


a recent psychologist} has extensively illustrated the well- 
known thesis that part of the joy of play lies in the 
“bewusste Selbsttéuschung,” the “conscious self-decep- 
tion” of the player. The delights of the theatre are of 
this sort ; the plays of children and even of puppies and 
kittens, either exhibit, or at least suggest, the same state 
of mind. Now “conscious self-deception” is a state of 
mind that more or less definitely spans and includes 
ignorance and knowledge, blind belief and proud disbe- 
lief, in one act. It is only a petty bondage to conven- 
tional formulas, and in particular a purely formal and 
thoughtless use of the phraseology of the principle of con- 
tradiction, which makes some of us unwilling to recognize 
these normal complications that find place in the unity 
of even our own little consciousness. As a dramatic 
spectator, I can at once feel with Othello his own strong 
delusion, and also see with Iago the precise devices that 
are employed to deceive, and meanwhile, as spectator, can 
take my critical view of the whole situation. As reasoner, 
I can (in following the course of an indirect demonstra- 
tion) appreciate the force of an argument even while I 
refute it ; or can at once hold an opinion, viewed in its 
unreflective meaning, before my consciousness, even while 
I also reflect upon it, and so give it a new and a deeper 
import; or can think the meaning of the separate asser- 
tions contained in the antecedent and consequent of a 
hypothetical judgment, even while I hold in mind the 


1 Groos, in discussing the psychology of Play in his Spiele der Thiere and 
Spiele des Menschen. The term ‘‘bewusste Selbsttd@uschung ”’ Groos 
borrows from K. Lange. See Spiele der Thiere, p. 308; Spiele des 
Menschen, p. 164, sqq., p. 499, sqq. 


302 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


decidedly different meaning involved in their combination 
in the judgment itself. 

Now what these instances illustrate in our own narrow 
sort of consciousness, I apply, in universal terms, to the 
Absolute. I hold that all finite consciousness, just as tt is 
in us, —ignorance, striving, defeat, error, temporality, 
narrowness, —is all present from the Absolute point of view, 
but is also seen in unity with the solution of problems, the 
attainment of goals, the overcoming of defeats, the correction 
of errors, the final wholeness of temporal processes, the sup- 
plementing of all narrowness. 

Consequently, I see no reason, after once we have 
found that the Absolute, in order to be complete, must 
include finitude, to ask yet further, “ How then in us 
does the finitude come to seem to be sundered from the 
Absolute?” Finitude means a sense of sundering, but of 
a sundering that from the Absolute point of view, also 
involves union. We, by hypothesis, are aware of the 
longings and of the ignorance. The Absolute, which is 
our own very selfhood in fulfilment, is aware of all that 
we are aware of (7.e. of the longings and of the ignorance) 
and of the supplement also. If one persists in asking, 
“ But what has sundered us from the Absolute, and nar- 
rowed our consciousness as it is narrowed?” my only 
general answer is, Such narrowness must find its place 
within the Absolute life, in order that the Absolute should 
be complete. One needs then no new principle to explain 
why, as Plotinus asked, the souls fell away from God.! 
From the point of view of the Absolute, the finite beings never 
fall away. They are where they are, namely in and of 


1Plotinus, Znn., V, 1, at the beginning. 


THE PLACE OF THE SELF IN BEING 303 


the Absolute Unity. From their own point of view, they 
seem to have fallen away, because (as finite) they are the 
longing aspect, and not the final fulfilment of longing ; 
because they are partial ignorance, and not the fulfilment 
of knowledge; because they are the expression of an atten- 
tion to this and this, and not of that attention to the whole 
which, in the Absolute, is the corrective and the includer 
of their inattention ; and finally, because they are stages 
of a temporal process, while the Absolute is possessed of 
the inclusive eternal insight. The only general deduction 
of their existence is furnished by the fact that, unless they 
existed, the Absolute Will, which is also their own, could 
not be expressed. 

What we have said of the relation of the Absolute to 
the various included Individuals, applies also, within the 
world of the various Selves, to the relation in which any 
larger or including Individual Self stands to the lives of 
the Individuals which, from our point of view, are in- 
cluded within it. Thus, according to our account, every 
new Self that arises in time must find its place within 
the life of a larger and inclusive Selfhood. This larger 
Selfhood indeed permits the included Self, in some aspect 
of its nature, to become an Individual,—an image of 
the Absolute,—a will that takes its own individual atti- 
tude towards the world. Yet the including Self also in 
some measure predetermines the character of that which 
it includes, and limits the latter to a particular place 
in Being. In our Supplementary Essay we suggested, 
very inadequately, the variety of internally differentiated 
structure which any Self-Representative System involves. 
As a fact, any Self except the Absolute is included within 


304 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


the life of a richer Self, and in turn includes the lives of 
partial Selves within its own. The consciousness of the 
included Selves is indeed hereby limited to a particu- 
lar place in Being, and so constitutes only a particular 
type of consciousness. At any moment of time the con- 
sciousness that embodies a particular stage in the life and 
self-expression of any Individual, may therefore be limited 
to an explicit attention to certain facts only, —the “rest 
of the world” being known to this Individual, just then, 
only as the undifferentiated background of its conscious- 
ness. All such limitations will be expressible in the same 
general terms. The larger Selfhood involves the inclusion 
of the partial Selfhood. Therefore the partial Selfhood 
exists ; and one has not to explain by new principles why 
its consciousness at any temporal instant appears, from its 
own point of view, as cut off from that which includes it. 
It is cut off only in so far as it is indeed a partial form of 
consciousness, which, as this partial form, knows at any 
time so much of the whole world as just then expresses 
its stage of life-purpose. 

An explanation of the particular existence of this finite 
consciousness can be given therefore, only in one of two 
forms: first, in terms of universal principles, in so far as 
without just this finitude, the eternal purpose would not 
obtain the wealth of individual expression that it actually 
possesses; or, secondly, in terms of the particular rela- 
tions of each finite being, in so far as it is what it is in 
consequence of the presence in the world, and especially 
in the temporal Past, of other finite beings, whose nature 
and acts required some aspect of its own life as their 
resultant. 


oa ae 


THE PLACE OF THE SELF IN BEING 305 


Consequently, any effort to give an account of the tem- 
poral origin and evolution of any particular finite being, 
such as one of ourselves, must follow the second of these 
forms of explanation, and cannot undertake to give an 
account of the origin of all finitude. The question about 
the evolution of new forms of finite life then becomes this : 
What conditions of the previous finite life of the world 
explain why, just at this point, a new Self should begin to 
appear? Or again, to put the question a little more gen- 
erally, our former theory as to evolutien accepted the 
thesis that humanity, as a whole, has sprung from some 
non-human process of experience which, before our special 
type of selfhood appeared, was taking place in the natural 
world. This previous process, we have said, was no doubt 
in itself a conscious process, perhaps possessing a type of 
consciousness whose “temporal span” was more or less 
different from our own, just because its present interest 
was always expressed by a longer or shorter series of facts 
than we now at present take into account. But in any 
case it was not what we should have called a human pro- 
cess. How came it to give origin to a process of our type ? 
This is the sole question that any philosophical theory 
of the evolution of the Self can undertake to deal with. 

Our answer will take some such form as the following, 
—a form inevitably hypothetical, but consistent with the 
facts and theories which we now have at our disposal. 


IV 


Any form of finite selfhood, just in so far as it is 
definitely conscious of explicit relations to the divine 


x 


306 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


plan, tends, ipso facto, to express itself in an activity that 
accords with this plan, and that in consequence is one of 
the stages in that temporal process whereby the divine 
self-consciousness directly gets its own temporal embodi- 
ment.! Now since the divine plan of life, in its whole- 
ness, is a self-representative system of longings and 
attainments, where each act expresses some particular 
purpose, and accomplishes that purpose, and where to 
every particular fact there corresponds just the purpose 
that wins embodiment in this fact, the conscious temporal 
life of any being who is explicitly aware of his relations 
to God, who acts accordingly, and who sees his act attain- 
ing its goal, must be a Well-Ordered series of deeds and 
successes, where each step leads to the neat, where there is 
so far no wandering or wavering, where novelty results 
only from recurrent processes, and where plans, as a 
whole, do not change. We have already seen, especially in 
our Supplementary Essay, that the process of counting, 
dry and barren as it often seems, is for us, in our igno- 
rance, an admirable example of the mere Form of such a 
recurrent activity as a being in full control of his own 
rational processes and of his experience would carry out. 
For counting produces an endless and, for our reflective 
investigation, an endlessly baffling wealth of novelties, as 
the Theory of Numbers proves. And yet this divine 
wealth of truth is the product of the seemingly so uni- 
form, the unquestionably recurrent process, of counting 
again and again. Give to such a process the concrete 


1 The relation of this thesis to the problem of Free Will, and especially 
to the question whether the finite being is free to act counter to the divine 
plan, i.e. is free to sin, will find its place in the next lecture, 


THE PLACE OF THE SELF IN BEING 307 


content of a life of action in accordance with a principle, 
and in pursuit of ideals, —and then you would have, in 
the will that expressed itself in this life, a boundlessly 
wealthy source of constantly novel experience. Such 
would be the grade of life that we sometimes ascribe to 
an angel, —a life wherein one is always serving God, un- 
swervingly, and wherein one is nevertheless always doing 
something new, because at every stage (as in our own 
number-series) all that has gone before is presupposed in 
every new deed, and so secures the individuality of that 
deed. 

But now such a finite life as this is, from our point 
of view, indeed an ideal. We are not such finite 
beings as this. Nor do we concretely know of any 
such. The finite beings whom we acknowledge in the 
concrete, are always, at any temporal moment, such as 
they are by virtue of an inattention which at present 
blinds them to their actual relations to God and to one 
another. Their acts are limited by reason of this inat- 
tention. They are indeed, as finite beings, aware of 
the world as a whole, as that which they acknowledge, 
and as that to which they ought to react thus or thus. 
But neither their own will nor their plans of action 
are at the present temporal instant clear to them. 
They are also conscious, although imperfectly, of them- 
selves. And their imperfect self-consciousness does in- 
deed show itself in the form of activities which tend 
to become recurrent, but in a somewhat tentative way. 
Such partially recurrent activities constitute intelligent 
habits. Examples of such are: a planful searching after 
plans, a rational striving to become more concretely 


308 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


rational, and so on. But in such processes these beings 
are seeking further definition of their own life and 
powers. They are seeking themselves, — their own 
purposes, and the means to the execution of these pur- 
poses. Now that such imperfect finite beings should 
be found in God’s world at all, is explicable solely on 
the foregoing general grounds. Ignorance, error, striv- 
ing after selfhood, —these are significant, even if, when 
taken by themselves alone, unintelligible forms of experi- 
ence. They are, however, intelligible in their relation to 
the whole. If the divine life did not include them, 
it could not win the completion of their incompleteness, 
and so could not attain absolute perfection in the eternal 
world. We have here then to presuppose the occurrence 
of some such processes of a finite, that is of a longing, 
dissatisfied, incomplete type. What interests us here is 
simply the problem: given such forms of finite striving, 
how could new forms, new Selves, arise from them? 
What about their nature makes them fruitful of new 
types of individuality ? 

To this question, one may next respond with another, 
viz. What constitutes a new form of finite life and expe- 
rience,—a new sort of selfhood? And the answer 
here is: A new form of selfhood means simply the 
appearance (as in our own case), of a new type of inter- 
est in the world, in God, and in finding the way to self- 
expression. A new individual is thus never a new thing, 
but a new kind of life-purpose, finding unique indi- 
vidual embodiment in experience by means of definite 
acts. Now already, in following the development of 
the empirical Ego within the range of our human expe- 


THE PLACE OF THE SELF IN BEING 309 


rience, we have seen how a new sort of selfhood can 
arise. We have now only to generalize in order to see 
how a similar process can occur universally, and can 
lead to a transformation of finite consciousness in the 
direction of the evolution of new types. 


V 


It will be remembered that, in our second lecture, 
we saw how a finite consciousness is led to take a two- 
fold view of its relations to the world. In the case of 
our human interpretation of the nature of things, it 
was this twofold view that gave us the conception 
of the contrast between the World of Description and 
the World of Appreciation. We are at present no 
longer concerned with the doctrines or theories about 
the universe which may result, in any finite mind, from 
the emphasizing now of this and now of that aspect 
of the contrast here in question; but we are much in- 
terested in dwelling, for a moment, upon the fact that 
this double view of things, which the ignorance of a 
finite being may lead it to take, has, or tends to have, a 
very important influence upon the differentiation of new 
kinds of activity. We may remember how the idleness 
of the cat watching the squirrels reminded us of the con- 
templative absorption of the men of science in describing 
phenomena. We easily see how vast an indirect influence 
upon human life and conduct such absorption in the study 
of the World of Description has possessed. But there 
is still another aspect of the tendency here in question 
which we must at this point emphasize. 


310 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


In so far as a finite being conceives himself as already 
knowing enough, in general, for his purposes, he sets 
about attaining his goal by direct self-expression. That 
is, he proceeds to react upon his world in a definite 
way. In so far, however, as although intelligent, he 
still feels his inability to act in such a more direct 
way, he falls into that state of watchful discrimination, 
which looks, as we saw, for some new object between any 
pair of objects that has already attracted attention.1 Now 
this search for the between is itself a kind of activity, 
with a recurrent plan. It differs from what we usually 
call a definite course of action by virtue of the way in 
which it deals with experience. And, as we saw, it is 
an activity directed by nothing so much as by an atten- 
tion to the contents of experience when once they chance to 
have been discriminated. Therefore it is indeed on the 
whole opposed, by virtue of this attitude, to the more 
direct plans of action already present in the life which 
this love of discriminating novelties interrupts. It em- 
phasizes, in a relatively random way, now this and now 
that special fact. It tries experiments in the forming of 
new series of linked contents. Now, in our last lecture, 
when we followed the genesis of the Empirical Ego, what 
did we find as the chief source of the new ideas that 
led to its gradual organization? Imitation. But upon 
what does all Imitation depend? First, upon an inter- 
est in discriminating between the doings of some other 
individual and the present deeds of one’s own organism ; 
and, secondly, upon an interest in seeking, through a per- 


1 The word between, be it noticed, is used here, and in what follows, 
in the generalized technical sense explained in Lecture II of this series. 


THE PLACE OF THE SELF IN BEING S11 


sistent process of trial and error, to find a new course 
of action which, when discovered, shall constitute a modi- 
fication of the former deeds of one’s own organism in the 
direction of the deeds of one’s model. 

It will be seen at once that the accomplishment of 
an act of imitation, whereby I modify what I formerly 
could do, so as to be able to conform to my fellow’s 
act, is essentially a construction of something that lies, 
in a technical sense, between the acts of my model, and 
what were formerly my own acts. Apart from my 
model, I already tended to act thus or thus. Under 
the influence of my model, I tend to approach his way 
of acting. But I never merely repeat his act. Imitation 
is a kind of experimental origination, a trial of a new 
plan, the initiation of a trial series of acts. The result 
of imitative efforts is that the world comes to contain 
a sort of action which lies between two former ways of 
- action, in such wise that, if you regarded these two 
former ways of acting as equivalent to each other, the 
new way would be equivalent to both. Meanwhile, by 
being interested in the new act as in something differ- 
ent from both its predecessors, you define for your own 
consciousness, in a clearer way, the difference of these 
predecessors from one another. The result is, that the 
world of your consciousness wins a new expression of 
the relation of the One and the Many. For here, as in 
our former discussion of the relation of between, it appears 
that the original, and puzzling, diversity between the 
imitator and the model has, by the interposition of the 
imitative act between these prior courses of action, come 
to appear as a diversity of stages in the same series. The 


312 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


triad, formed of the three terms,—(1) the original 
activities of the imitative being, (2) the activities of the 
model, and (3) the imitative act itself, —is now a triad 
of connected members whereof the third lies between the 
two others. The finite world has hereby won a new 
consciousness of the unity of its own life. 

Any individual Self grows, however, by means of 
very numerous imitations of many models. Every new 
act of imitation has this character of interposing a new 
intermediary between a pair of facts that, apart from 
the imitation, would have appeared less related. The 
result is that the new Individual, the life of the em- 
pirical human Self, comes to be, in one aspect, a@ sertes 
of results of intermediation, a more or less systematic 
establishment of new terms whereby triads are consti- 
tuted. Every result of imitation tends, however, to the 
establishment of recurrent processes, whereby the new 
sort of action, once discovered, tends to repeat itself 
indefinitely in new acts of the same sort. For the 
mark of the will that has once discovered its own pur- 
pose is that its activities assume the recurrent form. 
Hence, in initiating new acts, the imitative activity tends 
to the establishment of new forms of recurrent self- 
expression. 

In addition to this more definite experimental search 
for new forms of activity by means of imitative adjust- 
ments to the social environment, and in addition also to 
the recurrent activities whereby a growing individual 
shows that he has discovered what to do, and so seeks 
novelty only in the form of the new terms of a self- 
representative series, we find, indeed, in the life of any 


THE PLACE OF THE SELF IN BEING 313 


growing self, a still vaguer process of growth through mere 
trial and error. And in the early life of any mind, as 
well as in our maturer life whenever we are in the midst 
of very novel conditions, this process plays a large part. 
In this case, a being, as yet unconscious of a plan, and 
too ignorant or too unfortunate to find the right social 
models to guide him, acts at random in accordance with 
his instincts, until by mere happy accident he discovers a 
plan, which he then begins to pursue in recurrent fashion. 
This is in a great measure what happens when a child 
gradually learns to creep, stand, walk. This way of 
acquiring new habits by a wholly or partly non-imitative 
adjustment to the environment, has been studied by 
psychologists even more than the more complex pro- 
cesses of imitation. It is in this way that we vaguely look 
for new ideas, find our way in new places, help ourselves 
in learning new arts such as bicycling, and so on. Yet we 
always prefer the imitation of social models to this vaguer 
sort of wandering whenever social guidance is possible. 

It is to be noted, however, that even here the new 
adjustment is learned by a process of finding constantly 
something new that stands between our former course of 
action and our vaguely appreciated goal. We are dis- 
satisfied. That means, so far as we are conscious, that we 
find ourselves doing something, and conceive vaguely, 
in the yet unknown future, a way of acting that would 
satisfy if we could find it. Our course, hereupon, is to 
seek something between that unknown goal, and ourselves 
as we are. This something, as soon as found, tends to 
satisfy the will as an effort, even if it leaves us dis- 
appointed with the result. 


$14 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


All our finite striving thus includes a creation of new 
intermediaries between the starting-point and the goal, 
by imitation where that is possible, by random attention 
to new facts where such is our only course. 

The evolution of a new Self, in the realm of our own 
conscious life, thus involves, at every step, just the con- 
trast between the two finite ways of viewing the world, 
and between the two sorts of resulting series, — just the 
contrast, I say, which we studied so extensively when we 
compared the structure of the World of Description and 
the World of Appreciation. Hither, namely, one has 
already found out, according to one’s lights, what to do, 
or else one is vaguely trying to discriminate, in the vast 
background which constitutes the world, the facts whose 
union into series, through the establishment of intermedi- 
aries, will give one a comprehension of what one’s envi- 
ronment is, a sense of how the One and the Many are 
related, and so an insight into what one has to do. In 
the first of these two ways of dealing with one’s world, 
one is already, as far as one’s consciousness goes, pos- 
sessed of one’s plan as a Self. One’s life then consists 
in doing again and again what, according to one’s con- 
scious plans, one has to do, and in thereby winning new 
stages of self-representative life. But in the second case, 
one is receptive, rather than freely constructive; is 
searching ; and succeeds, if at all, only by an experi- 
mental interpolation of new terms in given series of 
discriminated facts. The union of these two tendencies 
leads to a constant differentiation of new stages of self- 
consciousness. The principal source of the novel forms 
of self-expression is the second of the two tendencies. 


THE PLACE OF THE SELF IN BEING 315 


The first tendency leads to the sort of novelty in results 
that the number-series has illustrated. 

So much for the two processes, so far as we can ob- 
serve them within the limits of our human consciousness. 
I now make the wholly tentative hypothesis that the 
process of the evolution of new forms of consciousness in 
Nature is throughout of the same general type as that 
which we observe when we follow the evolution of new sorts 
of plans, of ideas, and of selfhood in our own life. And, 
as the general evidence for the worth of such an hypothe- 
sis, I point out the following facts. 

The types of life that are phenomenally known to us 
in Nature, form series such as indicate a gradual evolution 
of new forms from old. A new individual life, so far as 
we observe, in the outer world, the signs of its presence, 
is a new way of behavior appearing amongst natural phe- 
nomena. ‘This new collection of functions comes to be 
manifested to us gradually. In the process of heredity, 
its generation involves, in a vast number of cases, the 
phenomena which our science interprets as the sexual 
union of cells that represent previously living individuals. 
As a result of this union of sexual elements, the cell from 
which the new organism developes has, in all this class 
of cases, characters that lie between those represented by 
the parent cells. The resulting organism consequently 
has characters, and accordingly developes functions, 
that lie between those of formerly existing organisms ; 
and so the new living individual is at once a new 
link in the series of the possible forms of its type, and 
an individual variation of its species. In these respects, 
sexual generation is analogous to the process of conscious 


316 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


imitation. For imitation (not, to be sure, in the case of 
a whole organism, but in the case of a single volun- 
tary function) means that a new process results from 
the conscious union of the influence of two previous 
processes; and in case of imitation, as we have just seen, 
the new process lies between the original processes. 
Thus the conscious union of former types of activity, 
in the very act that, while uniting, discriminates them, 
results in a new sort of intermediate activity. A corre- 
sponding union of two elements, with a resultant that 
lies between formerly existent beings, characterizes sexual 
generation. 

But in another class of cases, new living individuals, 
as they are phenomenally known to us, result aserually. 
Here the processes involved are sufficiently typified, for 
our present purposes, by the very process of cell-multipli- 
cation from which any new organism always results. 
All such processes are, in form, relatively recurrent. 
Novelty, where it becomes notable at all in the course 
of such processes, depends upon the massing of the 
results of former stages of this same recurrent process. 
So it is, in part, when the multiplying cells of a new 
organism undergo differentiation just because the newer 
cells find their places in a whole which is formed of 
all the previous cells, and so adjust themselves to an 
environment different from that in which the earlier 
cells grew. But this whole process is analogous, in 
structure and in result, to the recurrent processes of the 
conscious will that has found what it has to do, that 
does it again and again, and that reaches novel results 
in a way which the counting process has most clearly 


THE PLACE OF THE SELF IN BEING SiG 


illustrated for us. Whether such novel results are 
significant, depends on the grade of significance that 
the special will, whose expression we observe, has 
reached. But such recurrent processes are, as we have 
seen, the normal ones of the World of Appreciation. 
They are known to us, in our own consciousness, as the 
source of a particular sort of novelty in the results of 
conduct. They lead to Well-Ordered series of self- 
expressions. 

But further, the new living individuals, in their devel- 
opment, largely illustrate what we call the process of 
gradual adaptation to the environment by novel forms of 
structure and function. Here again the character of the 
enormously complicated organic processes involved is still 
analogous to a process that we observe in consciousness, 
viz. to our conscious process of learning new arts through 
trial and error. The series of facts that we observe in 
the living beings are, in this type of instances, on the 
whole, non-recurrent. The process is one of interpolat- 
ing new terms in a series of stages that lie between the 
original condition of the organism, and a certain ideal 
goal of perfect adjustment to the environment which the 
individual organism never reaches. 

So far then, for certain analogies between the evolution 
of new living beings in the phenomenal world, and the 
evolution of new forms of selfhood in conscious life. But 
now for one more analogy, and one that relates to that 
most critical phenomenon, the death of an organism, and 
to the temporal cessation of a given process of conscious 
striving. 

The discriminating tendency that, in our consciousness, 


é 


318 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


gives rise to the conceptions of the World of Description, 
is always, as we have seen, one of two contrasting tenden- 
cies that our finite relation to our world determines. Of 
these two tendencies, this is the subordinate one, which 
yields to the tendency to recurrent expression of our 
already established Purpose, whenever we know what to 
do. So far as we conceive our world in terms of the will 
that is now explicit in us, we do not need to give our- 
selves over to the discrimination of new phenomena, and 
we do not do so. Descriptive Science is secondary to 
life, and the scrutiny of that world “in the background,” 
in search of novelties, ceases whenever we are absorbed in 
what seems to us triumphant self-expression. This is 
true even when the will which seems to itself clearly con- 
scious of what it has to do, and of how to do it, is in fact 
of what we have to call a relatively low grade. For in 
us the will can be base in content, even when it is in form 
to a great extent of the higher type. i 

Consequently, our discriminative activities, and also our 
imitations, our processes of trial and error, and all our 
tentative seekings after greater clearness, are subject to 
the often rigid selection exerted by our already established 
conscious plans of recurrent action. Or, as they say, prac- 
tical motives predominate in our life. We make these 
tentative efforts for the sake of establishing new plans of 
action wherever we lack plans. But when we have plans, 
already accepted, the tentative establishment of new 
courses of action between stages already existing, is per- 
mitted only in so far as it does not run counter to these 
already established plans. 

Well, just so, in Nature, the variations of organic life 


THE PLACE OF THE SELF IN BEING 319 


that get established by means of the processes analogous 
(as we have just seen) to those of trial and error, and to 
those of imitation, are subject to a rigid selection on the 
part of the “environment.” But the “environment,” 
according to our own interpretation of Nature, stands, 
as an environment with already established characters, 
for the expression of such portions of the Nature-life as 
have already won the habitual, that is, the more or less defi- 
nitely and permanently recurrent form, wherein a relatively 
persistent will to act repeatedly in the same way has 
become characteristic of the finite consciousness that we 
suppose to be represented by the natural phenomena in 
question. 

In view of this analogy, I suggest that the evolution 
of new Selfhood in our own conscious case, and of new 
forms of life in Nature, is a process subject everywhere 
to the same sort of selection, whereby new tendencies are 
accepted or rejected according to their relation to preéx- 
istent tendencies. The evolution of new Selfhood, as I 
conceive the matter, is rendered possible by the fact that 
a finite form of conscious life may have a twofold relation 
to the Absolute, and so may seek the truth and its own 
self-expression in a twofold way,—a more active and 
definite course of self-expression, or a more tentative one 
of discovery. That is, it may grow either by performing, 
in recurrent fashion, over and over, the type of action 
that it has already come to regard as its own form of 
Selfhood, or else by adopting the discriminating attitude 
that gives us, in our own conscious life, our conceptions 
that together make up our view of the World of Descrip- 
tion. Whena consciousness adopts the latter of these two 


320 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


attitudes, what happens within the unity of its sphere 
of experience is the appearance of new contents that lie 
between previously recognized contents, or that lie, as ten- 
tative expressions of its will, between itself and the goal. 
These new expressions of purpose are tentative, like our 
trials and errors, or like our imitations. When they are 
successful, they so mass themselves as to form definite 
centres of new experience. By emphasizing the contrast 
between the Self that has created or discovered them, and 
the rest of the world, they then suggest plans of action, 
which become recurrent, so long as they survive. But 
when they suggest nothing that permanently accords 
with the established habits of the Self within which they 
arise, they are unadapted to their environment, and so 
pass away. A rigid selection presides over their persist- 
ence. It is the selection established by the more per- 
sistent habits, and conscious intents, of the finite Self to 
which they belong. The portion of Nature where these 
tentatively adopted new forms of life phenomenally 
appear to us, we call the Organic World. 

But now these new creations, if they survive, are not 
the mere contents of another and larger consciousness. 
They are also processes occupying time, and embodying 
will; they are themselves finite conscious purposes, hav- 
ing an inner unity, a relation to the Absolute, of which 
they also are tpso facto partial expressions, and a tendency 
to adjust themselves to the goal in their own way. If, 
as in case of the conscious Self of any one of us, they 
become aware of this their own relation to the Absolute, 
then they no longer survive or pass away merely in so far 
as they serve the larger purpose that originally invented 


THE PLACE OF THE SELF IN BEING 321 


them as tentative devices of its own. They then, like all 
finite purposes of self-conscious grade, define their own 
lives as individually significant, conceive their goal as the 
Absolute, and their relations to thetr natural sources as re- 
lations that mean something to themselves also. Their des- 
tiny thus becomes relatively free from that of the finite 
Self within which they first grew up. 

Thus indeed the natural generation of an organism 
would be the mere phenomenon of a process of creating 
new stages within the life of previously existing Selves. 
But the new stages might become significant for them- 
selves, with their own time-span, their own relations to 
the Absolute, and their own sort of selfhood. Originally 
I, as this Individual, coming into existence at this point 
of time, might result from an organic process that phenom- 
enally represents how a finite Selfhood, much vaster than 
mine (let us say the Selfhood of the human race as a whole) 
established in a tentative and experimental way, within its 
own conscious life, a new process that was serially inter- 
polated between the processes represented by the repro- 
ductive cells of my parents. This was, for the race, merely 
a tentative variation in its life-series, due to the same sort 
of interest that, in our imitative life, makes us interested in 
trying the effect of creating a new sort of function inter- 
mediate between two previous ones, or to the same sort of 
scrutiny of the world that leads us to make new experi- 
mental discriminations in our scientific thinking. Had 
this variation been inconsistent with the habits of action 
already established in Nature, I should not have survived. 
Just so, a useless imitation, or a new idea inconsistent 
with established ideas, is erelong abandoned. But having 


Y¥ 


322 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


survived, I have entered, with all the instincts of my race, 
into the social order. On one side of my nature I am 
thus a resultant. My conscious interests were originally 
narrowed by the act that determined my place in the 
series. Hence I am primarily constituted by a series of 
interests in a small group of facts, and am relatively 
inattentive to all the rest of the universe. But within 
my narrow span I can still learn about universal truth, 
because, after all, I am a conscious process, and every 
such process is really linked to all the world. But when 
once I become aware that my little form of willing also is 
a hint of an Absolute truth, I know myself as in intent 
this Individual in the World. And now I have indeed 
a character that may well survive, that in fact will sur- 
vive, all the organic processes which were originally ex- 
pressed in my life as this variation of the human stock. 
For in God, I am this seeker after God, so soon as I 
know myself as a Self at all, and, as such a seeker after 
God, I no longer wholly depend on the finite Self within 
which I came into being, just as my organism, even in 
its physical functions, no longer depends on the parent 
organisms. 

By precisely such processes, the evolution of new life 
everywhere in Nature would be, upon this hypothesis, 
explicable. Selves would always originate within Selves, 
but, as related to the Absolute, would be capable of sur- 
viving the finite experimental purposes for which they 
were originated. Their natural origin would be per- 
fectly consistent with an immortal destiny, just because 
all facts in the world, however originated, have teleo- 
logical relations with the Absolute, and because, what- 


THE PLACE OF THE SELF IN BEING 823 


ever life includes an explicit seeking for its own selfhood 
is in conscious relations with the Absolute. 

The appearance of new Individual Selves would be, 
however, when temporally considered, a genuine fact. 
And their source would be the one that in ourselves 
enables us to vary the plans of our Will through the 
tentative play of the Discriminating Attention. And 
thus, in completing the sketch of our hypothesis regard- 
ing the interpretation of Nature and Evolution, we have 
brought this hypothesis into definite relation to our 
former contrast between the World of Description and 
World of Appreciation. This contrast appears, not 
merely as a fact of our own consciousness, but as a con- 
sequence of a tendency that is responsible, in Nature, for 
the whole process of Evolution. What in us appears as 
the conflict between science and practical life, is an ex- 
ample of the struggle for existence in Nature. 


VI 


That the Self whose natural relations have been so 
definitely admitted, is, like any other phenomenon in 
Nature, a proper object for the investigations of any 
external observer who is interested in explaining the 
occurrences of his life in terms of Causation, is now 
plain enough. An external observer of a human Self, 
as expressed in the behavior of the phenomena of its 
organism, may be a psychologist. If so, he will be 
interested in explaining how any human Self appears as 
a resultant of temperament, heredity, training, and the 
rest, and how his life is subject to law. To treat 


524 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


the Self thus, is to make its life an object in the psycholo- 
gist’s own World of Description. The undertaking will 
be as much justified as any other undertaking of science. 
To an external observer who seeks to win his purposes 
as a student of science, the individual Self, and all its 
temporal deeds, must be viewed as facts to be explained, 
in so far as that is logically possible, through their 
causal connections with previous facts, and with the 
whole of Nature. Such an observer, in so far as he 
deals with the World of Description, can recognize no 
deed of the Self as a mere outcome of free will. Every 
describable character of the Self, its temperament, its 
motives, its impulses, its training, its knowledge, its 
deeds, will appear to this observer as causally explicable 
by heredity and by environment. In so far as these 
aspects‘of the Self are not yet explained by science, they 
will still be inevitable and proper problems for causal 
explanation. Science, whether physical or physiological 
or psychological, will remorselessly and unceasingly 
pursue the end of making man, the natural being, compre- 
hensible to the understanding of man, the observer of 
Nature. And this undertaking will be strictly rational. 
When we admit all this, do we not endanger our own 
doctrine of the freedom of the Individual Self ? 

I answer: No, for this very undertaking will have 
as its sole justification the fact that the teleological 
structure of Being gives warrant for holding that the 
true purposes of our descriptive science are, as far as 
that is logically possible, actually expressed by the uni- 
verse. Man, as the observer of Nature and of man, has 
a purpose, and a very profound purpose, in trying thus 


THE PLACE OF THE SELF IN BEING 325 


to comprehend in causal terms his relation to Nature 
and to his fellows. We know from earlier lectures 
what this purpose is. This purpose, according to our 
view, must be capable of some relatively final expres- 
sion, viz. of the very expression, which our science 
now begins and unweariedly prosecutes, but which no 
merely mortal toil will ever finish. Hence it is true 
that human nature, down to the least externally de- 
scribable detail of its temporal fashion of expressing 
itself, is a natural phenomenon, a part of universal Nature, 
and is as much capable of some kind of explanation in 
causal terms as is any natural fact. But, on the other 
hand, this very way of viewing man sets to itself its 
own limits, viz. the limits of the World of Description. 
For, in the first place, thus to view man is not to 
view him as he consciously views his own inner life, 
that is, as possessing Internal Meaning. To explain man 
in causal terms is to view him as an external observer 
sees or might see him; and not as he himself means to 
be when he expresses his will in his deeds. Hence what 
you never causally explain about a man is precisely his 
primary character as a Self, namely, his conscious mean- 
ing itself, in so far as it is his. And secondly, all causal 
explanation has to do with the types and the describable 
general characters of events, and never with whatever 
is individual about events. For the individual, as we 
saw in our foregoing series of lectures, is the indefinable 
aspect of Being. But what you cannot define, you 
cannot explain in causal terms. 

And go, to sum up, —that I now have this character, 
and this environment, and that I am subject to these or 


4 


326 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


these consequences of my past experience, you can under- 
take to explain causally. Yes, whatever about my words, 
my deeds, my manner, my mood, my feelings, or my plans, 
is describable as a feature common to me and to any 
other being in the world, — whatever then there is about 
me which is expressible in general terms, or which is 
capable of being externally observed, you can and must 
undertake, with rationality, to explain causally as due to 
my ancestry, training, circumstances, environment, and 
dependence upon Nature in general. But what remains 
causally inexplicable is precisely my Being as this indi- 
vidual, who am nobody else in God’s world. Now my 
individuality is not in the least separable from what the 
Scholastics would have called my “common nature.” My 
individuality means simply, that my innumerable common 
traits are teleologically expressed in this internally deter- 
minate but externally undetermined unique life which is 
now mine, and which, if I have a personal ideal, is to be 
mine until I have come to my full and final embodiment 
as this one of God’s individuals. And so once more, if 
you ask me what, in my present consciousness, expresses 
not the separable portion, but that inseparable aspect of 
my nature which neither God nor man can causally ex- 
plain, then I answer: Just my conscious intent to be, in 
God’s world, myself and nobody else. In this sense alone 
my life, not as that of an Independent Being, but as the 
life expressing a rational purpose to win an unique rela- 
tion to all the universe, an unique contrast with all other 
Selves, or if you will, an unique instance of dependence 
upon all the rest, is now, and will always continue to be 
causally inexplicable and irreducible. For the unique as 


THE PLACE OF THE SELF IN BEING 327 


the unique is not the common nature as such; and only 
the common nature of things can be causally explicable. 


Vil 


So much then for the causal relations of my Selfhood. 
* But,” you may insist, “is not my unique and individual 
nature, if not causally determined, still teleologically 
determined by that very relation to the whole upon which 
my existence as this individual depends? How can our 
doctrine speak of the will and of the individuality of the 
Self as in any sense free, and still recognize that unity of 
the world and of the divine plan upon which our whole 
theory depends ?” 

To answer this objection I must indeed still further 
repeat considerations sketched in our former series of lec- 
tures, and must afresh apply them to the Self. Let us 
return therefore, as we close, to our former teleological 
view of the universe, and to the relation between God’s 
inclusive will and the various individual wills. Here I 
can only emphasize, in the form of replies to objections, a 
theory whose basis has been fully stated in our general 
Theory of Being. 

In answer, then, to this whole view of mine, you still 
may say, “In so far as this my will is God’s will, and is 
related to the whole, it is God and not my private Self 
that wills me to be what Iam.” I reply, The divine act 
whereby God wills your individuality to be what in pur- 
pose and meaning it is, is identical with your own indi- 
vidual will, and exists not except as thus identical. 

“Yet has not the oneness of Being been so explained, 


328 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


by our idealistic theory, as to imply that every life, ze. 
every fact in the universe, is so related to every other, 
that no fact in the universe could be altered without some 
consequent alteration of every other fact? For this was 
the earliest generalization reached by our Idealism in our 
criticism of the realistic doctrine. Now if there are thus 
no Independent Beings, how can there be in any sense 
Free Beings? And if I am so related to the world that a 
change in the universe beyond me would alter whatever I 
am, then am I not dependent upon the rest of the uni- 
verse for whatever I am? Upon this idealistic theory, 
is not the teleological determination of every fact in the 
universe by every other fact a reciprocal determination ? 
But is not such reciprocal determination absolute? Is 
not then every individual fact in this idealistic world so 
determined in its purpose by the purpose of every other 
that nothing undetermined, nothing free, is anywhere 
left?” So the objector may state his case. 

Hereupon I respond, In the very reciprocity of my 
relations to all else in the universe lies the very assurance 
that I possess a certain true and significant freedom. 
The world beyond me can say to me, “ Were I to change, 
you would change, and become in some sense another, 
both in your experience and in your purpose.” All this 
is true. But in turn I can reply, to the whole universe, 
natural and spiritual, Aye, but if my individual will 
changed, if I chose to be another than what I am, you, 
O world, just because of the universal teleology of your 
constitution, would be in some wise another, and that in 
every region of your Being. For you are no more truly 
independent of me and of my will than I am of you and 


THE PLACE OF THE SELF IN BEING 829 


of your might. However slight the change that I can 
make, I still do make a difference, by my will, to all be- 
ings in heaven and earth. And if I, in my individual 
capacity as this being, do not create the other beings, 
just as truly can one say that, in my individual character, 
they do not create me. Upon precisely such a considera- 
tion as this, our whole argument for Idealism itself was 
founded. 

“ Yes,” you may insist, “ but according to this doctrine, 
God’s will creates us all alike, and in some sense (viz. from 
the Eternal point of view), all at once, so that we various 
beings of the world are equally creatures of the one plan.” 
I respond once more, The very essence of our whole 
theory, as we already saw in the closing lecture of the 
foregoing series, is that the categories, whether of causa- 
tion or of teleological dependence, however they are con- 
ceived, are inevitably secondary to the fact that the world 
exists, in its wholeness and in every fragment and aspect 
of its life, as the positive embodiment of conscious will 
and purpose. Now to say that another either causes or 
teleologically determines me, is to say, at bottom, that my 
life expresses a purpose that is in some sense different 
from my purpose, or that is in some sense not my own 
private or individual purpose. But to say this is to point 
out what indeed is true of every aspect of my life that 
can be reduced to my relations with Nature and with my 
fellows, and with whatever else the world beyond me con- 
tains. Now all this my dependence upon other beings is 
not only true, but is desired and intended by my own pur- 
_ pose itself whenever my purpose is rational. For, as our 
idealistic argument from the very outset has maintained, 


330 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


I can purpose at all only by purposing that my will should 
find its expression in what is Other than myself, and con- 
sequently in what, in some sense, gives my will its own 
determination as a will that lives in this world of other 
life than my private life. That I depend for my life and 
meaning upon life not my own, is as true as that I am I 
at all. That this dependence involves a temporal origin, 
is due to the very nature of Time. The question is 
whether I wholly thus depend. And our answer has 
been that there is that about me which makes my will, 
as the will of an individual, not wholly the expression of 
other purposes than my private or individual purpose. 
This answer has been based upon our whole Theory of 
Being. If now I, the individual, exist, in one aspect, as 
the expression of nobody’s will but my own, does this 
assertion in the least conflict with our other assertion that 
I and all beings exist as the expressions of the divine 
will? I answer: There is no conflict; for the Divine 
Will gets expressed in the existence of me the individual 
only in so far as this Divine Will first not merely recog- 
nizes from without, but includes within itself my own 
will, as one of its own purposes. And since God, for our 
view, is not an external cause of the world, but is the 
very existence of the world in its wholeness as the fulfil- 
ment of purpose, it follows once more that my existence 
has its place in the Divine Existence as the existence of 
an individual will, determined, just in so far as it is this 
individual will, by nothing except itself. 

The problem then of my freedom is simply the problem 
of my individuality. If I am I and nobody else, and if 
Iam I as an expression of purpose, then I am in so far 


THE PLACE OF THE SELF IN BEING 831 


free just because, as an individual, I express by my exist- 
ence no will except my own. And that is precisely how 
my existence expresses, or results from, God’s Will. That 
this same existence of mine also has, besides its individu- 
ality, its dependence, its natural relations, its temporal 
origin, means that I am not only I, but also the Self along 
with all other Selves. But that the One Will of God is 
expressed through the Many individual wills, —this re- 
sults from that view of the relation of the One and the 
Many which our former series so extensively discussed. 
Simple unity is a mere impossibility. God cannot be One 
except by being Many. Nor can we various Selves be 
Many, unless in Him we are One. To know just this is 
to win the deepest truth that religion has been seeking 
to teach humanity. 


LECTURE VIII 


™ 15 a 
a) 


‘i oo 


LECTURE VIII 
THE MORAL ORDER 


In dwelling at such length, in the third lecture of the 
present series, upon the contrast between the Temporal 
and the Eternal aspects of Reality, I was dealing not 
merely with one of the most frequently misunderstood 
issues of philosophy, but with one of the most practical 
of the concerns of life. For in this contrast, and in the 
unity which underlies it, is involved the solution of the 
most perplexing problem with which the ethical conscious- 
ness of humanity has to deal. I call this problem the 
general question concerning the sense in which the world 
is a Moral Order. Our Idealism has declined to accept 
the world as a real fact merely given, in advance of an 
analysis of the sense in which the world is to be real. 
When we therefore now assert that the real has this or 
that character, our undertaking depends upon a previous 
analysis of what it is to be real. To be, we have said, 
means to fulfil a purpose, in fact, to fulfil in final, indi- 
vidual expression, the only purpose, namely, the Absolute 
purpose. Our closer study has shown us that this Abso- 
lute purpose is not only One, but also infinitely complex, 
so that its unity is the unity of many Wills, each one of 
which finds its expression in an individual life, while these 
lives, as the lives of various Selves, have an aspect in 
which they are free, in so far as each, while in many 
aspects determined, is still in its own measure a deter- 
4 335 


536 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


miner of all the rest. We have also further seen that, 
in so far as we mortals can undertake at all to conceive 
the expression of the Absolute Purpose, this expression 
is in one aspect Temporal, in so far as there is a process 
which has successive stages, such that some are no longer, 
and others not yet, when the present stage of the world- 
process is. In another aspect, as we have seen, the same 
world-process is Eternal, in so far as the whole of it is 
viewed at one glance by the Absolute, precisely as we 
view the whole of any brief rhythmic succession at a 
glance whenever we observe such successions. That the 
world has all these interrelated characters at once, we 
assert, yet not because we first recognize that all these 
characters are given as mere data in a realistic realm, so 
that only then we proceed to try to unify them after 
admitting their independent Being. No, we assert these 
various aspects of the world to be real only in so far as 
we can see that hereby purpose is fulfilled. Hereby each 
of these characters is deduced from our general concept of 
Being, as that concept is illustrated by our experience. 
One is the Absolute, because in mere multiplicity there 
would be no finality of insight. Many is the Absolute, 
because in the interrelationships of contrasted expres- 
sions of a single Will lies the only opportunity for the 
embodiment of wholeness of life, and for the possession 
of Self-consciousness by the Absolute. For the mystic 
long ago showed us that simple Oneness meant Nothing- 
ness. Individuals are all the various expressions of the 
Absolute, in so far as they are Many; just because, where 
the One is individual, every aspect and element of its self- 
expression is unique. ree, in its own degree, is every 


THE MORAL ORDER 337 


individual will amongst all the wills that the world-life 
expresses, because every such will, as unique, is in some 
respect underivable from all the others. Temporal, is the 
world order, because, so far as we can know, time is 
the universal form of the expression of Will. Eternal is 
this same world order, because past, present, and future 
time equally belong to the Real, and their Being implies, 
by definition, that they are present, in their wholeness, to 
the final insight. And Time, surveyed in its wholeness, 
is Eternity. 

So far, then, we have merely developed our central con- 
cept of Being, and have attempted to interpret experience 
in the light of this concept. But now we assert that 
this world which we have been characterizing is a Moral 
Order. In what sense, and for what reason, do we assert 
this ? 


I 


Despite the general exposition and defence that the 
ethical aspects of our conception of Being received in the 
former series of these lectures, and despite the frequent 
illustration that this same aspect has already received in 
the present series, it still seems necessary to face, more 
carefully than heretofore, familiar objections which, as 
experience shows, are sure to be directed against such a 
view as ours, whenever it is considered with reference 
to the moral consciousness of man. These objections, 
as I conceive, are founded upon a failure to grasp our 
doctrine of Being in its wholeness. Persistently dwell- 
ing, now too exclusively upon this and now too ab- 
stractly upon that aspect of our theory, and neglecting 


Z 


338 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


to regard the meaning of all its aspects together, an 
objector finds it easy to say, sometimes that the uni- 
verse which we depict is not sufficiently fixed and final in 
its form of Being to meet the demands of common sense, 
and sometimes that it is far too fixed and moveless in its 
type of Being to leave room for any genuinely moral 
activity. We have defended ourselves against Realism. 
Have we found sufficient room for the demands of a 
strictly ethical Idealism? We have maintained the unity 
of Nature and of Mind. Have we escaped from the dan- 
ger of making our moral activities the mere incidental 
phenomena that help to express our own predetermined 
individual nature? We have vindicated the uniqueness 
of every human Self. But have we given the Self any 
sufficiently significant moral task to perform in the uni- 
verse? We have insisted upon the finality and perfection 
of the whole life of the Absolute Self? But have we suc- 
ceeded as yet in rescuing the individual Selves from being 
mere expressions of a preéstablished harmony? We have 
assigned both to rigid and unchangeable natural law and 
to causal determination, a very subordinate place in the 
universe. But have we avoided a result equivalent to a 
sort of ethical fatalism? I conceive that, even after all 
that precedes, such objections will not infrequently be 
urged by some who may have followed so far our course. 
The answer, however, to every such objection lies at 
present extremely near. Our fuller statement, regarding 
the relations of the temporal and the eternal aspects of 
Being, has only to be applied to the present issues in 
order to lead at once to a recognition of the way in which 
all these ethical doubts are to be met, 


THE MORAL ORDER 339 


For the moment, however, I must give the ethical 
objector the word. He shall undertake to show what 
he means by calling the world a Moral Order. He 
shall attempt to show that the world which we have 
been depicting is not a Moral Order, or is not a com- 
plete and sufficient Moral Order. We shall then see 
how, from our point of view, such objections are to be 
met. And first, then, what is a Moral Order? And 
secondly, has our Idealism place for such a Moral Order ? 


II 


“A Moral Order,” our objector may first maintain, 
“depends upon recognizing not only that Selves exist, 
but that they so exist that they can do good or evil of 
their own accord, and by means of their own free will. 
In a true Moral Order, there is indeed law and control 
present in the universe; but each Self has its own 
sphere. And within this sphere the Self is not merely 
an unique voice in a symphony whose divine perfection 
is preéstablished, but an agent in a realm where one 
not only can go right but also can err, and where per- 
fections are attained, if at all, by means of the will of 
the individual. In a Moral Order there can be true 
progress. But progress, where it has an ethical mean- 
ing, involves the production of what never existed be- 
fore,—of the novel, and not merely of the absolute, of 
the finite, and not merely of the divine. Moreover, in 
a Moral Order, any ethical agent can say, ‘It is not 
yet foreordained what I shall accomplish. I must find 
that out by my own work.’ The ethical agent must 


340 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


also be able to say, ‘J am needed. Even God needs my 
help. Without my doing of the right, something would 
remain forever undone.’ The salvation of the individual 
moral agent must depend in part upon his own free 
choice. However the divine will may codperate in the 
moral world, it is open to the free agent to choose 
whom he will serve. Above all it is essential, for every 
moral view of the universe, to conceive that the world 
can be made better than it is. There is thus an essen- 
tial opposition, for the moral, even if not for the meta- 
physical consciousness, between the predicate ought to be, 
and the predicate zs. Perfection, in the moral sense, is 
something still to be sought, it cannot be merely found. 
The best world fora moral agent is one that needs him to 
make it better. ‘The purely metaphysical consciousness 
in vain, therefore, says of the good, Jt ts. The moral 
consciousness insists upon setting higher than every 
such assertion the resolve, Let it be.1 The moral con- 
sciousness declines to accept, therefore, any metaphysical 
finality. It rejects every static world. It is dynamic. 
Nowhere could it say, ‘I have found that what is is 
altogether good.’ Its watchword is, ‘Grow better and 
make better.’ 

“But now,” the objector may continue, “this your 
idealistic world lacks these essential characteristics of 
a true Moral Order. In your world everything, includ- 
ing all of what you call the free acts of the moral 
agents,——everything is present at one glance to the 
Absolute. And, for the Absolute, no other world than 


1 See Mr. Wm. Salter’s Ethical Religion, p. 13, for an eloquent expres- 
sion of this attitude. 


THE MORAL ORDER 341 


this one is, or in concrete truth can be. For in this 
world in its wholeness, the Absolute purpose, by your 
hypothesis, is embodied. Therefore, the whole, when 
viewed as a whole, is seen to be static, fixed, change- 
less. The individual agent knows at any instant, first, 
that what he really means, even in his blindness, is 
identical with the Absolute Will. He knows, then, 
that he can neither produce what ought not to be, nor 
create by his own deed a needed good that ought to 
be, and that, without his codperation, would never come 
to be. For his deed, as your theory teaches, is never 
anything but one of the incidents in the process through 
which the Absolute wins the eternal perfection. The 
individual agent therefore does not find that the world 
needs him to make it better, except in the one sense, 
that, according to you, the world is indeed certain to 
have one of its own incidental finite perfections em- 
bodied in whatever the individual agent does. Your 
moral agent, so called, is therefore unable to sin, or to 
go wrong, or to be less, at any temporal moment, than 
he should be. 

“Were he other than he is, then, as you maintain, 
the whole world would indeed also be other than it is. 
But, according to you, the world, as known to the Abso- 
lute, is known as a world that fulfils the Absolute pur- 
pose, and that, in so far, cannot be other than it is. 
Hence, once more, despite all that you have said about 
uniqueness and freedom, the individual is certain to 
be, in his own place, best as he is, whatever he is. 
And your Idealism is therefore, in its optimism, unable 
to give any genuine moral meaning to life. For in 


342 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


making whatever is, the final fulfilment of purpose, 
you have wholly lost sight of that contrast between 
what is and what ought to be, upon which all the moral 
consciousness depends. Your unique voices in the divine 
symphony are no more the voices of moral agents than 
are the stones in a mosaic. And if you relieve the 
individual from absolute causal determination, you do 
not relieve him from a fatalism none the less all em- 
bracing. You relieve him from absolute causal deter- 
mination by saying that the purpose to explain him by 
taking account of his relationships to other beings, is 
always a purpose of somebody else, of some finite ob- 
server who is external to the being explained; and you 
say that this external purpose of the causal explainer 
of any agent’s life is limited, as to its success, by the 
fact that this individual agent himself is unique, and 
that therefore, in some aspect, he is always incapable 
of being explained through any knowledge of his hered- 
ity, or of his environment, or of anything which is not 
himself. Now suppose that all this is granted. Still, 
by your idealistic hypothesis, any individual agent, if 
not explicable by means of anything external to himself, 
is still included in a perfect whole in such wise that he 
constitutes, despite his uniqueness, an organic part of 
that perfect whole. From this fate, according to you, 
he cannot escape. You have said, yourself, in a former 
discussion, in these lectures: ‘In vain do we wander in 
darkness. We are eternally at home in God.’ Accord- 
ing to you, then, we please God, and are ourselves 
pleased, in our union with God —and pleased too even 
with ourselves, whatever we are. And this indeed is 


THE MORAL ORDER 843 


our fate. As for foreordination in general,—your doc- 
trine of the temporal and the eternal has still to face 
the ancient difficulty concerning the reconciliation of 
the divine foreknowledge, and the free will of man.” 

I have allowed the objector, so far, to state his case 
as well as I am able to indicate, from my own experi- 
ence of such arguments, what that case is likely to be. 
I can answer only by pointing out, what, to my mind, 
are the facts regarding the matter here at issue. 


III 


And first, whatever our ethical doctrine may be, we 
shall all agree that the moral Ought, in its primary 
sense, is a category of temporal application. How- 
ever eternal the moral law may be, in its validity and in 
its relation to the knowledge of man or of the Absolute, 
it is a law whose reference is to acts, and to intended 
consequences of action, in so far as they follow one 
another in a time-sequence, or may be conceived as in 
such a sequence. Whoever says, “I ought to do thus 
or thus,” stands in a present moment of time, and looks 
forward to a future. His present decision is to be fol- 
lowed by a course of action. And in a world where 
there were no succession, there would be no morality. 
Consequently, the metaphysic of conduct is subject to the 
same general conditions as govern the metaphysic of any 
time-process. But, from our point of view, as we have 
now seen, time has its perfectly definable place in Being. 
There is succession. And our view of the Eternal has 
place for just such real view of succession. When one 


344 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


asserts that the future is not yet, our view, equally with 
the view of common sense, maintains that this assertion 
has truth. When one also asserts that past and future, 
— what is no longer and what is not yet, have their place 
together in the totum simul of the eternal order as the 
Absolute sees it, we have already observed how and 
why there is no conflict whatever between this assertion 
and the assertion that the past and the future are, tem- 
porally speaking, not present. Hence our view, in recog- 
nizing the true nature of the temporal order, and in 
showing the relation of this order to the eternal order, has 
already defined as real the general condition upon which 
all moral activity depends, and has asserted that this con- 
dition, namely, the temporal succession of the world’s 
events, is as real a fact for the Absolute as for us. The 
difference between the human view and the Absolute’s 
view of the temporal order is simply that, for men, only 
very brief series of successive events can be viewed totum 
simul, while for the Absolute, all events are thus viewed, 
while all events remain, for such an inclusive view, none 
the less successive than they are for us. 

So far, then, as to the mere temporal form in which 
alone any moral activity can take place. And now, 
in the next place, as to the more special conditions of 
moral activity : Our objector has said that, in a moral 
world, any moral agent can either do right, or choose 
the wrong. We accept the statement. Let there be 
any moral agent, A. We agree with our opponent 
that A must perform any one of his moral acts at some 
temporal moment. The act, in order to be a moral act at 
all, must, despite all of the aspects in which it may be 


THE MORAL ORDER 345 


determined by the heredity, environment, etc., of the 
agent, still possess an aspect in which it is not dedu- 
cible from any external conditions, but is the agent’s own 
present deed. Moreover, in order to be a moral act, this 
deed must form part of a succession of intentions, and of 
deeds, in which the agent’s own will is progressively 
expressed. And this individual will of the agent must 
be so expressed in the deeds that in some genuine respect 
it lies with the agent himself to determine what nothing 
else in the world wholly determines, namely, the right or 
wrong character of this deed, and its conformity or non- 
conformity to the standard which constitutes the Ought. 
All this our opponent asserts. All this, however, we too 
assert. And we have already in general indicated in 
former discussions why and how we assert just this to be 
true. Our present purpose is merely to develope and to 
apply, more specifically, the former results. 

Yet now, when our opponent still insists that we 
have no right to assert that these characters of free- 
dom and of relative self-determination, and of individ- 
ual power to do right or wrong, belong to the moral 
agents of our world, we in reply might stubbornly 
insist, if we chose, that our opponent himself should 
explain in what sense he regards the freedom and the 
individual initiative of moral agents as real facts in his 
own world. We might ask him, in other words, to 
make articulate his view of the sense in which his 
Moral Order has any sort of Being whatever. In our 
former series of lectures, we exhaustively treated the 
possible meanings of the ontological predicate. Our 
opponent, if he is to present a rational view, must do 


346 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


likewise. When he asserts the moral agents to be in 
any sense free, or to have in any sense their individual 
power of initiative, he becomes responsible for an on- 
tology. He is a realist, or a mystic, or a critical ration- 
alist, or an idealist in his metaphysic, whatever may be 
the ethical contents whose Being he asserts. We long 
since saw, then, why he can be consistent in his ontology 
only in case he is an idealist. But, unless he can set 
aside our former argument as to the nature of Being, 
then, whatever his well-warranted enthusiasm for a 
Moral Order may be, he can assert the Being of that 
Moral Order only by declaring that it is real simply 
because the Absolute knows it to be whatever it is, 
and because the Absolute Will finds in just this individ- 
uality, freedom, and initiative of the moral agents, whose 
acts occur in time, the fulfilment of the highest purpose. 
Now this is precisely what we ourselves assert. And 
we assert it for precisely the reason that leads our 
opponent to assert it, —namely, because, to our view as 
to his, a world where the temporal succession of acts, 
despite all its causal connections and its countless gen- 
eral characters, has room for individuality and for 
initiative, is precisely the sort of world wherein, and 
wherein alone, the highest purpose can be fulfilled, and 
the most perfect life expressed. 

Yet we shall indeed turn from this more polemic 
fashion of challenging our opponent to explain in what 
sense his Moral Order can express any Being at all; 
and we shall now explain, more fully, in what sense we 
declare that the temporal acts of individuals involve the 
power to go right or to go wrong, and in what sense, 


THE MORAL ORDER 347 


according to us, what ought to be and what ought not to be, 
can with equal possibility occur at any one temporal 
instant, despite, or in fact, just because of the eternal 
perfection of the whole. The true distinction, and the 
true connection, between the temporal and the eternal 
aspects of Being, furnish, in truth, the basis for a solution 
of this whole problem. 


IV 


Let us return to the individual moral agent. By his 
reality, as an individual being, at any moment of time, 
we now well know what we mean. We mean that just 
then there is a finite Internal Meaning, which seeks its 
own Other, and which, in any degree of blindness or of 
imperfection of insight that you please, is seeking, as this 
Other, the Absolute itself. We hold that this finite 
Internal Meaning is, furthermore, the meaning of a Self, 
which contrasts itself, more or less sharply, with the 
whole of the rest of the universe, even in seeking to 
find in this universe its own will expressed. So far we 
have, if you please so to call it, the fate of every finite 
Self. To seek anything but the Absolute itself is, in- 
deed, even for the most perverse Self, simply impossible. 
All life is looking for God, however base the forms of 
idolatry beneath which the false love of the world may 
ignorantly hide its own meaning, at any one temporal 
instant. And now, however you define your moral 
philosophy, it is indeed true that by the Ought you 
mean, at any temporal instant, a rule that, if followed, 
would guide you so to express, at that instant, your 
will, that you should be thereby made nearer to union 


348 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


with the divine, nearer to a consciousness of the oneness 
of your will and the Absolute Will, than you would 
become if you acted counter to this Ought. Now it is 
enough for our present purpose that a consciousness of 
such a rule can arise in any Self, at the moment of a 
moral act. Hereupon, however, there also arises the 
familiar situation in which conduct counter to the con- 
sciousness of the Ought appears, to the temporal Self, 
to be possible. 

This situation, so far as it here concerns us, in this 
extremely general sketch of the possibility of a Moral 
Order, is as follows: The Self, inevitably meaning the 
Absolute as that Other which it seeks to know as the 
Real, and inevitably seeking, also, to win union with that 
Absolute wherein its own final will is expressed, and to 
know the world as its own, and its own life as in harmony 
with the world, is still, as this present finite Self, con- 
scious of its contrast with that world which it views as 
beyond its present range of experience, or as beyond the 
circle wherein its Internal Meaning is now consciously 
expressed. Common sense expresses this contrast by 
saying that I have one will; while the world seems to 
have another will, which may to any extent oppose mine. 
The Ought, under these conditions, comes to our finite 
consciousness in the form of some principle which, in 
general, however we may formulate it, says: ‘“ Harmo- 
nize thy will with the world’s Will. Express thyself 
through obedience. Win thy victory by accepting thy 
task. The world is already thy Will absolutely expressed. 
Learn this truth by conforming thy deed to an absolute 
law.” It is enough for us here that this consciousness 


THE MORAL ORDER 349 


of the Ought can and does arise ; while the essence of it 
is that the Self is to accomplish the object of its search 
through obedience to an order which is not of its own 
momentary creation. 

But, as we have said, the Self is known through a con- 
trast-effect. Its own will, as it now is consciously pres- 
ent, is not yet known as in harmony with the Other 
wherein it inevitably seeks to find its own expression. 
It is always abstractly possible, therefore, for the Self to 
conceive its search for self-expression as simply an under- 
taking not to obey, but to subdue, to its own present pur- 
pose, the world which is beyond. Instead of developing 
its momentary Internal Meaning into harmony with its 
own External Meaning, it may, in its narrowness, seek 
to convert the latter into the former. Instead of assum- 
ing the attitude that Tennyson expresses by saying : — 


‘“ Our wills are ours to make them thine,” 


the Self may seek its self-expression explicitly in the 
form of rebellion. Nor is such a rebellious attitude by 
any means wholly evil. Conscious choice of a total evil 
is, indeed, impossible. For the Self, at its worst, seeks 
finality of self-expression, and seeks this self-expression 
through a life that is at once Other than its present In- 
ternal Meaning, and perfected in its form and content. 
Yet because the consciousness of the Self depends upon a 
contrast, the overcoming of the oppositions involved in 
that contrast, while never conceivable in an utterly evil 
shape, can be conceived, by the finite Self, as in conflict 
with what a clearer insight knows to be the Ought, since 
the consciousness of the Ought demands of the Self an 


350 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


overcoming of the opposition through a rational obedi- 
ence to the law of the Absolute, while the consciousness 
opposed to the Ought seeks to master the world in the 
service of the mere caprice of the Self. 

Or, to state the conflict in its simplest terms: I always 
will to become one with my world, and so, with God. 
But when I explicitly follow the Ought, I seek to trans- 
form myself as I now am into the likeness and the expres- 
sion of God. And when I oppose what a clearer insight 
would see to be the Ought, I seek to fashion the truth 
after the image, and to make God the mere tool of myself 
as Inowam. In both cases it is indeed impossible for 
me to avoid seeking a good, and expressing a truth as I 
act. For as a fact, I can only assert my finite Self by 
actively transforming myself; so that I actually obey, in 
some measure, even while I rebel. For the finite Self 
cannot seek its own, without passing over into new life. 
And there is self-sacrifice involved in even the most stub- 
born rebellion; and courage and endurance are exercised, 
unwillingly, even by the most cowardly of pleasure-seek- 
ers. The soul of goodness in things evil lies deeper than 
those admit who see not the tie that binds all Being in 
one. Even in the depths of hell the lost, if such there 
were, would still, despite themselves, serve God amidst 
their darkness. Nor can any being wander so far as to 
escape not only the presence, but the indwelling, of the 
Absolute. Moreover, even when the finite Self rebel- 
liously seeks to subdue all Being to its own present con- 
scious caprice, it actually expresses, in its own way, a 
truth. For there is indeed no life, however slight, which 
makes no difference to the rest of the world; nor is there — 


THE MORAL ORDER 351 


any caprice, however perverse, that is not an aspect, how- 
ever fragmentary, of God’s perfect meaning. So that 
when the Self rebels, it can rebel only because the Spirit 
dwells in it; and when it would fashion all things to its 
own will, it utters a truth, viz. the truth that, in its own 
degree, it is the object and expression of the divine inter- 
est. Butif the rebellious Self expresses thus unwillingly 
a truth that is already divine, the obedient Self, willingly 
seeking, even in what is Other, its own will, and surren- 
dering in order that it may possess, acts willingly in 
accordance with a truth that is final, and is conscious of 
its own meaning in a form that is far more significant 
than the one in which the life of the rebellious Self is 
embodied. 

Now it would belong to a system of ethical doctrine to 
develope what I thus only hint, namely, the positive con- 
tent of the moral act, and the deeper nature of the con- 
trast between what ought to be and what ought not to be. 
Here I am only interested in defining the alternative 
courses of action that are possible in a finite being suffi- 
ciently to show that a moral act, when once its content 
has been defined, can be conceived as occurring at any 
temporal instant, and in the life of any finite Self. But 
having defined the general situation which any moral 
agent faces, we again ask the question, Can our theory 
find room, in the temporal world, for free moral choices 
that conform or do not conform to the Ought? In other 
words, can a finite Self, knowing the Ought, in any sense 
freely choose to rebel or to obey? And is such free 
choice to do ill consistent with our theory of the perfec- 
tion of the whole, and the finality of the eternal order ? 


302 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


Vv 


Our question, as thus formulated, assumes several 
aspects, each of which must now be considered in its turn. 
Our own statement, in a former lecture, concerning the 
individuality and freedom of the finite Self, turned upon 
saying that in the unique whole of the Absolute life, every 
finite life, as related to that whole, and as one of the as- 
pects of this whole, must be itself unique. Since this 
uniqueness of each finite life, in other words of each Self, 
is itself the embodiment of an aspect of the Absolute 
Will; this aspect in turn appeared as itself an unique 
will, not elsewhere precisely duplicated, and so as the 
individual will of this finite Self. As the unique cannot 
be wholly defined through its external relations, or de- 
duced from them, or causally explained by means of them, 
we found each finite Self to be, in some aspect of its 
nature, free. And viewing the same facts in the light of 
the distinction between the temporal and the eternal, we 
now assert that each finite Self, in so far as it is an ethical 
individual, having a continuity of purpose in its life, ex- 
presses itself in a series of deeds, each one of which, as a 
deed that has an unique place in an unique life, is itself, 
in some measure and in some aspect, however slight,— 
free, —so that the individuality of every act sets a limit 
to the possibility of the causal explanation of this act by 
an external observer. We have now to see how this for- 
mer theory of the general nature of finite and temporal 
freedom applies to the case of the moral act, as that act 
has here been defined. That every such finite freedom of 
action is a strictly limited freedom, we clearly see. Our 


THE MORAL ORDER 353 


question is whether such freedom is sufficient to give 
finite acts their needed character as a choice between 
what ought to be done, and what ought not to be done, 
by the individual agent at any moment. 

Our objector may hereupon say: “What you have 
called the freedom of the finite Self certainly cannot 
be moral freedom. For, according to you, the Self 
always wills the same essential aim, namely its final 
union and harmony with its Other, or, in other words, 
its fulfilment through its oneness with the Absolute. 
As for the conflict between the Ought, on the one hand, 
and the rebellious attitude of the finite Self on the other 
hand, —a conflict whose decision, as you assert, consti- 
tutes the content of the moral act, — such a conflict can 
depend solely upon rgnorance. The Self seeks its own 
realization. It can seek nothing else. This realization 
means oneness with God. No other aim is possible. 
But ignorance of how to reach the goal is possible in a 
finite being. And, according to you, the rebellious Self 
is thus ignorant of its own true good, and states its 
fragment of truth in a false form. The Self that follows 
what a higher insight sees to be the Ought, on the 
other hand, merely knows the truth, and knowing fol- 
lows. Your so-called moral acts are thus mere expressions 
of knowledge or of ignorance, —not of freedom.” 

To this objection I reply that, by our hypothesis, 
whenever an individual acts, his deed is at once, and 
inseparably, an act of knowledge and an expression of 
purpose, —an insight and a choice. And the sense in 
which it is both knowledge and will at once is just 
here best indicated by remembering the sense in which 

2a 


304 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


every act of will, and every process of knowledge, 
involves what the psychologist calls Attention. To 
attend, is to be at once guided in your momentary deed 
by what you know, and determined in your knowledge 
by what you do. And, as Professor James has so 
successfully pointed out, and as we ourselves have 
maintained from the outset of the present series, 
the central feature of every voluntary deed, the consti- 
tutive principle of every finite life, is a process of Atten- 
tion. An idea arises in your mind. The idea already 
involves a nascent deed. Attend to that idea rather 
than to any other, and at once the idea, filling the 
whole circle of your consciousness, turns into its 
appropriate completed deed. In a moment of tempta- 
tion, the man who has his opportunity to embezzle, 
begins to think of how he could misappropriate the 
funds intrusted to him. The idea, already possessed 
of its ominous Internal Meaning, comes to conscious- 
ness as already the nascent deed of a Self rebellious 
against what is, for a higher insight, the Ought, — 
against the law of honor that here binds the Self to 
the truth, and to the Absolute. Does the conceived 
deed win possession of the whole field of conscious- 
ness? Then, indeed, by what thenceforth appears to 
the externally observant psychologist as an altogether 
automatic process, the deed is carried out in the man’s 
conduct. In other words, if the man thinks of nothing 
so much as of his opportunity to embezzle, then, if the 
opportunity also persists, and the physical power to 
accomplish the deed remains, he inevitably embezzles. 
On the other hand, if he thinks rather of the law of 


THE MORAL ORDER 355 


the obedient Self, of his honor, and of the tie that, 
when fully comprehended, is seen to be a tie that binds 
him to God, the deed remains undone, and the nascent 
evil Self is suppressed by the wiser Self. The only 
field of choice, in such a case, is therefore the field of 
attention. 

But an act of attention, I repeat, is at once an act by 
which we come to know a truth, and an act by which we 
are led to an outward deed. Such outward deed may 
be (as in the case earlier dwelt upon in our discussion 
of the World of Description), a deed whereby we come 
to seem, to an external observer, inactive, and merely 
observant of our world. But such inactivity, if it be 
deliberately chosen, is itself a sort of activity. As a man 
attends, so is he, so he knows, and so too, he acts, or 
voluntarily refrains from action. ‘Therefore it is vain, in 
case of any true choice, to separate, at just that instant, 
the knowledge which guides and the voluntary activity 
which then and there expresses this knowledge. What I 
potentially know, can indeed be, for any one abstract pur- 
pose, pretty sharply sundered from what I am able to do. 
Thus my memory has stores of possible knowledge that 
I do not now recall. And on the other hand, my acts 
could create outer objects that I have never yet made. 
And when one thus views the realm of what I can know, 
as for instance my storehouse of memories; and the realm 
of what I can do, namely, the possible new objects that 
my will could produce, knowledge and will seem far apart. 
But, in our present consciousness, knowledge and will 
are, as we long ago saw, merely two aspects of the present 
unity of conscious life. What we now know means what- 


306 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


ever is at present a discriminated fact in the unity of con- 
sciousness. What we now do means whatever we win 
through the present expression of our purposes in knowing. 
But the process whereby our present knowledge alters 
to meet our purposes, and is known as thus altering, is the 
process of attention. This process involves, then, an 
alteration of present knowledge to suit our purpose. 
It also, and inevitably, involves an acting according to 
our present knowledge. 

In the second lecture of the present series, we con- 
sidered our discriminating attention in its theoretical 
aspect, as something relatively opposed to definite action. 
But this opposition, as we saw, comes to light in cases 
where we so far lack the knowledge that is sufficient to 
guide us in a definite course of action. Here, however, 
we have to consider attention in so far as it means a 
deliberate and free dwelling upon, or ignoring of, plans 
of action which we are supposed already to possess. In 
this case, our attention appears not in its theoretical, 
but in its practical aspect. This attention is our choice 
to narrow the field of our own consciousness in a par- 
ticular way at a particular moment. 

It is indeed true that, according as a man now views 
the relation of the Self to the world, so, just now, he 
acts. It is equally true that, since every conscious act 
is a present act of attention, which is directed to some 
aspect of the relation between the Self and the world, 
therefore, according as a man now consciously acts, so, at 
this instant, he comes to view this very relation between 
the world and his individual Self. A morally ignorant 
man, who has never learned the law, or conceived in some 


THE MORAL ORDER 357 


particular sense of his own higher good, we acquit of 
moral defect, just in so far as he acts in this so far invin- 
cible ignorance. He must first get knowledge, as we say, 
before he can choose the right course of acting. It does 
not, however, follow that his knowledge of the good, when 
it comes, will deprive his good deeds of their free charac- 
ter. For in performing any one good deed, if he acts 
voluntarily, he will act by virtue of his own conscious 
attention to the good. So long as he clearly thinks of 
nothing so much as of his already known relation to the 
world and to God, he will indeed inevitably act accord- 
ingly, and be not the rebellious, but the obedient Self ; 
precisely as while the tempted man thinks of nothing 
so much as of his temptation to embezzle, he will inevi- 
tably steal whenever the opportunity offers. But, in both 
cases, knowledge will determine outer deed, precisely in 
so far as the inner deed of attention gets its purpose 
expressed in a particular kind of present knowledge. 
To our objector we consequently here reply: According 
to our view, all beings, everywhere, serve the Absolute 
purpose precisely in so far as then and there they know 
that purpose. Nor can any, even the worst beings, act 
without in some measure relating their momentary deed 
to what, however blindly, they then and there know of 
that purpose. But, on the other hand, all conscious beings, 
at any instant, know what they are conscious of, precisely 
in so far as they attend to an ideal. But the act of 
attention of just this instant, taken together with the 
resulting knowledge, is peculiarly apt to be the expression 
of just this instant’s unique, and accordingly free, will. 
In one aspect, as we saw before (in our second lecture), 


358 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


our consciousness at this instant is made narrow, our 
attention is centred upon just these facts, by virtue of 
conditions which we cannot now control. But in another 
aspect, our voluntary narrowing of the field of our atten- 
tion, at this instant, does alter the range of what we 
now know. Now it is in thts aspect that our attention, 
and so our will, can be, at any one instant, morally free. 
Hence when a being, by virtue of his training, and of the 
present grade of his consciousness, has at any instant pres- 
ent to him some form of the conflict between the Ought 
and the rebellious Self, what he then does turns upon, and 
is the expression of, the way in which he then and there 
attends to one or to the other of the warring interests. If he 
chooses to think of nothing so much as that it is just the 
private Self, as it now is, whose fulfilment, at any cost, he 
seeks, he comes to lack, in so far, the moralizing knowl- 
edge. His caprice, for himself, becomes then the only 
hint of the divine that tends to remain in sight. In so 
far as this tendency excludes everything else from sight, 
he forgets God as God, forgets the Ought as the Ought, and 
acts with a viciously acquired naiveté. Such a deed can 
never be wholly bad, simply because nothing absolutely evil 
exists, and because, as we metaphorically said, even in the 
depths of hell they still unwillingly serve God. But if, 
on the other hand, the attention fives nothing so much as 
the truer relation of the present temporal Self to the 
Other, upon whose definition the Ought depends, then 
just such attention wins its expression in the obedient and 
self-surrendering deed. What isin any such case done is, 
therefore, indeed the expression of present knowledge. But 
in this case the present state of knowledge is the expression 


THE MORAL ORDER 359 


of the present attention. And the attention is the will of 
the instant. Our theory is, that, despite all the causal 
dependence of the Self upon its own past, and upon all 
its social and natural conditions, just this act of attention, 
at this temporal instant, never occurred before, and will 
never occur again, and is, in so far, unique, individual, 
incapable of any complete causal explanation, and is, in 
consequence, the free act of this self. And thus, despite 
all the objections, we vindicate for our theory the power 
to deduce the possibility of temporal acts that possess 
a true moral significance. 

The sole possible free moral action is then a freedom 
that relates to the present fixing of attention upon the 
ideas of the Ought which are already present. To sin is 
consciously to choose to forget, through a narrowing of the 
field of attention, an Ought that one already recognizes. 
For while I cannot avoid acting in accordance with the 
Ought so long as I clearly know it, I can, through volun- 
tary inattention, freely choose to forget it. And while, 
again, the truth as far as I know it compels my deed, I 
do the good freely in so far as I freely choose to continue 
my already existent attention to the already recognized 
truth concerning the good. All sin, then, is sin against 
the light by a free choice to be inattentive to the light 
already seen. Or again, all sin is a free choosing of the 
sort of narrowness which, in our second lecture, we found 
to be, in one aspect, the natural fate of the human being. 
That is, sin depends upon a narrowing of consciousness, so 
that a present ignorance of what one ought to know occurs. 
Now a certain narrowness of consciousness we before found 
to be our fate. But freely chosen and vicious narrow- 


360 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


ness, —a deliberate forgetting of what one already knows 
of God and the truth, this is of the very essence of sin. 
All free choice of the good, on the other hand, is volun- 
tary persistence in attending to the good already known. 
Moral freedom is simply this freedom to hold by atten- 
tion, or to forget by inattention, an Ought already present 
to one’s finite consciousness. But such freedom is, upon 
our view, possible and actual. 


VI 


Yet the objector’s strongest argument remains still 
insufficiently emphasized. ‘Not thus,” he may say, “do 
you escape from the moral fatalism which was urged 
against you at the outset. What you have so far made 
out, if your argument be altogether granted, is, that, at 
any one point of time, a given moral agent, A, may freely 
so act, through his attentive process, as to emphasize 
either a false, or else a true view, of his relations to the 
Other that he seeks, namely, to the final expression of his 
whole will in the eternal order. The consequence may 
be a deed that a moralist will call an evil act or a good 
one, according as the agent decides by his choice in attend- 
ing or not attending to the Ought as he knows it. But 
you have done well to admit that according to your meta- 
phor, even in hell they unwillingly serve God. Those who 
make the hellish choice serve God ignorantly. But then, 
according to you, God knows that they do so. And in him 
even their own whole intent, together with the more con- 
scious and obedient intent of those whom the moralist 
calls the good, is completely brought to light, and is 


THE MORAL ORDER 3861 


eternally fulfilled, in an unique whole which, as you have 
repeatedly insisted, is such that no other fulfils or, speak- 
ing in terms of the concrete will, can fulfil, the one abso- 
lute purpose. In this unique whole, as you have also 
pointed out, every finite life and intent has its own indi- 
vidual place, a place that no other could take. And this 
place is, by hypothesis, a place in an absolutely perfect 
whole. The sinners, then, even by all their worst efforts 
to forget the good, cannot accomplish anything that makes 
the world less than perfect. Nor can the good do any- 
thing but express by their persistent attention their own 
consciousness that the whole is perfect. They cannot 
make the world better. Now where the world is such 
that the eternal perfection is predetermined, whatever the 
moral agent does, the situation is one of a moral fatalism.” 

I reply that here at last we reach the point where the 
distinction of the temporal and the eternal order becomes 
of most critical importance. Moral acts, as I have pointed 
out, occur in time. It is with reference to time, and in 
particular, to the time which any moral agent views as 
his future, that the agent himself, or any one who judges 
him, estimates any act as good or as ill. The free agent, 
whose temporal act (as an attentive choice between a per- 
sistence in knowing the Ought, and a free forgetting of 
Ought in favor of the evil), we have already character- 
ized, is told by the moralist, that by his deed he can make 
his world better, or worse. The emphasis here is laid, 
and rightly laid, upon fis world, upon the world as he ean 
view it in relation to his deed, — upon an aspect of Reality 
as such, and not upon the eternal whole of Reality taken 
as a whole. The moral agent is explicitly this Self as 


362 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


contrasted with other Selves. He is this individual 
among other individuals. You cannot indeed separate 
him from other individuals; but you recognize him as 
this individual by contrasting what he intends and 
effects, with what other individuals intend and effect. 

Now once considering the individual as acting in time, 
what you have a right to say to him is, that, if he in- 
tends evil results, —let us say, repeating our former 
example,—if he intends embezzlement, in a region of 
the temporal world where embezzlement is possible, 
and is accordingly an evil,—then, just in so far as 
he succeeds in carrying out his end, he produces what, 
at just that point of time, is indeed an actual evil. Now, 
in one of the lectures of our former Series, in speaking 
of death and similar evils, we already briefly considered 
how our Idealism has to view the general nature and 
the possibility of actual finite ills. Our examples of 
such ills were chosen, at that stage, not from the region 
of human conduct, but from our experiences of what 
seem to be natural ills, —ills whose source and true 
meaning are in large part unknown to us. Of such nat- 
ural ills, death is a classic instance, and we used meee 
the discussion to which I here refer, as our principal 
instance. Let us recall the main features of our view 
as there stated, reminding ourselves, for the moment, 
not so much of the sense in which moral ills or sins 
are possible, but rather of the general sense in which 
any evil can be said to have a place in Being. 

A finite ill is a fact of experience whose fragmentari- 
ness makes our universal search for the Other, for what 
lies beyond, for the context, explanation, justification, 


THE MORAL ORDER 363 


and supplement of this fact, peculiarly pathetic and 
eager. In the most general sense of the word evil, all 
finite facts, viewed as such, are indeed evil, precisely 
in so far as, when taken in themselves, they have no 
complete meaning, and leave us in disquietude, search- 
ing still for the Other, 7.e. for true Being in its whole- 
ness. To this aspect of finite life we long since called 
attention. It is not satisfactory to be finite. On the 
other hand, for our view, no finite fact is a total evil, 
for taken in its eternal context, as aspect of the whole, 
it ultimately implies, demands, or, if you please, means 
all other finite facts, and forms together with them, the 
total life in which the Absolute Will is fulfilled. In 
the more special sense of the word, however, we apply 
the term evil to facts which are so disquieting that they 
especially emphasize, as it were, their own finitude and 
ours, in so far as our experience is confined to them. 
When we face such facts anywhere in the temporal 
order, and are conscious of them as evils, we very espe- 
cially desire to change our own experience of them. 
This we desire, just because these facts send us so im- 
peratively to some Other, wherein we hope to find the 
features by virtue of which the positive value of the 
world shall become plain to us. In the presence of 
such ills, as for instance, pain and death, we inevitably 
say, “If this were all, then indeed better no world at 
all than this one.” And thus, in so far, an evil is a 
fact that very loudly proclaims, as it were, to our con- 
sciousness. “In me, Being in its wholeness and final- 
ity is not to be found. Elsewhere, elsewhere, lies the 
experience of the final truth.” 


364 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


Now how such ills can have any place in Being, we 
in a measure have seen from the very moment when, 
in refuting the abstractions of pure Mysticism, we first 
observed that unless the finite is real, the Absolute it- 
self has no Reality. If Being is a final whole of expe- 
rience, there must be that experience of which it is 
the whole, that striving of which it is the finality, 
that imperfection of which it is the completion. 
Or, to state the matter in less technical terms, unless 
the Absolute knows what we know when we endure 
and wait, when we love and struggle, when we long 
and suffer, the Absolute in so far is less and not 
more than we are. For all these states of ours mean 
something. The meaning of the world is the meaning 
of life, not of the lifeless; and attainment is not won 
except as the attainment of the goal of painful en- 
deavors. And the more significant the endeavors, the 
deeper the experience of finitude, and so of evil, that 
they include. But nothing that is known to the finite 
is lost to the Absolute; and finitude is a condition for 
the attainment of perfection, in precisely the sense in 
which the temporal is a condition for the consciousness 
of the eternal, or, to use our former simile, precisely 
as the successive chords of the music are a condition of 
the beauty of the whole succession when it is viewed as 
a whole. What ills find their place in finite Being, 
and what place any particular evil finds, —these are 
topics for special consideration. But of ill in general, 
this is the idealistic theory. 

But from such an indication as to the nature of ill in 
general, we return to the special case of moral evil. If evil 


THE MORAL ORDER 865 


in general can exist, in any finite and temporal region of 
our idealistic world, then evil can be the work of some 
finite moral agent. And this is as true for us as for our 
opponents. For when we call the evil the work of any 
agent, we mean that it expresses that agent’s will, as he 
embodied his will at some temporal moment of his life. 
Now for us it is as true, as for our opponents, that the 
will of a finite being can win an actual temporal expres- 
sion. And in consequence of what we have already said 
concerning the uniqueness and the individuality of the 
free agent’s temporal act, it is quite as possible for us as 
it is for our opponents to conceive that a just observer, 
aware of the facts, could say to a given finite agent, 
regarding a particular ill: “ This is what you have done. 
And but for you, and for you only, amongst all those who 
act in the world, this ill,—just this temporal fact that 
dissatisfies, never would have been.” 

“ But,” says our opponent, “according to you, the 
nature of Being, viewed in its wholeness, is fatally so 
constituted that this ill, which a given finite agent does, 
is so supplemented, so overcome, so included in a richer 
life, so taken up into the Other which this ill, even as it 
is, already means and implies, — that the whole is perfect 
despite the ill.” Yes, I reply, but how is this ill included 
and reconciled within the perfect whole? Not, according 
to our hypothesis, by virtue of the fact that the evil deed 
expresses the finite agent’s evil will, but because his will is 
supplemented, is overcome, is thwarted, is overruled, by what 
expresses some other will than his finite will was, in so 
far as he himself, at the moment of acting, consciously 
defined that will. For the supposition is that what he 


866 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


intended, just in so far as he opposed what he then viewed 
as his own interest to the world’s interest, and just in so 
far as this deed expressed his will, was the ill, and not 
the Absolute life ; the finite rebellion, and not the final 
harmony, — the embezzlement, for instance, and not the 
Ought. If per impossidile he had won might over Being, 
as he did win in his own measure and time, a momentary 
self-expression, the whole universe would have been an ill, 
and in fact, since nothing finally ill can exist as a whole 
at all, the universe would have been destroyed. For, by 
the very nature of Being and of evil, every sin, in its in- 
tention is, in essence, world-destroying. For in conscious 
intent, as an act of choosing to narrow attention so as 
to ignore what ought to be known and then to act in 
accordance with this vicious ignorance, it is inconsistent 
with the very conditions which make Being as a whole 
possible. What the ill-doer accomplished, then, was an 
actual ill, and an ill that would not have been, and that 
need not have been, but for his individual choice in nar- 
rowing his attention as he did. And in so far as his will 
was effective, there was that in the universe that had to be 
atoned for, and thwarted. Only through the conquest over 
this evil-doer and his deed, is the final perfection won. 
His deed is related to the goodness of the whole, much as 
the dread that in itself is cowardly, and is destructive of 
courage, is related to the courage that consists in enduring 
and in overcoming this dread, and that in so far depends, 
for its very perfection, upon that dread. 

In the temporal world, then, the evil-doer’s will is, 
according to our hypothesis, possessed of a measure, 
both of individuality and of freedom. It is in its own 


THE MORAL ORDER 367 


time and degree morally effective. What it produces 
is, in its temporal reality as this act or series of finite 
acts, an evil. This evil is due to the evil-doer, and 
without his choice it need not have occurred at all. 
Therefore, any free moral agent, in so far as he is free, 
may either choose or avoid evil deeds by choosing to 
attend to the good that he now knows, or to narrow 
his attention and ignore this good. Consequently, such 
an agent’s own world, that is, the world of the facts 
which express his finite will, precisely in so far as he 
himself distinguishes himself from all the rest of the 
Absolute life, — zs world, I say, is, for our doctrine, as 
for our opponent’s doctrine, a world which this finite 
agent can make worse or better if he chooses, and, 
within his own range of efficacy, as he chooses. The 
means by which he can freely do this we have seen, viz. 
his free attention or inattention to the good. As for 
the consequences of this free choice of his, they may, in 
a closely linked world, prove to be as grave, extended, 
and as lasting as temporal conditions may determine. 

So much then for the possibility of free and significant 
moral choices of good and of ill. Consequently, as to the 
charge that our view is a moral fatalism, what we say 
to the moral agent is this: You act as you will, just 
in so far as you are free. And you are free in the 
before-defined sense. That is, you are free to attend 
or not attend to the Ought as you already, at any mo- 
ment, have come to know it. If you do ill, the world- 
order will, indeed, in the end make good the ill you have 
done, and in that sense will make naught of your deed, — 
yet not because you are unable to do any ill at all, 


368 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


but because elsewhere, in the temporal order, other 
agents, seeking to overcome the disquieting ill which 
your will has chosen as its expression, will somewhere 
and somehow succeed. You yourself may, —yes, doubt- 
less will, in the end, come to join in this self-conquering 
task. The moral order of your idealistic world means, 
then, not that no moral ill can be done, but that, in the 
temporal order, every evil deed must somewhere and at 
some time be atoned for, by some other than the agent, if 
not by the agent himself, and that this atonement, this 
overcoming of the evil deed, will in the end make pos- 
sible that which in the eternal order is directly manifest, 
namely, the perfection of the whole. 

Now it is decidedly the condition of a moral order that 
evil should be, in the end, overruled for good. And 
precisely this is the result that our own theory defines 
and necessitates. When we then say that, in the eternal 
order, the whole is good, we do not say that this evil-doer 
is wholly good, or that his deed has no ill effects, or that 
any fate predetermines how he shall take his place in the 
good order. We assert that he becomes a part of the 
perfect whole in so far as his evil deed is overruled for 
good, either by another, or later, by his individual Self. 


Vil 


We have herewith in substance dealt with our oppo- 
nent’s case. We may return, however, in conclusion, to 
his original statements in their order as we stated them. 
“For the Absolute,” our objector (referring to our own 
view of the Absolute) said, “no other world than this 


THE MORAL ORDER 369 


one is, or in concrete truth can be.” Hence, as our 
opponent insisted, the whole, when viewed as a whole, is 
“static, fixed, changeless.” And therefore the deed of 
any moral agent is powerless to change this perfect 
world for good or for ill. Our reply here runs that the 
world, seen from the eternal point of view, is indeed not 
further subject to change. Yet this is only because the 
eternal point of view includes in its single glance the 
whole of time, and therefore includes a knowledge and 
estimate of all the changes that finite agents, acting in 
time, really work in their own world, namely, in the 
temporal world that is future to their own deeds, and 
subject to their own will. The totality of temporal 
changes, forms indeed, in one sense, a static whole, 
namely, in so far as no further series of events succeeds 
the whole of the temporal order of succession. But in 
another sense our world is as full of morally significant 
novelties as the nature of any world in any wise permits. 
For at every instant of time, according to our hypothesis, 
something novel, significant, individual, and in its own 
measure free, occurs, and leads to new results for which 
the choices of finite moral agents are responsible. 

Our objector further insisted that, for our view, “The 
individual knows at any instant that what he really 
means, even in his blindness, is identical with the Abso- 
lute Will.” Our reply is that here all turns upon the 
sense in which the word identical is used. The identity 
of the finite and the Absolute meaning is, for us, no mere 
identity without difference. I now know that, however 
blindly I strive, I suffer, or sin, my meaning, when fully 
interpreted in the light of all other life, of all the events 

2B 


370 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


that I now ignore, of all the future through which I and 
my fellows are yet to pass, of all the atoning deeds that 
shall yet reconcile my stubborn will to God’s will, and of 
all the acts that shall overrule for good my worst intent, 
—that my meaning, I say, when included in one whole 
with all these endless differences, is identical with God’s 
will. But taken by myself, as now I am, I am, indeed, 
remote enough, in my passing consciousness, both from 
my own self-expression, and from my final conscious 
union with my Other, namely with the Absolute. 

“But,” said the objector, “the agent’s deed, as your 
theory teaches, is never anything but one of the incidents 
in the process through which the Absolute wins the eter- 
nal perfection. Therefore your agent is unable to sin, or 
to go wrong, or to be less, at any temporal moment, than 
he should be.” I respond, The conclusion does not fol- 
low. Whatever I do, in my finitude, at this point of 
time, is, indeed, an incident in a process. The moral 
question is, What sort of incident? Viewed in itself the 
incident may be an evil deed. In that case, by the very 
definition of evil, and because the process, in its eternal 
completion, is good, the incident will be one that is 
turned to the good only by a further temporal process of 
overcoming the consequences of this deed, and of atoning 
therefor. The agent, then, according to us, is able to 
go wrong and to sin. If he sins, the eternal perfection 
includes his condemnation and the overcoming of his evil 
will, just as the hero condemns and overcomes his own 
dread, and thereby attains the perfection of courage. 

“ Were the agent other than he is,” urges the objector, 
“the whole world would, indeed, be other than it is. But 


THE MORAL ORDER 371 


according to you, the world as known to the Absolute, 
is known as a world that fulfils the Absolute purpose, 
and that in so far cannot be other than it is.” Hence 
the individual, as our objector also urged, cannot, with- 
out a failure of the Absolute purpose, be other than he 
is, and “is certain to be, in his own place, best as he is, 
whatever he is.” 

Our answer here insists simply upon a closer examina- 
tion of the situation before us. There is an agent, A, 
whose will is, in some aspect, determined by nothing ex- 
ternal to or other than himself, as he, at some moment of 
time, consciously is and acts. Were he other than he is, 
all the rest of the universe would in some sense be 
altered. Now he is an element in a perfect whole. But 
he is so merely because, in so far as evil appears in any 
region of that whole, this evil, by its very nature, de- 
mands, and finds, some Other, which so supplements it 
that it is overruled for good. As an evil, it cannot exist 
in isolation. Its supplement appears in the form of deeds 
of atonement, reparation, control, condemnation, and in 
the end, fulfilment. Such deeds in general are made 
necessary, by the evil deed, although their actual accom- 
plishment will involve, by our hypothesis, the expression 
of individuality that is in some sense or aspect other than 
the individuality that accomplishes the evil deed. These 
amending deeds will themselves, therefore, possess, in 
some measure, the character of free will acts. They will 
occur, in the temporal order, subsequently to the evil 
deed. They will, as common sense would word the situ- 
ation, “make good” the evil done. Only by virtue of 
these deeds, and because in the end they not merely offer 


312 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


external palliations to the ill done, but so include and 
control the will of the evil-doer himself that he comes to 
be related to the whole much as the dread of the hero is 
to the hero’s courage, — only thus does the evil-doer enter 
into and become one with the perfect whole. In himself 
considered, however, the evil-doer, as evil-doer, is not, for 
our view, “best as he is.” And if he had done otherwise, 
just these amending, atoning, reconciling, and perfecting 
deeds need never have occurred. If the evil-doer replies, 
“Yes, but the Absolute Will wrought even in and 
through me when I did ill,” we reply, The Absolute 
Will wrought in you, as Absolute Will, in so far as it was 
indeed well that you, as temporal individual actor, should 
just then be, in your own measure, free and individual. 
For freedom and individuality are aspects of every ele- 
ment in a perfect whole. But the Absolute Will, as such, 
was just what, in the evil deed, in so far as it was your 
free deed, you denied at the moment of your act; for, 
declining to attend to it, you made as if it were not. 
The amending and atoning deeds are not yours, in so far 
as you temporally chose the ill, but are acts either of 
your own Self at a later time, or of the other Selves. In 
brief, the Absolute Will wins through your condemna- 
tion and overcoming of your ill, and not through your 
cooperation, so long as, and whenever, your temporal act 
is not one of codperation. 

“But you lose sight,” continues the objector, “of that 
contrast between what is and what ought to be, upon 
which all the moral consciousness depends.” My reply 
here is that what ought to be and what is, can and do 
indeed fall asunder at any one instant of the temporal order. 


THE MORAL ORDER 373 


For that is the very nature of time, viz. that what is 
just now, at this instant of time, is not yet what ought 
to be, but needs Another to supplement it. Therefore is 
time the very form of the restless, finite Will. But what 
ought to be at any or at every point of the temporal order, 
is real in the eternal order in its wholeness. The world is 
not now good, nor is Being at this instant a temporally 
present whole, nor does either God or man at this instant 
of time see what now is as a fulfilment, or as right. 
Hence the future is needed to supplement the present. 
Hence it is that hope springs eternal in every finite in- 
stant. Hence it also is that, as the pessimists so mourn- 
fully observe, every hope for temporal good brings always 
its measure of disappointment. Nowhere in time is the 
good finally found. It is found, as the final good, only 
in the eternal order. 

“ According to you,” the objector had still insisted, “ we 
please God, and are ourselves pleased, in our union with 
God, — and pleased too with ourselves, whatever we are.” 
I respond, God is pleased, if so you wish to express 
the fact, and we too, in our union with God, are pleased, 
with the eternal triumph of the good over the evil. But this 
final satisfaction presupposes and includes just that dis- 
satisfaction with evil, which requires that every temporal 
evil deed shall meet its true adjustment to the good order 
through the deeds of atoning efficacy, or, in general terms, 
through the presence of that Other which every evil deed, 
when once seen as evil, demands. We are indeed pleased, 
in our union with God, in the eternal order, to see that 
our own evil deeds have been overruled for good. But 
just herein lies the essence of the moral order of the uni- 


374 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


verse, viz. in that we, too, however we wander, come in 
eternity freely to our home. 

“Yet your doctrine,” the objector finally urged, “has 
still to face the ancient difficulty concerning the recon- 
ciliation of the divine foreknowledge and the free will of 
man.” My response to this last objection is that, for our 
Idealism this ancient difficulty simply does not exist. 
We do not conceive that God, first preéxisting and fore- 
knowing, then in time creates a world that is real beyond 
himself, and that, in time, is subsequent in its events to 
his preéxistent foreknowledge. For us, God does not 
temporally foreknow anything, excepting in so far as he is 
expressed in us finite beings. The knowledge that exists in 
time is the knowledge that finite Selves possess, in so far 
as they are finite. And no such foreknowledge can pre- 
dict the special features of individual deeds precisely 
in so far as they are unique. Foreknowledge in time is 
possible only of the general, and of the causally predeter- 
mined, and not of the unique and the free. Hence neither 
God nor man can perfectly foreknow, at any temporal 
moment, what a free-will agent is yettodo. On the other 
hand, the Absolute possesses a perfect knowledge at one glance 
of the whole of the temporal order, present, past, and future. 
This knowledge is ill-called foreknowledge. It is eternal 
knowledge. And as there is an eternal knowledge of all 
individuality, and of all freedom, free acts are known as 
occurring like the chords in the musical succession, pre- 
cisely when and how they actually occur. 

So much then for the detail of our objector’s arguments, 
so far as we here need recall them. His general princi- 
ples have before been duly met. We conclude then, that 


THE MORAL ORDER 315 


our idealistic realm is a moral order, wherein any moral 
agent has his place, his task, his effectiveness, his freedom, 
and his individual worth, and has all these just by virtue 
of his unity with all Being, and with God. His acts are 
his own, even because God’s Will is in him as the very 
heart of his freedom. And his deeds are not indifferent 
to the whole universe, which wins through his free aid 
when he codperates, and through the overruling of his 
caprice when he withstands. Yet it wins by regarding 
and including his freedom. 


LECTURE IX 


ifs 


if 


ae 


A 


LECTURE IX 
THE STRUGGLE WITH EVIL 


Aut finite life is a struggle with evil. Yet from the 
final point of view the Whole is good. The Temporal 
Order contains at no one moment anything that can sat- 
isfy. Yet the Eternal Order is perfect. We have all 
sinned, and come short of the glory of God. Yet in just 
our life, viewed in its entirety, the glory of God is com- 
pletely manifest. These hard sayings are the deepest 
expressions of the essence of true religion. They are 
also the most inevitable outcome of philosophy. We 
have by this time laid the foundation for an understand- 
ing of the sense in which all these propositions are true. 
In doing so we have offered our principal contribution to 
the interests of Natural Religion. In the bare assertion 
of just these truths, that appear to our ordinary conscious- 
ness a stumbling-block and foolishness, the wisest of 
humanity, in India, in Greece, and in the history of 
Christian thought, are agreed. But the philosophical 
problem has always been to reconcile these doctrines with 
reason. An idealistic philosophy, when once understood, 
gives to all of them its own peculiar interpretation, but 
then makes them seem almost commonplaces. 

Yet we have still further to develope and to illustrate, 
in the final stage of our argument, the precise way in 


which these central truths are to be held and applied. 
379 


380 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


Nothing in philosophy appears more discouraging than 
any serious theoretical misstatement of the problem of 
evil. Yet nothing is more opposed to the interests of the 
awakened soul than to refuse every attempt to understand 
that problem in philosophical terms. In its purely ethi- 
cal aspects this problem concerned us at the last time. 
In its more general relations we shall now finally consider 
its meaning and its bearing upon the great virtues of 
courage, endurance, resignation, and hope. Hereby we 
shall be led to the view of the Union of God and Man 
which shall form the topic of our concluding lecture. 


I 


In speaking of moral evil, at the last time, we assumed, 
without special analysis, and as a result of ethical doc- 
trine, the meaning of the Ought, and the sense in which 
the conduct of a moral agent is to be judged as good 
or as evil according as it does or does not conform 
to the standard of the Ought. Upon the present occa- 
sion, where I shall have to deal with the general problem 
of evil, we shall less depend upon the special doctrines of 
Ethics. We shall use a more general and simpler defini- 
tion of evil, in terms of our Theory of Being, —a defi- 
nition which has repeatedly come to our notice. An evil 
is, in general, a fact that sends us to some Other for its 
own justification, and for the satisfaction of our will. 
This account of what it is to be an evil, we have now 
repeatedly illustrated. The account, when taken strictly, 
obviously applies, without exception, to every finite fact, 
qué finite, and especially to every fact in the temporal 


THE STRUGGLE WITH EVIL 381 


order, when that fact is viewed in relation to its own 
future. Any temporal fact, as such, is essentially more 
or less dissatisfying, and so evil. The only question, in 
this regard, about any temporal event, is how great an 
evil it makes manifest to our experience. But that in 
Time there is, for the will, no conscious satisfaction, is a 
thesis that, according to our view, is the necessary correla- 
tive of the thesis that Time is the form of the will. The 
future of our experience is that region to which, in our 
finite dissatisfaction, we proceed, seeking therein our fuller 
expression. To say this is simply to affirm that Time 
possesses the idealistic type of Being, and no other type. 
If one rejects, as we do, any realistic account of Time, as 
of every other aspect of Being, one finds no other way 
than this to view the nature of Time, or to define the rela- 
tions of the present to the future. For future time exists 
for me, in my finite capacity, either as that to which I 
have a conscious relation, or as that to which I have rela- 
tions whereof I am just now unconscious. In the latter 
sense, the future time when, for instance, I shall be sleep- 
ing, or shall be dead, appears to me indeed at this moment, 
as a time whose order is to go on without any reference 
to my will; and in so far, the law that every present has 
its future, and that to every instant another succeeds, 
seems to be capable of a purely realistic interpretation. 
Time, when so viewed, is regarded as the fate of the 
world, —as the devourer, the destroyer, of whatever now 
is. But the reasons that led us to abandon Realism have 
long since led us to declare that our conscious and not our 
merely fatal relations to Time, are the ones that give us 
our only genuine glimpses of the true nature of the tem- 


382 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


poral order. And, thus interpreted, future time is that 
realm of Being in which my will is yet to be expressed, 
or in which the other finite wills that I view, through the 
social contrast, or through my knowledge of Nature, as 
contemporaneous with mine, are also yet to be expressed. 
But if our will is yet to be expressed, then it certainly is 
not yet fully expressed in our experience. And this means 
that our finite will is now dissatisfied. Our original 
idealistic formula here recurs. Were the will satisfied 
with its present expression in experience, the whole of 
Being would now be present. No Other would be or be 
conceived. There would be no future; for future time 
would have neither meaning nor place in Being. As it is, 
a brief abstract and epitome of every finite conscious life 
in the temporal world might be given in the words, 
“ Dissatisfied with what now is, I press on towards what 
is yet to come.” 

It follows that dissatisfaction is the universal experi- 
ence of every temporal being. How this dissatisfaction 
empirically appears, under what form, with what inten- 
sity, —this is a matter that the more concrete experi- 
ence of life, taken in all its various aspects, has to decide. 
Vast ranges of finite ill, namely, those that are filled with 
physical suffering, have characters which we men are of 
course unable, at present, to explain in detail by any such 
abstract formula as the foregoing. Yet in those cases 
where our life is already largely under voluntary control, 
and where we are therefore more conscious of what life’s 
meaning is, we are able ourselves more directly to observe 
that the conscious ills, which, in such cases, still beset our 
fortune, are in a large measure due to the very magnitude 


THE STRUGGLE WITH EVIL 383 


and ideality of our undertakings themselves, to the very 
loftiness of our purposes, and even to the very presence of 
our active control over our deeds. For all these more 
ideal aspects of our consciousness mean that we set our 
standard high, and strive beyond the present more ar- 
dently. And in such cases our ideals actually imply our 
present dissatisfaction, and so contribute to our conscious- 
ness of temporal ill. In such instances, too, we see that 
the principal defect of these higher regions of our life is a 
defect of the very form of our present consciousness, and 
of any consciousness which is limited to some temporal 
present. For the type of consciousness that we now pos- 
sess, and any type of temporally limited consciousness, is 
too narrow for our higher purposes. It never can contain 
what shall adequately and finally express our present 
ideas. Hence the larger our ideals, the more we under- 
stand why it is that nothing temporal can satisfy us. 

On the other hand, it is indeed true that the abstract 
formula just stated does not enable us to comprehend why, 
quite apart from our consciousness of our ideals, some- 
times pain overwhelms, or sorrow besets, or fortune bears 
down heavily upon us, while at other times the conscious 
course of the time-stream appears relatively smooth, and 
we are even disposed, at some deluded moments, to say, 
with Othello, “My soul has found her rest so absolute.” 
I have no intention of using our merely general formula 
about temporal evil as a means for predicting or for 
explaining in detail our special human experience of ill. 
I admit at once that man’s Selfhood is bound by the most 
manifold ties to the life of universal Nature. In conse- 
quence, man constantly has fortunes that have no definite 


384 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


relations to his own conscious ideals. Man echoes, in his 
passing experiences of good and of ill, the fortunes, the 
interests, and the ideals of vast realms of other conscious 
and finite life, whose dissatisfactions become, as it were, per 
accidens, part of each individual man’s life, even when the 
man concerned cannot himself, at present, see how or why 
his own ideals, or what he takes to be his own concerns, are 
directly such as to make these dissatisfactions his fate. 
And this is true, first, in so far as man, the social being, 
echoes the joys and sorrows of his fellow-men, without 
regard to whether he consciously knows how these joys 
and sorrows stand related to his own ideal interests. But 
this echoing of other finite life than ours extends, secondly, 
as my hypothesis about Nature supposes, to all those rela- 
tions with the life of Nature upon which I earlier dwelt, 
when we were stating our cosmological theory. Thus, for 
instance, our organic pains, and our more instinctive emo- 
tions, have a depth and a manifoldness that I should 
hypothetically explain, in accordance with the theory of 
Nature earlier expounded, as due to the fact that vast 
strivings, — expressing the Will of the race rather than of 
the individual, and of Nature-Life in its wholeness rather 
than of the life of any one man, — strivings, that in them- 
selves are conscious and ideal, are at any moment, in 
our narrow present consciousness, merely echoed and 
hinted, by many of our profounder, but less rational joys 
and sorrows, repugnances and attractions. According 
as these vaster interests that pervade the processes of 
Nature, and that constitute the various meanings of its 
temporal occurrences, become more or less indirectly 
represented in our conscious life, we have experiences of 


THE STRUGGLE WITH EVIL 885 


such joys, and of such griefs, of such successes and of such 
failures, as we ourselves cannot directly explain in ideal 
or conscious terms. In so far, our dissatisfactions are 
indeed not recognized by ourselves as due to the temporal 
non-fulfilment of our own plans; and, therefore, in pre- 
cisely these cases, our fortunes seem unearned. And so, 
owing to the vast extent and to the complexity of these 
our relatively opaque relations to Nature, no one formula 
for the fortunes of life can possibly prove adequate to 
explain to ourselves, in our present form of consciousness, 
the wealth of our experiences of evil and of good, and 
the detail of these experiences. 

And yet, apart from these endless complications, the 
abstract formula does hold good that all finite and tem- 
poral processes of will must inevitably involve dissatis- 
faction. And the truth is also verifiable that, in so far 
as we can consciously grasp the meaning of our own lives, 
we know why they not only are, but, in the temporal 
order, must be, and, I may add, ought to be unsatisfactory, 
just because our ideals are so much vaster than our pres- 
ent form of experience, with its brief present instants, 
can ever adequately express, and just because the realm 
of finite life to which we belong is full of ideal striv- 
ings, so that the whole creation, seeking its own fulfil- 
ment, groaneth and travaileth together in pain until 
now. 

On the other hand, for our idealistic Theory of Being, 
this very presence of ill in the temporal order is the con- 
dition of the perfection of the eternal order. The most 
general reason why this is true we have now repeatedly 
stated. Simple Oneness is nothingness. Simple finality, 

2c 


386 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


apart from the process towards finality, is equally unintel- 
ligible. Attainment of a goal means a consciousness that 
a certain process wins its own completion. But this 
process is essentially a struggle towards the goal. Where 
there is the aim, there is also a consciousness that includes 
incompleteness, and that contrasts this with the comple- 
tion of the very process which itself embodies the various 
stages of the aim. The only way to give our view of 
Being rationality is to see that we long for the Absolute 
only in so far as in us the Absolute also longs, and seeks, 
through our very temporal striving, the peace that is no- 
where in Time, but only, and yet absolutely, in Eternity. 
Were there then no longing in Time, there would be no 
peace in Eternity. When the prayer is uttered that God’s 
will may be done on earth as it is in heaven, we do well 
to remember that the meaning, which here appears in the 
form of a petition, is identical with what philosophy must 
report as a simple fact, directly implied by our Theory of 
Being. Were not God’s Will in its totality, trium- 
phant in the struggle that goes on upon the earth, it 
would never be done in heaven at all. For heaven, if 
taken as the name for a realm where the Absolute Will 
is directly expressed, means simply the Eternal Order in 
its wholeness. While earth, taken as a region where the 
same Will at each instant appears as yet struggling with 
evil, is nothing whatever but a portion or aspect of the 
Temporal Order. But, as we have seen, these two orders 
are not divided in their Being. Realism would have sun- 
dered them. We simply cannot. The Temporal Order, 
taken in its wholeness, is for us identical with the Eternal 
Order. There are, then, not two regions sundered in 


THE STRUGGLE WITH EVIL 387 


their Being, in one of which the divine Will reigns 
supreme, while in the other the success of the divine 
plan is essentially doubtful. These two realms of Being 
are merely the same realm, viewed in one aspect as a tem- 
poral succession, wherein the particular present Being of 
each passing instant is contrasted with the no longer and 
not yet of past and future, so that fulfilment never at one 
present instant is to be found; while, in the other 
aspect, this same realm is to be viewed, in its entirety, as 
one life-process completely present to the Absolute con- 
sciousness, precisely as the musical succession is present 
at a glance to whoever appreciates a phrase of the music. 


II 


Thus, in its most abstract aspect, we have before us 
our idealistic method of viewing the ills of fortune, just 
as, at the last time, in speaking of the Moral Order, we 
endeavored to set before ourselves the idealistic way of 
viewing the nature and place of moral ills. But here- 
with we are indeed led to dwell upon yet another aspect 
of the problem of evil. The two undertakings just 
mentioned are not to be sundered. Our former study 
here again concerns us. Every ill of human fortune, 
since for our view it must be regarded as the expression, 
in the temporal order, of some finite will, is not explicable 
merely in abstract terms as due to the general nature of 
temporal Being. For it is also, presumably, either di- 
rectly due to the magnitude and ideality of our finite 
plans, or else is more or less directly the expression of 
the morally defective intent of some human or extra- 


388 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


human moral agent, or of the inadequacy of such an 
agent to his own ideals. 

In regard to the question: Whence and by whose deed 
or defect came just this ill-fortune?— we have indeed 
seldom any right to venture upon any detailed specu- 
lations. For since the Internal Meaning of the processes 
of Nature is, in general, hidden from man, we do well, 
in considering our natural misfortunes, rather to observe 
how best to adjust our skill to the actual ways of 
Nature, than to waste our time in a practically vain 
blaming of unknown hostile agencies for their blind or 
intentional interference with the life of man. Man’s 
practical business is with the direction of his own will 
to the service of God. And he does this most whole- 
somely when he least concerns himself with the mis- 
deeds, if such there be, of extra-human finite agents. 
Not even in case of the consequences of human conduct 
is it wholesome to judge our fellows, except within the 
narrow range where the facts are inevitably known to us, 
or where our judgment can lead to the improvement of 
the conduct of our fellows. Still less is the search for 
the origin, and for the specific nature of what one 
might call, in traditional speech, the diabolical ele- 
ments in the finite world at large, any profitable search 
for us mortals. The wise man contents himself, as far 
as possible, with the knowing, in general, that there is 
an indefinitely vast range of voluntary finite evil-doing 
which, in the temporal order, has to be endured, and for 
which atonement must be temporally rendered, in order 
that the divine will may be eternally accomplished. 

On the other hand, it is indeed plain that the moral ill 


THE STRUGGLE WITH EVIL 389 


of any agent, when once it has to be recognized as such, 
is thereby seen at once to become the source of ill for- 
tune to other finite moral agents. For just because this 
world is a moral order, we suffer together. Nor can it 
be wholly indifferent to any righteous man that his 
neighbor sins. In a sense the sin of every evil-doer 
amongst us taints all of us. For if I am a man, and if 
nothing human is alien to me, then, however much my 
individual free will may be set against any direct consent 
to the evil-doer’s particular purpose, this my free will, 
by virtue of our very definition of individuality, is in 
no sense absolutely independent of the common human 
nature that I share with the sinner. AJ] human sin is 
therefore indeed in some sense my own. It is at least my 
ill fortune, even where it is not at all my own individual 
choice. And in this sense every wise man, in contem- 
plating sin and its consequences, in all cases where he 
must needs know of them, hears the echo of the word, 
That art thou, sounding in his own heart in a tone which is 
as tragic, as the assertion itself is here one-sided, but in 
its own partial measure, true, even for the saintliest of 
men. No man amongst us is wholly free from the conse- 
quences, or from the degradation, involved in the crimes 
of his less enlightened or less devoted neighbors ; and 
the solidarity of mankind links the crimes of each to the 
sorrows of all. 

Morally evil deeds, and the ill fortune of mankind, are 
thus inseparably linked aspects of the temporal order. 
To know this in the right sense is not to be predisposed 
to a hasty moral judgment of our fellows, nor to the wan- 
ton imputation of blame to agencies either human or 


390 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


extra-human ; but it is rather to learn to judge our own 
life-task more seriously. Let an ill fortune come, in such 
wise that I myself can impute to my own free will no con- 
scious share in provoking this ill fortune. In general, I 
shall then be entering upon a vain search, if I try, in my 
finitude, to discover whose guilt or whose defect it is, 
whereof I now suffer the consequences. Yet since the 
whole temporal order is the expression of will, and since 
even the processes of external Nature, for our own view, 
embody the intent of finite agents, whose life is linked to 
ours by ties to us at present mysterious, I can indeed say, 
in general, that all ill fortune results from the defects, or 
at least from the defective expression, of some finite will. 
This finite will is in general unknown to me. I do well 
not to trouble myself to impute blame. Yet presumably 
every such defect of finite will has, like our own defects, 
a genuinely moral significance. I am therefore right in 
holding that, when I suffer an ill fortune due to external 
natural agencies (however meaningless that ill fortune 
may appear to me), Iam enduring a part of the burden of 
the world’s struggle with temporal finitude, or with sin 
and with its consequences. Hence my endurance becomes, 
to my wiser view, no merely self-centred Stoicism, in- 
tended only to show my own powers, but a willingness 
to codperate, whenever I can, in the divine task of giving 
meaning even to the seeming chaos of our present tem- 
poral experience. My willingness to bear hardness, as 
a good soldier, when I possess such willingness, is there- 
fore never content to be merely passive, or to remain a 
mere matter of personal pride. I shall undertake to atone 
for the ill that the unknown agent has done, and so to 


THE STRUGGLE WITH EVIL 891 


show how even the seemingly accidental natural ill can 
be made an element in a life of significant devotion and 
of positive meaning. The soul of goodness in things evil 
I shall not merely assume, but shall try actively to find 
out, through my very effort either to codperate in remov- 
ing this natural ill, or so to face it, that I shall come to 
work all the more serviceably and loyally because of its 
very presence in my life. 

On the other hand, when I inevitably am obliged to 
know whose sin it is whereof I endure the consequences 
when I suffer, I shall then remember, once for all, that all 
men are brothers, and that no man’s fault can really be 
wholly indifferent to my Being ; and I shall even rejoice, 
when I have the strength, that to me the opportunity is 
here given to join consciously in the common task of aton- 
ing for this sin. 

Were I at this point a realist, I might no doubt rebel 
to find that my essentially independent moral entity had 
been, by ill fortune, somehow yoked by external and by 
arbitrary ties to my fellow’s evil deeds, so that I seemed 
to myself to be dragging about with me the corpse of 
another man’s crimes even while my deserts were wholly 
sundered from his. But I am no realist. I know that I 
have no Being whatever which can be sundered from the 
Being of my fellow-man. I know that I have moral 
individuality only in so far as I have my unique share in 
the identically common ideal task of endurance, and of 
seeking for the expression of the Eternal Will. My 
individuality is therefore parted by no chasm from my 
fellow’s life. My responsibility, while not that of my 
fellow, is in no sense any absolutely independent fact in 


392 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


the universe, but is most intimately linked with my fel- 
low’s deeds and fortunes. I shall therefore indeed rejoice 
when, quite apart from any idle desire to impute blame, 
I become conscious of this, as of all other truth. And I 
do become conscious thereof whenever I am forced to 
observe that my sufferings are due to my fellow’s mis- 
deeds. I do not indeed rejoice that he did these evil 
deeds. But that wherein I rejoice is to have thus indicated 
to me the common human task of undertaking, in com- 
pany with my fellows, to make good just this evil. Ido 
not go out of my way to learn even this sort of truth. For 
it is, I repeat, not my human business to seek to impute 
blame, but to serve God however and whenever I can ; 
and search for the source of an evil deed is in general an 
idle task, in a world where fortune constantly teaches 
me quite as much about such matters as I just now need to 
know. Yet to pry into the guilt of my neighbor is one 
matter ; to rejoice that I have found a human office is 
quite another. And when the knowledge of my neigh- 
bor’s fault is forced upon me through my own resulting 
misfortune, I rejoice, if I am wise, to discover at least one 
case where my share in the atoning work of our common 
humanity is clearly laid out before me. 

But further, this knowledge of the intimate, although 
often to us so mysterious, relation of ill fortune and sin, 
renders especially serious my view of my own moral task. 
No sin of mine is wholly indifferent to my fellows. All 
future life is in some wise other because of my misdeeds, 
whether finite beings observe the fact or not. This our 
whole definition of Being necessarily implies. I con- 
stantly carry about with me a genuine, if in one sense 


THE STRUGGLE WITH EVIL 393 


strictly limited, responsibility for the whole world’s for- 
tunes; for what is deed to me is in some sense fortune 
for all other Selves. My visible sphere of action can- 
not then be so narrow that I am wholly without influence 
upon the whole realm of Being, and upon every region 
thereof. And thus the significance of my moral exist- 
ence, however petty my apparent range of influence, and 
however limited in one sense my powers may be, ex- 
tends, in another sense, without limit, through the whole 
range of the future temporal order. In brief, it is with 
your moral efficacy as with your physical efficacy when 
viewed in accordance with the ideal theory of gravi- 
tation. According to that theory, when you move, you 
move, however little, the whole earth and the sun and the 
stars. 

And thus we have sketched, in general terms, our 
idealistic view of the solidarity of the moral order, 
and of the interrelation between evil doing and ill for- 
tune. All that we have herewith asserted is in strict 
accord with the definite, but also limited, range that 
our foregoing lecture gave to the moral freedom of the 
Individual. Our doctrine of individuality demands that 
every Self shall be in some respect free. Our doctrine 
of the unity of Being implies that all Selves are known, 
without any true separation, in the organism of a single 
world life. And so far from there being any opposition 
between these two aspects of our idealistic realm, they 
are strictly reciprocal aspects. The one World and the 
free Individual imply each the other. For the proof 
and the significance of individuality are to be found, 
not in any independence and separateness of soul, but 


394 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


in the very fact that since the Absolute life is One, 
every region of this life has unique relations to the 
whole, while uniqueness of will and meaning imply 
everywhere a measure of finite freedom. On the other 
hand, the proof of the Absolute unity is statable only 
in terms of the principle that whatever is, is the final 
expression of the fully developed internal meaning of 
any finite idea; so that the Absolute is needed in order 
to give meaning to any Self, and no Self can be wholly 
independent of any other. 


III 


The most general formula whereby the presence of 
ill in the temporal order is to be explained and the 
general relations between moral defect and ill fortune, 
have now been severally considered. What happens 
in the temporal order is always more or less evil. And 
on the other hand, the content of any particular evil is 
due to some finite will. Meanwhile, we mortals have 
an extremely limited power to understand in detail the 
connections between sin and ill fortune. Yet we can 
very certainly say that ill fortune is by no means always, 
or even predominantly, due to the sins of the sufferer. 
On the contrary, the very solidarity of the moral world 
implies that when any individual sins, all beings, in a 
measure, endure the evil consequences; so that, in gen- 
eral, the greater part of any man’s suffering is due to 
causes that are not in any wise identical with his own 
free will. 


It next concerns us to consider the consequences of the 


THE STRUGGLE WITH EVIL 395 


foregoing view in their relations to the problems of The- 
odicy, and in their further practical bearings upon the 
spirit in which the ills of life are to be met.! 

The older forms of Theodicy were determined mainly 
either by realistic or by mystical motives. Such fashions 
of justifying the presence of evil in the world fall with 
the realistic and the mystical concepts of Being. Yet, 
even apart from the general metaphysical objections to 
such older solutions of our problem, their theoretical and 
practical defects, when viewed as ethically significant 
hypotheses, deserve here some brief attention. Let us 
simply summarize one or two of the principal forms of. 
such hypotheses. 

Mysticism, by its very nature as an ontological doc- 
trine, involves a conscious effort to deal with the prob- 
lems of evil. Such an effort is therefore an essential part 
of its undertaking, and every mystical theology is also a 
Theodicy. The mystical doctrine is, of course, that evil 
has no Being at all. And on the other hand, most of the 
numerous efforts, in the history of ethics and theology, to 
prove that evil is simply something illusory, rest upon a 
more or less explicitly mystical basis. Herein, however, 
lies a very sharp contrast between Mysticism and our own 
Idealism. For us, evil is certainly not an unreality. It 
is a temporal reality, and as such is included within, and 
present to, the eternal insight. What we have through- 
out asserted is that no evil is a whole or a complete 
instance of a being. In other words, evil, for us, is some- 


1 The following discussion follows, to some extent, the lines of my 
essay entitled ‘‘The Problem of Job,” published in my Studies of Good 
and Evil. 


396 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


thing explicitly finite; and the Absolute as such, in the 
individuality of its life, is not evil, while its life is un- 
questionably inclusive of evil, which it experiences, over- 
comes, and transcends. 

But Mysticism, on the contrary, has always asserted 
that an experience of evil is an experience of unreality, 
or is, like every finite experience, an illusion, a dream, a 
deceit. Now, not only do such doctrines fall with the 
form of ontology upon which they depend; but taken in 
themselves, as comments upon life, and as ethical doc- 
trines, they are at once self-contradictory and Anti- 
nomian. If evil is merely called finite error, this finite 
error remains none the less, as a fact of human experi- 
ence, an evil. One has only changed the name. The 
reality remains what it was. And in escaping from such 
error, the mystic either escapes from nothing at all (and 
in that case, indeed, escapes not at all, since nothing has 
happened when he escapes); or else he escapes from a 
real ill, when he turns from error to the Absolute (and 
in that case, the reality of the evil from which he escapes 
is admitted). The whole dialectic of practical Mysticism 
thus depends upon condemning as worthless our finite 
illusions, while yet asserting that, as worthless, they have 
no Being whatever, and so cannot even be rightly con- 
demned or transcended. For what you condemn or trans- 
cend has, for you, while you condemn or transcend it, a 
place in Being, even though, as our Idealism asserts, it is, — 
indeed, never the whole of Being taken as a whole. But 
this dialectic of Mysticism, as thus stated, is obviously 
endless. ‘The mystic first denies that evil is real. He 
is asked why then evil seems to exist. He replies that 


THE STRUGGLE WITH EVIL 897 


this is our finite error. The finite error itself hereupon 
becomes, as the source of all our woes, an evil. But no 
evil is real. Hence no error can be real. Hence we do 
not really err, even if we suppose that evil is real. Here- 
with we return to our starting-point, and can only hope 
to escape by asserting that it is an error to assert that we 
really err, or that we really believe error to be real. And 
of the dialectic process thus begun there is, indeed, no end, 
nor at any stage in this process is there consistency. 

On the other hand, it is equally obvious that this sim- 
ple denial of the reality of evil makes an end of every 
rational possibility of moral effort. Where there is noth- 
ing to escape, to transform, to transcend, or to make bet- 
ter, deeds become as illusory as the ills with which they 
contend. Meister Eckhart well said, of his Absolute, 
the Godhead “ never looked upon deed,” and knows noth- 
ing of good works or of evil-doers; while the Hindoo 
mystics with equal right pointed out that, to the Abso- 
lute Self, there is no difference between the murderer 
and the saint. And Angelus Silesius stated the mysti- 
cal view with a like consistency when he declared that 
the prayer, Thy will be done, is fulfilled only in so far as 
the true God has no will at all that can be thwarted : — 


“Und sieh, er ist nicht Wille, 
Er ist ein’ ewige Stille.” 


In consequence, the mystical Theodicy is, indeed, thor- 
oughly Antinomian. You may do what you will. You 
can do no evil. For evil has no reality. How could you 
give to any evil deed true Being, even of the most frag- 
mentary type? 


398 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


It remains by way of comment upon the mystical The- 
odicy, to point out once more, and with emphasis, that 
our Idealism herein very sharply differs from Mysticism. 
For us God has and is a Will. And through all the 
struggles of the Temporal Order, just this will is winning 
its way; while, on the other hand, in the Eternal Order, 
just this will is finally and triumphantly expressed. 
Meanwhile, in the Temporal Order, there is, at every 
point and in every act, relative freedom. And for that 
very reason there is the possibility and the fact of a 
finite and conscious resistance of the will of the World 
by the will of the Individual. The consequences of such 
resistance are real evils, — evils that all finite beings and 
the whole world suffer. Such evils are justified only by 
the eternal worth of the life that endures and overcomes 
them. And they are temporally overcome through other 
finite wills, and not without moral conflict. The right 
eternally triumphs, yet not without temporal warfare. 
This warfare occurs, indeed, within the divine life itself, 
and not in an externally created world that is realistically 
an independent Being, other than God, and sundered 
from him. But this very view makes the conflict no 
less genuine, and the eternal victory no less a moral 
victory. 

A modified form of the mystical Theodicy, in connection 
with the realistic elements, apears in the classic doctrine 
of evil in the Scholastic theology. Here evil has, as the 
Thomistic doctrine assures us, no positive entity ; but 
involves imperfections whose only real basis lies in the 
perfections of the beings concerned. Yet this doctrine 
escapes from the direct consequences of Mysticism only 


THE STRUGGLE WITH EVIL 399 


through the addition of those realistic elements which 
characterize the scholastic doctrine of the created world. 


IV 


We may pass then, next, directly to the realistic forms of 
Theodicy. And of these, for the moment, we need espe- 
cially mention but one,—a form especially familiar in 
popular theology, and by no means ignored in the classic 
statement of the just-mentioned scholastic theory of evil. 
According to this view real evil is entirely due to the free 
will of moral agents who are essentially Independent 
Beings, and who have their existence apart one from 
another, like all the entities of Realism. ‘The soul that 
sinneth it shall die.” This is the central thesis emphasized 
by such a realistic Theodicy. Any moral agent with a free 
will is created by God. But God’s will then leaves him 
quite free to choose for himself whether he will do well or 
ill. In so far as he chooses ill, evil enters the world. 
This evil is not in any sense in God, nor yet in the world 
by any divine consent ; but is in a being who, in his free- 
dom, is now wholly independent of God or of any other 
moral agent. The divine justice hereupon indeed 
demands that the moral order should be vindicated by 
requiring the sinner to reap the consequences of his deed. 
As usual with Realism, a primary sundering of entities is 
somehow to be made good by a secondary act that annuls 
the sundering. And the ills of the world, thus explained 
as the divinely determined penalty of sin, are such that 
the sufferers have only their own sinfulness to blame for 
their woes, while God’s righteous government is vindicated 
by their inability to escape his judgment. 


400 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


I call this view, in many of its popular forms, a realistic 
Theodicy, because its expounders usually and profoundly 
object to our foregoing account of the deeper unity of the 
Temporal and the Eternal Orders, and lay great stress 
upon sundering the moral agents of the universe. They 
do this, first, for the sake of making, as they often say, the 
responsibility of each moral agent something quite definite 
and unmistakable, and secondly, for the sake, as they often 
add, of entirely clearing the divine Will from any respon- 
sibility for the deeds of the finite agents, and finally, for 
the sake of assuring us that no true harm can come to the 
righteous. In its most consistent form this theory would 
be forced, as a consequence, to regard all the explicable and 
real sufferings of the world as the direct penalty of sin, and 
as visited upon the individual evil-doers themselves. For, 
as a well-known and highly realistic popular ethical view 
has often asserted, it would be unjust if God visited upon 
one moral agent the penalty of another moral agent’s sins. 
For are not the Selves, one insists, essentially and mutally 
independent entities, whose salvation or damnation ought 
to be, and in a moral world is, their own doing? And 
how can God’s ways be justified unless we suppose that he 
wishes all men, — these Independent Beings whom he has 
created, — to prosper and to win blessedness, if only they 
choose to be righteous? If they sin, theirs is the just 
penalty. But no ill can happen to the righteous in this 
justly governed world of the ethically Independent Beings. 

Accordingly, in view of the complications of life, and 
because of the frequent appearance of ills that seem to 
fall upon the innocent, and because of the seeming delay 
of the divine justice in the visible affairs of men, this doc- 


THE STRUGGLE WITH EVIL 401 


trine, ever since the days of Job’s friends, or of the 
speculations of the more realistic of the early Hindoo 
sages regarding the source of evil, has been forced to make 
use of various supplementary hypotheses, which here, 
indeed, need not long detain us. A righteous man seems 
to suffer. Hereupon this realistic Theodicy appears 
endangered. Injustice appears to have come into the 
world. How shall one explain the facts? Well, with 
Job’s friends, one may make the hypothesis that the 
righteous man has secretly sinned. Or, with the popular 
doctrine of the Hindoos, a doctrine occasionally imi- 
tated in Western thought, one may suppose that a sin 
done in some previous state of existence is visited upon 
the sufferer in the present life. Or, borrowing from the 
mystic as much of his lore as one needs, one may divide 
apparent ills into two sorts, — the one sort being merely 
illusory ills, blessings in disguise, or matters that the 
enlightened can see to be of no real moment whatever ; 
while only the other sort of ills, namely those which are 
the penalties of sin, are genuine ills. To the former class 
are then referred those ills of mere fortune which seem to 
come both to the just and to the unjust. One supposes 
that only human illusion makes these appear to be ills at 
all. For God’s will has wrought them, and, by hypothe- 
sis, not as penalties of sin. And God’s will could mean 
naught but good to his righteous children. Hence of such 
ills we must make light. They may often seem grave. 
But this sort of Theodicy calls them mere appearances. 
On the other hand, there are, in the world, true evils. 
But they are the penalties of sin. And they are always 
visited upon the evil-doer himself. 
2D 


402 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


Seldom has such a Theodicy as this been carried out with 
any very rigid consistency. On the other hand, as a gen- 
eral tendency in doctrine, this form of the explanation 
and justification of evil is very well and popularly 
known. Yet if it were ever expressed with a thorough- 
going consistency, I hold that its consequences would be 
as hopeless, when viewed with reference to the interests 
of any ethical interpretation of the universe, as the real- 
istic ontology upon which it is based is helpless against 
the attacks of a sound metaphysical analysis. This view 
gives us in truth no intelligible Theodicy whatever. 

For, as a fact, our ethical interest in the universe is 
quite as inseparable from a belief in the solidarity of all 
human life, and in fact in the solidarity of all finite life, 
as this same ethical interest is also inseparable from a 
belief in the relative freedom and the individuality of 
finite agents. Moral agents must indeed possess their 
measure of finite freedom, if the world is to be a moral 
order. But in no ethically significant sense can they be 
Independent Beings, of any realistic type, if this same 
world is to possess any moral unity of meaning whatever. 
For what gives the moral life its whole positive signifi- 
cance is the fact that individuals can and do suffer, and 
undeservedly suffer, and, in a measure, helplessly suffer, 
for the wrong-doing of other individuals, while for the 
very same reason, moral agents can do positive good in 
and for the lives of other moral agents. In a moral world 
I, as ethical agent, must indeed be free to choose my own 
measure of individual and moral good and ill. But I 
cannot be free to suffer only for the consequences of my 
own sins. For if this latter were the case, and if this 


THE STRUGGLE WITH EVIL 403 


freedom to suffer only for my own sins were the general 
rule that held for all moral agents, then everybody’s true 
inner fortune would indeed be wholly independent of the 
deeds of his fellows. But in that case no moral agent 
would have any genuinely significant task to perform. 
For our genuinely significant moral tasks all involve help- 
ing our fellows. And the power positively to help my 
fellow is necessarily correlative with my power to harm 
him. Where I cannot harm, I cannot help. And in a 
world where I cannot genuinely help another, my whole 
moral life becomes limited to the task of cultivating 
a purely vain and formal piety, as empty as it is ineffec- 
tual. It follows that this form of realistic Theodicy, in 
joining to its theory of free will a conception that finite 
Selves are sundered in their true Being, and so in their 
fortunes, by chasms, has unwittingly destroyed the moral 
universe. 

This consequence of this realistic Theodicy can easily 
be developed by any illustration of a case where a good 
deed appears possible. The stranger has fallen by the 
wayside. Can the good Samaritan do him any service? 
Yes, —but only upon the hypothesis that real evils are 
not solely the inevitable consequences that divine justice 
brings upon sufferers because of their own sins. For 
if the real evils of the world are all of them the just 
penalties of the sins of those who suffer, then, accord- 
ing to the realistic theodicy, yonder stranger’s suffering 
is one of two things. Perhaps, namely, it is no real 
evil at all, but an illusory appearance of mishap. In 
that case no good need or can be done by giving the 
stranger succor. But perhaps, on the other hand, it 


404 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


is a well-earned penalty for his past misdeeds,—a pen- 
alty which divine justice inflicts. But in the latter 
case, by the hypothesis of the realistic Theodicy here 
in question, the penalty has come to this stranger solely 
because a righteous God knew that it was earned, and 
that it must come. How then can the good Samari- 
tan hope to intervene between the just God and the 
righteous penalty? If he succeeded in relieving the 
sufferer, he could at best only postpone the day of God’s 
just wrath, and of the inevitable penalty. Or, in other 
words, the relief would be a mere illusion. The priest 
and the Levite who pass the sufferer by, and who leave 
him to the punishments of God, are therefore following 
out the only consistent practice that our realistic Theodicy 
could counsel. At most, like Job’s friends, they might 
have approached the sufferer to warn him of the neces- 
sity of making his peace with God. Even this warn- 
ing could convey to him no real good. For the grace 
of repentance also he would possess, if he deserved it, 
and if it could avert any of the evil consequences of 
his deed. Meanwhile, the thieves amongst whom the 
stranger fell really did him no ill except just what he 
deserved. They too, then, were God’s ministers, and in 
no wise evil-doers. 

The result is here indeed a moral fatalism, of an un- 
expected, but none the less inevitable, sort. But what 
the illustration brings to light is, that the problem of 
evil indeed demands the presence of free will in the 
world; while, on the other hand, it is equally true that 
no moral world whatever can be made consistent with the 
realistic thesis according to which free will agents are, 


THE STRUGGLE WITH EVIL 405 


in fortune and in penalty, independent of the deeds of 
other moral agents. It follows that, in our moral world, 
the righteous can suffer without individually deserving 
their suffering, just because their lives have no inde- 
pendent Being, but are linked with all life. 

Nor, in fact, can any realistic conception of the moral 
agents, as souls essentially independent, in their Being, 
of their creator, or of one another, be just to the soli- 
darity upon which every explanation and justification 
of the ills of the world must rest. If the ills of the 
creatures are events external to the life of their creator, 
then the creator has fashioned suffering in which he him- 
self has no share, and of which he is independent. In 
that case the ancient dilemma as to the limitation of 
his power upon the one hand, or of his benevolence 
upon the other, retains all its hopelessness of meaning. 
The ways of God cannot thus be justified. 


Vv 


I return afresh to our own idealistic view. I state 
again its theses and their consequences, — but this time 
in a directly practical form. 

I suffer. Why? In general because I am an agent 
whose will is not now completely expressed in a present 
conscious life. I seek in the Beyond my fulfilment. The 
higher my ideals, the more far-reaching my plans, the 
more I am full of the longing for perfection, the more 
there is in me of one kind of sorrow, — namely, of sorrow 
that my present temporal life is not yet what I mean it 
to be. Moreover, the narrowness of my present form of 


406 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


consciousness not only limits my ideal search for the 
fulfilment that I conceive in the future. It also sets 
bounds to my conscious retention of my former attain- 
ments. What I have won, I too often forget and forsake. 
My past is no longer mine, just because my consciousness 
is of such narrow span. I lose my own past, just as I 
struggle in vain to win what is still my future. Thus 
I am beset with temporal ill behind and before. The 
no longer and the not yet equally baffle me. 

Now is there any good in all this essential, and, never- 
theless, ideally colored, misfortune that besets the best 
deeds and meanings of my present form of conscious- 
ness? Yes. There is, indeed, one very great good. 
For in respect of this better aspect of my life, I suffer 
because of the very magnitude and the depth of my 
meanings. I am in ideal larger than my human experi- 
ence permits me, in present fact, to become. My evil is 
the result of this my highest present good. Can I im- 
prove this my state of temporal ill? Yes, by every seri- 
ous effort to live in better accord with my ideal. To be 
sure, there is no infallible rule for winning temporal 
good fortune; for my fortunes, and my actual power to 
attain my temporal goals, depend upon my infinitely com- 
plex natural relations with other life. No act of my finite 
individuality has created, or can transform, my tempera- 
ment, my heredity, my environment, or can free me from 
the burden that I must cheerfully accept, —the burden of 
being this man, weighted with the presence of this organ- 
ism, this inheritance of human sorrow and sin, this task 
in a world of cares. But one thing lies in my power. 
And that is, to be devoted to my life’s task, namely, to 


THE STRUGGLE WITH EVIL 407 
the Eternal. For me the readiness is all. But I can be 
ready, ready to accept the dear sorrow of possessing 
ideals, and of taking my share of the divine task. 

But in all this my own struggle with evil, wherein lies 
my comfort? I answer—my true comfort can never lie 
in my temporal attainment of my goal. For it is my 
first business, as a moral agent, and as a servant of God, 
to set before myself a goal that, in time, simply cannot 
be attained. Woe unto them that are at ease in Zion. 
Yes, woe unto them, for they are essentially self-contra- 
dictory in the blindness of their self-assertion. They 
assert that they win peace in their temporal doings; 
but temporal peace is a contradiction in terms. We 
approach such peace nearest of all when we have least 
of ideal significance in our consciousness. We attain it 
only in deep sleep, while the restlessly beating heart sug- 
gests that nature is even then dissatisfied with and in 
every present state of what men call our organism; but 
while we, as mere finite human individuals, will nothing, 
think nothing, and for just that time are nothing. Who- 
ever is awake, is content with the present precisely in 
so far as the world means little to him. The more the 
world means, at any moment, to our consciousness, the 
more we go onward towards some goal. The more then 
are we discontent with the instant. 

Our comfort cannot, therefore, be at once significant, 
and yet a matter of purely temporal experience. Wherein, 
then, can comfort truly be found? I reply, In the con- 
sciousness, first, that the ideal sorrows of our finitude are 
identically God’s own sorrows, and have their purpose 
and meaning in the divine life as such significant sor- 


408 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


rows; and in the assurance, secondly, that God’s fulfil- 
ment in the eternal order—a fulfilment in which we 
too, as finally and eternally fulfilled individuals, share, — 
is to be won, not as the mystic supposed, without finitude 
and sorrow, but through the very bitterness of tribula- 
tion, and through overcoming the world. In being faith- 
ful to our task we, too, are temporally expressing the 
triumph whereby God overcomes in eternity the temporal 
world and its tribulations. 

I say, our sorrows are identically God’s own sorrows. 
This consequence flows directly from our Idealism. And 
we accept this consequence heartily. It contains the only 
ground for a genuine Theodicy. The Absolute knows all 
that we know, and knows it just as we know it. For not 
one instant can we suppose our finite experience first 
“absorbed” or “transmuted” and then reduced, in an 
ineffable fashion, to its unity in the divine life. The 
eternal fulfilment is not won by ignoring what we find 
present to ourselves when we sorrow, but by including 
this our experience of sorrow in a richer life. And, on 
the other hand, nothing in our life is external to the divine 
life. As the Absolute is identically our whole Will 
expressed, our experience brought to finality, our life 
individuated, so, on the other hand, we are the divine 
as it expresses itself here and now ; and no item of what 
we are is other than an occurrence within the whole of the 
divine existence. In our more ideal sorrows we may 
become more clearly aware how our intention, our plan, 
our meaning, is one with the divine intent, and how our 
experience is a part of the life through which God wins 
in eternity his own. And the comfort of this clearer 


THE STRUGGLE WITH EVIL 409 


insight lies precisely here: —I sorrow. But the sorrow 
is not only mine. This same sorrow, just as it is for 
me, is God’s sorrow. And yet, since my will is here 
also, and consciously, one with the divine Will, God who 
here, in me, aims at what I now temporally miss, not 
only possesses, in the eternal world, the goal after which 
I strive, but comes to possess it even through and be- 
cause of my sorrow. Through this my tribulation the 
Absolute triumph, then, is won. Moreover, this triumph 
is also eternally mine. In the Absolute I am fulfilled. 
Yet my very fulfilment, and God’s, implies, includes, de- 
mands, and therefore can transcend, this very sorrow. 
For now, secondly, I assert, even in all this, that the 
divine fulfilment in eternity can be won only through the 
sorrows of time. For, as a fact, we ourselves, even in 
our finitude, know that the most significant perfections 
include, as a part of themselves, struggle, whereby oppos- 
ing elements, set by this very struggle into contrast with 
one another, become clearly conscious. Such perfections 
also include suffering, because in the conquest over suffer- 
ing all the nobler gifts of the Spirit, all the richer experi- 
ences of life, consist. As there is no courage without a 
dread included and transcended, so in the life of endur- 
ance there is no conscious heroism without the present 
tribulations in whose overcoming heroism consists. There 
is no consciousness of strength without the presence of 
that resistance which strength alone can master. Even 
love shows its glory as love only by its conquest over the 
doubts and estrangements, the absences and the misunder- 
standings, the griefs and the loneliness, that love glorifies 
with its light amidst all their tragedy. In a world where 


410 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


there was no such consciousness as death suggests to us 
mortals, love would never consciously know the wealth 
and the faithfulness of its own deathless meaning. Who- 
ever has not at some time profoundly despaired, knows 
not the blessed agony of rising from despair and of being 
more than the demonic powers that are wrecking his life. 
Art, which in its own way often gives us our brief 
glimpses of the eternal order, delights to display to us all 
this dignity of sorrow. The experience of life, amidst 
all the chaos of our present form of consciousness, brings 
home to us this great truth that the perfection of the Spirit 
is a perfection through the including and transcending of 
sorrow, —-and brings it home in a form that leaves us no 
doubt that unless God knows sorrow, he knows not the 
highest good, which consists in the overcoming of sorrow. 

So much then for our sorrows, so far as they have to us, 
as we are, a consciously ideal meaning. But, you may 
say, much of sorrow, such as mere physical pain, and 
such as our more degrading ill fortune, has not this qual- 
ity. To us as we are such sorrow seems in no wise 
ennobling. What comfort have we for ills that seem not 
to have, for our present consciousness, any ideal meaning ? 
Do they link us with the divine? Do they help us on- 
wards in the task of life? Do they not rather tend to 
drive us to forget our goals, and to lose sight of life’s 
meaning ? Can such sorrows thus be justified ? 

I have already, in substance, replied to this objection. 
Man, as he is, lives not only his more consciously ideal 
human life. Linked as he is to countless processes of 
nature, and of his fellows, he echoes, in his passing expe- 
riences, the sorrows of the world. He cannot now know 


THE STRUGGLE WITH EVIL 411 


the ideal meaning of the vast realms of finite life in whose 
fortunes he is at present mysteriously doomed to share. 
His comfort here lies in knowing that in all this life 
ideals are sought, and meanings temporally expressed, — 
with incompleteness at every instant, with the sorrow of 
finitude in every movement of the natural world, but 
with the assurance of the divine triumph in Eternity 
lighting up the whole. 

In brief, then, nowhere in Time is perfection to be found. 
Our comfort lies in the knowledge of the Eternal. 
Strengthened by that knowledge, we can win the most 
enduring of temporal joys, the consciousness that makes 
us delight to share the world’s grave glories and to take 
part in its divine sorrows, -—sure that these sorrows are 
the means of the eternal triumph, and that these glories 
are the treasures of the house of God. When once this 
comfort comes home to us, we can run and not be weary, 
and walk and not faint. For our temporal life is the 
very expression of the eternal triumph. 


LECTURE X 


= 
> 
: 
4 
— 
: 


LECTURE X 
THE UNION OF GOD AND MAN 


For better or for worse, the investigation to which our 
two series of lectures have been devoted now draws to its 
close. Our case has been presented. A theory of Being, 
itself founded upon an interpretation of human experi- 
ence, has been applied to special problems, such as human 
life constantly offers to our notice. The result has been 
an outline of the basis of a Philosophy of Religion. We 
began our first series of lectures by stating our general 
problem as that of the World and the Individual, —of 
their nature and their relations. As we close, we are 
chiefly interested in that aspect of this problem which 
now, in view of the immediately preceding lectures, lies 
nearest to us; viz., the question as to the relations between 
God and Man. 


I 


Our account of the human Self has endeavored to be 
as just as our space permitted to the complexity, the 
temporal instability, and the natural dependence, of 
Man the finite being, when he is viewed in the con- 
text of the physical world. There is a sense in which 
man is a product of Nature, and in which his life is 
but one incident in a vast process of Evolution, —a pro- 


cess whose inner meaning in great part at present escapes 
415 


416 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


us. We have tried to see the extent to which just this 
is true. There is also a sense in which man’s life as a 
Self appears to be a mere series of relatively accidental 
experiences, and of shifting social contrast-effects. We 
have attempted to show how far this also is the case. 
There is a philosophical truth in saying, as tradition 
and common sense long ago said, that man is a prey of 
fortune, — that his life is a shadow, that all his essence 
seems insubstantial, transient, and uncertain, and that, 
so far as you find law governing his life, it appears to 
the external observer to be a merely natural law, indif- 
ferent to the meanings and ideals that man _ himself 
most prizes. And to such truth also we have en- 
deavored to be just. But when we were led to em- 
phasize all these limitations of human nature, our 
interpretation of them was from the outset determined 
by the inevitable consequences of our general theory 
of Being. None of these aspects of man’s existence 
could appear to us startling or strange, or even disap- 
pointing, because we had long since learned in what 
sense, and in what sense only, these very facts could 
possess any Being whatever. For in thinking of this 
world, where his natural place in the temporal order is 
so insignificant, man finds that the very link which 
binds the whole universe to this instant’s knowledge 
is a link that predetermines what meaning the whole 
must itself possess, and consequently what meaning 
man’s life, despite its apparent pettiness, must illustrate. 

To the individual man we have accordingly said: 
Conceive yourself, in the light of your science, as 
this seeming plaything of natural destiny. Know your 


THE UNION OF GOD AND MAN 417 


frame. Remember not only that you are dust, in the 
ancient sense of that word, but also that you are in 
your inner life, in the way that psychological analysis 
has now rendered familiar,— an insubstantial series of 
psychical conditions, physically and socially determined, 
precisely in so far as such determination is possible, — 
a being whose nature has only such permanence as may 
prove to be involved in the permanent meaning of those 
fleeting conditions themselves, in case they indeed may 
possess any such.meaning. View yourself as an inci- 
dent, or at best an episode, in the world-embracing 
process of evolution. And then, when you have done 
all this, ask afresh this one question: How can I know 
all these things? And how can all these facts them- 
selves possess any Being? You will find that the only 
possible answer to your questions will take the form 
of asserting, in the end, that you can know all this, 
and that all this can be real, only by reason of an onto- 
logical relation that, when rightly viewed, is seen to 
link yourself, even in all your weakness, to the very 
life of God, and the whole universe to the meaning of 
every Individual. In God you possess your individual- 
ity. Your very dependence is the condition of your 
freedom, and of your unique significance. The one 
lesson of our entire course has thus been the lesson of 
the unity of finite and of infinite, of temporal depend- 
ence, and of eternal significance, of the World and all 
its Individuals, of the One and the Many, of God and 
Man. Not only in spite, then, of our finite bondage, 
but because of what it means and implies, we are full 


of the presence and the freedom of God. 
25 


418 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


But now, emphasizing the especially human aspect 
of our ontology, and the especially ethical significance 
of our theoretical results, we must expound a little 
more fully some of these our characteristic theses. 
And the particular further task of this closing lecture 
must be to bring together the various threads of our 
argument, in so far as they bear upon the doctrine of 
the individual Self, and of the more practical aspects 
of this its union with God. We have laid our basis. 
Let us indicate some of the consequences of our theory. 


II 


And next, as to our whole definition of the nature of 
the Divine Life. If our foregoing argument has been 
sound, our Idealism especially undertakes to give a 
theory of the general place and of the significance of 
Personality in the Universe. Personality, to our view, 
is an essentially ethical category. A Person is a con- 
scious being, whose life, temporally viewed, seeks its 
completion through deeds, while this same life, eternally 
viewed, consciously attains its perfection by means of 
the present knowledge of the whole of its temporal striv- 
ings. Now from our point of view, God is a Person. 
Temporally viewed, his life is that of the entire realm of 
consciousness in so far as, in its temporal efforts towards 
perfection, this consciousness of the universe passes from 
instant to instant of the temporal order, from act to 
act, from experience to experience, from stage to stage. 
Eternally viewed, however, God’s life is the infinite whole 
that includes this endless temporal process, and that 


THE UNION OF GOD AND MAN 419 


consciously surveys it as one life, God’s own life. God 
is thus a Person, because, for our view, he is self-con- 
scious, and because the Self of which he is conscious is 
a Self whose eternal perfection is attained through the 
totality of these ethically significant temporal strivings, 
these processes of evolution, these linked activities of 
finite Selves. We have long since ceased, indeed, to sup- 
pose that this theory means to view God’s perfection, or 
his self-consciousness, as the temporal result of any pro- 
cess of evolution, or as an event occurring at the end of 
time, or at the end of any one process, however extended, 
that occurs in time. The melody does not come into ex- 
istence contemporaneously with its own last note. Nor 
does the symphony come into full existence only when 
its last chord sounds. On the contrary, the melody is 
the whole, whereof the notes are but abstracted frag- 
ments ; the symphony is the totality, to which the last 
chord contributes no more than does the first bar. And 
precisely so it is, as we have seen, with the relation be- 
tween the temporal and the eternal order. God in his 
totality as the Absolute Being is conscious, not i time, 
but of time, and of all that infinite time contains. In 
time there follow, in their sequence, the chords of his 
endless symphony. For him is this whole symphony 
of life at once. Moreover there is indeed, for our doc- 
trine, no temporal conclusion of the world’s successive 
procesess, — no one temporal goal of evolution, — no 
single temporal event to which the whole creation 
moves. For as, even in the finite symphony, every 
chord restlessly strives after a musical perfection that 
in itself it only hints, and that it does not yet finally 


420 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


contain, but as nevertheless this very perfection is in the 
whole symphony itself, viewed as a whole,— so, in the 
universe, every temporal instant contains a seeking after 
God’s perfection. Yet never, at any instant of time, is 
this perfection attained. It is present only to the con- 
sciousness that views the infinite totality of this very 
process of seeking. 

Such has been our doctrine concerning the divine life, 
when taken in its character as the life of the Absolute. 
That a conception of an endless temporal process which 
nevertheless constitutes one whole, present to one con- 
sciousness, is a possible conception, and that this concep- 
tion is free from the self-contradictions which have usually 
been ascribed to the idea of the Infinite, —all this I have 
endeavored to show at length. But in consequence of 
this endlessness which I ascribe to the temporal order, and 
in consequence of the fact that no last event, no final 
occurrence in the sequence of the world’s life, is to my 
mind possible, and in consequence of the wholeness of 
meaning which I nevertheless attribute to the divine 
consciousness itself, I am led to add here a word as to 
the general significance of historical progress, and of the 
evolutionary processes of the universe,—a word that 
will prove necessary for the purposes of this our con- 
cluding lecture. 

At every instant, in the temporal order, God’s will is 
in process of expressing itself. Now since this is true of 
every instant of time, it follows that every stage of the 
world-process, viewed as God views it, stands in an imme- 
diate relation to God’s whole purpose. Hence there is, 
indeed, always progress in the universe in so far as at any 


THE UNION OF GOD AND MAN 421 


instant some specific finite end is nearing or is winning 
its temporal attainment. Yet those are wrong who lay 
such stress upon the conception of progress as to assert 
that, in order for the world to attain a divine meaning 
at all, it is necessary to suppose whatever comes later in 
time to be in all respects better, or to be in every way nearer 
to God’s perfection, than is what comes earlier in time. To 
make this assertion is to declare that in the divine order of 
the universe there is a Law of Universal Progress in time, so 
that all temporal things grow, by God’s will, in all respects 
better as the world goes on. But our view does not make 
this assertion. Unquestionably, in the temporal order, if 
this is indeed, as we have asserted, a Moral Order, there is 
always in some respects Progress, because there is always 
a seeking of some new form and partial expression of 
Being, and a passing on towards such new forms and 
expressions. Moreover, as we have seen, there are new 
Ethical Individuals originating in time, and thenceforth 
adding their significance to the world’s process. But 
if the temporal world thus always contains progress, 
it none the less obviously always involves, for any tem- 
porally limited conscious view, decay. Temporal prog- 
ress, then, is only one aspect of the temporal order. 
For, as we pass on into our own future, we lose closer 
conscious touch with our own past. The growth of the 
man involves the death of his own childhood, with its 
special suggestions of divine beauty. The maturity of 
age means the loss of youth. For us mortals, every new 
temporal possession includes the irrevocable loss of former 
conscious possessions. Now this same tendency, as we 
have earlier seen, seems to hold true of all the irreversible 


422 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


process of universal Nature. For in Nature, too, nothing 
recurs. The broken china will not mend. The withered 
flowers bloom no more. The sun parts forever with its 
heat. Tidal friction irrevocably retards the revolution of 
the earth. And all these things, while they include the 
very conditions of progress, also involve decay. 

In brief, it is, with the occurrences of the successive 
movements of time, or with the stages of life, precisely as 
it is with whatever else in the universe you learn to con- 
ceive as an individual fact. One finite individual, taken 
as such, never possesses the precise and unique perfections 
of its fellow, z.e. of any other individual. Hence when- 
ever you have to pass, in your finite experience, from a 
partial view of one individual fact to a similar view of 
another individual fact, you lose something as well as gain 
something; and of this truth you become more clearly 
aware the nearer you come to an insight into the true 
natures of the objects concerned. Nothing can really be 
spared from the whole, 7z.e. from the universe. Hence 
every transition, such as we make in our finite experience, 
is a loss as well as a gain. No progress therefore is mere 
progress. Every growth is also a decay. Every attain- 
ment of temporal good is also the suffering of a temporal 
ill. And just that is what every mother observes when 
she learns to mourn because her children win the very 
maturity that she has all the while longed and striven to 
help them win. Just such is our experience too when we 
listen to music. In hearing the Heroic Symphony of 
Beethoven, how easily, during the Funeral March, — 
yes, even during the triumphant glories of the closing 
movement, —how easily, I say, may not the hearer wish 


THE UNION OF GOD AND MAN 423 


himself back again in the midst of the striving life that 
the opening theme of the first movement introduces. 
Finite gain is also finite loss. This is the axiom of the 
temporal world, in so far as you view its events under the 
conditions of any finite span of conscious survey. Hence 
mere Progress, — Progress without any admixture of tem- 
poral decay and loss,—is not the law of the sequent 
events of the world. 

On the other hand, in so far as any finite conscious- 
ness seeks, in its own future, a temporal goal that it 
has not yet won, and then approaches that goal, —for 
just this consciousness, in view of just this goal, there 
is indeed Progress. Now from our point of view, the 
general rationality of the world’s temporal processes 
assures us that at all times there is, on the whole, and 
despite countless hindrances and evils, precisely this 
sort of attainment of significant goals occurring in the 
world. Hence Progress is, in one sense, but by no means 
in every sense, a fact always present in time. It is 
always present in the sense that at every moment of 
time some new and significant goal, that never before 
was attained, is approached by the finite agents whose 
will is just now in question. They seek new good, 
and, despite all evil, they always tend to win good, 
and always have some measure of success in striving 
intelligently for such good. On the other hand, Prog- 
ress is not universal, if by universal Progress you mean 
a condition in which the temporal world should be in 
all essential respects better at any one moment than it 
ever was before. On the contrary, you can always say 
that in some respects the finite universe of any one 


424 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


temporal instant is worse than it ever was before, since 
it has irrevocably lost all those perfections that the 
past contained, and that now are sought for in vain, 
while with every new temporal instant of the world 
more and still more of such perfections become lost 
beyond recall in the past. For instance, Progress for 
mankind here on earth is not universal; for, remember, 
we have lost, beyond earthly human recall, the Greeks, 
and the constructive genius of a Shakespeare or of a 
Goethe; and these are, indeed, for us mortals, simply 
irreparable losses. Yet, on the other hand, Progress 
in a sense is universal for mankind; for daily civiliza- 
tion, retaining some of its ancient treasures, adds new 
ones; and, aiming at goods never yet won, attains them. 
The one most essentially progressive aspect of the tem- 
poral order is that which is due to the appearance of new 
Ethical Individuals. For their perfections are additions 
to the world’s stock of ideal goods; and they, as we 
shall see, do not pass away. Yet it has to be remem- 
bered that a new Ethical Individual, considered in any 
one temporal stage of his life, is not merely an added 
perfection, that the world never possessed before. He 
is alzo an added problem,—a new source of conflict 
and of often painful endeavor. Only from the eternal 
point of view is he finally viewed as a perfection. In 
time he may appear, for a long while, as a new evil. 
Now, it is worth while to recall such considerations, 
simple as they are, whenever we are concerned to con- 
ceive the relation of Progress, or of that still more gen- 
erally conceived realm of processes called Evolution, to 
the divine life. As a fact, all ages are present at once 


THE UNION OF GOD AND MAN 425 


as elements in an infinite significant process to the 
divine insight. Every age therefore has, as the his- 
torian Ranke once said of the ages of human history, 
its “unmittelbare Beziehung auf die Gottheit.” All 
things always work together for good from the divine 
point of view; and whoever can make this divine point 
of view in any sense his own, just in so far sees that 
they do so, despite the inevitable losses and sorrows of 
the temporal order. 


III 


So much, then, for some results of our general view of 
the divine Personality, and of the relation between the 
temporal and eternal aspects of its life. And now, in the 
next place, for our view of the human Person. Man, too, 
in our view, is a Person. He is not, indeed, an Absolute 
Person; for he needs his conscious contrast with his fel- 
lows, and with the whole of the rest of the universe, to 
constitute him what he is. He is, however, a conscious 
being, whose life, temporally viewed, seeks its completion 
through deeds. That from the eternal point of view 
this same life of the individual man, viewed as intention- 
ally contrasted with the life of all the rest of the world, 
consciously attains its perfection by means of the knowl- 
edge of the whole of its temporal strivings,—this is, 
indeed, a corollary of our foregoing doctrine, a corol- 
lary which we have yet more precisely to develope. It 
is just this corollary which constitutes the basis of the 
philosophical theory of Immortality,—a theory which 
we have here briefly to characterize and to explain. 

The human Self, as we earlier saw, is not a Thing, nor 


426 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


yet a Substance, but a Life with a Meaning. I, the indi- 
vidual, am what I am by virtue of the fact that my inten- 
tion, my meaning, my task, my desire, my hope, my life, 
stand in contrast to those of any other individual. If I 
am any Reality whatever, then I am doing something 
that nobody else can do, and meaning something that 
nobody else can mean; and I have my relatively free 
will that nobody else can possess. The uniqueness of 
my meaning is the one essential fact about me. 

But when with this consideration in mind we turn to 
ask about the relation of the human Self to Time, our first 
impression is that our doctrine gives no positive decision 
as to how long a temporal process is needed for the com- 
plete expression of the whole life and the entire meaning 
of any one human Self. And as a fact, if we take the 
term “Self” with reference to those varieties of meaning 
that before engaged our attention when we discussed the 
empirical Ego, we see at once that there is a sense in 
which what can be called a particular finite Ego gets its 
temporal expression, so far as you view that expression 
apart from the rest of the universe, only within some 
very limited portion of time. The Self, as we said, 
can be arbitrarily limited, if you will, to this instant’s 
passing selfhood, taken as in contrast to all the rest of 
the universe of Being. The Self of this finite idea, 
of this passing thrill of Internal Meaning, is, indeed, if 
you choose so to regard it, something that, from God’s 
point of view, and in its relation to God, is seen as a 
genuine Self,—an Individual. For, as we have from 
the outset observed, the Self of this instant’s longing has 
its true and conscious relations to all the rest of the 


THE UNION OF GOD AND MAN 427 


infinite realm of Being. We men are, indeed, just now 
not wholly conscious of the true individual meaning of 
even this passing moment. But in God this meaning 
becomes conscious. 

For this instant has its twofold aspect, the temporal 
and the eternal. Viewed temporally, it is just some- 
thing that now occurs, and that, seen as God sees it, 
has its own unique contrast with every other event in 
the universe, and that also is in so far no other event, 
and no other Self. Nowhere else in time will its pre- 
cise contents recur. Viewed eternally, it finds the com- 
plete and individual expression of its whole meaning 
in God’s entire life. In so far as it is conscious of 
its true relations to the divine, it is this unique prayer 
for the coming of the kingdom of heaven. And in the 
eternal wholeness of the divine life, this prayer is an- 
swered. Browning’s wonderful little poem, Zhe Boy 
and the Angel, well expresses this aspect of the twofold 
meaning of every instant of finite individuality. Here 
and now, and not merely elsewhere and in the far-off 
future, this instant’s song of praise, this moment’s search 
after God, is the temporal expression of a value that is 
unique, and that would be missed as a lost perfection of 
the eternal world if it were not known to God as just this 
finite striving. The temporal brevity of the instant is 
here no barrier to its eternal significance. And in so 
far, the lesson of our whole theory is that, when you are 
viewed as just this momentary Self, working here in the 
darkness of your finitude upon the task of your earthly 
life, you have not to endure temporally, for a long time, 
in order to be linked to God. In him you are even now 


428 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


at home. For you here mean, by every least act of ser- 
vice, infinitely more than you find presented to your 
human form of consciousness; and in God this meaning 
of yours, just as the true meaning of this temporal in- 
stant’s deed, wins its eternal and self-conscious expression. 

But now, of course, as we have long since seen, the Self 
of the single temporal instant is far from being the whole 
human Self as we rightly come to contrast that Self of the 
Individual with all the rest of the world. The whole 
human Self, as we have seen, is the Self of the unique 
life-plan. And this Self needs a temporally extended 
expression, which no single instant of our human expe- 
rience contains. The Self thus viewed has a meaning 
that seeks unity with God only through the temporal 
attainment of goals in a series of successive deeds. And 
of course the Self, taken in this sense, is a far truer 
expression of what we mean by our individuality than is 
the Self of any one temporal instant. Yet here again 
the length of temporal expression that is required for the 
embodiment of any one type of finite individuality varies 
with the temporal significance of the ideal that may be in 
question in defining the Self. A life-plan, in so far as it 
is conscious only of brief temporal purposes, needs only 
a brief life to accomplish its little task. The Self that 
merely reads this lecture to you, on the present occasion, 
is indeed, from the eternal point of view, an individual. 
But it is so far an individual of limited finite duration. 
The Self of the mere reader of this lecture has no endur- 
ance beyond to-day. It is defined by a contrast with the 
rest of the universe that is especially determined by 
the conditions of just this temporal academic appoint- 


THE UNION OF GOD AND MAN 429 


ment. Its particular social contrast is with your present 
Selfhood as hearers. Its work is done when the hour 
closes. Nowhere else, in time, has just that individuality 
its task, its duty, its deed, or its expression. On the 
other hand, the ethical continuity of just this selfhood 
with the selfhood of other tasks, of former lectures, of the 
writing of these lectures, and of my personal obligations 
to you and to the University, is so essential a fact in my 
life, as I ought to view my life, that here the sundering of 
one fragment of temporal processes from other processes 
seems especially arbitrary and useless. Yet, whenever 
we undertake any task, however transient its temporal 
expression, that view of the union of God and Man, of the 
Eternal and the Temporal, upon which our whole teaching 
here depends, requires us steadfastly to bear in mind that 
every fragment of life, however arbitrarily it may be 
selected, has indeed its twofold aspect. It is what it tem- 
porally is, in so far as it is this linked series of events, 
present in experience, and somehow contrasted with 
all other events in the universe. It is what it eter- 
nally is, by virtue of those relations which appear not 
now, in our human form of consciousness, but which do 
appear, from the divine point of view, as precisely the 
means of giving their whole meaning to these transient 
deeds of ours. To view even the selfhood that passes 
away, even the deeds of the hour, as a service of God, 
and to regard the life of our most fragmentary selfhood 
as the divine life taking on human form, —this is of the 
deepest essence of religion. From this point of view 
it is indeed true that now, even through these passing 
deeds, we are expressing what has at once its eternal and 


430 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


its uniquely individual Being. Here God’s will shall be 
done as elsewhere in the temporal universe it can never 
again be done, and has never yet been done:—so to 
resolve is to view our daily duty as our duty, and this 
passing selfhood, even in its transiency, as possessing 
eternal meaning. 

Yet not thus do we discover the adequate view of the 
relation of the Human Self to time. For the Ethical Self, 
as we have already seen, has its meaning defined in terms 
of an activity to which no temporal limits can be set with- 
out a confession of failure. When I aim to do my duty 
I aim to accomplish, not merely the unique, but such a 
service that I could never say, at any one temporal in- 
stant: “There is no more for me to accomplish; my 
work is done. I may rest forever.” For that is of the 
very essence of Ethical Selfhood, namely, to press on to 
new tasks, to demand new opportunity for service, and to 
accept a new responsibility with every instant. It follows 
that the same considerations which imply the intimate 
union of every temporal instant’s passing striving with 
the whole life of God, equally imply that an individual 
task which is ideal, which is unique, and which means the 
service of God in a series of deeds such as can never end 
without an essential failure of the task, can only be linked 
with God’s life, and can only find its completion in this 
union with God, in an individual life which is the life of 
a conscious Self, and which is a deathless life. And thus 
at length we are led to the first formulation of our con- 
ception of human Immortality. 


THE UNION OF GOD AND MAN 431 


IV 


As a fact, the sense in which the human Individual, 
taken in his wholeness, as one ethical Person amongst 
other Persons, is to be viewed as Immortal, may be more 
precisely defined, at the present stage of our inquiry, by 
means of three distinct yet closely linked considerations. 

The first is a consideration founded upon our whole 
theory of the nature of Individuality, as we set forth that 
theory in defining the doctrine of Being. 

We know Being from three sides. Whatever is, is 
something that in one aspect forms a content of experi- 
ence. Nothing has a place in the realm of Reality which 
is not, in one aspect, something presented, found, verified, 
as a fact known to God, and given as a datum of the 
Absolute Experience. This is the first aspect of Reality. 
But secondly, nothing is real which is not also, in 
another aspect, an object conforming to a type, —an 
object possessing definable general characters, and em- 
bodying Thought,— an object expressive of the ideas 
that the Divine Wisdom contemplates. These two aspects 
of Being we studied at length in our foregoing series of 
lectures. But we found that these two aspects of Being 
are not the only ones. A third is not less essential, 
and is in fact the most significant of the three. What 
is real is not only a content of experience, and not 
only the embodiment of a type, but it is an individual 
content of experience, and the unique embodiment of a 
type. And we found, as the most essential result of our 
whole analysis of Being, that neither in terms of mere 
experience, which contains only contents immediately 


432 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


given, nor yet in terms of mere abstract thinking, which 
defines only general types, can the true nature of this 
third aspect of Being, viz. of the individuality of any 
given fact, be expressed or discovered. Individuality is 
a category of the satisfied Will. his fact is an individual 
fact only in so far as no other fact than this could meet 
the purpose that the world as a whole, and consequently 
every fact in the world, expresses. I can then never 
merely experience that this fact is unique, or that this 
individual is unique. Nor can I ever merely, by abstract 
thinking, define what there is about the type of this fact 
which demands that it should be unique, or should be an 
individual at all. In so far then as I merely feel the pres- 
ence of contents of experience, I can postulate that they 
stand for or hint the existence of individuals. But as 
mere observer I never empirically find that this is so. In 
so far as, once having thus felt the presence of facts of 
experience, I proceed, as for instance in my study of 
science, to describe the types and the laws of these con- 
tents of my experience, I can once more postulate that I 
am indeed thinking about realities which, in themselves, 
are individual. But I can never discover, by my think- 
ing process taken as such, what constitutes their in- 
dividuality. When I become aware of the presence of 
one of my fellow-beings, I never either feel or ab- 
stractly conceive why this being is such that no other 
can take his place in Being. For if I observe how he 
looks and acts, I so far do not observe in him any rea- 
son why another might not look and act precisely as he 
does. And if I proceed abstractly to conceive the fash- 
ions and laws of his behavior, I expressly define only gen- 


THE UNION OF GOD AND MAN 433 


eral types. It is precisely the no other character, the 
uniqueness, of this individual, the character whereby he 
is this man and nobody else, which neither my observa- 
tion nor my description of my fellow can compass. 

Hence, as we long since saw, for us, creatures of frag- 
mentary consciousness, and of dissatisfied will, as we here 
in the temporal order are, the individuality of all things 
remains a postulate, constitutes for us the central mystery 
of Being, and is rather the object that our exclusive affec- 
tions seek, that our ethical consciousness demands, that 
love presupposes, than any object which we in our finitude 
ever attain. Now this, our relation to the true individu- 
ality of the beings of our whole world, holds as well in 
case of the Self of each one of us, as of the remotest star 
or of God himself. The individual is real; but under 
our finite conditions of dissatisfied longing, the individual 
is never found. 

Just here, however, lies the first of the three considera- 
tions whereby our general theory of Being has a bearing 
upon the doctrine of Immortality. The Self, however 
you take it, — whether as the Self of this instant’s long- 
ing, or the Self of any temporal series of deeds and of 
experiences, is in itself real. It possesses individu- 
ality. And it possesses this individuality, as we have 
seen, in God and for God. In its relation, namely, 
to the whole universe of experiences and of deeds, 
this Self occupies its real and unique place as such that 
no other can take that place, or can accomplish that task, 
or can fulfil that aim. Now the consciousness which 
faces the true individuality of this Self is, by our whole 
hypothesis, continuous with, and directly one with, the 

2F 


434 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


finite and fragmentary consciousness that the Self pos- 
sesses of its own present life. The Self can say: “As 
human Self, here and now in time, I know not consciously 
what my own individuality is, or what I really am. 
But God knows. And now God knows this not in so far 
as he is another than myself, 7.e. another individual than 
the Self that I am. He knows me in so far as, in the 
eternal world, in my final union with him, I know myself 
as real. In him, namely, and as sharing in his perfect 
Will, my will comes consciously to find wherein lies 
precisely what satisfies my will, and so makes my life, 
this unique life, distinct from all other lives. Here, now, 
in the human form, my life so imperfectly expresses for 
my present consciousness, my will, that I indeed intend 
to stand in contrast to all other individuals, and to be 
unique; but still find, in my finite dissatisfaction, that I 
am not here aware how my will wins its unique expression. 
But in God’s Will, and as united to him, my will does 
win this unique expression. What is, however, in the 
idealistic world, is somewhere known. The knowing, 
however, that my will wins unique expression in my life, 
and in my life as distinct from all other individual lives, 
is, wpso facto, my individual and conscious knowing. 
Hence in God, in the eternal world, and in unity, yet 
in contrast with all other individual lives, my own Self, 
whose consciousness is here so flickering, attains an in- 
sight into my own reality and uniqueness.” 

The inevitable consequence is that every Self, in the 
eternal world, wins a consciousness of its own individual 
meaning, by virtue of the very fact that it sees itself as 
this unique individual, at one with God’s whole life, and 


THE UNION OF GOD AND MAN 435 


fulfilling his Will through its own unique share in that 
Will. However mysterious our individuality is here, in 
our temporally present consciousness, we, in the eternal 
world, are aware of what our individuality is. We our- 
selves, and not merely other individuals, become, in God, 
conscious of what we are, because, in God, we become 
aware of how our wills are fulfilled through our union 
with him, and of how his Will wins its satisfaction only 
by virtue of our unique share in the whole. “I shall be 
satisfied,” the finite and dissatisfied will may indeed say, 
“when I awake in thy likeness.” And in our union with 
God, we are, in the eternal world, awake. 

So far, however, we make a statement of the conscious 
aspect of our union with God,—a statement that, in its 
reference to the temporal endurance of the Self, appears 
still ambiguous. What we so far assert is that, in God, 
every individual Self, however insignificant its temporal 
endurance may seem, eternally possesses a form of con- 
sciousness that is wholly other than this our present flick- 
ering form of mortal consciousness. And now, precisely 
such an assertion is indeed the beginning of a philosophi- 
cal conception of Immortality. In brief, so far, we assert 
that individuality is real, and belongs to all our life, but 
that individuality does not appear to us as real individu- 
ality in our present human form of consciousness. We 
accordingly assert that our life, as hid from us now, in the 
life of God, has another form of consciousness than the one 
which we now possess ; so that while now we see through 


1 To the development of the aspect of the problem of Immortality that 
has here been summarized I have devoted my Ingersoll Lecture on the 
Conception of Inmortality, published in 1900. 


436 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


a glass darkly, in God we know even as we are known. 
This doctrine, as we shall soon find, implies far more 
regarding the temporal endurance of the Self than we 
have yet made wholly manifest. 


Vv 


But now this first consideration may be supplemented 
by a second. By the arbitrary selection, and isolation, of 
any one finite Internal Meaning, you can, as we have said, 
regard any temporally brief series of conscious finite ideas 
asa Self. And so regarded, this arbitrarily selected Self 
appears as implying, so far, no long continuance. It dies 
with its own moment, or hour, or year, or age, of the 
world’s history. We have indeed just seen that in order 
to be at all, however transiently, such a Self has to be an 
individual fact in the realm of Being, and that, as an 
individual, it is inevitably linked in God with a form of 
self-consciousness in which its own life and meaning and 
place in the universe become manifest to it as its own. 
Even such a Self, then, possesses, in the eternal world, a 
form of consciousness far transcending that of our present 
human type of momentary insight. In your eternal 
union with God you see what even your present life and 
purposes mean; and they mean, even as they are, infi- 
nitely more than your human type of consciousness makes 
manifest to yourself. But there is, indeed, another aspect 
of even your most transient life as a changing and appar- 
ently passing Self. And this aspect comes to light when 
you ask in what way, and in what sense, any finite Self 
can come to a temporal end, can die, can cease to be. 


THE UNION OF GOD AND MAN 437 


A very neglected problem of applied metaphysics here 
awaits our treatment. In our seventh lecture of the 
present series we touched upon it briefly in speaking of 
the selective process in nature and in conscious life. It 
recurs here in another form. 

This problem is the one of the very Possibility of 
Death. The statement of the problem in these terms 
may surprise. Yet what is our whole metaphysical in- 
quiry but a seeking to comprehend the possibility of even 
the most commonplace facts? That death occurs, we 
know. What death is, common sense cannot tell us. I 
propose to take up the question here in its most general 
form, and as a question of metaphysics. The physical 
death of a man is but a special case of the law of the 
universal transiency of all temporal facts. We have 
studied that law, in former lectures, in several aspects. 
The most universal law of Nature we found to be that of 
the constant occurrence of events that, once past, are irrev- 
ocable. We found that the most general reason for this 
irrevocableness of every temporal event is simply the indi- 
vidual character of that event as a real fact. What once 
has occurred can never occur again, simply because what- 
ever is real is individual, is unique, and therefore, in its 
individuality, is incapable of repetition elsewhere in the 
world than precisely where it occurs. The very reason 
that makes us often regard the past as dead beyond recall 
is then the fact, presupposed, but never experienced by 
us in our finite capacity, namely, the fact that the past is 
a realm where unique and individual occurrences have 
found their place. Because all temporal happenings, or 
real events, are incapable of being twice present in the 


438 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


world, therefore new times must always bring new hap- 
penings ; and what has once taken place returns not. In 
this sense, in the temporal world, individuality and tran- 
siency are intimately linked aspects of the universe. 

In dealing with the problem of time, we have therefore 
already dealt, in a sense, with the general problem that 
underlies this whole question about death. But here we 
indeed undertake this problem in a more concrete form. 
In a sense, indeed, the life of every temporal instant dies 
with that instant, yet what interests us at present is the 
fact of the temporal termination, not of any and every 
instant’s life, but of certain significant series of life- 
processes, whose continuance from moment to moment, 
from year to year, from age to age, we indeed often desire, 
or regard even as necessary, if our human world is to 
win for us any adequate meaning, while nevertheless, 
as a fact, these processes prove to be, from our human 
point of view, of limited duration. Thus springtime dies, 
youth passes away, love loses its own; evolution, as we 
have just seen, goes hand in hand with decay ; and above 
all, the lives of human individuals meet with a termina- 
tion in physical death, —a termination which is, from our 
point of view, so meaningless and irrational that it stands 
as the one classic instance of the might of fate, and of 
the apparently hopeless bondage of our human form of 
existence. 

And now, taking these concrete instances of ‘death in 
our temporal world, and viewing them as peculiarly im- 
pressive and pathetic examples of temporal transiency, I 
once more ask, How, from our idealistic point of view, is 
such death possible at all as a real event? Here isa finite 


THE UNION OF GOD AND MAN 439 


fragment of life, —I care not what it is, so long as it shall 
possess, for our present human purposes, some deep 
internal meaning. It may be the life of a mother’s love 
for her infant; it may be the life of two lovers, dreaming 
of a supernatural happiness; it may be the enthusiasm 
that inspires a soldier’s devotion for his flag, or an artist’s 
longing for his ideal; or finally, it may be the whole 
personal human life of a hero, of a statesman, or of a saint. 
Now the law of our human realm of experience is that 
any such life some day, so far as we can see, comes to an 
end, and is lost beyond human recall. The mother’s love 
for the present infant becomes a dear memory, while the 
infant, perhaps, grows into an evil and pain-inspiring 
maturity. The lovers part, or perhaps forget. Fate of 
all sorts cuts short, sooner or later, the soldier’s, the 
artist’s, the hero’s, the saint’s activities. Now in all such 
cases, whether or no what we call physical death inter- 
venes, the same essential problem appears. This is the 
problem of death in a concrete, but still generalized form. 
Something with a meaning comes to an end before that 
meaning is worked out to its completion, or is expressed 
with its intended individual wholeness. The problem 
presented by such cases is not to be answered by the 
purely general statement, already made, — the statement 
that everything temporal is transient, and that only the 
eternal whole passes not away. That most general state- 
ment, by virtue of our theory of the temporal order, does 
indeed point out that the eternal perfection of the world 
of the divine Will can only be expressed in a realm of 
temporal deeds, each one of which, as temporal, is tran- 
sient, and, as an individual deed, is irrevocable. But what 


440 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


now is our problem is furnished by those series of events 
in which something individual is attempted, but is, within 
our ken, never finished at all. We ask about the death 
which does not apparently result from the mere nature of 
the time-process, from the mere necessity that every 
finite and individual event should occupy its one place in 
the temporal realm. No, the death which here concerns 
us is the ending that seems to defeat all the higher types 
of individual striving known to us. And now, we state 
this problem, as idealists, thus, How can such death as 
this have any place at all in Being ? 

Our clew to the answer is, however, furnished to us by 
our whole Theory of Being. A realist would not venture 
to raise our question, if once he recognized the fact of 
death as a real fact at all. For him, death would be an 
independently real fact; and of no such fact could he 
consistently ask the reason. A mystic would indeed not 
leave unanswered our problem. He would reply, ‘“ Death 
is an illusion.” But then, for the mystic, add is illusion. 
A critical rationalist would simply say: “It is the valid 
law of Being. All finite things pass away.” But we, as 
idealists, have another task whenever we attribute Being 
to any object. For us, to be means to fulfil a purpose. 
If death is real at all, it is real only in so far as it fulfils 
a purpose. But now, what purpose can be fulfilled by 
the ending of a life whose purpose is so far unfulfilled ? 
I answer at once, the purpose that can be fulfilled by the 
ending of such a life is necessarily a purpose that, in the 
eternal world, zs consciously known and seen as continuous 
with, yes, as inclusive of, the very purpose whose fulfil- 
ment the temporal death seems to cut short. This larger 


THE UNION OF GOD AND MAN 441 


purpose may indeed involve, as we have long since seen, 
the relative inhibition and defeat of the lesser purpose. 
But in our idealistic world it cannot involve the mere 
ignoring of that lesser purpose. The thwarting of the 
lesser purpose is always included within the fulfilment 
of the larger and more integral purpose. The possibility 
of death depends upon the transcending of death through 
a life that is richer and more conscious than is the life 
which death cuts short, and the richer life in question is, 
in meaning, if not in temporal sequence, continuous with 
the very life that death interrupts. 

Or, to put the case otherwise: A conscious process, 
with a meaning, but with a meaning still imperfectly 
expressed, is cut short, and left with its purpose still dis- 
embodied. So far we have a fact, namely, the fact of 
death, but so characterized that its Being is stated in 
merely negative terms. We, as idealists, ask, What is 
this death? If real, it is a positive fact; it is not some- 
thing merely negative. But what positive fact? For us, 
all facts are known facts, are facts of consciousness and 
ultimately of the consciousness of the Absolute. The 
defeated purpose is such only in so far as it is known, and 
then is known as terminated. But is known, I insist, by 
whom? In terms of what individual conscious life does 
even the Absolute know of the finite life that has ended ? 
I answer, the defeated purpose is known by some con- 
scious being who can say: “This was my purpose, but 
temporally I no longer seek its embodiment. I have 
abandoned it. It is no longer a purpose of my life.” 
The life that is ended is thus viewed by the Absolute as 
followed, at some period of time, by another life that in 


442 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


its meaning is continuous with the first. This new life 
it is which says, ‘No longer is that terminated purpose 
pursued by me.” But now, in our world, where only the 
fultilment of purpose has any Being whatever, the new 
consciousness, in and for which the old life is terminated, 
must say, “That ceasing of my former purpose, that 
ending of my past life, has its meaning; and this mean- 
ing is continuous with my own larger meaning. My 
former Self is dead, only in so far as my new Self sees 
the meaning of that death.” Or in other words, the new 
Self is really inclusive of and able to transcend the mean- 
ing of the old Self; or, in fact, the two Selves really 
form stages in the development of one Individual. Thus 
from our point of view, even the selective process which 
we before studied in Nature is a process involving survival 
as well as death. 

Not otherwise, in our idealistic world, is death possible. 
I can temporally die; but I myself, as larger individual, 
in the eternal world, see why I die; and thus, in essence, 
my whole individuality is continuous in true meaning 
with the individuality that dies. The lovers may part, 
but in the eternal world, individuality that is temporally 
sequent to theirs, and continuous in meaning with theirs, 
is found as consciously knowing why they parted. Was 
it faithlessness? Then it was sin; and in the eternal 
world, this larger individuality is found viewing the part- 
ing as their fault, for which, as for all sin, atoning deeds 
are needed. Was it wisdom that they should part? Then, 
in the eternal world the sorrow of their parting is contin- 
uous with a willing bearing of this parting, as one of 
time’s sorrows. It is so with the mother’s loss of the 


THE UNION OF GOD AND MAN 443 


infant, or with the hero’s or artist’s pursuit of his ideal. 
It is so too with physical death. How, and in what way, 
the deathless individuality sees itself as including and 
fulfilling the selfhood whose struggles death terminates, 
we do not in any detail at present know. That this 
larger selfhood is in the end in unity with the divine 
Selfhood we know; but we know too that it is not as 
something lost in God, that the dead Self of our human 
life wins its unity with the divine. For our theory 
implies that when I die, my death is possible as a real 
fact only in so far as, in the eternal world, at some time 
after death, an individual lives who consciously says: 
“Tt was my life that there temporally terminated unfin- 
ished, its meaning not embodied in its experience. But 
I now, in my higher Self-expression, see why and how 
this was so; and in God I attain, otherwise, my fulfilment 
and my peace.” 

The Possibility of Death, as a metaphysical fact, in 
a world where all facts are facts of consciousness, and 
where even the worst sorrows and defeats exist only 
as partial expressions of a divine meaning, depends, 
then, upon the deeper fact that whoever dies with his 
meanings unexpressed, lives, as individual, to see, in 
the eternal world, just his unique meaning finally 
expressed, in a life sequent to, although not necessarily 
temporally continuous with, the life that death termi- 
nated. I shall finally die, in time, only when I come 
to say of myself, “My work is consciously and abso- 


lutely accomplished.” 


444 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


VI 


But this brings us to our third consideration, which, 
in fact, has been already expressed in our former words, 
both in this and in foregoing lectures. An ethical task 
is essentially one of which I can never say, “My work 
is finished.” Special tasks come to an end. The work 
of offering my unique service, as this Individual, to 
God and to my fellows, can never be finished in any 
time, however great. For always, at any future moment, 
if I know my union with God, I shall know, whatever 
my form of consciousness, that there are my fellows 
beyond me, different from myself, and yet linked by 
the ties of the divine unity to my life and my destiny. 
I shall know then that I have not yet accomplished all 
of the relations to them which my ethical tasks involve. 
To be an ethical individual is to live a life with one 
goal, but contrasted with all other lives. Every deed 
emphasizes the contrast, and so gives opportunity for 
new deeds. A consciously last moral task is a contra- 
diction in terms. For whenever I act, I create a new 
situation in the world’s life, a situation that never 
before was, and that never can recur. It is of the 
essence of the moral law to demand, however, that when- 
ever a new deed of service is possible, I should undertake 
to do it. But a new deed is possible whenever my 
world is in a new situation. My moral tasks spring 
afresh into life whenever I seek to terminate it. To 
serve God is to create new opportunities for service. 
My human form of consciousness is indeed doubtless a 
transient incident of my immortal life. Not thus halt- 


THE UNION OF GOD AND MAN 445 


ingly, not thus blindly, not thus darkly and ignorantly, 
shall I always labor. But the service of the eternal is 
an essentially endless service. There can be no last 
moral deed. 

And thus, in three ways, our union with God implies 
an immortal and individual life. For first, in God, we 
are real individuals, and really conscious Selves, —a fact 
which neither human thought nor human experience, nor 
yet any aspect of our present form of consciousness, can 
make present and obvious to our consciousness, as now 
it is. But since this very fact of our eternal and indi- 
vidual Selfhood is real as a conscious fact, in God, we 
too, in him, are conscious of our individuality in a form 
higher than that now accessible to us. And secondly, 
the death of an individual is a possible fact, in an ideal- 
istic world, only in case such death occurs as an incident 
in the life of a larger individual, whose existence as this 
Self and no other, in its individual contrast with the 
rest of the world, is continuous in meaning with the 
individuality that death cuts short. No Self, then, can 
end until itself consciously declares, “ My work is done, 
here I cease.” But, thirdly, no ethical Self, in its union 
with God, can ever view its task as accomplished, or its 
work as done, or its individuality as ceasing to seek, in 
God, a temporal future. In Eternity all is done, and 
we too rest from our labors. In Time there is no end 
to the individual ethical task. 


VII 


But now these considerations lead us, in our closing 
words, to dwell briefly upon an aspect of the life of the 


446 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


Ethical Individual which has grown more and more 
obvious as we have proceeded. 

We have often spoken of the Human Individual as 
a finite being. In the temporal order, he everywhere 
remains so; for he has a temporal beginning; and at 
any moment of time he has so far lived but for a finite 
period, has so far accomplished but a finite task, and 
seeks, as one whose life is unfinished, his own tempo- 
ral future, which is not yet. The same can be said of 
any temporal being, of whatever degree of dignity or of 
wisdom, whose life is considered from any period of time 
onwards, and up to any point of time. But now what 
of the completed Self, of the Ethical Individual, as it 
comes consciously to distinguish itself from all others, 
in the eternal world, and as it finds itself fully expressed 
in its own unique aspect of the life of the Absolute ? 
Is it still to be called a finite Self? 

The plain answer of course is that, as the complete ex- 
pression of a Self-representative System of purpose and 
fulfilment, it is there, viz. in the eternal world, no longer 
finite, but infinite. Yet it differs from the Absolute Self 
in being partial, in requiring the other individuals as its 
own supplement, and in distinguishing itself from them in 
such wise as to make their purposes not wholly and in 
every sense its own. It is, as Spinoza would have said of 
his divine attributes, “infinite in its own kind”; only 
that, to be sure, its existence is not independent of that of 
the other Individuals, as the Spinozistic attributes were 
independent of one another. For itis not related to these 
other selves merely through the common relation to God ; 
on the contrary, it is just as truly related to God by means 


THE UNION OF GOD AND MAN 447 


of its relation to them. Its life with them is an eternally 
fulfilled social life, and the completion of this eternal order 
also means the self-conscious expression of God, the Indi- 
vidual of Individuals, who dwells in all, as they in him. 
There is needed a convenient term for expressing the 
nature of an individual being which, although “infinite in 
its own kind” (that is, infinite as a complete expression of 
its own self-representative purpose), is still essentially but 
a part of a larger system, involving still other purposes 
and beings. The word “ finite” suggests, indeed, the char- 
acter of needing a relatively external Other. In this sense, 
however, it remains certainly true that the Ethical Indi- 
vidual profoundly needs, in the eternal world, as its Other, 
without which it can neither be nor be conceived, the 
universe of the other Ethical Individuals. And it needs 
them not merely as parts of itself, but as its comrades. If 
then the term “ finite” could be used without ambiguity in 
this special sense, one could indeed say that in contrast 
with the Absolute Individual, who is the sole completely 
integrated Self, the single Ethical Individual remains 
finite, since it is, even in the eternal world, essentially 
dependent, even for the expression of its own will, upon 
the other Individuals beyond itself, in contrast with whom 
it defines itself. Butsince the word “finite” is, with tech- 
nical accuracy, used for systems that are not self-repre- 
sentative in type, the best way is not to attempt any 
unauthorized use of the term, but to characterize the 
eternal ethical Individual as infinite but partial. Its fel- 
lows, in the self-conscious organism of the Absolute, are, 
as we have seen, infinite in number, since the Absolute 
must possess an infinite wealth of self-representation. On 


448 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


the other hand, the various individual Selves may, and 
in an infinite number of cases must, as the various self- 
expressions of the same system, interpenetrate in the most 
manifold ways, sharing in countless instances the same 
immediate contents of experience, even while viewing 
these contents in different orders, and as the expressions 
of different, although interrelated, individual life-purposes. 
The possibility, and in fact the necessity, of some such 
structure, in the completed self-representative system, we 
discussed, in a very inadequate fashion, in our Sup- 
plementary Essay.1 Had we time here to illustrate the 
complications which the recent investigations of self-repre- 
sentative systems have shown to be characteristic of their 
structure, we should see clearly that, although the world 
of the Absolute Individual is, from our point of view, an 
individual selection from an infinitely wealthy realm of 
unrealized possibilities, its internal structure, in order that 
it should be self-representative at all, must involve the 
sort of formal complexity here suggested, and must there- 
fore make inevitable that interpenetration of the lives of 
countless and various Selves which our own theory of the 
origin and social nature of the ethical Self demands. It 
is this interpenetration, in various ways and degrees, of 
the lives of the completed Selves in the eternal world 
which, according to our hypothesis concerning Nature, 
would presumably be manifested, in a phenomenal way, 
in the temporal world, by the processes of intercommuni- 
cation amongst the various members of any social order, 
or amongst what to us seem widely sundered regions of 
Nature. For according to our hypothesis, no actual rela- 


1p. 517, sqq., p. 546, of the former series. 


THE UNION OF GOD AND MAN 449 


tions of various minds are merely external and mechani- 
cally determined; but all are due to the fact that every 
Self, representing in its own way the Absolute, represents 
also other Selves in a way and order that may, in the 
temporal world, appear to any extent as a process whose 
individual instances are determined by special physical 
conditions. 

The znfinity and the accompanying partial character 
of each Ethical Individual suggests, however, still one 
more consideration that older theological doctrines have 
very generally failed to recognize as a possibility. Yet 
the modern theory of Infinite Assemblages makes it 
almost a commonplace of exact thinking, when once 
any system has been recognized as infinitely complex 
in structure, to take note of this consideration in deal- 
ing with such a system. 

To an infinite collection of objects, as we saw in the 
Supplementary Essay, the axiom that the part cannot be 
equal to the whole does not apply. ‘There is a perfectly 
definite sense! in which a part of an infinitely complex 
system can remain, not only a part that excludes from 
itself some portion of the whole, but a part that is 
only one of an infinite number of mutually exclusive 
parts of this whole. Thus, to give a purely formal 
instance of what I here have in mind, let me ask you 
to consider the whole numbers. Amongst the whole 


1See, concerning the mathematical considerations here in question, 
the recent report of Schénfliess: ‘‘ Die Entwickelung der Lehre von den 
Punktmannigfaltigkeiten,’’ in the Jahresbericht der deutschen Mathe- 
matiker-Vereinigung, Bd, VIII, Heft I, in particular, p. 4, sq., p. 10, sqq., 
and p. 18, sqq. 
26 


450 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


numbers you can select at pleasure a relatively very 
small sub-class, or part; viz., those whole numbers which 
are powers of 2, that is, 2 itself, as the first power, the 
square of 2, the cube of 2, and soon. You can then select 
another part; viz., the whole numbers which are powers of 3; 
and a third part; viz., those which are powers of 5. You 
can suppose this process of selection carried on so that each 
one of the demonstrably infinite collection of prime num- 
bers, 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 18, etc., shall form the basis of a 
selection of a partial collection of whole numbers, viz. 
its; own powers. Thus the powers of 7, of 11, of 18, 
and so on, would form a system of collections of whole 
numbers. Now consider these resulting partial collee- 
tions of whole numbers. Each collection is precisely as 
infinite as the entire series of whole numbers. For 
2, or 8, or 5, or whatever other prime number you 
have taken, has a first power, a second power, a third 
power, and so on without end. For every whole num- 
ber defines a new power of the prime numbers in ques- 
tion. Each of the partial collections of whole numbers 
thus defined has, in consequence, one number to corre- 
spond to every whole number without exception, namely, 
its first number, its second, its third, and so on without 
end. And yet no two of these partial collections con- 
tain any whole numbers in common; for no power of 
any prime number is equal to any power of another 
prime number. All of the partial collections contain 
nothing, however, but whole numbers; and there are 
an infinity of these infinite partial collections, although 
each of them is, in its own internal complication, pre- 
cisely equal to the whole from which they are all alike 


THE UNION OF GOD AND MAN 451 


selected. Nor do even they, if taken together, in the 
least exhaust the original collection of whole numbers ; 
since there are countless equally infinite collections of 
whole numbers which are not powers of any prime num- 
ber, but which are products of various powers of prime 
numbers. And so we can define an infinite system such 
that it contains an infinity of mutually exclusive parts, 
while each of these parts is equal to the whole in internal 
complexity of structure, and in the multitude of its own 
parts. 

This instance, taken by itself, is formal and seemingly 
trivial. It assumes metaphysical importance, however, 
as soon as you remember that, from our point of view, 
the infinity of the real system of the Self, whether in 
case of the Ethical Individual, or in case of the Absolute, 
is an actual, and, in the eternal world, a completed in- 
finity. We see then that, from our point of view, the 
Ethical Individual, however small a part of the infinite 
System of Individuals he may be, yet may be conceived 
as strictly equal in infinity of structure and of variety 
of content to the Absolute, having a series of experiences 
precisely as rich in its details, a knowledge precisely as 
multitudinous, a meaning precisely as complex, as the 
Absolute Self in its wholeness. Yet the Ethical Indi- 
vidual may be none the less only a part, —only one of 
an infinite number of equally partial Individuals, whose 
lives, to be sure, are not in every respect mutually exclu- 
sive, but who are not at all confounded either with one 
another or with the Absolute in its wholeness. 

We therefore need not conceive the eternal Ethical Indi- 
vidual, however partial he may be, as in any sense less im 


452 NATURE, MAN, AND THE MORAL ORDER 


the grade of complication of his activity or in the multitude 
of his acts of will than is the Absolute. And thus we 
see, in a new way, how the individual Self may recog- 
nize that in God it finds its own fulfilment, while still it 
clearly distinguishes other Selves, within the Absolute, 
as in one sense beyond it. It may be conceived then as 
a Part equal to the Whole, and finally united, as such 
equal, to the Whole wherein it dwells. 


— But we must turn from the eternal back to our tem- 
poral world. The special, the very finite, and imperfect 
task of these lectures is indeed accomplished. We have 
dealt with the nature of God, with the origin and mean- 
ing of man’s life, and with the union of God and Man. 
Our result is this : — Despite God’s absolute unity, we, 
as individuals, preserve and attain our unique lives and 
meanings, and are not lost in the very life that sustains 
us, and that needs us as its own expression. This life 
is real through us all; and we are real through our 
union with that life. Close is our touch with the eternal. 
Boundless is the meaning of our nature. Its mysteries 
baffle our present science, and escape our present ex- 
perience ; but they need not blind our eyes to the cen- 
tral unity of Being, nor make us feel lost in a realm 
where all the wanderings of time mean the process 
whereby is discovered the homeland of Eternity. 


INDEX TO THE FIRST AND SECOND SERIES 


[The First Series, on the Four Conceptions of Being, is referred to in this 


index as I, the Second Series as II. 
conceptions are printed in SMALL CAPITALS. 


appear in ttalics.] 


ABSOLUTE, The. — The conception of 
Being as implying that Being em- 
bodies an absolute system of ideas, 
I, 36.— The Absolute as God, 40; 
unity of knowledge and will in the 
Absolute, 41 (cf. 460-462) ; the Ab- 
solute as the Individual of Individu- 
als, 40; Absolute Thought and 
Absolute Purpose, 41.— Relation of 
this account of the Absolute to pre- 
vious statements by the author, 
ix, x; the opponents of the search 
for the Absolute, xi; consequences 
of the account of the Absolute in the 
present work, as to its relation to 
Mysticism, and to the problem of 
Individuality, 42. — Spinoza’s Ab- 
solute, 71; the Absolute of Mysti- 
cism, 79, 82, 148; in its Hindoo 
form, 158-165; this view of the Ab- 
solute more fully expounded, 165-— 
175; Christian forms of the Absolute 
of Mysticism, 85, 86, 176; contrast 
of Mystical Absolute with the real- 
istic conception of Being, 179, 180; 
incompleteness of the mystical view 
regarding the Absolute and partial 
or relative justification of this view, 
180-182, 186-195; relation of Mysti- 
cism to Critical Rationalism, in re- 
gard to the doctrine of the Absolute, 
illustrated from the theology of Saint 
Thomas, 230-233; Idealistic concep- 
tion of the Absolute introduced, 
339-342; defended against empiri- 
cism and scepticism, 345-382; unity 
of the idealistic Absolute, 396-401 ; 


The terms for the more fundamental 
The names of authors cited 


this unity is the unity of conscious- 
ness, 424-427; relation of the Abso- 
lute to Individuality and Freedom, 
459, 460, 465, 466, 469, 470.— The 
Absolute as a self-representative 
system, and as actually infinite, 513, 
544-546 ; this follows even for Mysti- 
cism, 547-549. — The relations of the 
Human Self and the Absolute, II, 
273-277, 288-294, 327-331.— Sum- 
mary of the idealistic doctrine of the 
Absolute, 385-337; relation to the 
problem of the Moral Order, 337-375 
[see also MornaL OrpER].— General 
relation of the Absolute to evil, 
379; finite evil as the condition of 
the perfection of the Absolute, 
3885-387, 393; contrast with the doc- 
trine of evil in Mysticism, 395-399. 
— The Absolute as a Person, 418- 
420; conscious union of the various 
Individuals and the Absolute, 434~ 
437; equality of the eternally com- 
pleted Ethical Individuals and the 
Absolute, 445-452. — Bradley’s con- 
ception of the Absolute, I, 477, 482- 
485; its relation to the problem of 
the One and the Many, 485-489; 
Bradley’s Absolute as a self-repre- 
sentative system, 513, 549-553. [See 
also Berne, THEORY OF; GOD; 
SELF.] 

Acknowledgment.—Our knowledge 
of finite facts is due to an acknowl- 
edgment of an Ought, IJ, 11-42, — 
This acknowledzment is determined 
by practical motives, II, 26; it ac- 


453 


454 


companies particular acts, 27; a fact 
is that which ‘I ought to recognize,” 
30; acknowledgment of facts ful- 
fils purpose better than would other- 
wise be possible, 31; special relations 
of purpose and fact, 32-36; acknowl- 
edgment not a capricious activity 
of the will, 36-38. [See Fact, 
KNOWLEDGE. ] 

Act, see ACTIVITY. 
Activiry.— What is often called the 
active or motor aspect of mental life, 
important for the psychological 
theory of the nature of ideas, I, 21- 
22; illustrations, 23-25; relation to 
the definition of Idea, 22; no theory 
of the causes of activity presupposed 
in this statement, 21; significance of 
voluntary activity, 56,57; selective 
activity an aspect of the Internal 
Meaning of all Ideas, 31, 72, 306, 
308, 310, 311, 317-319; without con- 
sidering such selective activity, the 
truth of an idea cannot be judged, 
320-322, 331-334. — Selective activity 
in relation to experience, 285-288. 
— Idealistic definition of the nature 
of activity, 467-469. — Activity as 
amark of realityin realistic systems, 
105-106. — The acknowledgment of 
particular facts as an expression of 
activity, II, 27-42; ‘‘ When I know 
I am acting,” 27; relation of this 
activity to my responses to my en- 
vironment,”’ 30, 31; this activity as 
“free’’? and as ‘‘constrained,’’ 36- 
39. — Our active interest as the con- 
dition of our knowledge of likenesses 
and differences, 48-51; the concep- 
tions of the World of Description 
as due to a type of activity, viz., 
that of discrimination, 62-65; this 
activity as Well-Ordered, although 
the various series of phenomena that 
it leads us to discriminate are not 
so, 101, cf. 88, 89 note; the Internal 
Meaning of one who describes facts 
involves an activity that is relatively 
creative, 103; the World of Appreci- 
ation as a Well-Ordered Series of 
acts, 105, 106. Active aspect of our 
Time-consciousness, 123-126, 131- 
133; 184-136. — Active aspect of | 


INDEX 


the concept of the Self, 269-277; 
288-294.— ‘The two types of finite 
activity, the Well-Ordered Series of 
deeds, and the tentative search, 
through discriminations, for the 
definition of a new plan, 305-309; 
the latter of these types possibly re- 
sponsible for the whole process of 
Evolution, 309-323. — The possibil- 
ity of moral activity considered 
and defined, 347-360. [See also 
FREEDOM. | 

Algebra, I, 10 ; metaphysical aspect of 
an existence-theorem in the Theory 
of Equations, 213-217. 

Ancient Mariner, Coleridge’s, quoted, 
I, 85. 

Anselm, Saint, 1, 230. 

Appearance, distinguished from real- 
ity or true Being by popular lan- 
guage, I, 53, 54; by early Greek 
philosophers, 97, 98 ; by Locke, 100; 
by the Sankhya, 102, 103 ; by Hin- 
doo Mysticism, 161-165, 170,171 ; in- 
stances of difficulty of distinguishing 
appearance and fact in the realm of 
mathematical validity, 215-220 ; dif- 
ficulty of defining how an idea can 
be false, 318-323 ; yet the existence 
of error and falsity certain, 323, 324; 
how error is possible, 334, 335. — 
Bradley on Appearance and Reality, 
477-489. 

Appreciation, World of. Preliminary 
definition of our appreciative con- 
sciousness, and of the World of Ap- 
preciation in general, IT, 26, 27, and 
27 note ; further statement, 46 ; the 
World of Appreciation as the expres- 
sion of purposes, 105, 106 ; this same 
world as the World of the Self, or of 
a system of Selves in unity, 106, cf. 
the discussion, 169-174; its form 
that of the Well-Ordered Series of 
acts, 105, 106 ; the temporal form of 
the World of Appreciation, 137, 138, 
ef. 146-151. [See also SrnF ; Anso- 
LUTE ; DESCRIPTION, WORLD OF.] 

Aristotle, I, 4; Teichmiller on his 
Theory of Being, 55; his view of 
Being illustrated, 63; his conception 
of God not in genuine accordance 
with the realistic conception of 


INDEX 455 


Being, 70, 71; devotes great at- 
tention to the realistic form of the 
problem of Individuality, 76; his 
conception of God in some degree 
mystical, 78; states the realistic con- 
ception of Being in his attack upon 


Protagoras, 98, 99; his relation to | 


Critical Rationalism, 208, 228-229. 
—Aristotle on the Infinite, 510, 
555-556, 560; on general ideas, 292. 
Assemblages, infinite, mathematical 
theory of, Il, 22; 449-451. [See In- 


FINITE and Ss£xF, under the special | 


head, SELF-REPRESENTATIVE Sys- 
TEM.] 

Atomism, I, 105, 109. 

Attention. — The present condition of 
our finite attention, at any time, de- 
termines the grade and extent of our 
knowledge, II, 57-59; finitude as in- 
attention, 59-62; this attention and 
inattention constitute an attitude of 
the will, 58, 59, 61. — Consequence of 
this limitation as seen in our dis- 
criminations, and in the develop- 
ment of the Categories of the World 
of Description, 62-96. — The source 
of this limitation of attention in 
ourselyes hypothetically explained 
by an hypothesis as to the evolution 
of new Selves in the course of natural 
evolution, 309-323. 

Augustine, Saint, I, 85, 228, 230, 323. 


Baldwin, J. Mark, On Imitation and the 
origin of the empirical Self, II, 261. 

BEING, as object of inquiry in study of 
Natural Religion, I, 4. For defini- 
tions of Being see Brine, THEORY 
OF. 

BeinG, THEORY OF, as constituting 
the main topic of the lectures, I, 4,5; 
difficulty of this Theory, zd.; neg- 
lected state of the topic, 6sqg.; three 
objections to such inquiries, 7; an- 
swers to these objections, 7-10; 
relation of the Theory of Being to 
Lord Gifford’s programme, p. 11; 
branches of the inquiry indicated, 
11; limitation of the historical side 
of the inquiry to principal historical 
conceptions of the nature of Being, 
12, 13; relation of the Theory of 


a 


Being to all discussions about God, 
the World, the Self, ete., 12, 13; pro- 
posed application of the general 
Theory of Being to special problems, 
14-16. — Preliminary statement of 
the author’s Theory of Being, 16- 
36; its general relation to the prob- 
lem as to the nature of Ideas, 16-19; 
problem of Being as that regarding 
the External and Internal Meaning 
of Ideas, 27-33; illustration and 
statement of main thesis about 
Being, 36. — Genera] relation of Con- 
cept of Being to that of Experience, 
53, 55-57, 80, 83, 149, 150, 283-239, 
251-259, 285-290, 360-368 ; ef. II, 11- 
24,— General Relation of Concept 
of Being to that of Will and to that 
of Purpose, I, 23, 37, 40, 55-60, 149- 
153, 154, 155, 325-335, 355, 374-382 ; 
TI, 96-104, 106, 134.—Relation of 
Being to Individuality, I, 38-40, 73, 
261, 269, 291-296, 297, 327, 329, 336- 
341, 446-449, 455-460, 567, 573-575. — 
Relation of Concept of Being to that 
of Limit, and to that of Determinate 
Totality, 37, 191-195, 297-299, 336- 
341, 570-588.— The usual Vocabu- 
lary for expressing Being, 47-54; 
three forms of popular expressions 
for Being, 53, 54.—Tur Four His- 
TORICAL CONCEPTIONS OF BEING 
defined in general, 60-61. —The 
First and Second of these Concep- 
tions more particularly character- 
ized, 62-87.— The First Concrr- 
TION OF Brine, REALISM, defined, 
63; illustrated, 63-65; more fully 
explained, 66-70; its historical for- 
tunes summarized, 70-75; its defect 
in general indicated, 75-77. This 
conception criticised in detail, 91— 
137; criticism summarized, 142-143, 
Realism compared with the Sec- 
ond Conception of Being, 185-188 ; 
brought into relation to the Third 
Conception, 195-207 ; to the Fourth 
Conception, 353-3855. — Modified 
forms of the First or Realistic Con- 
ception, 196-201. — Realism implies 
the Infinite Complexity of the Real, 
538-543.— Relation of Realism to the 
Problem of Evil, II, 399-405. The 


456 


rejection of Realism implies the 
abandonment of the Conception 
of a Soul-Substance, 267-268; other 
forms of Realism as applied to the 
Self, 282-284.— THE SEconpD CoNn- 
CEPTION OF BEING, MysrTicisM, de- 
fined I, 80; more fully illustrated, 
and its historical relations sketched, 
81-87 ; stated and criticised in detail, 
144-195; compared with Realism, 
185-188; considered in relation to 
the Fourth Conception of Being, 
348, 349, 355-356. — Relation of Mys- 
ticism to the concept of the Infinite, 
547-549; to the Problem of Evil, 
II, 395-398.— The TH1rRD CONCEP- 
TION OF BEING, CRITICAL RATION- 
ALIsM, defined in general through 
its relations to modified Realism, I, 
195-202; more specifically defined, 
202-208; illustrated, 209-220; its 
historical forms exemplified, 227- 
239; characterized in its relations to 
the problem of individuality, 240- 
244; criticised, 244-262; this criti- 
cism restated, 268-270; transition 
from the Third to the Fourth Con- 
ception, 270-339.— Relation of the 
Third Conception of Being to the 
concept of the Infinite, 543, see 
also the whole discussion of the 
mathematically valid conception of 
the Infinite, 501-538. — Relation of 
the Third Conception to the World 
of Description, II, 96; to the con- 
ception of natural law, 214-216; 
to the conception of the Self, 284— 
286. — The FourTH CONCEPTION OF 
Brine, IDEALISM, summarized in 
the preliminary statement, I, 26-36; 
this conception is familiar in modern 
doctrine, but at the present day 
stands in need of further definition 
as to the relation of Thought, Idea, 
and Will, and of Finite and Infinite, 
which an Idealism demands, 40, 41; 
defined, 61; reached by means of 
a transition from the Third Concep- 
tion of Being, 270-339. — The world, 
as the Fourth Conception of Being 
defines it, characterized 341. — 
Summary of the Fourth Conception, 
347, 348; review of the argument 


INDEX 


whereby it is reached, 349-360. — The 
Fourth Conception as related to 
Realism, 353; to modified Realism, 
354; to Mysticism, 355; to Critical 
Rationalism, 356.— Auswers to Ob- 
jections to the Fourth Conception, 
360-382; answer to the objection of 
Empiricism, 360-368; to Scepticism, 
369-374; to the argument from the 
presence of Evil in the world, 374-— 
382.— Consequences of the Fourth 
Conception as regards the Unity of 
the world, 391-427; general prob- 
lem of the Unity of Being, 391-396; 
argument for the unity of the world 
of the Fourth Conception, 396-401; 
objections to such unity derived 
from the apparent multiplicity of 
the forms of Being present in the 
empirical world, 402-406 ; answers to 
these objections, 406-413; interpre- 
tation of these special forms of Be- 
ing, in terms of our Idealism, out- 
lined, 413-418; special comments 
upon such interpretations, and the 
principles that govern them, 418- 
427. Consequences of the Fourth 
Conception as regards Individual- 
ity and Freedom, 432-470; relation 
of Fourth Conception to the cate- 
gories of Knowledge and Will, 433- 
442; to the category of Cause, 440, 
443-446; to the conceptions of the 
wholeness and the determination of 
the facts of the world, 446-455; to 
the conception of the Individual, 
455-460; to the relation between the 
Finite and the Absolute Will, 460— 
466; to the problem of the One and 
the Many in general, 465, 466; to the 
conception of the Activity of the 
Will, 467-469; to the conception of 
the Freedom of the Will, 469, 470. — 
Relation of the Fourth Conception 
to Bradley’s Theory of Being, 473- 
477; to the concept of the Infinite, 
545-547; theses regarding the ideal- 
istic conception of the Infinite, 568, 
569; the Determinateness of the 
Infinite maintained upon idealistic 
grounds, 570-581; the idealistic view 
of the Infinite as a Totality, 581- 
588. [See, for further details regard- 


INDEX 


ing each of the Four ConcEPrions 
OF BEING, the special entries under 
Reavism, Mysticism, CriTicau Ra- 
TIONALISM, IDEALISM.] Concept of 
Being as illustrated in special cases: 
Bradley’s Theory of Being discussed, 
I, 473-494 536, 549-553. See also 
Bradley. — Aristotle’s Theory of 
Being, 55, 63, 70, 98, 99, 208, 228. 
—Kant’s Theory of Being, 63, 64, 
71, 233-238, 247. Contrast of what 
is and what ought to be, urged 
against idealistic theory by objector, 
II, 342; answer, 343-345, 361, 368, 
372-374. 

Berkeley’s Idealism, I, 246; his view 
of nature stated and criticised, II, 
234-237. 

Bernard of Cluny, I, 171. 

Bettazzi, on the properties of self- 
representative systems, I, 523 note. 

BETWEEN, relation of. — Ordinary in- 
stances of the relation between, II, 
66, 67 ; it comes to be noted in connec- 
tion with discriminations, and tends 
to throw light upon the structure of 
the objects discriminated and of the 
whole to which they belong, 7d., also 
68 ; Kempe’s generalization of the re- 
lation between, 77; statement of this 
generalization and exact definition 
of between, 79; relation of the gen- 
eralized between to the problem of 
the One and the Many, 81-83; re- 
sulting formation of series of dis- 
criminated objects, 85-86 ; postulates 
regarding the generalized relation 
between, 86-91; application to the 
discovery of Laws in systems of 
facts, 91-95; the categories of the 
World of Description depend upon 
the relation between, 96, cf. 70-76; 
types of series and of systems that 
result from the search for the be- 
tween, and contrast of these types 
with Well-Ordered Series, 83 note, 
90 note. — The process of the search 
for the between is indifferent to the 
order in which objects are inyesti- 
gated, 100, 101; consequently de- 
fines a World of Description, which 
is the same for various observers, 
99, 100, 103. — Application of the re- 


457 


lation between to our conception of 
natural objects, 177. 

Bolzano, on the Infinite, I, 510 note, 
512 note, 516. 

Borel, on the concept of the infinite, 
I, 502 note, 515 note, 525 note. 

Bosanqguet, on the infinite and the 
number-series, I, 508, 514, 517, 557. 

Bradley, F. H. The author’s indebt- 
edness to Bradley acknowledged, I, 
xii, 254, 474. — Bradley’s Theory 
of Being discussed, 473-494, 536, 
549-553. — His doctrine of the de- 
grees of truth and reality, 419; 
of the One and the Many, 474- 
477. 

Browning, Robert, 1, 151, 179. 


Cantor, George, on the conception of 
the infinite, I, 502 note, 510 note, 
514, 515 note, 516, 561 note; II, 76. 
—On the concept of the infinitesi- 
mail, I, 562. 

Categorical judgments, the relations 
of idea and object which they ex- 
press, I, 275-290. 

Category.— Problem of the Catego- 
ries, II, 10; general concept of hu- 
man experience, 11-25; result as 
to nature of our knowledge, 25; 
principle of the classification of our 
knowledge, 26; the distinction of 
the World of Description and the 
World of Appreciation, zd.; general 
nature of the Other or object of 
knowledge, 28-30; the category of 
the Ought introduced, 30, 33; facts 
as the embodiment of the Ought, 
33; illustrations, 34-36; the Ought 
and the Will, 36-39; the two as- 
pects of the Ought, 39-41; the three 
categories of the Ought, Subjectiv- 
ity, Objectivity, and Teleology, 41, 
42.— The categories of the World 
of Description introduced, 438, 44. 
— Likeness and Difference, 44- 
53; the momentary classification of 
facts, as those that are the pres- 
ent objects of actual attention and 
those that are the objects of possi- 
ble attention, 53-62. — Discrimina- 
tion of facts, the theoretical attitude, 
and the category of the Between, 


458 


63-70; 76-86; the category of Serial 
Order, 70-76; its relation to quanti- 
tative science, 75; the category of 
Law, 91-95; forms of serial order, 
the Well-Ordered Series, and its 
contrast to the series formed on the 
basis of the relation between, 75 
note, 76 note, 83 note, 88-91; sum- 
mary of the categories of Descrip- 
tion, 96; the Well-Ordered Series 
as the characteristic category of the 
World of Appreciation, 98, 101-104, 
105-107. 

CAUSATION, not presupposed by the 
doctrine that the idea is the embodi- 
ment of the Will, I, 23; not possible 
in the realistic world of the Many, 
127.— Causality in Kant’s world 
of possible experience, 237. — Rela- 
tion of problem of causation to ide- 
alistic theory of Being in general, 
and to the question whether the Will 
is a cause of Being, 438-446; cf. 
the discussion of the relation of will 
to belief, IJ, 36-39.— Relation of 
problem of causation to the individ- 
uality and activity of the Self, I, 
466-470. — General grounds for the 
formation of the concept of natural 
Law, II, 70-76 [see DescRIPTION and 
BETWEEN]; the discovery of the 
laws present in serial systems, 
91-95.— The concept of rigid or 
permanent causal laws in Nature, 
186-204. — Causation in the psycho- 
logical realm, 323-327. — Causation 
and Freedom, see Freedom. 

Classification, its relation to the will 
and to the Ought, II, 51, 52. 

Clifford, W. K. The Mind-Stuff hy- 
pothesis of Clifford, I, 63; IJ, 239, 
240. 

Cognition, Psychology of Cognition, I, 
20. [See KNOWLEDGE.] 

Common Sense, its view as to ideas, I, 
35; its Realism, 107, 108; question 
as to how far it is realistic, 108; its 
relation to Critical Rationalism, 208. 

Consciousness, Unity of, I, 424. [See 
for treatment of the forms and prob- 
lems of Consciousness, the terms, 
IpEA, EXPERIENCE, Fact, Mysti- 
CISM, IDEALISM, SELF.] 


INDEX 


Conservatism, social, as related to 
metaphysical Realism, I, 73-75, 91. 
—Variation of this attitude in case 
of the realistic theories of the Self, 
II, 283, 284. 

Continuity, its relation to concept of 
infinite divisibility, I, 505. 

Correspondence, relation of, discussed 
in connection with the definition of 
Truth, I, 300-311. — Examples of, in 
connection with the theory of the 
self-representative system and the 
infinite, 503, 508, 509-512, 515-519, 
521-525. 

Cosmology, outline of, as one topic of 
the lectures, I, 15; conditions of 
an idealistic cosmology, 414; state- 
ment of the author’s cosmology, II, 
45-242; see CATEGORIES, CAUSA- 
TION, DESCRIPTION, NATURE, TIME, 
ETERNITY, and Fact. 

Couturat, L., on the concept of the in- 
finite, I, 502 note, 516, 529 note, 558 
note. 

CriTicAL RATIONALISM, the THIRD 
CONCEPTION OF BEINGS. This con- 
ception defined, I, 61; reached, as 
a result of efforts to define a modi- 
fied Realism, 195-202; according to 
this conception, to be real means to 
be valid or true, 202; or to be an 
object of Possible Experience, 203.— 
This conception prominent in mod- 
ern science, in recent theology, etc., 
205; Energy and Evolution con- 
ceived as real in this sense, 205; 
application to conception of God, 
206; the Third Conception typical 
of Nineteenth Century thought, 206. 
— Illustrations of this concept from 
objects of the world of common 
sense, 208-211; from mathematics, 
212-220; the ‘‘ existence-theorems’’ 
of mathematics and their difficulties, 
213-219; how such theorems proved, 
219; resulting illustration of the 
manifoldness of the conception of 
fact, 220; ideal constructions that 
are also facts, 221. — The Third Con- 
ception in the history of philosophi- 
cal thought, 227-239; its beginnings 
in Plato, 227; in Aristotle, 229; its 
place in Saint Augustine’s Concep- 


INDEX 


tion of God, 230; in the theory of 
the Divine Ideas in the theology of 
Saint Thomas, 230-232; its full de- 
velopment in the philosophy of 
Kant, 233-239 ; illustration of Kant’s 
realm of Possible Experience, 237; 
later instances of the conception, 
239. — Socially important Char- 
acteristics of Critical Rationalists, 
240.—The controversy over Uni- 
versals as revived by modern Criti- 
cal Rationalism, 240, 241; novel 
shapes taken by this revival, 242; 
the world of Critical Rationalism 
one of Forms, 243, 244. — Estimate 
of Critical Rationalism ; its strength, 
245-250; is justified as against Real- 
ism, 245-246; illustration from Ber- 
keley’s arguments, 246, 247; the 
Third Conception inevitably used, 
in some sense, by any articulate 
Theory of Being, 247-250. — Defect 
of Critical Rationalism lies partly 
in its ambiguous relation to experi- 
ence, 252-261; experience guides all 
reasoning, even about mathematical 
objects, 252-255; yet for us, experi- 
ence is of the merely presented, 
while the valid objects about which 
we reason are to be valid beyond our 
experience, 256; this true both of 
mathematically valid and of physi- 
cally or morally valid objects, 257 ; 
and no reasoning about yalid ob- 
jects makes present to our experi- 
ence the sense in which this validity 
beyond our experience is definable, 
259. — What then is the valid object 
when not presented ? 260.— Validity 
is ambiguous, as implying, on the 
one hand, a form of existence that 
is to be known only through our ex- 
perience, and, on the other hand, an 
extra-empirical form of existence, 
261.— The same difficulty stated 
in the form of the problem of Indi- 
viduality, 261.—-Transition to the 
Fourth Conception of Being, 270- 
335. — The problem, What is Truth? 
269, 270.— Discussed as the prob- 
lem about the truth or validity of 
Judgments, 270-290; as the prob- 
lem about the individuality of Being, 


459 


290-300; as the problem about how 
the valid idea can possess an Object, 
300-335. — See Inka, BrEinG, THEORY 
oF, IDEALISM. 


De Contemptu Mundi, poem of Ber- 
nard of Cluny, I, 171, 180, 188. 

Dedekind, Richard, on number con- 
cept, on the concept of the infinite, 
aud on the self-representative sys- 
tems, — quoted and cited, I, 499, 502 
note, 510-512, 512 note, 523, 525, 529 
note, 539-535; Il, 76.— On mathe- 
matical induction, I, 579. 

Democritus, I, 63. 

Descartes, as representative of Real- 
ism, I, 99. 

DESCRIPTION, THE WORLD OF, op- 
posed to the World of Appreciation, 
IJ, 26. The World of Description is 
the world as our more abstractly 
theoretical consciousness views it, 
id. — This sort of consciousness re- 
sults from the finite limitation of 
our attention, whereby, singling out 
a few objects for concrete acknowl- 
edgment, we are forced to acknowl- 
edge all else as the vague whole 
called the ‘‘ rest of the world,’’ 57- 
62.— As a consequence this ‘ rest 
of the world”’ appears to us, at any 
moment, as a field of objects of 
Possible Attention, 62; within this 
field we seek, by discriminating, 
for new objects, 64; our attitude, in 
this, is relatively passive, yet in- 
volves a kind of activity, 64, 65; 
plan of our search determined by 
the relation between, 66-68, 76-83; 
resulting formation of series of con- 
ceived or experienced objects, 83-86 ; 
relation to the problem of the One 
and the Many, 83, 84; importance 
of the concept of series for the whole 
structure of science, 70-76. — Postu- 
lates of the search for the between, 
86-91; systems of objects resulting 
from this search, 91; the “ invari- 
ants’’ of such systems are discover- 
able, because of the nature of the 
relation between, 93,94; these inva- 
riants as the laws of our systems, 
94, 95, and 95 note. — Contrast of the 


460 


world of Description with the final 
expression of the Will demanded by 
the Fourth Conception of Being, 95- 
104; this final expression is a World 
of Appreciation, 106.— Limitations 
of the World of Description: it is 
not a world of Individuals, I, 96; but 
of Validity, id. ; its discovered series 
are not in the form of Well-Ordered 
series, 97, 101, 102; the endless search 
for the between meets limitations 
in experience, 97; it essentially im- 
plies the possibility of various de- 
scriptions of the same facts, 99, 100; 
hence never gives the truth its final 
and individual form, 100; it is justi- 
fied mainly by the fact that discrimi- 
nation itself is a type of action, 101- 
104.— The World of Description in 
concrete form as the world of 
our socially trained consciousness 
of Nature, 155, 156, 175-204. — 
Nature conceived by our common 
sense as the common object for 
various observers, 175-180; hence 
the contrast between the physical 
world and our fellows tends to grow 
sharper aS we grow more civilized, 
180, 181; consequent dualism, 184; 
and resort to discrimination, and to 
the search for the between in our 
dealings with Nature, id.; abstract 
notion of human experience in gen- 
eral, 185; search for law in nature, 
187-189; invariants always discover- 
able in exactly describable series of 
facts, 188, 189; postulate of the 
further unchangeableness of these 
invariants through lapse of time, 
189-192; social motives for this 
postulate, 192-195; the postulate 
not self-evident, 195 ; historical illus- 
trations, 195-197; relative value and 
limitations of the postulate, 197-204. 
—The possibility of a process in 
Nature that is similar to our human 
search for the between, 319; rela- 
tion to theory of evolution, 319-323. 
Design, argument from, as topic of a 
possible study of Natural Religion, 
Ta. 

Determination, as a characteristic of 
Being, I, 39; relation of, to concept | 


INDEX 


of Individual, 39, 40, 296-299, 335- 
339, 570-588, 455-460. [See InpI- 
VIDUAL.] 

Difference, Likenesses and differences 
in facts, as objects of knowledge, 
relation of these likenesses and dif- 
ferences to the Will, II, 46-53. 

Dualism. Realism inevitably dualis- 
tic as to the relation of Idea and 
Object, I, 184; consequences of this 
dualism fatal to realism, 134-138. — 
Argument against the dualism of 
Matter and Mind, II, 207-242. 


Eckhart, Meister, I, 42, 72, 78, 82, 176, 
177, 547. 

Ego, see SELF, and SELF, THE HUMAN 
SELF. 

Eleatic doctrine of Being, I, 63; its 
One as an object of Thought, 64; its 
Realism, 98; permanence of the real 
according to, 105; mentioned, 109, 
111, 163. 

Empedocles, I, 63. 

Empiricism, I, 360-374 ; II, 11-24. 

Ens, I, 51 note. 

Equal, In a self-representative or in- 
finite system the part may be equal 
to the whole, I, 510-519, — this prop- 
erty used as definition of the infinite, 
510, 511, 512 note.— Results as to 
the equality of the completed Ethi- 
cal Individual and the Absolute, II, 
449-452. 

Equations, Theory of, the metaphysi- 
cal aspect of the fundamental exist- 
ence-theorem in this theory, I, 213- 
217. 

Esse existentiw, and Esse essentiz, I, 
51 note. 

Essence, as contrasted with Existence 
in technical usage, 49, 50, 51 note. 
ETERNITY and THE ETERNAL. — The 
concept of eternity founded upon 
that of time, II, 133; the temporal 
world, in its wholeness, an eternal 
world, 7d. ; grounds for this conclu- 
sion, 138-142; the two senses of pres- 
ent, which are observable in our own 
consciousness of time [see TrmE] en- 
able us to define how the whole tem- 
poral order is present at once to the 
Absolute, 138; this presence the 


INDEX 


totum simul (of the scholastic phi- 
losophy), 141.— Difficulties about 
the eternal stated and solved, 143- 
147.— Application of the doctrine 
to the Self, 147-151; to the solu- 
tion of the problem of the Moral 
Order, 337, 361-875; to the general 
problem of Evil, 379; 385-387; 407- 
411; to the questions regarding the 
relations of God and Man, 418-452. 

Ethical Individual, see INDIVIDUAL. 
Ethics [see also Moran Orper]. 
The view of the nature of ideas be- 
longing to ethical doctrine, I, 35. — 
Ethical systems of metaphysics, 63; 
the Being of the Moral Law as 
conceived by Critical Rationalism, 
211.—The acknowledgment of 
finite facts as the expression of a 
consciousness of the Ought, IT, 32- 
41.— The human Self as an ethical 
conception, 269-277; 286-294. — The 
relation of the ethical activities of 
the human self to the whole consti- 
tution of the idealistic world, 335- 
375. — The destiny of the human Self 
as an Ethical Individual, 424-452. 

Evellin, F., I, 561. 

Evil. — The existence of evil in finite 
experience as a means of defining 
the problem of Being, I, 149-154; 
consequences for Mysticism, 154- 
155.— The existence of evil viewed 
as a general objection to Idealism, 
374-382; relation of idealistic to 
older accounts of the nature of evil, 
376; twofold character of evils, 377; 
an evil appears to us as a partial 
fact of experience whose individu- 
ality is not now to be observed, 379; 
negative aspect of evil, 379; evil 
requires still further search for the 
Other, 380; but this Other is still 
the wholeness of the very faci itself, 
by virtue of our general theory of 
External and Internal Meaning, 7d. ; 
illustration of how this can be, 381. 
—The problem of Plotinus as to 
how ‘‘the souls fell away from 
God,’’ does not exist for an Ideal- 
ism, II, 302; in what sense finitude 
involving imperfection must be in 
the Absolute life, 297-303. — Tem- 


461 


poral consciousness as involving 
longing, 123, 124-126; the tempo- 
ral and the external view of this 
process of longings and imperfec- 
tions, 147-151.— General definition - 
of evil, 362-363; place of ills in a 
good order, 364; place of moral evil 
in a good world, 364-368; moral 
evil as temporal, 361, 366; its rela- 
tion to the eternal order, 366, 368; 
to the Absolute Will, 369-375. — All 
temporal events as in some sense 
evil, 381, 382; relation of evil to 
the narrowness of consciousness and 
the loftiness of ideals, 383; relation 
of evil to natural processes and to 
moral processes either known or 
unknown to us at present, 383-394; 
temporal ill a condition of eter- 
nal good, 385, 386.— The Problem 
of Evil for mystical Theodicy, 
395-397 ; contrast with Idealism, 
398 ; for realistic Theodicy, 399-405 ; 
for an Idealistic Theodicy, 405-411. 

Evolution. — Significance of, for our 
interpretation of Nature, II, 209- 
213; the doctrine of Evolution our 
largest generalization of our knowl- 
edge of nature, 209; seems espe- 
cially to indicate the unity of mental 
and material processes, 210, 211; our 
ideas of evolutionary processes as 
examples of our more literal and 
less artificially constructed ideas 
about nature, 220-223; interpreta- 
tion of evolution by means of a 
general hypothesis about nature, 
224-233, — The evolution of the em- 
pirical Self, 261-265. — Hypothesis 
as to the origin of new Selves in 
the process of natural evolution, 
294-323. — Evolution and Progress, 
420-425. 

Existence, as contrasted with 
sence, I, 49, 50, 51 note. 
Bune, THEORY OF.] 

Existence-theorems in mathematics, 
I, 213-217. 

Exprrigence, J, 40; as furnishing 
the material for our view of Being, 
55-00; the lectures an inquiry 
regarding experience, x, xi; the 
problem of Being is a problem of 


Es- 
[See 


462 


Experience, 55; contrast of imme- 
diate and idealized experience, 56.— 
Relation of Mysticism to Experi- 
ence, 148-153, cf. 81, 82.—Rela- 
tion of Realism to Experience, 
124-130, cf. 67, 68.—Relation of 
Critical Rationalism to Experience 
in Kant’s doctrine, 233-238. — Prob- 
lem of the relation of Critical 
Rationalism to Experience consid- 
ered on its merits, 245-261.— The 
general relation of Idea and Ex- 
perience from the point of view of 
Idealism, 324-342; 357, 359; 360-374. 
— The general character and limi- 
tation of human experience, II, 
11-24. — The organization of human 
experience and its categories, 25- 
151. [See KNowLEDGE, Facr, and 
CATEGORIES. ] 

External.—In what sense Realism con- 
ceives the reality as external to the 
mind, discussed, I, 94-97. — Matter 
as external to knowing human sub- 
jects, how it comes to be so con- 
ceived, II, 175-180; preference for 
the senses of sight and touch, as 
tests of externality, how explained, 
178-180. — External Meaning of 
Ideas, see IDEA, and Fact. 


Fact, and Facrs.—The World as 
Fact, in contrast to the world as 
Idea, I, 17, 18, 42; Facts in contrast 
to Thought, 56-59; in relation to the 
External Meaning of Ideas, 26-32; 
as popularly contrasted with ideas, 
48; as related to the technical dis- 
tinction between the what and the 
that, 49-51; the three popularly 
recognized characters of the fact- 
world, 52-54; facts as present in 
experience, 55; as obstacles to the 
idealizing process, 56; as related to 
the concept of Being in general, 58, 
59; to the Four Conceptions of Being, 
60, 61. — Fact as recognized by Mys- 
ticism, 82; contrast between the 
facts of ordinary empiricism and 
the Fact, as Mysticism views it, 83. 
— The realistic conception of the 
fact-world, 93; practical indifference 
of realistic facts to whether they are 


INDEX 


known or not, 93, 94 [for further 
references to the realistic view of 
facts see RerALIsM, and BEING, 
TueEoryY OF, First CONCEPTION OF 
Brine]. — Practical interpretation 
of our relation to facts as an intro- 
duction to the point of view of 
Mysticism, 148-153 [see also Mys- 
TICISM, and BERING, THEORY OF, 
SEcoND CONCEPTION OF BEING]. — 
Interpretation of the nature of fact 
by modified Realism, 195-202.— 
Facts of the type defined by the 
Third Conception of Being, illus- 
trated, 208-220; Kant’s view of 
the world of facts of Experience, 
235-238 ; facts in the world of math- 


ematical science, and of pure reason~- 


ing in general, 252-257; general 
character of the facts in the region 
of our valid experience of Nature, 
257-259 [see also CRITICAL RATION- 
ALISM, and THEORY OF BEING, 
THIRD CONCEPTION OF BEING, for 
further references to this general 
view of the fact-world].— Facts as 
related to the process of judgment, 
272-290; hypothetical and universal 
judgments as assertions of the non- 
existence of certain classes of objects 
in the fact-world, 274-278; particu- 
lar judgments as empirical asser- 
tions of the existence of facts, 282, 
283; relation of judgment to expe- 
rience, 285-288; in what sense the 
facts of experience are ‘‘ stubborn ”’ 
or possessed of ‘‘ overwhelming 
power,’’ 286; facts must be experi- 
enced in relation to Internal Mean- 
ings, 287; relation of the foregoing 
considerations to the problem of the 
Individuality of facts, 290-299, — 
The object or Other, which the Inter- 
nal Meaning of an Idea seeks as its 
own complete and determinate ex- 
pression, has the character of a 
fact, 329-335; illustration in case of 
mathematical knowledge, 329-330; 
in case of ‘external’? empirical ob- 
jects, 331-335. — Objections to this 
view urged by empiricism, 360-362; 
answered, 362-368; facts of ex- 
perience must be in themselves 


INDEX 


individual, as well as possessed of 
immediacy, 362-363; but individu- 
ality only possible if facts are fulfil- 
ments of purpose, 366-368; the very 
concept of experience itself not a 
merely empirical concept, 364, 365. — 
Scepticism, if consistent, implies a 
theory of the structure of the world 
of facts, 369-373.— Facts, in so far 
as they are evil, are never whole 
facts, 375-382. — The principal types 
of facts in the universe, 402-405; 
variety of these types an argu- 
ment against Idealism, 406-407; 
answer to this argument, 407-413; 
human experience in its present form 
inadequate to define for us all the 
possible categories of facts, 413, 414; 
sketch of the idealistic interpreta- 
tion of the unity of the fact-world, 
414-424. — The uniqueness and Indi- 
viduality of facts as due to the rela- 
tion of each fact to the whole world, 
462-466 ; the union of the One and 
the Many in the fact-world explained 
by Idealism by means of the unity 
of consciousness, 466, cf. 424-427. — 
Bradley’s problem of the One and 
the Many as a problem about a 
“bare external conjunction of 
facts,’ 486-487; this conjunction 
as self-contradictory, 487; what, in 
Bradley’s view, would solve this 
problem if we could find it present 
in experience, 488, 489; the order of 
the fact-world as explicable, accord- 
ing to our own Idealism, in terms of 
the concept of the Kette, 535; re- 
sulting general answer to Bradley’s 
difficulty, 536, 537; the Infinite as a 
fact, 538-554; objections to this view, 
554-563; answer to these objections, 
570-588. — The recognition of par- 
ticular facts, in the world of our 
concrete experience, is never a mere 
acceptance of data, but is an Ac- 
knowledgment of an Ought, II, 
11-42; elements that for us human 
beings remain metempirical are 
implied by all human experience, 
12-24; the ‘‘accredited facts’”’ of 
experience must include those that 
are actually experienced by no one 


463 


man, but that are acknowledged as 
the object of organized ‘‘ human ex- 
perience,’ taken in a collective 
sense, 12, 13, 16, 20, 21; yet in a 
very precise sense experience is our 
“ only guide ”’ to the facts, since all 
our experience points beyond itself, 
22, 23; that which transcends our 
individual experience is experience 
for the Absolute, 24 ; our acknowl- 
edgment of particular facts is de- 
termined by practical motives, 26 ; 
a particular fact is implied and pre- 
supposed by the will in its accom- 
plishment of a particular act, 27-29 ; 
our own will therefore in part re- 
sponsible, at any moment, for the 
“stubborn ”’ and “‘ foreign ’’ charac- 
ter of facts, 29, 30; hence a fact is 
that which I ought to recognize, 30 ; 
our own purpose better fulfilled by 
acknowledging than by not acknowl- 
edging the fact, 31; the fact as cor- 
relative to a conceived completer 
expression of the will than is pos- 
sible at the moment when the fact 
is acknowledged, 32 ; and thus the 
general relation of facts to the Ought 
is to be explained, 32-34; conse- 
quent view of particular facts as 
expressions of purpose, 34-36 ; the 
will not capriciously related to facts, 
nor merely the cause of our ac- 
knowledgment, 36-38; in what 
sense the will is constrained by 
facts, 39; the three fundamental 
categories of the Ought and of the 
fact-world, 39-42. — The likenesses 
and differences of facts discussed, 
46-52; these likenesses and differ- 
ences of facts as objects of interest, 
48, 49 ; and so of the will, 50, 51 : re- 
sults for the question of the objec- 
tive validity of classifications, 51, 52. 
—Facts classified into those now 
definitely acknowledged and “ the 
rest of the world,” 53-55 ; meaning 
of this classification, 55-57 ; igno- 
rance of particular facts means a 
sort of finite inattention to them, 
57-58 ; the process of experience as 
a struggle with this inattention, 58; 
this inattention due to an attitude 


464 


of will fixed for us, in the main, at 
any instant, by our position in the 
universe, 58, 5); contrast of this 
theory with the usual view of 
knowledge, 60-62 ; facts as objects 
of possible attention, 62; conse- 
quent attitude of inquiry into facts 
as the source of the categories of 
the World of Description, 62-65. — 
Inquiry into facts as discrimination 
of facts, 64; resulting search for 
facts between facts already discrim- 
inated, 66-86 [see also BETWEEN] ; 
resulting postulates regarding the 
constitution of the world of facts, 
87-89; contrast of Well-Ordered se- 
ries of facts and facts in the serial 
order which these postulates as- 
sume, 88-91; method of discovering 
laws in the world, as the postulates 
of the search for the between define 
that world, 91-94. — Limits of these 
postulates of the World of Descrip- 
tion, 95-104; the ultimate facts are 
those of the World of Apprecia- 
tion, 102-104; they form Well-Or- 
dered Series, 101, 102, 105-107. — 
Facts as occurring in Time, 113- 
138 [see also Tims]; as forming an 
Eternal Order, 138-151 [see also 
ErerRnity].— Physical facts, how 
known, 159-168 [see also NATURE]. 
— Physical facts as objects espe- 
cially of the senses of sight and 
touch, 175-178 ; reason for this, 
178-180.— Our description of natu- 
ral facts especially subject to social 
tests, 180-186; how and why natu- 
ral facts are conceived as subject to 
Causation, 186-197; criticism of the 
presuppositions in question, 197-204. 
— Laws of Nature as more ideal or 
more literal when compared with 
the facts, II, 214-219; the four types 
of more literally verifiable laws of 
natural fact, 219-223; results for 
the interpretation of nature, 224— 
233. — The facts regarding the em- 
pirical Self summarized, 256-265 
{see also SrLF].— The twofold atti- 
tude of finite beings toward facts, 
which is responsible for the contrast 
of the World of Description and the 


INDEX 


World of Appreciation, may also be 
the source of the evolution of new 
forms of Selfhood, 309-323. — Finite 
and temporal facts, in what sense 
evil, 881-385; as connectedly viewed 
in the eternal order, are good, 385- 
387. 

Fichte, I, 4. 

Fine, on the Number-System, I, 530 
note. 

Freedom. As topic in these lectures, 
I, 15; as related to Individuality, 
42, 466-470.— The freedom of the 
human Self, asserted, 469, 470; con- 
sidered in connection with the ideal- 
istic definition of the Self, II, 286, 
290-292; viewed as the possession 
of the Self in its relation to God, 290, 
292; the scope of the freedom of the 
Self defined, 293, 294; consistency 
of the freedom of the Self with its 
natural origin, 322; relation of this 
freedom to causation and to psycho- 
logical explanation, 323-327; to the 
unity of the divine plan, 327-331; 
summary of the whole doctrine, 336, 
337.— The freedom to do moral ill 
discussed, 352-360. 

Functions, Theory of, I, 217. 

Future, see TIME. 


Garbe, Richard, I, 101. 

Generality of Ideas, implies finitude 
and ignorance, I, 39; opposed to de- 
terminateness and Individuality, 
id. 

Geometry, I, 10. 

Gifford, Lord, I, vii, 11. 

Given, the. The Real viewed as the 
given, in the common usage of lan- 
guage, I, 53; by Realism, 67. [See 
IMMEDIACY and the IMMEDIATE. ] 

Gop, the conception of, in what sense 
a topic in these lectures, I, 11; asser- 
tion of God’s existence involves a 
theory of Being, 12; how this theory 
is related to our idea of God, 15; 
Aristotle’s idea of God partly mysti- 
cal, 78; mystical experience of God, 
82, 84; Saint Thomas’s God is him- 
self a mystic, 85, 86; mystical ac- 
counts of God as the Absolute, 156- 
180; God as conceived by Critical 


INDEX 465 


Rationalism, 206.— The Fourth Con- 
ception of Being defines the nature 
and life of God, 426, 427; how this 
life isan expression of Will, 459, 460- 
466, and how related to finite wills, 
id., and also 467-470. — For the rela- 
tion of God to the human Self, see 
SeLr.— For the relation of God to 
ethical activity, see MorAL ORDER. 
— God is declared to be a Person, 
II, 418-425 ; consequences of our doc- 
trine for the problem of Immor- 
tality, 431445. [See ABsoLUTE, and 
BEING, THEORY OF.] 

Good and evil, see Moran ORDER 
and Evin.— The Good Will, Kant’s 
view of, I, 19. 

Greek thinkers, early, as representa- 
tives of Realism, I, 97. 

Grenzbegriffe, 1, 37; see Limit. 

Gutberlet, C., I, 556 note. 


Harkness & Morley’s Introduction to 
the Theory of Functions, cited, I, 
530. 

Hegel, 1, 4, 6, 32, 415.—On the con- 
cept of the Infinite, 508 note, 527 
note. 

Helmholtz, I, 529 note. 

Herbart, the Reals of, I, 63, 64, 67, 71, 
96, 109, 110, 197. — Inconsistencies of 
Herbart’s view, I, 72, 77. 

Hindoo Mysticism, I, 78, 156-165, 169- 
171, 173-175. 

Hindoo Philosophers, I, 131. 

Hindoo Realism, the Sankhya, I, 100- 
104. 


IpzEA, definition of, in what sense this 
definition a topic of the lectures, I, 
16, 17, 18; definition stated, 24; def- 
inition of the term meaning of an 
idea, 24; Internal Meaning of an 
Idea defined, 24-26; External Mean- 
ing, 26-32; relation of Internal to 
External Meaning as the question 
upon which the whole Theory of 
Being turns, 32, 33; the sundering of 
Internal and External Meaning, 33; 
their union, 34-36.— Generality of 
Ideas as implying their vagueness 
and finitude, 39.— ‘‘ Mere idea’’ as 
opposed to ‘real fact’? in popu- 


258 


lar usage, 48.— Idea as related to the 
what or the essence, 52; as gener- 
ally related to experience and to the 
problem of Being, 56-59. — The prob- 
lem of External and Internal Mean- 
ing in Realism, 112-120; 134-137. 
—Only the Internal Meaning of 
ideas known to Mysticism, 176; 
relation of ideas and objects in mod- 
ified Realism, 195, 196, 201; in criti- 
cal Rationalism, 201, 202, 203, 208- 
211; as illustrated by the case of 
mathematical ideas, 214-220.— Re- 
lation of the Platonic Ideas to the 
Third Conception of Being, 227- 
228; of the ‘Ideas of God”’ to the 
same conception in Saint Thomas’s 
theology, 230-233. — Further discus- 
sion of the relation of ideas and 
Reality in Critical Rationalism, 
244-262. — Berkeley’s Idealism, 246. 
—The relation of idea and expe- 
rience as the problem of Critical 
Rationalism, 251-262.—The prob- 
lem of idea and object, or of the 
relation between Internal and Exter- 
nal meaning of ideas, as the central 
problem of Being, 265-342. — Exter- 
nal and Internal Meaning consid- 
ered in case of judgments, 270-290; 
in relation to judgments about 
individuals, 290-300; in relation to 
the correspondence between idea 
and object, 300-311; in relation to 
the sense in which an idea can pos- 
sess an object, 311-324. — Relation 
of idea and object for Idealism, 
324-342. — Finite ideas and their ob- 
jects, II, 25-44. 


IDEALISM. THE FourtH CONCEP- 


TION OF BEING, defined in general 
terms, I, 61; its difference from Mys- 
ticism, 77; recognizes the real as 
other than one’s ideas so long as 
one is still seeking truth, 95; is 
the doctrine of the lectures, ix. 
—Idealism reached through a criti- 
cism of the Third Conception of 
Being and by way of a study of the 
relations of idea and object, 266— 
$42,— The Third Conception of Be- 
ing, in regarding the real as the 
Valid, appeals to experience to test 


466 


validity, but leaves uncertain what 
constitutes the validity of a truth 
when it is not tested, 269; to solve 
this problem, the relation of idea 
to object is jirst studied in case of 
the valid judgment, 270-290. — Uni- 
versal judgments express internal 
meanings, and assert non-existence 
of objects excluded by these inter- 
nal meanings, 270-277; hence never 
can express a positive knowledge of 
the Being about which they make 
assertion, 279; particular judgments 
are empirical, and our experience 
establishes nothing universal about 
the reality to which judgments re- 
fer, 282-283; hence neither form of 
judgment satisfies our wish to ex- 
press a determinate positive knowl- 
edge of our object, 284-290; and 
neither brings us to the expression 
of the nature of individuality, 290- 
295; but these defects of the two 
forms of judgment indicate the di- 
rection in which we have to look for 
the definition of what we mean by 
the object about which we judge, 
295-296. — Truth as the determinate 
that excludes as well as includes, 
296 ; the reality as the Limit of the 
process of determination of idea and 
experience, 297-299.— The relation 
of Idea and Object is, secondly, 
viewed as a Correspondence of the 
two, 299-335. — An idea, in order to 
be true, must correspond to its ob- 
ject, 300; but this required corre- 
spondence is of a type determined 
by the purpose which the idea em- 
bodies, 301-311; while in order to 
be an object of an idea, an object 
must be selected by the purpose of 
the idea, 311-320.—Consequent di- 
lemma as to the nature of truth 
stated: either purpose of idea de- 
termines both the object and the 
correspondence, and then no error 
possible, or in the reverse case, no 
truth possible, 320-324; solution 
of this dilemma gives the Fourth 
Conception of Being, 325-329; the 
object is the purpose of the idea de- 
terminately embodied in experience, 


INDEX 


829; illustrations, 329-335.— The 
problem of individuality restated 
in light of foregoing solution, 335- 
337; universal and particular judg- 
ments, and the limit to which their 
expression approaches, 336; this 
limit in relation to the will, 387, 
338; the real as the individual em- 
bodiment of Internal Meaning, 339. 
—The Fourth Conception restated 
and defended, 345-383. [See Berne, 
THEORY OF, and ABSOLUTE.] For 
applications of the Fourth Concep- 
tion to special problems, see under 
the special terms in question. 


Imitation, in relation to the Self, II, 


261; in relation to the theory of 
Evolution, 310-322. 


Immediacy and the Immediate. — Im- 


mediacy, as sign of the reality of 
facts in popular metaphysical usage, 
I, 53; as related to thought and 
idea, 56-60; as basis of the mysti- 
cal conception of Being, 61; as rec- 
ognized in some sense by Realism, 
67,68; detailed exposition and criti- 
cism of the mystical view of imme- 
diacy, 144-195, see MysTIcIsM. 


Immortality.— Possibility of the im- 


mortal existence of a Self that be- 
gins in time, as a product of evolu- 
tion, and as a being subject to 
natural conditions, II, 320-323.— 
Philosophical doctrine of immortal- 
ity stated in the form of three con- 
siderations: (1) with regard to the 
implications of the general theory 
of What makes individuality pos- 
sible, 431-436; (2) with regard to 
the possibility of the negative fact 
of death, in so far as the death of 
an included selfhood implies an in- 
cluding selfhood continuous in mean- 
ing with the first, 436-448; (3) with 
regard to the essential endlessness 
(in time) of the task of the Ethical 
Individual, 444, 445. 


Independence, as basis of Realistic 


definition of Being, I, 61; definition 
of, in extreme form, 112-120, 123. 


Independent Beings, see REALISM; also 


see Brine, THEORY oF, FIRST 


CoNCEPTION OF BEING. 


INDEX 


India, as home of Mysticism, I, 78, 
156-165, 169-171, 173-175. For 
Realism in India, see the Sankhya. 

INDIVIDUAL, the, as one topic of the 
lectures, I, 11, 15.— General rela- 
tion of the concept of the individual 
to the problem of the completion 
and determination of the Internal 
Meaning of ideas, 39.—The Ab- 
solute as an Individual of Individ- 
uals, 40.— Individuality as the 
constant object of finite search, 
42.— Interest in individuality a 
motive in the realistic conception 
of Being, 73, 75.—The problem of 
the Individual is of critical impor- 
tance for Realism, 76.—This prob- 
lem appears as that of the One and 
Many in realistic theory, and is dis- 
cussed as such, 121-133.— Mysti- 
cism and the Individual, 240. — 
Critical Rationalism does not recog- 
nize the Real as Individual, 240.— In 
dividual determination as the goal 
of thinking, and of all the processes 
expressed in ideas, I, 261, 269, 283; 
the Real must be individually deter- 
minate, 290-300; negative definition 
of individuality, 291-294; the what 
is abstractly universal, the that in- 
dividual, 294; but neither experience 
nor thought define individuality, 
295; individual determination as the 
principal character of the Real, 297; 
as a Limit, 297, 298.— Positive defi- 
nition of individuality in terms of 
purpose or will, 335-339, 456-457; 
relation of our finite view of indi- 
viduality to the final point of view, 
457; the Individual as, for us, the 
postulated object of the exclusive 
affections, 458, 459; for the Absolute 
the Individual is both the whole 
world, and every portion thereof 
viewed as in significant relations to 
the whole, 459, 460, 464, 465. — Ap- 
plication of this view to the Self, IJ, 
269-277; 283-294; 327-331.— The 
Ethical Individual as in the eternal 
world the equal of the Absolute, 
although a part of the Absolute, 
445-452. — Individuality in relation 
to the concept of the InrinirTx, I, 


467 


584-588. — Individuality and Immor- 
tality, Il, 431-436. [See Sexr.] 
Induction, mathematical, Dedekind 
on the foundation of the conclusion 
from 2 cases to n+ 1, I, 579. 
InFinirg.—The world of the Third 
Conception of Being is explicitly 
infinite, I, 259.— Problem of the 
infinite as an ancient phase of the 
general problem as to unity and 
variety, 475; its relation to Brad- 
ley’s difficulties about the definition 
of the Absolute, id.; importance of 
the problem, 476; the self-contradic- 
tory character of the actually infi- 
nite a familiar thesis since Aristotle, 
id.; discussion of this concept closely 
related to that of the Self, id.— Il- 
lustrations of the “‘ infinite process ”’ 
as defined by Bradley, 478-481; 
for him this process is the nec- 
essary result of a relational way 
of thinking, 481; analysis of this 
infinite process, 490-494; it is due 
to the self-development of thought, 
492, 493; and is an _ instance 
of the way in which plurality de- 
velops out of unity, 494; results 
necessarily from any recurrent oper- 
ation of thought, 494-499; hence is 
best illustrated by the number series, 
499; and in mathematics such an 
infinite process is not condemned 
merely because of its endlessness, 
500.— A recurrent operation ex- 
presses itself in the construction of 
a self-representative system of ob- 
jects, 501-507 ; illustration of such a 
system, 503, 504; its structure, if 
complete, is infinitely complex, 505. 
— General definition of a self-repre- 
sentative system, 507-509; resulting 
positive definition of the concept of 
the infinite, 509; Dedekind’s form 
of this definition, 510-512; further 
illustration from the properties of 
the number series, 512, 519; a sys- 
tem that is self-representative at all, 
is so in an infinite number of ways, 
518, 519; contrast of Dedekind’s 
type of self-representative system 
and other types, 519-525; the self- 
representative system as Kette, 520; 


468 


properties of a Kette, 523-525.— The 
Self in general, the self-representa- 
tive system, and the number series, 
their formal identity, 526-534; the 
concept of order which is involved, 
528-530, 532, 534; relation to the 
theory of all types of order, 535-538 
[ef. Il, 86-91, and see also entries 
under Series, and BeTwEEN]; the 
realm of Reality is a self-represen- 
tative system, hence has the form of 
a Self, and hence is also infinite in 
complexity, I, 538-554; this result 
holds for the First Conception of 
Being, 539-543; Mysticism cannot 
escape it, 547-549; Critical Ration- 
alism explicitly admits it, 543, 544; 
Idealism accepts it, 544-546; Brad- 
ley’s Absolute is subject to the same 
necessity of being a self-representa- 
tive system, 549-552; hence Reality 
infinite, 553.— The objections to the 
actually infinite are stated, 554-563; 
first as Aristotle’s objections, 555; 
then in various more recent forms, 
556-558 ; then as they appear in stud- 
ies of the logic of the Calculus, 558- 
562; and otherwise, 562, 563.— An- 
swer to these objections, 563-588; 
theses as to the infinite, 568-569; 
the actually infinite is but one as- 
pect of Being, 563; is not inconsis- 
tent with determinateness, 565-567 ; 
is a determinate and individual 
whole, 570-581; possesses totality, 
581-588; is completed in what sense 
and is incomplete in what sense, 587. 
Infinitesimal, in the Calculus, I, 559, 
562. — Mr. Charles Peirce on, 562 note. 
Intellect and Will, relations of, I, 21. 
[See KNOWLEDGE and WILL. ] 
Internal Meaning of Ideas, see IDEA. 


Jerusalem the Golden, hymn of Ber- 
nard of Cluny, I, 171, 180, 188. 


Kant, mentioned, I, 75.— His philoso- 
phy in part a search for a higher 
form of consciousness, 17; his 
view of the understanding as the 
maker of Nature, 32; his Things in 
Themselves, 63, 64; his world of 
Mogliche Erfahrung not conceived 


INDEX 


in realistic terms, 71; his general 
relation to Critical Rationalism, 
207; discussion of Kant’s theory 
of experience, 233-238, cf. 247. — 
Relation of Kant’s theory of 
knowledge to that developed in the 
lectures, II, 10; 71. 


Kerry, Benno, on concepts of Limits, 


I, 502 note; on Dedekind’s theory 
of the infinite, 512 note. 


Kette, aterm used by Dedekind fora 


self-representative system of a par- 
ticular type, I, 520-525. — Schroeder 
on the properties of a Kette, 525 
note; Bettazzi on, 523 note. [See 
SELF, under SELF-REPRESENTA- 
TIVE SYSTEM.] 


KNOWLEDGE. — Its relation to Will, I, 


21, 41.— Realistic knowledge of the 
Real a problem, 65; the realistic 
metaphysic makes this problem logi- 
cally insoluble, 134-136; Realism 
makes the real independent of knowl- 
edge, 66; view that Realism some- 
times takes as to the relation of 
Knowledge and Will, 70; defini- 
tion of the realistic independence of 
knowledge and object, 115-120.— 
Knowledge and experience, idea 
and object, for Critical Rationalism, 
202-211; 213-220; 233-244; 251-262. 
— Problem of knowledge, or of idea, 
and object, as basis of transition to 
the Fourth Conception of Being, 
270-342. — The idealistic concep- 
tion of the relation between knowl- 
edge and will, 487, 581 note. — The 
categories of our human type of 
knowledge; the categories of the 
Ought, II, 839-42; the twofold atti- 
tude of the finite will toward facts, 
26; the one attitude as the expres- 
sion of an inattention to all but a 
few facts, and as formulating itself 
in the categories of the World of 
Description, 55-103; the other atti- 
tude as giving rise to the categories 
of Appreciation, 104-107. —Knowl- 
edge in its relations to the Moral 
Order, and to Free Will, 347-360. 


Law.—Logical origin of the conception 


of law in the natural and in the 


INDEX 


moral worlds, II, 70-76. — The origin 
of the concept of law in the World 
of Description, 76-91; the estab- 
lishment of particular laws in this 
world, 91-95; contrast of the types 
of series, and so of law in the Worlds 
of Description and Appreciation, 95- 
107.— The conception of the laws 
of Nature, origin and meaning 
of this conception, 175-197; value 
and limitations of the conception of 
natural law, 197-204.—Two types 
of natural laws recognized in the 
special sciences, 214-219; the more 
literal of these types of natural laws 
illustrated and discussed, 219-224; 
resulting hypothesis as to the inter- 
pretation of Nature, and of the laws 
of Nature, 224-233.—The Self as 
subject to natural law, 323-327. 

Leibniz, Monads of, I, 63, 64, 109, 110, 
209.— Criticism of his theory of 
Nature, II, 237-239, 

Limit, concept of, I, 37, 38; as em- 
ployed by Mysticism, 191-194, ef. 
181; the Individual as the limit of 
determination, which we _ seek 
through the process of experience, 
297-299; further definition of the 
concept of limit, 298. 

Linkage of Facts, see CATEGORIES, 
BETWEEN, CAUSATION, DEScCRIP- 
TION. 

Lipps, G. F., on the iterative processes 
of thought, I, 502 note. 

Logic, I, 37. 

Lotze, on Plato’s Ideas, I, 227. 

Luther, I, 85. 


Matter, Our belief in the material 
world, origin of this belief, its foun- 
dation, and its relation to social 
motives, II, 159-186. [See also 
NATURE. ] 

Meaning of an Idea, see IDEA. 

Metaphysics, see BeInc, THEORY OF. 

Meyer, Franz, I, 512, 561. 

Mind Stuff, I, 63; I, 239. 

Monads of Leibniz, see Lutpniz.—A 
world of conscious monads might 
be conceived as real in the sense of 
the technical realist, I, 69.—Con- 
trast between the interpretation of 


469 


Nature in the lectures, and the 
Monadology of Leibniz, II, 238. 
Morat Orper.— The problem as to 
the relation between Idealism and 
the moral order considered, II, 335- 
375.— Objections to the ethical 
character of an idealistic world 
stated, 339-343; freedom necessary 
in a true moral order, and not 
merely such freedom as Idealism 
attributes to the Selves, 339, 340; 
the Ought and the fact are contrast- 
ing categories, never to be identified, 
340; but Idealism identifies them, 
341; the unity of the Individual and 
the Absolute in Idealism deprives 
the Self of true initiative, 342; ab- 
solute foreknowledge and freedom 
inconsistent, 343.— Answer to these 
objections depends partly on distin- 
guishing the temporal and the 
eternal order, 338, 343; moral activ- 
ity is temporal, 343-345; challenge 
to the objector to state his own 
Theory of Being, 545, 346; at any 
moment of time the Self seeks the 
Absolute, 347; but may do so more 
or less blindly, 348-350; and so may 
rebel against the ethical Ought, zd. ; 
because the temporal and relatively 
blind Self views its life in the light 
of a contrast-effect, 349; and may 
emphasize falsely, 350; the ethical 
Ought characterized, 348-351. — But 
is this act done counter to the 
Ought a free act ? 352, 353 ; objection 
that it is due to ignorance, 353; 
answer in terms of the theory of 
attention, 353-360; when the tem- 
poral Self knows the Ought, but 
then by a free act of inattention 
ignores it, 7.c. forgets it, then a free 
act counter to the Ought becomes 
possible, 356, 357; sin as ‘‘ viciously 
acquired naiveté,’’ 358; such free- 
dom possible, 359, 360.— Objection 
that this forgetfulness can only hap- 
pen as an incident in the perfect 
world, and so must be a good thing 
if it happens at all, 360, 361. — 
Answer by reference to the contrast 
of temporal and eternal, 361, 362; 
summary of the general theory of 


470 


evil, 362-364; moral evil as a tem- 
poral event, 365; is part of a perfect 
whole by being thwarted and over- 
come, 365, 366; hence free and sig- 
nificant and temporal choices of evil 
possible, yet consistent with the per- 
fect whole, which is the eternal 
order, 367, 368; since evil must be 
temporally atoned for, 368; and the 
eternal order is the completion of 
this process of atonement, 368.— 
Answer in detail to the objector, 369- 
375; the world perfect in its eter- 
nal completion, but not in its tem- 
poral stages, 369; the evil-doer’s 
will is identical with the Absolute 
Will only as supplemented and 
thwarted thereby, 369; evil inci- 
dents may belong to a good process 
by virtue of deeds of atonement, 
370; this explains how the evil-doer 
is part of a perfect whole, 372; his 
freedom needed, even where its con- 
sequences are evil, 372; the ought to 
be and the is are in conflict in time, 
and united only in eternity, 373; 
the perfection of the world consists 
in the triumph over the evil, 373; 
absolute foreknowledge does not 
exist, 374; what God possesses is 
eternal knowledge, 374, which is not 
foreknowledge, 374. 

MYSTICISM, THE SECOND CONCEPTION 
oF BEING, defined in general, I, 61; 
characterized, 77-86.—It is very 
generally misunderstood, 79, yet his- 
torically very widely represented, 
78; it consists in asserting that to be 
means to be simply and wholly im- 
mediate, 79; it is the most thorough- 
going form of empiricism, 81, 83; it 
is reached, negatively, by a sceptical 
process of thought, 82; it is conscious 
of the contradictions of Realism, 7d. ; 
it rejects the superficial in experi- 
ence, and seeks the deepest form of 
immediacy, 82; it is no more and no 
less defective than Realism, 84; it is 
capable of finding place in various 
religions, 84; hence migratory, 85; 
its relations to orthodoxy, 85, 86; 
Mysticism and Realism as polar 
opposites of each other, 86, 180,— 


INDEX 


Mysticism expounded more in detail, 
144-156; it is opposed to admitting 
the Many, and knows only the One, 
144; its relation to ordinary life 
and experience, 145; to Protagorean 
scepticism, 145, 146; to its critics 
generally, 147; its practical ten- 
dency, and its insistence upon sat- 
isfaction of the Will as its goal, 
149-154; the contrast, with common 
views, and with Realism, which is 
present in this aspect of mystical 
doctrine, 154-156; historical basis 
of Mysticism in the Upanishads, 
156. — Hindoo Mysticism character- 
ized, 156-171; its Absolute is a 
pure Immediacy within conscious- 
ness, 170; yet not known to us in 
its true form, as we are at present 
conscious, td.; hence defined by a 
contrast-effect, 171.— Mysticism in 
medieval expression, 171-173. — 
Mystics make their case turn on 
reductio ad absurdum of opposed 
views, 173.— History of Mysticism 
repeats one doctrine in many forms, 
175-178; Mysticism the polar oppo- 
site, or mirror-picture of Realism, 
179; like Realism it ends in making 
Being equivalent to Nothing, 180; 
the contrast-effect upon which Mys- 
ticism turns is to be interpreted only 
in case the finite is real as well as 
the Absolute, 181-182. — Mysticism 
has the advantage over Realism of 
being a reflective doctrine that 
points beyond itself, 185, 186; is 
self-critical and dialectical, 188; 
truth and falsity of Mysticism, 
189-195. 


NATURAL RELIGION. — Three concep- 
tions of natural religion character- 
ized, I, 1-5; the conception adopted 
in the present work, 5; in what 
sense dependent upon the Theory of 
Being, 7-9, 11, 12, 14; relation of 
Idealism to the interests of Natural 
Religion, 40-44; Mysticism as a re- 
ligious experience, 78-87. — Idealis- 
tic view of the unity of the world 
considered in its religious aspect, 
424-427; unity of divine and human 


INDEX 


individuality, 459-466; consequence 
for the freedom and activity of the 
human Individual, 466-470. — God 
and the Self in their general rela- 
tions, II, 275-277, 289-290, 292-294, 
297-308, 319, 322, 323-331.— God and 
the Moral Order, 335, 336, 343-375. 
— The essence of religious doctrine 
as to the perfection of God and the 
need and defect of the finite being, 
379, 380.— The relation of God to 
sorrow and ill-fortune, 393411.— 
God as Person, 418-425. — Relation 
of God to Immortality, 431-445. — 
Equality of God and the Ethical 
Individual, 445-452. 

NaATuRE. — Outer Nature as an object 
of study for natural religion, I, 3, 
4; human nature, as such an object, 
4.— Outlines of the idealistic view 
of Nature, 405, 414-418. — Transi- 
tion to the more special study of the 
problem of Nature, II, 7, 9-11, 157. 
— Difficulty of defining precisely the 
scope of the term Nature, 157-159; 
theory of our knowledge of Nature 
introduced, 159; theory that our ex- 
perience of resistance is the evidence 
of the existence of Nature, 161; criti- 
cism of this theory, 161-165; transi- 
tion to social theory of our knowledge 
of external world, 165, 166 ; evidence 
for this theory, 166-168; basis of our 
belief in the social world, 168-174; 
consequences for our belief in the 
physical world, 175-180; why the 
senses of sight and touch are pre- 
ferred as giving us evidence of the 
existence of natural objects, 178-180. 
The interpretation of Nature accord- 
ing to the categories of the World of 
Description, — what form taken by 
this interpretation, 180-183; why 
material Nature contrasted with 
mind in such a sharp way by civil- 
ized man, 183-186; the conception 
of Nature as subject to rigid law, — 
basis of this conception, 186-197; 
relative validity and limitations of 
this conception, 186, 195-204 ; natural 
law and social custom, 192, 195-197 ; 
man’s knowledge of natural law an 


471 


view quite as much as of extra 
human facts, 197-204. — The laws of 
Nature distinguished into the more 
nearly literal and the more ideal 
laws, 214-219; the different value of 
these two kinds of laws for the philo- 
sophical interpretation of nature,219; 
four types of natural processes that 
are definable in terms of laws of the 
more literal kind enumerated and 
illustrated, 219-224: (1) the irre- 
versible processes, 219, cf. 217, 218; 
(2) the processes of mutual assimila- 
tion, 220; (3) the formation of tem- 
porary and approximate rhythms or 
habits, 221; (4) the evolutionary pro- 
cesses, 223 ; significance of the evolu- 
tionary processes illustrated, 209- 
213. — Consequent hypothesis as to 
the unity of Nature, the relations of 
mental and material worlds, and the 
basis of evolution, 224-233. — Rela- 
tion of this hypothesis to Fourth 
Conception of Being, 234; to Berke- 
ley’s interpretation of Nature, 234— 
237; to that of Leibniz, 237, 238; to 
other hypotheses, 239-241. — Consid- 
erations as to the application of this 
hypothesis to the problem of the 
evolution of new Selves, and new 
forms of experience in general, 294— 
323. 

Neo-Platonism, I, 78. [See also Plo- 
tinus.] — Relation of Neo-Platonism 
to critical Rationalism, 228, 230. 


Object and Objective. — Realistic defi- 
nition of the object of ideas, I, 93-97 
{see also Rpavism]; Sinkhya defini- 
tion of an object, 101, 102; result of 
the realistic theory of the relation 
of object and idea, 134-136.— For 
the problem of idea and object in 
its general form, see InkA, IDFAL- 
1sM, and BrrnG, THEORY oF. — For 
the problem of our finite knowledge 
of particular objects, see Fact, 
CarrmGcory, Acknowledgment, DkE- 
SCRIPTION, KNOWLEDGE. 

Occasionalism, as a form of Realism, 
I, 99. 

Omar Khayydm, quoted, I, 94. 


expression of the human point of ; One and Many. — Problem of the One 


472 


and the Many in the history of 
Realism, I, 110, 111; dilemma of 
the One and Many as it exists for 
Realism, stated, 121-123; considered 
as to the hypothesis of the Many, 
123-132; as to the hypothesis of 
the One, 133; outcome of the discus- 
sion, 134-137; first view of the true 
unity of the world, 137, 138; need of 
further definition of this view, 142. 
— Problem of the One and the Many 
for Idealism, 424-427; this problem 
as stated by Bradley, 473-485; pos- 
sible solution indicated by him, 485- 
489; the properties of the Self- 
Representative System as indicat- 
ing the true solution of the problem, 
489-588. [See INFINITB, and SELF, 
under the heading, SELF-REPRE- 
SENTATIVE SystEM.]—The prob- 
lem of the One and the Many in 
the case of the relation of the 
Absolute to the many Individual 
Selves, II, 296-305, 270-272, 292-294, 
418-452. 

Ontology, of Religion, I, 11. [See 
BrinG, THEORY OF.] The Ontologi- 
cal Predicate discussed in an intro- 
ductory fashion, 13, 15, 48, 49-54, 55. 
Order, the concept of, in relation to 
the concepts of the Self and the infi- 
nite, I, 526-538; the different forms 
of serial order, IJ, 69, 70, 72-76, 83 
note, 85, 86, 88-91, 97, 98, 101, 102, 
105-107. — The Well-Ordered Series 
as the typical form of the expression 
of the Self, 69; as the fundamental 
form of Order, I, 535-538; see also 
passages just cited, on the different 
forms of serial order. — Order in the 
temporal expressions of the Self, II, 
105, 106, 305-323. [See Smxr, and 
SERIES.] 

OTHER, the, as name for the Object, 
or External Meaning of ideas, I, 59; 
if completely present would, as we 
conceive, end the conflict of Thought 
and Immediacy, id.; on the other 
hand seems that which should con- 
trol or set aside ideas, and so as pos- 
sibly evil, 60.— Realism defines the 
Other as wholly other than ideas, 65; 
all conceptions of Being agree in rec- 


INDEX 


ognizing the object as in some way 
more-or less other than one’s ideas 
while one is seeking truth, 95.— For 
detailed discussion of the Other as 
the Object of the Idea, see Inma, 
IpEALISM, and Brine, Theory of.— 
On the Other as the object of ac- 
knowledgment for finite ideas, see 
Fact, CATEGORY, NATURE. 

Ought, the.—The category of the 
Ought as expressing the form of our 
acknowledgment of particular facts, 
II, 30-42. — Relation of the theoreti- 
cal Ought and the practical Ought of 
Ethics, 32. [See Fact, Acknowl- 
edgment, CarEGorY.]—The three 
special categories of the Ought, 41, 
42.—The ethical Ought and the 
Moral Order, 335-375. [See MorRAL 
ORDER. |] 


Peirce, Charles S., I, 254, 255; 510 
note. His contribution to the defi- 
nition of the concept of the infinite 
as expounded by Schroeder, 512 
note, 514 note. —His view as to in- 
finitesimals, 562 note. —His views 
of natural law and of necessity, II, 
195, 221. — His cosmological specula- 
tions, 220, 234.— The author’s in- 
debtedness to, I, xiii, Il, xvi. 

Permanence, as sign of Reality in the 
popular ontological vocabulary, I, 
53, 54; in technical Realism, 105; 
not essential to realistic systems, 
105, 106. 

Philosophy, difficulties of, 7,8; signifi- 
cance of, 8; relations of philosophy 
to special sciences, 9; to Rational 
Theology, 10; consists in thorough- 
going reflection, 10; history of, in 
what way used in preparing for 
Theory of Being, 12; how a philoso- 
phy should be judged, 16. — Bearing 
of Philosophy upon life, II, 1-5.— 
Relations of Philosophy to special 
sciences, 6-9, see Brine, THEORY 
OF. 

Plato, I, 17; the Ideas of Plato, 63, 64, 
67; they are for us, as we at present 
exist, independent, realistic entities, 
but have also another and more 
mystical aspect when considered 


INDEX 


with reference to our previous ex- 
istence, 71.—Plato shows that 
thought is concerned with univer- 
sals, 76; his position with respect to 
Realism discussed, 98, text and note ; 
although on the whole a realist, an- 
ticipates arguments against realism, 
and advances them as his own, 98; 
his view as to permanence of Real- 
ity, 105; his relation to Critical Ra- 
tionalism, 207, 211, 227, 228. 
Pilotinus, I, 18; I, 302; gives the doc- 
trine of the Platonic Ideas a partly 
mystical interpretation, I, 71. 
Poincaré, on the nature of mathemat- 
ical reasoning, I, 502 note. 
Possipinity of Experience, valid, as 
synonym for the TurrD ConcEp- 
TION OF Berna, I, 61.— Kant’s 
Mogliche Erfahrung discussed, 233- 
239.—J. S. Mill’s account of the 
conception cited, 239.— See Brine, 
THEORY OF, and CRITICAL RATION- 
ALISM. — POSSIBLE ATTENTION, ob- 
jects of, II, 62-95 (a term for the 
objects of the World of Description), 
see DESCRIPTION. — Possible, the, 
as opposed to the real or to Being, 
I, 277, 296; 572-581. 

Probabilities, Theory of, I, 113. 
Protagoras, as assailant of Realism, I, 
98; answered by Aristotle, 99. 
Psychology, of Cognition, I, 20; of 
ideas, and of their relations to the 
Will, 22, 35; use of realistic concep- 
tion of Being customary in, 68.— 
Psychology as special science whose 
results cannot be predetermined by 
philosophy, II, 8.— Psychological 
aspects of our experience of time, 
113-126. — Psychology of our belief 
in the material world, 159-168, 175- 
186; of our social consciousness, 
168-171; of the empirical Self, 257- 
265. — Justification and limits of 
the postulates of psychology in their 
application to the causal necessity 
of mental processes, 323-327. 
Purpose. — The Absolute as involving 
Purpose, I, 40, 41.— Fulfilment or 
attainment of purpose as a motive 
in the mystical conception of Being, 
149-156; cf. 176-179.— Purpose of 


473 


ideas as determining what sort of 
correspondence to their objects they 
are required to possess, 300-311; as 
determining what constitutes the 
object meant by any idea, 316-320; 
resulting dilemma as to the possi- 
bility of truth and error in ideas, 
820-324; consequent definition of 
the object, or of Being, as the em- 
bodiment of purpose, 325-335.— 
The Individual as the unique or 
determinate expression of purpose, 
336-339; 455460.—The realm of 
purposes as self-representative and 
consequently infinite, 544-546. — In- 
dividuality and the infinite, viewed 
in their relations in the light of this 
theory, 584-588. — The World of Ap- 
preciation as an expression of 
purpose, II, 26, 95-106.—The ac- 
knowledgment of finite facts as an 
expression of purpose, 31-42. [See 
WILL, APPRECIATION. ] 


REALISM, THE First CONCEPTION OF 


BEING, defined in general, I, 62-70; 
it lays stress on the Independence of 
real objects, 63; historical illustra- 
tions of, 63; immediacy involved in 
realistic conception, but inadequate 
to express the realistic conception 
of Being, 64; Realism regards Being 
as also something deeper than what 
is merely given, id. ; and as possess- 
ing Truth, 64; Realism is conse- 
quently a synthesis of three ele- 
ments, id.; it defines the Real as 
wholly Other than the idcas which, 
from without, refer to that Being, 
65; for Realism, knowing processes 
make no difference to the Being 
known, 66; relation of Realism to 
popular metaphysics more precisely 
stated, 67, 68; a world of realistic 
entities might be a world of con- 
scious monads, 69; peculiar charac- 
ter of the relation between idea and 
object implied by Realism, 69, 70.— 
Historical fortunes of Realism, 70- 
75; a realistic system of philosophy 
recognizes, as a rule, some entities 
which are not real merely in the 
realistic sense, 70, 71; illustrations 


474 


in Aristotle, 71; in Plato, id.; in 
Kant, id.; in Spinoza, id.; in Her- 
bart, 72. — Practical significance of 
Realism, 72-75; ‘‘sanity’’ of real- 
ism, 74, 75; it is a step toward the 
formation of a conception of Indi- 
viduality, 75; it is socially useful, 
id.; yet internally self-contradic- 
tory, 76; the problem of Individual- 
ity constitutes its central difficulty, 
76, 77; illustration of this fact in 
case of Herbart, 77.— Detailed ex- 
position and criticism of Realism, 
91-137 ; abstractness of the under- 
taking, 92; for Realism, the var- 
nishing of knowledge would make 
no difference to the independent 
facts known, 93; literary illustra- 
tion of this view from Omar Khay- 
yam, 94; Realism wrongly defined 
as the doctrine that reality is ‘‘ ex- 
tra-mental,”’ 94; all conceptions of 
Being make Being external in some 
sense to our ideas, or at least other 
than our efforts to know Being, 95; 
nor does Realism necessarily make 
all facts external in any sense to all 
minds, 95, 96; this externality to 
all minds characteristic only of some 
forms of Realism, 96; hence the in- 
difference of any being to what is 
known about it by another the es- 
sential mark of Realism, 97.— De- 
tailed historical illustrations of 
Realism, 97-106; early Greek think- 
ers as realists, 97; Plato as realist, 
98; Aristotle states the essential 
principle of Realism, 99; Cartesian 
dualism as Realism, 99; Oecasional- 
ism as Realism, zd. ; Locke’s enun- 
ciation of the principle of Realism, 
100; the Sankhya as Realism, 100- 
104; the realistic principle as enun- 
ciated by a Sankhya commentator, 
102; illustrations, id.; the souls of 
the Sankhya as in their turn inde- 
pendent of the objects that they 
know, id.; also 103; resulting indi- 
cation that for Realism the inde- 
pendence of the object and of the 
knowledge of this object isa mutual 
independence, 103, 104; the struggle 
of One and Many in the history of 


INDEX 


Realism, 104; permanence as a char- 
acter of the Real in the history of 
Realism, 105; activity or efficacy as 
such a character, id.; these predi- 
cates of the Real historically impor- 
tant, but not essential to Realism, 
105, 106; outcome of the history of 
Realism, 106.—The central issue 
regarding realism stated, 107; baf- 
fling character of this issue, 7d. ; 
difficulty of conceiving precisely 
what the independence of the real 
shall mean, 108; paradoxical con- 
sequences of this difficulty, 108, 109; 
the Independent Beings of the tech- 
nical realist as beings remote from 
the world of common sense, 109; 
wavering of Realism between the two 
extremes of viewing the world as con- 
taining One Being, and one as con- 
taining many mutually Independent 
Beings, 110, 111; difficulties of both 
extremes, id.— The problem of Real- 
ism requires a closer study of the 
precise definition of Independence, 
113; relative independence in the 
Theory of Probabilities, 113, 114; 
this sort of independence not that 
which Realism seems to mean, 115; 
need of taking the realistic defini- 
tion first in its most extreme form, 
postponing modifications until later, 
115; statement of this extreme form, 
116-120; the independence in ques- 
tion is the absolute and essential 
independence of object over against 
knowledge, 117; this independence 
mutual, 119; if links or relations 
of object and knowledge come into 
existence, they must be logically 
secondary to the essential indepen- 
dence here in question, 116, 118.— 
The hypotheses possible to the real- 
ist when once his objects are defined 
as in the extreme sense independent 
of knowledge: the hypothesis of the 
Many Independent Beings and of 
the One Independent Being, 121-124; 
definition of the hypothesis of the 
Many, 123; relation to Herbart’s 
Theory of Being, 121; problem as 
to how the Many Independent Beings 
can come to enter into relations, 


INDEX 


124; attempted answer to this ques- 
tion in terms of our experience, 124; 
rejection of this answer, 125; ex- 
perience shows us no Independent 
Beings, 126, 127; the question must 
be answered, if at all, on the grounds 
of the definition of independence. — 
Two theses as to the Many Inde- 
pendent Beings of the realistic 
hypothesis of the Many, 127; proof 
of the first thesis: That these beings 
can never acquire any link or rela- 
tion, 127-129; proof of the second 
thesis: That these Beings can have 
no common characters, 129-131; re- 
sults as to the realistic hypothesis 
of the Many, 131.— The hypothesis 
of the One Independent Being, 132; 
it is not possible for the realist, 133; 
for knowledge and its object are 
both of them beings, or parts, or 
aspects of beings, 133; and these 
beings are independent of each 
other, 134, 135; hence there are at 
least two Independent Beings in a 
realistic world, viz., idea and object, 
134; by the former proof they have 
nothing in common, and no rela- 
tions, 135; hence the realist’s own 
ideas and knowledge have no rela- 
tion or similarity to the realist’s 
own world, 135, 136; hence the real- 
ist’s world reduces to Nothing, 136, 
137; general results as to the link- 
age of facts and the Unity of Being, 
137, 138; summary of the argument, 
142, 143.— Modified Realism as an 
attempt to avoid the self-contradic- 
tory consequences of extreme Real- 
ism, 195-202; doubt whether extreme 
Realism would attempt to maintain 
its case if confronted with foregoing 
difficulties, 195; realistic indepen- 
dence as practical, and relative, 196; 
consequently any real object knowa- 
ble under conditions ; effort to state 
such modified Realism, 196, 197; re- 
lation of such views to theories of 
object as the cause of knowledge, 
197; it is not possible to leave any 
part or aspect of the Real indepen- 
dent of knowledge, 198, 199; hence 
the independent aspect which the 


3 


475 


foregoing Modification of Realism 
attempts to preserve must be aban- 
doned, 200; hence the Real becomes 
that which is essentially and thor- 
oughly fitted to be known, 201; 
hence Realism becomes transformed 
into the Third Conception of Being, 
201. [See, for the relations of 
Realism to the other Conceptions 
of Being, THEORY OF BEING, espe- 
cially under THE First ConcEPTION 
oF BEING.] — For relations of Real- 
ism to the problems of Time, the 
Self, Evil, and the Infinite, see also 
these terms themselves. 

Reality, as distinguished by the Scho- 
lastics, and by some modern usage, 
from existence, I, 51, 52, and 52 note. 
[See Bemnc, THEORY OF.] 

Real, the, see Brine, THEORY OF. 

Reals of Herbart, I, 63, 64. [See 
Herbart.] 

Recurrent operations and processes, I, 
494-501. [See SELF, under the spe- 
cial heading, Smuir-Representative 
System.] 

Reflection, in philosophy, I, 10, 12. 

Relations, possibility of, in case of real- 
ism, discussed, I, 127, 128. [See, as 
to relations, entries under BETWEEN, 
SELF, SERIES, Law, CAUSATION, 
One and Many, ReAuism, IDEAL- 
IsM.] 

Religion, see NATURAL RELIGION, 


Sdnkhya, the, as example of early 
Hindoo Realism, I, 100-104, 109, 110, 
197. 

Scholastic Philosophy, I, 18, 78, 85. 
[See also Augustine, Saint, and 
Thomas, Saint, Aquinas.] 

Schroeder, E., on the nature of exact 
thinking, I, 253; on the meaning of 
universal and particular judgments, 
282 note, 283 note ; on the Universe of 
Discourse, and its relation to self- 
representative processes, 553; on 
Dedekind’s theory of the Kette, or 
self-representative system, 525; 
on the definition of finite and infinite, 
512 note; on Dedekind’s theory of 
mathematical induction, 580. 

Sexr, in general. — The mystical doc- 


476 


trine of the Self and the Absolute, 
in Hindoo Mysticism, I, 156-165; dis- 
cussion of this view, 166-169; as in- 
terpreted by the seer Yajnavalkya, 
169, 170; as thus identified with the 
Immediate and the Absolute, 170,171. 
— The search of the Idea for corre- 
spondence with its object is a search 
for the expression and embodiment 
of ifs own internal meaning, and so 
is a search for the Self, 329; argu- 
ment whereby this result is reached, 
265-335. — Resulting conception of 
the individuality of the Self, 335- 
342. — Restatement of this view of 
the Self of any finite idea, and com- 
parison with other conceptions, 348- 
360; responses to objections, 360- 
382.— Will, Individuality, Free- 
dom, and Activity in relation to the 
Self, 433-470.—The form of the 
Self: the SrLF-REPRESENTATIVE 
System, I, 488-588. — Only as a self- 
developed variety, resulting from a 
single plan or idea, can the Many be 
understood with reference to the 
One, 488, 489; the thinking process 
is such a self-differentiating unity, 
490-494; this unity logically de- 
mands an infinite variety of expres- 
sion, 493; recurrent processes con- 
sidered in relation to selfhood, 494— 
591. —Self-representative systems 
defined, and illustrated in detail, 
501-554; first illustration from the 
perfect map contained within the ob- 
ject mapped, 502-507; Dedekind’s 
Kette, and the positive definition of 
the infinite as a self-representative 
system, 507-512; the number se- 
ries as a self-representative system, 
513-519; various other types of self- 
representative systems, and their 
comparison with the number-system, 
519-525; the self-representative sys- 
tem as self-representative in infi- 
nitely numerous ways, 523-525; the 
form of the Self in relation to the 
concept of order, 526-538; the Well- 
Ordered Series defined, II, 69; this 
form of order characteristic of the 
expression of the Self, id., and I, 529- 
535; is the fundamental type of 


INDEX 


order, 535-538; is characteristic of 
the World of Appreciation, II, 101- 
107; andis also characteristic of the 
temporal expression of the Self, so 
far as it is conscious of its own pur- 
pose, 305-323.— The form of the 
Self is possessed by Reality, what- 
ever be our concept of reality, I, 538- 
554; the Real is accordingly infi- 
nite, and the infinite real, 554-588. 
SeLF, HumaN AND Drvine, their 
inter-relationships, and their union, 
II, 415-452; God as a personal and 
individual Self, 418425; Man as a 
personal and individual Self, 425- 
452; manifold meanings of the tem- 
poral Self reviewed and unified, 
427-430; the problem of the Immor- 
tality of the Self considered in three 
stages, 431-445.— The Ethical Self, 
in the eternal world, a Part of God, 
yet equal to the Absolute, 445-452. 
SELF, THE HuMAN. — Variety of 
meanings of the term, II, 247-256; 
the moral significance of the Self, 
247-249; the noble and the base Self, 
249-251; external origin of the 
higher Self, 250-252; tendency of 
the Self to disintegration into many 
Selves, 253-256.—Three kinds of 
conceptions of what the human Self 
is, 256, 257; the first kind, viz., the 
empirical Self and its varieties, 257- 
265; social origin both of the empiri- 
cal Self and of these variations, 
260-265. — The non-idealistic concep- 
tions of the metaphysically real Self 
as the second kind of conceptions of 
the Self, 266-268; the third kind of 
conception, viz., the idealistic view 
of the Self, 268-277; the human 
Self an ethical conception, 269; the 
Self as the expression of a mean- 
ing in a life, 269, 270; relation 
to the Absolute, 270-272; any In- 
ternal Meaning as in some sense a 
Self, 272, 273; the human Self as de- 
fined by an Ought and an ideal, 273- 
276; relation to God essential to the 
Being of the Self, 277. — Contrast 
of the conceptions of the real Self as 
defined according to the various 
Conceptions of Being, 282-294; the 


INDEX 


realistic conceptions of the Self re- 
viewed, 282-284; the Self for Mysti- 
cism, 284; for Critical Rationalism 
(Kant, Fichte), 284-286; the resto- 
ration of true individuality to the 
Self one aspect of Idealism, 286-290 ; 
the contrasts of various Selves, 289, 
292; the uniqueness and individual- 
ity of the Self dependent on its rela- 
tions to God, 290; the human Self 
not an independent being, 291; yet 
has a certain degree of freedom as 
well as uniqueness, 290-294; is self- 
conscious only in God, 290; its own 
way of expressing God’s will is not 
derived from without, 293; its free- 
dom due to its relation to God, 294. 
— The temporal origin of the human 
Self, and its relation to the process 
of Evolution, 294-323; the ground 
for the existence of various Selves 
within the Absolute explained, nega- 
tively, on the basis of the criticism 
of Mysticism, 297; positively, on 
the basis of the properties of the 
self-representative system, 297, 298; 
no need of explaining how the finite 
Self ‘‘ fell away ”’ from the Absolute, 
299, 302; the temporal and the eter- 
nal aspect of the relation between 
the finite Self and the Absolute, 299 ; 
the unity of consciousness, even in 
us, shows the inclusion of lesser Self 
within greater, 300-302; the finite 
Self never falls away from the Ab- 
solute at all, 302; finite Self always 
contained within larger finite Self, 
303, 304. — The temporal expression 
of an ideal type of finite Self, 305- 
307; the known types of finite 
Selves are approximations to this 
ideal; they are characterized by 
a certain form of inattention, 307; 
this leaves them, at any temporal 
instant, in a twofold relation to 
the Absolute, 309; the process of 
discrimination, and the use of the 
relation between, 310-314; results 
of discrimination seen in Imitation, 
310-312; in trial and error, 312-313; 
but the principle of tendency to 
recurrent or self-representative pro- 
cesses of self-expression is seen in 


477 


the formation of habits, 314; this 
union of two types of processes 
responsible for the differentiation 
of new forms of Self in our own 
experience, 315; and possibly in 
Nature, 316; consequent hypothesis 
as to the natural origin of new 
Selves, 315-323; sexual genesis as 
an instance of the between, 315; 
possible relation of this process to 
imitation, 315-316; recurrent pro- 
cesses in generation, 316, 317; trial 
and error, and natural selection, 
317-319; new Selves begin as ex- 
periments occurring within the ex- 
perience of previous Selves, 320; 
may win self-consciousness of their 
relation to the Absolute, 321; and 
then their natural origin is consist- 
ent with an immortal destiny, and 
with their individuality as distinct 
Selves, 322, 323.— The human Self 
as proper object for psychologi- 
cal study, 323-327; extent of its 
natural dependence, 326; this de- 
pendence consistent with its free- 
dom, 3826.—In what sense the 
human Self free in its relations to 
the Absolute, 327-331. — The human 
Self and the Moral Order, 338-375; 
the Self as inevitably meaning the 
Absolute, 347, 348; yet capable, at 
any instant, in its ignorance, of an 
actually evil opposition of its nar- 
rower will to the Ought, 348-351; 
difficulty regarding the possibility 
of free choice of the evil by the 
Self, 351-353; solution in terms of 
the hypothesis that a free voluntary 
ignoring of the good already known 
is possible in the temporal life of 
the Self, 353-360; this freedom sub- 
ject to the moral necessity for aton- 
ing deeds performed by the Self at 
other times, or by other Selves, 
360-368; relation of the temporal 
evil-doer to the eternal order, 369- 
375. — The temporal self always dis- 
satisfied, 382, 383; solidarity of the 
deeds and fortunes of the various 
finite Selves in the temporal order, 
387-394; this solidarity consistent 
with the true moral freedom of each 


478 


Self, 393, 394.— A realistic mutual 
independence of the Selves would 
make a moral world impossible, 
399-405.— Temporal and_ eternal 
fortunes of the Self, 407-411, 418-452. 


Sprigs.—Infinite series and their 


limits, I, 191, 192, 297-299. — Series 
that are due to recurrent processes, 
494-499; the number series as the 
classic instance of this type, 499; 
such a series results from the prop- 
erties of a self-representative sys- 
tem, 502-519, 523-525, 527-535; such 
series are fundamentally important 
for the constitution of order-systems 
of any grade, 535-538. — A series of 
the general type of the number- 
series is called a WELL-ORDERED 
Serigs, II, 69; it abstractly ex- 
presses the mere form of the life, or 
of the activity, or of the knowledge 
of a Self, 105-106 ; and is the typical 
series of the World of Appreciation, 
id.; it may be transfinite, 69. — The 
typical series of the World of De- 
scription result from a process of 
the discrimination of objects be- 
tween objects already discriminated, 
II, 76-86; this process is itself well 
ordered, 88; but leads to the concep- 
tion of series not well ordered, 88, 
90; the resulting types of series dis- 
cussed, 90-96. 

Shandilya, Hindoo Seer of the Upan- 
ishads, I, 158, 159. 

Shelley, P. B., quoted, I, 147. 
Shvetaketu, the instruction of, in the 
Upanishads, I, 159. 

Social Consciousness.— Social motives 
are embodied in the realistic concep- 
tion of Being, I, 73; these motives 
expressed in the assertion of sanity 
which is often used as an argument 
for Realism, 74.— Origin of social 
ideas, II, 168-174. 

Space, as one indivisible whole, I, 114; 
limited significance of our experi- 
ence of, when viewed metaphysi- 
cally, 420. 

Spencer, Herbert, I, 63, 64, 109.—On 
ideas, 309. 

Spinoza, I, 19; the Substance of 
Spinoza, 63; is partly a realistic en- 


INDEX 


tity, partly a mystic Absolute, 71; 
mentioned or cited, 109, 111, 176, 
177, 510, 544. — His views as to re- 
flective and direct knowledge of 
God, 579. — His denial that the real 
is a selection from the possible, 451. 

Stout, G. #., I, 22. 

Suarez, I, 51. 

Synthetic Idealism, see IDEALISM. 


Teichmiiller, on Aristotelian Theory 
of Being, I, 55; on Plato’s Ideas, 227. 

Tennyson, quoted, I, 177; mentioned, 
178. 

That, the, I, 18, 49-52. — The contrast 
between the that and the what re- 
lated to the contrast between Exter- 
nal and Internal Meaning, 50. [See 
IpEA, see also What.]—The that 
determines the what, 388. 

Theology, Rational, its relation to phi- 
losophy, I, 10; its history determined 
by the conflict of the four Concep- 
tions of Being, 61. [See NatrurRAL 
RELIGION, ABSOLUTE, GoD, and 
Brine, THEORY OF.] 

Theory of Being, see BEING, THEORY 
or; Theory of Knowledge, see 
Knowledge. 

Thomas, Saint, Aquinas, I, 6 ; 230-233 ; 
as in some respects a mystic, 78, 85, 
86. 

Thought, as in general related to the 
problem of Being, I, 56-60. [See 
IpbEA, KNOWLEDGE, JUDGMENT, 
IDEALISM, CATEGORY, APPRECIA- 
TION, DEscripTion, for special 
forms and problems of thought.] On 
relation of Thought and Will, 581. 

Tims, as one indivisible whole, I, 114; 
the problem of temporal Being in 
general, 402-404; indications of the 
unity of temporal Being, 407-410; 
idealistic theory of time, indicated, 
421-422; the concept of “‘time-span ”’ 
introduced, id. — Detailed treatment 
of the concepts of time and eter- 
nity, II, 111-151.— Our empirical 
consciousness of time, 113-126; con- 
sciousness of change, 113; of succes- 
sion, 114; twofold meaning of the 
term present, 115-121; a succession 
may be known “‘at once,’’ 115-118; 


INDEX 


impossibility of evading the double 
sense of ‘‘ present,’’ 119-121; the 
consciousness of succession not to be 
characterized as due to a synthetic 
activity that is distinct from the 
succession itself, 121, 122; the ‘‘ spe- 
cious present’’ and the concept of 
“time-span’’; the appreciable or 
volitional aspect of our time-con- 
sciousness, 123-126. — The concepts 
of past, present, and future in our 
generalized view of time, 126-132; 
arbitrary length of the conceptual 
present, 127, 128; twofold meaning 
of conceptual present, 129, 130; 
volitional significance of conceptual 
time, 131-133. — Relation of concepts 
of time and eternity, 133-142; the 
reality of time, 133-136; relation of 
time to problem of Internal and Ex- 
ternal Meaning, 134-136; the time 
of the World of Description and that 
of the World of Appreciation, 137, 
138; in what sense time a discrete 
and in what sense an infinitely di- 
visible series, 7d.; twofold sense of 
the term present considered with 
reference to the definition of eter- 
nity, 139-142; further illustration of 
the time-span, 142. — Consequences 
of this theory as to the relation of 
the Absolute to time, 143-147; as to 
the relation of the Self to the tempo- 
ral and eternal world, 147-151.— 
Irreversible processes in Nature, 
viewed in relation to time, 216-218; 
habits and approximate rhythms in 
Nature, their origin and their pass- 
ing away, 221-223; consequent hy- 
pothesis as to the relation of nature 
processes to time, 226-229; the con- 
cept of time-span further illustrated, 
227, 228; relation of time-span to 
grade of evolution, 231; to our in- 
terpretation of the psychic life of 
animals, 232; to the problem of our 
own origin and destiny, 233. —Con- 
cept of ideal natural laws as a con- 
cept of invariance through time, 190; 
significance of this concept criti- 
cised, 191-195. — Relation of time to 
the problem of Evil, 379-383; to the 
moral order, 361-375; to the Abso- 


479 


lute, 418-420; to Progress, 420-425 ; 
to the Self, 425-445. [See Erzr- 
NITY, SELF, ABSOLUTE.] 

Truth.—The character of being true is 
one of the characters of Being rec- 
ognized in the popular metaphysical 
vocabulary, I, 54; this becomes the 
essential characteristic for Critical 
Rationalism, 61. [See Criticau 
RATIONALISM, IDEA, IDEALISM, and 
Brine, THEORY OF.] 


Unconscious, the, in Nature, an hy- 
pothesis rejected by our Idealism, 
II, 240. 

Unity of Being, see ONE AND MAny. 

Universality, see ONE AND Many. 

Universal Judgments, meaning of, I, 
275-282. 

Universals as objects of thought for 
Plato, I, 76; impossible for Realism, 
129; are real for Critical Rational- 
ism, 241. 

Universals, see also IpHA, and Gener- 
ality. 

Unknowable, the, of Spencer, I, 63, 64, 
209. 

Upanishads, I, 78, 156-165, 169-171, 
173-175. 


Validity, as the character of Being 
according to Critical Rationalism, 
I, 201, 202, 203. [See CriTicaL 
RATIONALISM and BEING, THEORY 
OF. ] 

Vedanta, I, 78. [See Mysticism and 
Hindoo Mysticism.] 

Veronese, G., I, 529 note. 

Virtual Entities, as term for the reali- 
ties defined by Critical Rationalism, 
I, 206. 


What, the, I, 13, 47, 49-52; as name 
for the essence, or esse essentizx, 51 
note. — The what and the that mu- 
tually independent for Realism, 63, 
107. 

Wut. — The will in relation to knowl- 
edge, I, 21; as related to ideas, and 
especially to the Internal Meaning 
of ideas, 22-26, 34, 35, 36, 37; as 
related to the Conception of Being, 
40; as brought into relation to 


480 


knowledge by some realistic theo- 
ries, 70.—Summary of the reasons 
for attributing Will to the Absolute, 
581 note. — Relation of this will in 
the Absolute to its thought and ex- 
perience, id. —General relation of 
Will to Knowledge, 461, 462; will 
and idea in any finite being, 462- 
466; the freedom and activity of 
the finite will, 466-470. —On will 
in its relations to IprA, the Ought, 
to KNOWLEDGE, and to BEING, see 
those terms. [See also IDEALISM, 
SELF, Purpose, MorAL ORDER, 
and FREEDOM.] 

WoRLD, the, in what sense the topic 
in the lectures, I, 11, 15. —The con- 
trasts between the World as Fact 
and the World as Idea, 17, 18, 42. — 
The relations of the World and the 
Individual as topic of these lectures, 
40, 42,43. — The World for Realism, 
problem as to whether it is One 
or Many, discussed, 121-138. — The 


INDEX 


World as Mysticism defines it, 144, 
156-165, 175, 180 [see also Mysti- 
cismM].— The World of Modern Crit- 
ical Rationalism illustrated, 204-222, 
227-239 [see also CRITICAL RATION- 
ALISM].—The World as Idealism 
defines it, 392, 393; considered with 
reference to its unity, 402-427; with 
reference to the presence and variety 
of Individuals within it, 441-446, 
460-470. For the division of the 
world with reference to the concepts 
Nature, the Self, God, etc., see those 
terms. [See also ABSOLUTE, BE- 
ING, THEORY OF, and INDIVIDUAL. ] 


World.—The World of Description and 


the World of Appreciation, see DE- 
SCRIPTION and APPRECIATION. 


Yajnavalkya, Hindoo Seer of the 


Upanishads, I, 169, 172, 188. 


Zeller, H., on the Platonic Ideas, I, 98, 


227. 


si sil s 


cits 


20875 
Royce, Josiah 
The world and the individual 


Sey IP DP Ia 


Sanaa ed anda ftdearatacasacarateeatatacaraeessedestadateiataiseeeaiaeasseaeseataeeea 
FPS DPD DDD PI Pe ROP DDO DNPH PER NER NE DNL PDP aT rE 

LPI D VMI VPP PPO OPER Ss PI Og 
NAN sede 


“Sv6 g@ ALOWAY 


a aaa 
4S ea aetna ceedeaeaeaede 


.c WLM 698 


2. 


/ 4 


5 


Ei ota piaca Paar peat mr PII TADS OPIN DEM H DRDO RH DR RIDE 
PPO MII HEDIS DRI HIE DRI DIAS DDERDRR DDR 
PEA Fe oh DPD DRS DROP WIR ROH DDD DDR DE DD SEEDER rye F 


spss Naas atasat hae stacaese seas saaeasateed 


PRP RIOR OIE 


se 


POM ay 


pul 


LAL 


ee EARP OLR DEDEDE N pep peep ae 
BED DED bs OSPR DEDEDE DLN DOR RD NDR SDS SR OP DD LP DODD 


Rac ataatanatanataneas tates 


jenp 


Rebate tae Pema Pacha hs DPD DD DD DEMOS D-DD DDD DDD DEDEDE DED DRED PPPS PaD 
qu Nee eed SCIONS IOI ; 
SHANNA MOST a eK SEES CeO 


EP EP 


EU 


NARROW TN UR Ee 


