War and Insurance (Josiah Royce, 1914)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/warinsuranceaddr00royciala). Royce's essays on war and the social invention of insurance as mutual loyalty made concrete.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

LIBRARY

THE  UNIVERSITY
OF  CALIFORNIA

SANTA  BARBARA


PRESENTED  BY

Marie  B. Wol ford


WAR  AND  INSURANCE


THE  MACMILLAN  COMPANY

NEW  YORK  • BOSTON • CHICAGO  • DALLAS
ATLANTA  • SAN  FRANCISCO

MACMILLAN  &  CO.,  LIMITED

LONDON  • BOMBAY  • CALCUTTA
MELBOURNE

THE  MACMILLAN  CO.  OF  CANADA,  LTD.

TORONTO


WAR  AND  INSURANCE


AN  ADDRESS

DELIVERED BEFORE THE PHILOSOPHICAL  UNION

OF  THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA AT ITS

TWENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY AT BERKELEY

CALIFORNIA, AUGUST 27, 1914


BY

JOSIAH  ROYCE

ALFOBD PROFESSOR  OF  NATURAL  RELIGION,  MORAL

PHILOSOPHY  AND CIVIL  POLITY AT

HARVARD  UNIVERSITY


WITH  AN  INTRODUCTION
AND  NOTES


THE  MACMILLAN  COMPANY
1914

All  rights  reserved


COPYRIGHT,  1914,
BY  THE  MACMILLAN  COMPANY.


Set  up  and  electrotyped. Published  October,  1914.


Nortoooto  tyrees

J.  8.  Gushing  Co.  —  Berwick  &  Smith  Co.
Norwood,  Mass.,  U.S.A.


LifOfUUlI

UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFOR
SANTA  BARBARA


PREFACE

As  a  preparation  for  an  address  which  I
had  been  invited  to  deliver  on  the  occasion
of  the  twenty -fifth  anniversary  of  the  Philo-
sophical Union  of  the  University  of  Cali-
fornia, I  read  to  a  general  audience,  at  the
summer  session  of  that  University  at  Berke-
ley (during  the  last  fortnight  of  July,  in  the
present  year)  a  series  of  six  philosophical
lectures.  These  six  preparatory  lectures
contained  a  restatement  of  the  theory  of
what  I  had  called,  in  a  recent  book  of  mine,
the  "  Process  of  Interpretation,"  and,  in  par-
ticular, discussed  the  nature  and  functions
of  "  Communities  of  Interpretation."  What
this  last  term  means  the  reader  of  this  present
book  may  learn,  if  he  pleases,  on  pages  47-64.

I  had  intended  to  continue  and  to  sum-
marize the  main  theses  of  these  six  lectures
in  my  anniversary  address  before  the  Union.

iii


PREFACE

The  summer  session  ended. The  war  began.

My  address,  in  the  form  in  which  I  had
intended  to  read  it,  was  thus  rendered  use-
less, and  was  thrown  aside.  But  the  theory
both  of  the  "process  of  interpretation"  and
of  "  the  communities  of  interpretation  "  had,
during  the  last  two  years,  seemed  to  me  ca-
pable of  a  wide  range  of  practical  applica-
tions ;  and  some  of  these,  including  a  sketch
of  certain  very  general  philosophical  aspects
of  banking  and  of  insurance,  had  been  already
presented  to  my  audience  at  Berkeley  during
the  July  lectures  just  mentioned.

Abandoning,  then,  my  previous  plans  for
the  address  before  the  Union,  I  wrote  this
present  address,  —  partly  in  the  neighborhood
of  Los  Gatos,  in  the  Santa  Cruz  mountains
of  the  California  Coast  Range,  and  partly
at  Berkeley.  This  writing  took  place  be-
tween August  2  and  August  27,  under  the
immediate  influence  of  impressions  due  to  the
events  which  each  day's  news  then  brought
to  the  notice  of  us  all;  and  yet  with  a
longing  to  see  how  the  theory  of  "  interpre-

iv


PREFACE

tation"  which  I  owe  to  the  logical  studies  of
the  late  Mr.  Charles  Peirce,  would  bear  the
test  of  an  application  to  the  new  problems
which  the  war  brings  to  our  minds.

I  have  to  thank  my  friend,  Mr.  John  Gra-
ham Brooks,  of  Cambridge,  Massachusetts,
as  well  as  my  colleague,  Mr.  H.  B.  Dow  (lec-
turer on  Insurance  at  Harvard  University) ;
and,  above  all,  my  philosophical  colleague
at  the  University  of  California,  Professor
Charles  H.  Rieber  (who  was  my  host  while
I  was  at  Berkeley,  and  who  is  also  the  presi-
dent of  the  Philosophical  Union),  for  some
careful  criticisms  of  this  address;  and  for
their  aid  in  preparing  it  for  publication.

JOSIAH  ROYCE.

CAMBRIDGE,  MASSACHUSETTS,
September  15,  1914.


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION


ADDRESS  ON  WAR  AND  INSURANCE


SECTION  J'A'iK

I. THE  UTOPIA  OF  UNIVERSAL  PEACE . .  4

II. THE  NEIGHBOR  : LOVE  AND  HATE . .  12

III.  THE  DANGEROUS  SOCIAL  RELATIONS  AND

COMMUNITIES 28

IV.  THE  COMMUNITY  OF  INTERPRETATION .  42
V. SPECIAL  COMMUNITIES  OF  INTERPRETATION  55

VI. MUTUAL  INTERNATIONAL  INSURANCE .  65

NOTES

I. STEINMETZ'S  "  PHILOSOPHY  OF  WAR  " .  83
II. KANT'S DOCTRINE CONCERNING "ANTAG-
ONISM "  AS  A  SOURCE  OF  SOCIAL  DE-
VELOPMENT 83

III.  LOVE  FOR  COMMUNITIES ....  85

IV.  EFFORTS  ALREADY  MADE  TO  USE  THE  FOUR

COMMUNITIES  OF  INTERPRETATION  IN

INTERNATIONAL  AFFAIRS ...  86

V. "THE  FIRST  ACT  OF  WAR"  93


Vll


INTRODUCTION

TITT'HEN  a  number  of  persons  are  subject
to  risks,  they  may  contribute  to  a
common  fund,  and  then  use  this  fund  as  a
means  of  making  good  certain  of  the  losses
which,  in  consequence  of  these  risks,  fall  upon
one  or  another  member  of  the  company  of
adventurers  who  thus  contribute.  The  con-
tributions themselves  form  an  insurance  fund.
The  method  of  business  in  question  con-
stitutes the  basis  of  the  modern  institution
called  insurance.  The  special  ways  in  which
the  adventurers  are  brought  into  association,
and  the  sorts  of  risk  against  which  the  indi-
vidual members  of  a  group  of  insurers  are
protected,  vary  widely.  But  at  the  basis  of
any  systematic  modern  method  of  insurance
lie  considerations  which  belong  to  the  general
theory  of  probability,  and  which  are  every-
where in  question  in  the  statistical  sciences.
Since  risks,  and  the  adventures  of  individual

ix


INTRODUCTION

men,  are  amongst  the  most  practical  matters
with  which  we  are  acquainted,  while  the
theory  of  probability  and  the  principles  of
statistical  science  involve  some  of  the  most
abstruse  problems  of  logic  and  mathematics,
insurance,  viewed  either  as  a  mode  of  business
or  as  a  social  institution,  is  one  of  the  most
momentous  instances  of  the  union  of  very
highly  theoretical  enterprises  with  very  con-
crete social  applications.

Furthermore,  as  experience  shows,  the
insurance  principle  comes  to  be  more  and  more
used  and  useful  in  modern  affairs.  Not  only
does  it  serve  the  ends  of  individuals,  or  of
special  groups  of  individuals.  It  tends  more
and  more  both  to  pervade  and  to  transform
our  modern  social  order.  It  brings  into  new
syntheses  not  merely  pure  and  applied  science,
but  private  and  public  interests,  individual
prudence,  and  a  large  regard  for  the  general
welfare,  thrift,  and  charity.  It  discourages
recklessness  and  gambling.  It  contributes
to  the  sense  of  stability.  It  quiets  fears  and
encourages  faithfulness.

x


INTRODUCTION

But  this  principle  of  insurance  has  not  yet
been  applied  to  international  affairs,  and,  in
so  far  as  the  present  writer  is  aware,  no  one
has  heretofore  proposed  that  a  group  of  nations
should  form  an  organization  for  the  mutual
insurance  of  its  members  against  any  kind  of
risks.

The  present  essay  offers  reasons  why  such
a  proposal  is  both  timely  and  feasible.  Since
the  whole  subject  is  new,  what  is  attempted
in  this  brief  discussion  cannot  be  a  mature
plan.  This  paper  is  preliminary,  is  tentative,
and  intends  to  be  subject  to  a  thoroughgoing
revision.  Its  whole  present  purpose  is  gained,
in  fact,  if  it  leads  to  a  serious  revision  of  its
own  imperfections.  It  wishes  to  attract  the
attention  of  some  wiser  minds  than  that  of
its  author  to  the  fact  that,  at  the  moment  of
an  unprecedented  crisis  in  the  world's  history,
the  possibility  of  precisely  this  new  mode  of
international  cooperation  which  is  here  out-
lined is  worthy  of  a  somewhat  careful  study.

Nations,  viewed  as  corporate  entities,  are
as  subject  to  risks  as  are  individual  human

xi


INTRODUCTION

beings.  Some  of  these  risks  are  principally
moral  in  their  nature ;  but  many  of  them  can
be  more  or  less  exactly  estimated  in  economic
terms.  Thus,  floods,  famines,  pestilences,
earthquakes,  and  volcanoes  may  interfere,  in
various  fashions,  with  the  economic  as  well
as  with  the  rest  of  the  social  life  of  the  peoples
thus  afflicted.  Apart  from  actual  famines,
the  considerable  failure  of  their  crops  may
impair,  for  a  season,  the  normal  supplies  of
individual  nations.  Internal  crises,  social  and
political,  may  interrupt  their  healthy  develop-
ment in  ways  involving  not  only  moral
disasters,  but  heavy  expenses.  Such  evils
come  upon  various  nations  with  irregularly
recurrent,  but  also  with  widely  different,
weight  and  seriousness.  Only  a  vast  and
long-continued  collection  and  an  exceedingly
difficult  statistical  analysis  of  the  facts  regard-
ing such  calamities  could  determine  the  regu-
larities which  a  sufficiently  large  number  of
instances  of  national  disaster-  would  be,  if
properly  studied,  certain  to  show.  Such
regularities,  however,  if  once  discovered,

xii


INTRODUCTION

would  furnish  an  "actuarial  basis"  upon
which  an  insurance  of  individual  nations
against  such  risks  could  conceivably  be
undertaken.

But  in  order  that  an  insurance  could  be
actually  undertaken,  there  would  have  to  be
in  existence  a  vast  and  well-secured  fund,
contributed  by  a  great  number  of  individual
nations,  and  held,  under  established  rules,
ready  to  supply  the  means  of  paying  to  an
insured  nation  —  perhaps  the  whole  of  its  loss
in  case  of  any  previously  defined  sort  of  dis-
aster ;  or  perhaps  such  a  portion  of  that  loss
as  an  equitably  devised  insurance  contract,
duly  adjusted  to  the  contribution  previously
made  by  the  nation  in  question,  declared  to
be  payable  from  the  common  fund  in  case  a
certain  definite  disaster  befell  one  of  the
nations  which  had  subscribed  to  the  insur-
ance agreement.

Since  all  irregularly  distributed  phenomena
of  a  given  type,  if  sufficiently  numerous,  —
so  long  as  they  are  indeed  finite  in  number,
—  show  some  kind  of  statistical  regularity,

xiii


INTRODUCTION

this  "actuarial  basis"  for  various  forms  of
international  insurance  could  be  furnished
by  the  patient  study  of  the  economically  de-
finable risks  and  losses  of  a  sufficiently  large
group  of  nations,  followed  through  a  long
enough  period  of  time.

But  an  essay  which,  like  the  present  one,
proposes  a  new  international  enterprise,  gains
little  from  a  mention  of  this  purely  the-
oretical possibility.  The  fortunes  of  nations,
—  their  risks  and  their  calamities,  in  so  far
as  such  matters  are  estimable  in  economic
terms  at  all,  —  might  indeed  be  studied
historically  and  statistically  (as  if  by  an
observer  from  another  planet),  in  case  we
had  any  hope  that  a  group  of  nations  could
be  induced  to  contribute  to  a  common  fund
to  be  used  for  the  insurance  of  individual
nations  against  any  special  sorts  of  disaster.
And  a  sufficient  study  of  duly  collected  his-
torical and  statistical  materials  could  indeed
indicate  to  an  expert  actuary  the  way  in
which  a  group  of  nations  could  make  pro-
vision for  compensating  the  individual  mem-

xiv


INTRODUCTION

bers  of  the  group  for  certain  disasters.  But
the  main  concern  of  this  essay  lies  in  propos-
ing as  a  topic  for  further  study  and  confer-
ence the  practical  question  whether  any
valid  grounds  can  be  given  why  various
nations  ought  to  be  urged  to  contribute  to
such  a  common  insurance  fund.

The  proposal  seems  so  far  away  from  our
present  habits  of  international  intercourse,
and  so  unlikely  to  meet  approval,  that  one
who  glances  at  the  title  of  the  present  essay
is  likely  to  turn  away  from  it  without  further
reading.  The  only  hope  of  the  author  lies
in  the  fact  that  the  topic  of  the  essay  may  be
approached  from  various  sides,  and  may
consequently  arouse  the  interest  of  several
sorts  of  people.  Where  one  possible  reader
finds  himself  forthwith  repelled,  another  may
be  induced  to  give  to  the  topic  a  second
thought  even  because  of  the  very  aspect  of
the  matter  which  his  neighbor  has  thought
fantastic,  or  abstruse,  or  unpractical.  The
business  of  this  word  of  introduction  consists
simply  in  indicating  how  many  sided  the

xv


INTRODUCTION

topic  is,  and  so  how  many  and  varied  are  the
chances  that  the  author's  proposals  are
worthy  of  being  submitted  to  scrutiny  as
much  when  they  ought  to  be  rejected  as
when,  by  chance,  some  of  them  are  worthy
of  approval.  For  the  principal  value  of
these  proposals  lies  in  the  fact  that  they  have
a  certain  novelty  (although  they  are  also
the  outcome  of  a  lengthy  process  of  previous
reflection) ;  that  they  set  forth  a  method  of
practical  action  suited  to  the  present  crisis
(although  they  are  also  founded  on  the  theses
of  a  student  of  philosophy) ;  that  they  refer
to  matters  which  the  experience  of  the  busi-
ness world  has  long  since  tested  (although
they  also  speak  of  issues  which  the  tragedies
of  the  present  moment  show  to  be  infinitely
ideal  and  pathetic) ;  and  finally  that,  while
they  are  written  down  in  the  midst  of  a  world
war,  they  expressly  analyze  and  attempt  to
use  that  motive  which,  in  the  history  of
humanity,  has  thus  far  most  made  for  peace.


xvi


INTRODUCTION

I

Now  the  body  of  this  essay  approaches
our  main  thesis  from  the  side  of  "War."  It
discusses  in  a  way  which  I  believe  to  be
somewhat  novel  some  of  the  deepest  motives
which  render  war  at  present  so  fatally  recur-
rent and  dangerous.  Hereupon  it  draws  a
contrast  between  these  essentially  war-pro-
ducing motives  of  human  life  and  those
motives  which  are  exemplified  in  certain
of  the  well-known  and  important  social
and  commercial  institutions  of  the  world.
Amongst  those  motives  it  dwells  in  particular
upon  the  ones  which  are  represented  by  the
modern  institution  of  insurance.  Hereupon
it  outlines,  with  necessary  brevity  and  incom-
pleteness, a  plan  whereby  a  possible  future
organization  for  mutual  insurance  amongst
the  nations  may  be  devised  and  may  tend
towards  the  gradual  establishment  of  more
pacific  relations  among  the  nations  than
they  now  possess.

To  the  plan  thus  submitted  certain  obvious
objections  arise.  While  leaving  to  the  essay

xvii


INTRODUCTION

itself  its  own  part  in  the  exposition  and
defense  of  the  plan  for  international  insur-
ance which  is  set  forth,  this  Introduction
will  best  serve  its  purpose  if  it  briefly  empha-
sizes certain  of  these  most  obvious  objections
to  the  plan  proposed,  and  then  points  out
why  they  are  not  final,  and  how  they  may
be  in  a  measure  obviated.

The  first  of  these  objections  will  occur  to
every  reader.  If  one  supposes  that  for  any
reason  a  group  of  nations  were  considering
whether  to  contribute  to  a  common  fund  for
the  insurance  of  the  individual  nations
belonging  to  this  group  against  any  class  of
evils,  it  would  be  natural  to  say:  "All  inter-
national peace,  under  existing  conditions,  is
fragile.  A  fund  contributed  by  individual
nations  for  their  insurance  against  disasters
would  constitute  a  possible  object  of  preda-
tory attacks.  In  other  words,  the  safety  of
the  insurance  fund  would  have  to  be  pro-
vided for.  This  would  be  as  difficult  as  to
provide  for  the  carrying  out  of  any  other
international  agreement  in  which  large  inter-

xviii


INTRODUCTION

ests  were  involved.  Concerning  the  admin-
istration of  the  fund  differences  of  opinion
would  arise.  Since  the  fund  would  be  inter-
national, these  differences  would  have  to  be
submitted  to  arbitration  or  else  to  war.  To
the  already  existing  obstacles  which  the  Hague
tribunal  has  to  meet  new  obstacles  would  be
added.  Differences  of  opinion  concerning  the
use  of  the  insurance  funds  would  frequently
involve  what  is  usually  called  national  honor.
They  would,  therefore,  be  hopeless  differ-
ences. And  this  initial  defect  would  appear
to  belong  to  any  international  insurance
scheme."

It  is  worth  while  in  this  Introduction  to
call  especial  attention  to  the  fact  that  the
plan  outlined  in  the  main  body  of  this  essay
undertakes  to  meet  this  very  objection  by  a
novel  proposal.  This  proposal  contemplates
the  founding  of  an  entirely  new  but  very
easily  comprehensible  kind  of  international
corporation,  —  a  distinctively  new  entity
which  would  be  neither  a  nation,  nor  a
court  of  arbitration,  nor  an  international

xix


INTRODUCTION

congress,  nor  a  federation  of  states,  nor
any  such  body  as  at  present  exists.  The
new  body  would  be  a  Board  of  Trustees,
with  powers  and  duties  which  would  be
in  the  main  fiduciary  and  with  no  political
powers  or  obligations  whatever.

The  new  proposal  depends  upon  a  con-
sideration which  I  believe  to  be  deeply
founded  in  human  nature,  and  which  can  be
best  understood  only  if  the  reader  is  kind
enough  first  to  become  acquainted  with  what
this  essay  sets  forth  concerning  those  human
relations  which  I  call  "dangerous"  and  those
which,  as  I  believe,  experience  shows  to  be
essentially  peaceful  in  their  tendencies.
Common  sense  well  recognizes,  and  all  human
history,  so  far  as  it  is  applicable  to  the  prob-
lem at  all,  exemplifies  the  fact,  that  it  is  dif-
ficult to  find,  for  purposes  of  dealing  with
delicate  and  controversial  matters,  a  trust-
worthy politician,  or  a  trustworthy  diplomat,
or  a  trustworthy  ruler,  or  (in  case  of  matters
that  involve  sufficiently  pressing  and  passion-
ate issues),  an  entirely  trustworthy  and

xx


INTRODUCTION

unprejudiced  arbitrator  or  judge.  But  it  is
much  easier  to  find,  under  suitable  social
conditions,  a  faithful  and  enlightened  and  fair-
minded  trustee.  This  essay  contains  many
illustrations  of  the  reasons  why  this  assertion
is  true.

This  essay  proposes  that  a  certain  fund,
contributed  by  various  nations,  should  be
put  into  the  hands  of  a  board  of  international
trustees.  The  constitution  and  the  mode
of  selection  of  the  members  of  this  board  is
briefly  set  forth  in  the  text.  The  board,
according  to  the  scheme  proposed,  would
have  a  minimum  of  judicial  powers.  These
judicial  powers  would  never  refer  to  ques-
tions which  could  be  called  questions  of
national  honor.  The  judicial  problems  of
the  'board  would  be  limited  to  questions
referring  to  the  actual  interpretation  of  cer-
tain contracts.  These  contracts  would  be
either  of  the  nature  of  insurance  policies,  or
else  of  other  forms  of  trust  agreements.
When  these  contracts  had  put  certain  funds
into  the  hands  of  the  board,  the  funds  being

xxi


INTRODUCTION

held  in  trust  for  certain  insured  nations,  or
for  other  nations  that  intrusted  funds  to  the
board,  the  board  would  have  the  sole  right,
in  controversial  cases,  simply  to  decide  what
the  terms  of  the  contract,  or  of  certain  con-
nected duties  of  trust,  established  as  the  right
of  the  nation  or  nations  of  whose  funds  the
board  was  trustee.

The  tentative  proposal  of  this  essay  is
that  the  decision  of  the  board  regarding  these
matters  —  a  decision  which  would  always
be  made  by  a  public  procedure  and  in  accord-
ance with  established  rules  —  would  be  a
final  decision,  so  that  no  nation  should  have
any  authority,  under  its  agreement,  to  appeal
from  the  decision  in  question.  Reasons
appear  in  the  essay  why  such  confidence  in
trustees  regarding  the  interpretation  of  their
own  fiduciary  duties  would  be  well  founded,
if  once  the  international  agreement  under
which  the  board  was  constituted  had  been
reasonably  well  devised,  and  if  once  the
board  had  been  carefully  selected  by  the
insuring  nations  and  if  the  board  were  suf-


INTRODUCTION

ficiently  large  and  varied,  and  if  its  proceed-
ings were  public.

The  board  of  international  trustees  in
question  would  possess,  or  would  gradually
and  naturally  acquire,  various  fiduciary  duties
in  addition  to  those  determined  at  any  stage
by  its  relation  to  the  business  of  international
insurance.  Insurance  is  in  many  cases
naturally  combined  with  various  forms  of
investment,  and  with  various  devices  for
serving  the  common  ends  of  the  members  of
a  mutual  insurance  company.  Every  such
fiduciary  duty  of  the  board  would  be  deter-
mined by  special  agreements  and  would  be
administered  according  to  the  rules  and
decisions  of  the  board.  Inevitably  the  board
ought  to  have  a  right  to  proceed  against  its
own  members  by  whatever  judicial  methods
it  chose,  in  case  an  individual  act  involving
breach  of  trust  was  in  question.  But  the
board  as  a  whole  would  not  have  to  report  to
any  nation.  It  would  act  deliberately  and
'publicly,  but  in  the  light  of  its  own  conscience
and  discretion.  This  entire  autonomy  of  the

xxiii


INTRODUCTION

board  with  regard  to  its  duties  and  acts  as
trustee  would  be  correlated  with  an  entire  ab-
sence of  any  political  functions  or  powers.

The  international  board  of  trustees  which
my  plan  contemplates  would  have  no  police
to  guard  it,  no  international  army  or  navy
to  protect  it,  no  direct  interest  in  interna-
tional controversies,  and  no  reason  for  diplor
matic  relations  with  any  existing  powers.
It  would  receive  its  funds  in  trust  as  volun-
tary contributions  of  the  nations.  It  would
administer  its  trust  in  accordance  with  poli-
cies of  insurance  and  deeds  of  trust.  It
could  neither  declare  war  nor  make  peace.
Nominally  it  might  hold  its  sessions,  after
the  manner  of  the  Hague  tribunal,  in  some
neutral  state,  and  be  regarded  as  possessing
a  peculiarly  close  although  essentially  ideal
and,  so  to  speak,  sentimental  connection
with  that  state.  But  its  obligations  would
be  to  its  own  conscience,  guided  by  the
deeds  of  trust  which  it  had  undertaken  to
administer.

Its  members  would  be  selected  by  inter-
xxiv


INTRODUCTION

national  agreement.  Its  rules  would  be  sub-
ject to  change  only  in  such  fashion  as  did
not  abridge  the  rights  already  acquired  by  the
nations  who  had  entered  into  the  agreement.

Just  as  the  individual  holder  of  the  pol-
icy of  an  insurance  company  has,  if  he  is  dis-
satisfied with  the  conduct  of  his  company,
the  freedom  to  surrender  his  policy  and  to
receive  in  turn  the  "surrender  value"  of
that  policy,  so,  subject  to  certain  general
and  reasonable  rules  regarding  due  notice
and  a  proper  period  of  time  allowed  for  with-
drawal, any  nation  that  found  itpelf  dissatis-
fied with  the  procedure  of  the  international
board  of  trustees  would  be  free  to  withdraw
its  interest  in  the  entire  enterprise  and  to
receive  the  "surrender  value"  of  its  policy,
and  a  return  of  its  funds  held  in  trust.

I  submit  that  an  international  board  of
this  kind  would  be  at  present  a  novelty,  and
that,  if  some  form  of  international  insurance
proves  to  be  feasible,  such  a  body  might
become,  in  the  end,  one  of  the  most  potent
international  enterprises  on  earth.

xxv


INTRODUCTION

But  all  the  foregoing  is  subject  to  the  very
obvious  objection,  that  if  the  board  had  no
army,  no  navy,  and  no  political  powers,  it
would  be  helpless  to  defend  the  funds  com-
mitted to  its  trust  from  the  assaults  of  any
power  that  desired  to  use  these  funds  for  its
own  purposes.  In  fact,  the  powers  of  the
board  of  trustees  in  question  would  be  indeed
financial  and  fiduciary  in  case  the  nations
respected  these  powers.  But  such  powers,
an  objector  might  insist,  would  be  wholly
spiritual.  Wherein  would  lie  their  temporal
safeguard  ?

To  this  perfectly  obvious  objection  this
essay  proposes  an  equally  obvious  plan  by
which  the  funds  committed  to  the  trustees
could  be  so  invested  that  they  were  actually
inaccessible  to  any  power  on  earth  which
was  not  actually  in  a  position  to  conquer
all  of  the  powers  who  had  entered  into  the
insurance  agreement  or  who  had  deposited
funds  with  the  trustees.  The  funds  could
be  invested  as  widely  in  the  world  as  one
pleases,  and  could  be  made  subject  to  the

xxvi


INTRODUCTION

order  of  tjie  board  of  trustees  and  of  that
board  only.  If  an  individual  capitalist,  fear-
ing that  a  war  of  the  nations  might  endan-
ger his  private  fortune,  desired  tp  keep  that
fortune  safe,  he  could,  even  in  the  present
troubled  world,  guarantee  that  result  with
reasonable  safety  by  investing  his  funds
widely  enough,  in  various  countries,  and
securely  enough  in  each  of  his  selected  deposi-
tories. The  new  entity  which  this  essay
proposes  to  institute,  the  international  board
of  trustees,  would  have  far  more  varied
opportunities  to  keep  its  funds  in  places
where  the  armies  and  the  navies  of  i^he
various  existing  powers  would  threaten  it
in  vain  despite  the  publicity  of  all  its  official
proceedings.

The  board  would  possess  no  territory  which
could  be  seized,  it  would  lay  claim  to  no
neutrality  which  could  be  violated.  Its
absence  of  political  power  would  secure  it
against  direct  armed  assault.  Its  individual
trustees  might  be  made  prisoners  or  executed ;
but  such  efforts  might  well  kill  its  body

xxvii


INTRODUCTION

without  touching its essentially intangible
soul.

Since  its  acts  of  investment  would  all  be
made  according  to  established  rules  and
under  the  public  charge  of  the  board,  its
individual  trustees  would  have  no  power  to
surrender  its  funds,  no  matter  how  much
they  wished  to  do  so.  Only  the  board,
acting  in  its  corporate  power  as  trustee,
would  have  any  power  to  dispose  of  the
funds  that  were  put  into  its  trust.

II

The  next  objection  which  readily  occurs  to
the  mind,  and  which  the  reader  of  the  plan
for  international  insurance  herein  expounded
is  especially  asked  to  notice,  is  founded  upon
the  fact  that  if  the  nations,  by  large  contribu-
tions to  the  common  fund,  won  for  them-
selves large  and  important  rights  through
their  insurance  agreements,  they  would  win
hereby  no  safety  against  the  dangers  of  war,
and  in  particular  of  conquest.  Yet  amongst
all  the  evils  against  which  nations  could
xxviii


INTRODUCTION

insure,  if  a  scheme  for  mutual  insurance
proved  to  be  successful,  some  at  least  of  the
evils  due  to  war  would  surely  be  the  most
important.  The  objector  might  well  con-
tinue that,  if  it  were  possible  to  give  to  the
plan  such  a  development  as  to  enable  the
international  board  to  insure  an  individual
nation  against  any  considerable  portion  of
the  losses  and  expenses  which  war  might
entail,  the  very  success  of  the  plan,  up  to
that  point,  would  tend  to  render  individual
nations  careless,  and  so  more  disposed,  if  pos-
sible, than  they  otherwise  would  be,  to  engage
in  war.  For  the  man  whose  house  is  insured
may  thereby  be  rendered  less  rather  than
more  careful  with  regard  to  the  risk  of  fire.
To  both  these  objections  the  plan  out-
lined in  this  essay  provides  what  may  be
regarded  as  at  least  a  partial  answer.  This
answer  must  be  judged  in  the  light  of  the
few  passages  in  the  essay  which  directly
deal  with  these  aspects  of  the  question.  I
call  attention  to  these  passages,  and  expressly
point  out  that  what  I  propose  involves  a

xxix


INTRODUCTION

tentative  suggestion,  which  is  proposed  for
the  sake  of  revision.

What  it  is  worth  while  to  mention  in  this
Introduction  is  that  this  essay  suggests  an
extension  to  international  insurance  of  devices
which  are  already  known  in  the  insurance  of
individuals.  In  particular,  a  part  of  the
plan  here  tentatively  set  forth  would  involve
a  way  in  which  the  life  of  every  one  of  the
insured  nations  was,  so  to  speak,  insured  by
the  general  insurance  organization  for  the
benefit  of  mankind.

That  is,  the  more  rights  an  individual
nation  had  acquired  by  virtue  of  previous
insurance,  the  less  motive  a  conqueror  would
have  for  finding  this  nation  attractive  prey.
For  the  insurance  board  of  trustees  might
undertake,  by  special  agreements,  functions
which  were  not  only  those  of  insurance  but
also  those  of  investment,  so  far  as  concerned
an  individual  nation.  That  is,  an  individual
nation  might  put  a  portion  of  its  property  in
trust,  and  under  the  administration  of  the
board.  One  could  even  now  conceive  that

xxx


INTRODUCTION

some  South  American  republic  might  find
such  an  investment  of  a  portion  of  its  wealth
possible  and  useful.  In  the  future  still
greater  nations  might  be  attracted  into  simi-
lar undertakings.

But  if  either  insurance  rights  or  trust
funds  thus  belonged  to  a  nation  which  hap-
pened to  suffer  the  accident  of  occupation
or  of  conquest,  the  conqueror  of  such  a  nation
would  not,  according  to  this  plan,  be  able  to  find
so  much  of  the  conquered  nation's  property,
or  to  use  it.  For  the  plan  defined  in  this
essay  includes  the  provision,  that,  if  a  nation
loses  its  life,  then  its  insurance  rights,  and
of  course  its  funds  deposited  in  any  form
in  trust  with  the  international  board,  simply
revert  to  the  common  fund  of  mankind,  and  are
henceforth  used  and  held  in  trust  by  the  inter-
national board  for  the  benefit  of  all  the  insuring
nations.

Closely  connected  with  this  provision  of
the  plan  here  outlined,  is  another,  whereby
whatever  nation  won  in  a  war  would  be  pre-
vented from  extorting  from  any  vanquished

xxxi


INTRODUCTION

nation,  by  means  of  any  sort  of  treaty,  either
its  insurance  rights  or  any  other  funds  which
it  had,  before  the  war,  put  in  trust  with  the
board.  This  Introduction  may  well  call
attention  to  these  aspects  of  the  plan
involved  in  this  essay,  since  in  case  of  the
success  of  such  a  plan  as  the  one  here  out-
lined, these  provisions  might  become  valu-
able allies  to  the  cause  of  peace.

Finally,  so  far  as  the  present  set  of  objec-
tions is  concerned,  the  important  provision
that  any  nation  committing  the  "first  act
of  war"  with  which  a  given  contest  began,
would  thereby  vitiate  so  much  of  its  policy
as  related  to  any  possible  insurance  that  it
might  possess  against  any  of  the  costs  or
expenses  of  this  particular  war,  —  this  im-
portant provision  would  tend  to  introduce
a  restraining  motive  against  war.  And  many
other  such  restraining  motives  could  be
readily  devised  and  added  to  this  first  motive
by  means  of  insurance  agreements.  How
far-reaching  such  a  provision  would  prove
may  be  left  for  the  further  study  of  the

xxxii


INTRODUCTION

reader  of  this  essay  and  for  such  future
discussions  as  this  essay,  by  good  fortune,
may  arouse  amongst  students  of  the  ques-
tions thus  proposed.  It  is  enough  at  this
point  simply  to  insist  that  there  are  here
international  questions  which  are  worthy
of  careful  consideration,  and  which  do  not
involve  any  of  t^he  difficulties  which  have
already  played  so  large  a  part  in  the  history
of  arbitration,  and  of  other  attempts  at  inter-
national agreements.

Ill

A  colleague  of  mine,  and  a  high  authority
upon  problems  of  insurance,  in  replying  to
my  request  for  his  criticisms  upon  this  essay,
has  pointed  out,  as  a  serious  objection  to  any
plan  for  international  insurance,  that  strong
nations  would  be  likely  to  prefer  to  insure
themselves,  while  if  only  the  weak  nations
joined  in  the  international  agreement,  little
would  be  accomplished.  The  direct  rejoinder
to  this  objection  which  is  suggested  in  the
text  of  the  present  essay,  consists  in  pointing
xxxiii


INTRODUCTION

out,  that  if  there  were  any  evils,  whether  or
not  evils  of  war,  against  which  international
insurance  proved  to  be  feasible,  and  if  the
plan  here  proposed  began,  even  very
modestly,  to  accomplish  something  in  the
way  of  bringing  several  nations  together  for
purposes  of  mutual  insurance,  every  such
mutual  insurance  would  involve  the  nations
in  new  forms  of  cooperation,  whose  motives
would  be  of  the  essentially  peace-making
kind  analyzed  in  the  text  of  this  essay.

But  precisely  in  so  far  as  such  motives
appeared  at  all  as  a  result  of  international
insurance,  they  would  tend  to  make,  more
and  more,  national  evils  insurable.  For  if
the  nations  begin  thus  to  cooperate,  they  will,
for  the  first  time,  learn  what  that  sort  of  honor  is
which  is  involved  in  keeping  agreements  such
as  the  insurance  business  exemplifies.  What
is  called  national  honor  is  at  present  alto-
gether too  much  a  matter  of  capricious,
private,  and  often  merely  personal  judg-
ment, simply  because  the  nations  are  not  as
yet  self-conscious  moral  beings.

xxxiv


INTRODUCTION

They  have  not  learned,  as  corporate  enti-
ties, what  mutual  loyalty  is,  because  they
have  not  begun  to  come  together  in  those
communities  whose  type  is  described  in  this
essay.

Personal  honor  is  always  the  correlative
of  some  practical  form  of  loyalty,  and  of  some
recognition  of  an  obligation,  —  a  recognition
that  one  acquires  through  actual  business
of  the  sort  that  does  not  go  on  in  those  dan-
gerous relations  which  this  essay  somewhat
elaborately  analyzes.

If  the  international  body  of  trustees  had
in  its  charge  any  large  trust  in  which  a  num-
ber of  nations  were  interested,  these  nations,
working  through  their  board,  would  become
clearly  conscious  of  the  sort  of  loyalty  and
hence  of  the  sort  of  honor  which  is  found
upon  the  highest  levels  of  the  business  world.

Thus  a  genuine  and  reasonable  sense  of
honor  would  begin  automatically  to  enter
international  relations.  And  the  more  it
entered,  the  more  chances  there  would  be
for  mutual  insurance.  This  mutual  insur-

xxxv


INTRODUCTION

ance,  if  it  once  extended  to  any  of  the  evils
of  war  at  all,  would  tend  in  time  to  extend  to
more  and  more  of  them.  And  in  this  way
the  community  of  mankind  would  be  formed,
and  would  gradually  grow  by  methods  and
in  accordance  with  principles  which  are  at
once  ideal  and  businesslike.

So,  even  if  one  began  with  the  mutual
insurance  of  a  comparatively  few  nations
which  were  relatively  weak,  a  new  sort  of
international  relation  would  begin  to  exist.
And  the  more  this  relation  existed,  the  more
new  international  insurance  enterprises  would
be  possible.  The  whole  very  wonderful  his-
tory of  insurance  tends  to  show  this,  and  to
warrant  the  somewhat  enthusiastic  predic-
tion with  which  this  essay  closes.

IV

One  further  remark  remains  for  this  Intro-
duction to  emphasize.  Important  as  it  seems
to  the  present  writer  that  some  beginning
should  be  made  in  inducing  a  group  of  na-
tions to  contribute  to  a  common  fund  for
xxx  vi


INTRODUCTION

insurance  against  some  of  the  evils  of  war
(however  few  of  such  risks  may  be  as  yet
insurable)  —  still  this  essay,  in  dealing  with
"war  and  insurance,"  certainly  does  not
intend  to  confine  itself  solely  to  the  possi-
bility of  insurance  against  the  risks  of  war.
A  widely  varied  list  of  natural  calamities
against  which  insurance  is  possible  has  al-
ready been  presented.

It  is  noticeable  that  any  international
insurance,  which  dealt  with  natural  calami-
ties, would  involve  a  contract  in  which  the
individual  nation  was  indeed  to  receive  some
definable  insurance  payment  in  case  of  cer-
tain disasters ;  but  that,  as  a  fact,  the  indi-
vidual subjects  would,  in  most  such  in-
stances, be  obviously,  at  least  in  part,
the  natural  beneficiaries  who  would  receive
from  their  government  the  payments  which
would  first  come  to  the  nation  in  ques-
tion from  the  international  board  of  insur-
ance.

From  the  nature  of  the  case,  the  inter-
national board  would  have  no  authority
xxxvii


INTRODUCTION

whatever  to  direct  any  sovereign  state  how
it  was  to  distribute  to  its  subjects  funds
delivered  by  it  as  proceeds  of  the  payment
made  to  it  by  the  board,  in  accordance  with
the  insurance  policy.  No  possible  interna-
tional controversy  could  arise  regarding  the
use  which  any  sovereign  state  made  of  any
of  its  insurance  benefits  when  once  they  were
received.

But,  on  the  whole,  any  modern  sovereign
state  would  be  inevitably  much  influenced
by  the  prevailing  public  opinion  of  its  own
people  with  regard  to  the  distribution  of
its  insurance  funds.  Consequently,  the  exist-
ence of  insurance  benefits  and,  in  turn,  the
existence  of  contributions  made  by  the  indi-
vidual state  to  the  international  insurance
fund,  would  be  of  great  possible  benefit  to
any  individual  state,  in  dealing  with  its  most
pressing  social  problems.  For  whether  a  na-
tion was  amply  able  to  insure  itself  against  a
risk  or  not,  an  insurance  policy  would  con-
stitute a  convenient  means  of  providing,  in
advance,  by  a  single  financial  device,  for  a
xxxviii


INTRODUCTION

definite  class  of  the  needs  or  the  risks  of  its
subjects.

A  single  example  will  suffice  to  indicate
the  way  in  which  a  system  of  international
insurance,  once  established,  would  furnish  an
extremely  simple  mode  —  a  wholly  new  sort
of  machinery  —  by  means  of  which  an  indi-
vidual state  might  deal  with  some  of  its  most
intimate  internal  problems  and  issues.

The  various  forms  of  workmen's  insur-
ance are  now  becoming  of  great  importance
in  the  life  of  individual  states.  Such  prob-
lems are  dealt  with  by  different  nations  in
modes  which  vary  and  ought  to  vary  accord-
ing to  the  special  social  problems  which
occupy  the  consciousness  of  the  individual
nations,  and  which  also  vary  with  the  sys-
tems of  legislation  and  of  government  which
characterize  different  nationalities.

Every  effort  to  apply  the  experience  of  one
sovereign  state  with  regard  to  the  best  form
of  workmen's  insurance  to  the  life  of  another
sovereign  state,  has  at  present  to  involve
new  legislative  or  administrative  decisions,
xxxix


INTRODUCTION

and  constitutional  difficulties  of  the  most
varied  sort.

Now  international  insurance,  without  in
the  least  interfering  with  the  discretion,  with
the  constitution,  or  with  the  independence
of  any  nation  concerned,  would  furnish,  if  it
existed,  a  most  convenient  mode  whereby
various  nations  could  learn  from  one  an-
other's experience,  how  to  deal  with  such  a
problem  as  that  of  workmen's  insurance,  and
how  to  apply  what  they  learned  through  such
experience  to  the  special  modes  of  adminis-
tration and  of  legislation  which  were  suited
to  the  constitution  of  each  state.

Thus,  suppose  that  the  international  board
of  trustees  existed,  and  that  the  individual
state  was  willing  to  contribute  a  fund  to  the
general  fund,  thereby  taking  out  a  policy
which  insured  to  it,  at  suitable  intervals,  a
payment  adequate  to  cover  the  total  cost  of
a  given  class  of  accidents  occurring  to  its
workmen  in  the  various  dangerous  occupa-
tions. The  form  of  such  a  policy,  its  costs
and  conditions,  would  depend  entirely  upon

xl


INTRODUCTION

what  proposal  the  international  board  was
prepared  to  entertain,  and  what  contribu-
tion to  the  common  insurance  fund  the
sovereign  state  in  question  was  willing  to
make.  The  insurance  payments,  when  duly
made,  would  be  wholly  at  the  disposal  of  the
state  receiving  them.

Only,  instead  of  devising  some  elaborate
legislation  of  its  own,  hampered  perhaps  by
numerous  constitutional  and  legal  restric-
tions, determined  by  the  whole  past  history
of  its  laws  and  customs,  the  insured  sovereign
state  would  now  have  on  its  hands  simply
the  problem  of  distributing  the  fund  paid  to
it  as  the  result  of  its  workmen's  insurance
policy,  to  the  people  to  whom,  in  its  opinion,
this  sum  should  be  equitably  distributed.

In  a  country  such  as  the  United  States,
where  any  plan  for  workmen's  insurance  of
any  type  must  at  present  pass  through  the
slow  ordeal  of  adjusting  itself  to  the  laws  and
customs  of  each  separate  state  of  the  Union,
and  where  a  constitutional  amendment,  au-
thorizing a  general  federal  law  on  the  subject,

xli


INTRODUCTION

would  involve  awkward  and  possibly  danger-
ous complications,  the  whole  subject  could  be
much  more  simply  dealt  with  if  the  interna-
tional board  of  insurance,  after  due  investi-
gation of  the  facts  about  accidents,  about
old  age,  or  about  any  other  topic  involving
matters  of  interest  to  bodies  of  workmen  in
any  state  of  the  Union,  named,  not  upon
constitutional  grounds,  and  not  upon  the
ground  of  any  treaty  with  any  foreign  power,
a  sum  in  return  for  which  the  international
insurance  board  would  be  willing  to  pay,  at
stated  intervals,  into  the  treasury  of  the
United  States,  a  certain  sum  called  for  by  a
certain  policy,  in  case  the  United  States
Congress  simply  appropriated  the  money  to
pay  for  the  policy  in  question.

Now  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  United
States  is  amply  able  to  insure  itself  against
all  risks  and  expenses  that  are  due  to  disease
or  to  accident  or  to  old  age,  in  so  far  as  these
things  affect  its  various  classes  of  laborers.
It  is  equally  sure  that  manifold  constitutional
difficulties  and  varieties  of  custom  he  in  the

xlii


INTRODUCTION

way  of  carrying  through  any  scheme  affect-
ing workmen's  insurance  throughout  the  vari-
ous states  of  the  American  Union.

It  would  be,  therefore,  of  advantage  to  the
United  States  if  an  international  insurance
board  existed,  and  if  it  had  the  opportunity
to  pay  for  any  policy  that  might  at  any  time
seem  good  to  it  affecting  workmen's  insur-
ance anywhere  within  its  borders.  For  the
constitutional  difficulties  and  the  varieties
of  state  legislation  which  stand  in  the  way
of  carrying  out  any  one  plan  for  workmen's
insurance  in  the  United  States  would  not
stand  in  the  way  of  a  plan  for  appropriating
a  certain  sum  to  be  paid  by  the  authority
of  Congress  to  the  international  insurance
board.  Nor  would  such  difficulties  be  nearly
as  great  when  the  problem  arose  as  to  how
the  proceeds  received  from  such  a  policy
were  to  be  distributed  to  individual  workmen
throughout  the  United  States,  or  to  any  part
of  it.  The  insurance  policy  would  not  be
needed  as  a  financial  investment.  But  it
would  furnish  a  new  and  valuable  machinery

xliii


INTRODUCTION

for  devising  and  carrying  out  possible  social
reforms.

This  is  but  a  single  example.  As  soon  as
one  considers  the  possible  uses  of  an  interna-
tional insurance  board,  in  case  that,  while  it
did  its  business  with  the  nations,  their  indi-
vidual subjects  were  the  natural  beneficiaries
of  the  insurance  in  question,  one  sees  that,
without  the  least  interference  with  the  discre-
tion or  the  independence  of  any  nation,  a  vast
simplification  of  the  machinery  whereby  each
nation  might  deal  with  its  own  social  prob-
lems would  be  furnished.

While  the  various  nations  took  out  policies
for  any  such  social  purpose  by  putting  cer-
tain sums  in  trust  with  the  board,  they  would
very  naturally  take  counsel  together,  by  com-
paring their  various  modes  of  social  insur-
ance, and  of  other  socially  beneficent  pro-
cesses. Every  word  spoken  in  such  counsel
would  tend  toward  mutual  understanding  among
the  nations  and  towards  simplification  of  the
social  problems  of  each,  or  of  the  ways  in  which
these  problems  were  to  be  dealt  with.  Yet  at

xliv


INTRODUCTION

no  moment  would  such  conference  in  the
least  interfere  with  the  honor  of  the  indi-
vidual nations,  or  involve  new  disputes,  or
stand  in  the  way  of  any  national  ambi-
tion.

It  will  be  clearly  observed  that  the  inter-
national board  of  insurance  would  have  no
hostility  to  the  growth  of  international  arbi-
tration, or  to  the  authority  of  the  Hague  tri-
bunal. Its  existence  would  imply  no  hin-
drance to  any  other  influence  that  at  pres-
ent furthers,  or  that  may  in  future  further,  the
substitution  of  peace  for  war  in  international
life.

Therefore  the  strong  nations  could  use,  and
could  profitably  use,  international  insurance
quite  as  much  and  quite  as  hopefully  as
the  weak.  For  it  would  provide  them  a
new  machinery  for  the  financial  care  of  re-
forms.

The  more  it  was  used,  the  more  it  would  be-
come useful.  And  the  genuine  community  of
mankind  would  indeed  be  begun,  not  as  a
merely  fantastic  hope,  but  as  an  institution

xlv


INTRODUCTION

whereby  part  of  the  world's  daily  business
was  done.

It  seems  well  to  close  this  Introduction
with  the  words  of  a  great  authority  on  the
theory  of  insurance,  —  words  by  which  the
present  writer's  thoughts  have  been  con-
stantly guided  in  the  writing  of  this  essay.
The  words  are  those  of  Charlton  Thomas
Lewis,  Ph.D.  They  appear  in  the  article
on  "Insurance,"  which  the  eleventh  edition
of  the  "Encyclopaedia  Britannica"  prints  on
page  658  of  Volume  XIV:  —

"The  value  of  insurance  as  an  institution
cannot  be  measured  by  figures.  No  direct
balance-sheet  of  profit  and  loss  can  exhibit
its  utility.  The  insurance  contract  produces
no  wealth.  It  represents  only  expenditure.
If  a  thousand  men  insure  themselves  against
any  contingency,  then,  whether  or  not  the
dreaded  event  occurs  to  any,  they  will  in  the
aggregate  be  poorer,  as  the  direct  result,,  by
the  exact  cost  of  the  machinery  for  effect-
ing it.  The  distribution  of  property  is
changed,  its  sum  is  not  increased.  But  the

xlvi


INTRODUCTION

results  in  the  social  economy,  the  substitu-
tion of  reasonable  foresight  and  confidence
for  apprehension  and  the  sense  of  hazard,  the
large  elimination  of  chance  from  business
and  conduct  have  a  supreme  value.  The
direct  contribution  of  insurance  to  civili-
zation is  made,  not  in  visible  wealth,  but  in
the  intangible  and  immeasurable  forces  of
character  on  which  civilization  itself  is
founded.  It  is  preeminently  a  modern  insti-
tution. Some  two  centuries  ago  it  had
begun  to  influence  centers  of  trade,  but  the
mass  of  civilized  men  had  no  conception  of  its
meaning.  Its  general  application  and  popu-
lar acceptance  began  within  the  first  half  of
the  19th  century,  and  its  commercial  and
social  importance  have  multiplied  a  hundred-
fold within  living  memory.  It  has  done
more  than  all  gifts  of  impulsive  charity  to
foster  a  sense  of  human  brotherhood  and  of
common  interests.  It  has  done  more  than
all  repressive  legislation  to  destroy  the  gam-
bling spirit.  It  is  impossible  to  conceive
of  our  civilization  in  its  full  vigor  and  pro-

xlvii


INTRODUCTION

gressive  power  without  this  principle,  which
unites  the  fundamental  law  of  practical  econ-
omy, that  he  best  serves  humanity  who  best
serves  himself,  with  the  golden  rule  of  reli-
gion, 'Bear  ye  one  another's  burdens."


xlviii


WAR  AND  INSURANCE


WAR  AND  INSURANCE

RE  AT  tragedies  are  great  opportunities.
The  new  griefs  which  to-day  beset  the
civilized  nations  call  for  new  reflections  and
for  new  inventions.  Our  past  methods  of
furthering  the  cause  of  peace  on  earth  have
disappointed  many  hopes  that,  in  their  day,
seemed  both  fascinating  and  reasonable.  We
must  not  expect,  at  any  time  in  the  near
future,  to  make  an  entire  end  of  war,  but  we
need  to  understand  better  than  we  now  do  the
depth,  the  gravity,  and  the  true  nature  of
the  motives  which  have  thus  far  made  war-
like tendencies  so  persistent  in  the  life  of
mankind.  We  also  need  to  discover,  if  we
can,  methods  not  yet  tried,  whereby  the  wars
of  the  nations  may  be  gradually  rendered
less  destructive,  and  less  willful.

This  essay  is  to  be  devoted  to  both  the
tasks  thus  indicated. The  main  part  of  this
B  1


WAR AND INSURANCE

paper  will  give  an  account  of  some  of  the
familiar,  but  too  little  heeded,  and  too  ill
defined  reasons  why  wars  are,  despite  our
civilization,  so  fatally  recurrent  incidents  of
our  international  life.  This  first  part  of  our
paper  must  be  somewhat  lengthily  stated ;
for,  as  the  old  Buddhist  scripture  says :

"  Long  is  the  night  to  him  who  is  awake ;  long  is  a
mile  to  him  who  is  tired  ;  long  is  life  to  the  foolish  who
do  not  know  the  true  law." l

And  our  poor  human  nature  is  still  on  the
level  on  which  we  are  often  wakeful  in  the
night  and  often  have  yet  to  seek  after  the
knowledge  of  the  true  law  which  may  some
day  bring  us  nearer  to  the  life  of  peace.

This  earlier  and  also  lengthier  part  of  our
paper  will  gradually  lead  us,  however,  to  the
definition  of  some  principles  bearing  on  a
fragment  of  the  true  law  both  of  war  and  of
peace.  And  so  far  this  paper  will  be  a  con-
tribution to  what  has  been  called,  by  the
Dutch  Ethnologist  Steinmetz,  the  "Philos-
ophy of  War."  But,  at  the  very  close  of  our

1  MAX  MULLER,  "  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,"  Vol.  X,  p.  20.


INTRODUCTION

discussion,  we  shall  be  led  to  an  application
of  these  principles  which  I  believe  to  be  in
certain  respects  new.  We  shall  then,  in  the
second  and  much  shorter  part  of  our  discus-
sion, propose  a  method  of  practically  further-
ing the  gradual  growth  and  reenforcement  of
the  cause  of  peace  on  earth.  This  method
has  not  yet  been  tried.  I  believe  that  the
principles  upon  which  it  is  founded  are,  in
certain  concrete  instances,  as  familiar  to  the
modern  civilized  man  as  are  his  most  char-
acteristic forms  of  prudence,  of  thrift,  and  of
cooperation.  But  the  application  of  these
principles  to  the  philosophy  of  war  remains
still  inadequate ;  and,  at  the  present  moment,
this  field  for  further  efforts  to  form  plans  that
look  towards  peace  is  still  open.  This  paper
will  thus  close  with  a  brief  indication  of  the
nature  of  one  such  plan.


3


THE  UTOPIA  OF  UNIVERSAL  PEACE

rriO  propose  any  way  for  furthering  the
cause  of  universal  peace  is  to  arouse  the
objection  that  all  such  proposals,  if  definite
in  their  formulation,  and  universal  in  their
intention,  have  thus  far  always  proved  uto-
pian.  As  has  often  been  asserted,  man  ap-
pears in  history  as  essentially  a  fighting  ani-
mal. When  he  becomes  civilized,  he  changes,
indeed,  the  fashion  of  his  fighting,  and,  in
the  course  of  time,  gradually  improves  both
the  morals  and  the  methods  of  his  warfare.
Cruelty,  pillage,  and  extermination  become
less  prominent  amongst  the  aims  which  ab-
sorb the  warrior's  mind.  Wars  are  waged  for
purposes  which  become  more  ideal  as  time
goes  on.  Humanity  of  mood  directs,  in  a
measure,  the  plans  of  rival  nations.  The
modern  national  spirit  itself  sometimes  appears

4


THE  UTOPIA  OF  UNIVERSAL  PEACE

to  be  a  sort  of  preparation  for  some  larger
enthusiasm  which,  as  we  often  hope,  may,  in
a  far-off  future  age,  make  the  community
of  mankind  its  main  object  of  fraternal  devo-
tion, and  the  whole  earth  its  country.

But,  on  the  other  hand,  as  the  nations  grow
in  power  and  in  self -consciousness,  some  of  the
disastrous  but  profoundly  human  motives
which  most  tend  to  make  men  fight  with  their
neighbors,  not  only  survive  in  the  midst  of
the  highest  cultivation  which  we  have  yet
reached,  but  are  even  intensified  by  the
very  intelligence,  by  the  loyalty,  and  by
the  resoluteness,  which  lie  at  the  basis  of
what  our  civilization  most  needs  and  prizes.
Nobody  can  rightly  consider  the  problem
of  war  who  regards  the  war  spirit  as  a  mere
relic  of  barbarism,  or  as  due  solely  to  the  evil
side  of  our  nature.  The  mystery  of  war  and
of  its  fascination  can  be  fathomed  only  in  case
we  first  observe  that  although,  of  old,  wars
were  often  due  in  a  large  part  to  the  passions
and  ambitions  of  rulers  and  of  the  ruling
classes  of  the  warring  peoples,  modern  wars,

5


WAR AND INSURANCE

however  much  princes  may  take  part  in  their
beginnings,  are,  on  the  whole,  waged  by
peoples,  and  are  in  part  the  expressions  of
the  recently  acquired  power  of  an  intelligent
democracy.  Ancient  wars  were  frequently
the  result  of  ignorance,  and  of  blind  popular
passion,  of  superstition,  or  of  the  greed  of
individuals.  Modern  wars  are  in  many  cases
deliberately  and  thoughtfully  planned  by
patriots  who  love  their  country's  honor,  who
are  clearly  conscious  of  well -formulated  ideals
which  they  think  righteous,  and  who  fight
in  the  name  of  the  freedom  of  the  people,
and  in  the  service  of  what  they  suppose  to  be
the  highest  human  culture.  World-wide  sym-
pathies do  not  prevent  warlike  passions  from
seeming  to  many  who  cultivate  them  not
only  necessary,  but  morally  indispensable;
not  only  honorable,  but  holy  ;  not  only  fasci-
nating, but  rational.

Let  us  remember  then  that,  whatever  the
mere  form  of  any  national  government  may
be,  it  is  at  present  the  democracy  itself,  or
at  all  events,  the  prevailing  popular  will,

6


THE  UTOPIA  OF  UNIVERSAL  PEACE

however  it  is  expressed,  which,  in  the  more
warlike  modern  nations,  actually  prepares
for  war,  which  dreams  of  it  in  advance,  which
tries  cheerfully  to  bear  the  burdens  of  its
expenses,  which  glories  in  its  risks  and  in  its
victories,  and  which  frequently  and  con-
sciously justifies  it  as  the  highest,  as  the  com-
pletest,  and  so  as  the  most  ethical  expression  of
national  loyalty.  Let  us  remember  too  that
modern  democracy,  or  whatever  else  expresses
the  will  of  a  people,  does  this  not  because  it
lacks  a  sympathetic  interest  in  the  concerns
and  in  the  sentiments  of  the  men  of  other
nations,  but  because  our  modern  form  of
human  solidarity  is  such  that  international
hate  travels  as  far,  as  fast,  and  as  persuasively
as  does  love.  The  civilized  world  thrills
with  sympathy  for  the  calamities  of  obscure
or  of  distant  men ;  but  it  also  thrills  with  a
common  admiration  for  high  spirit,  and  for
warlike  enthusiasm.  Sympathy  implies  a  dis-
position to  imitate,  and  so,  just  because  of
our  present  degree  of  solidarity,  we  tend  to
imitate  whatever  is  impressively  vigorous

7


WAR AND INSURANCE

about  the  will  and  the  power  of  interesting
men  and  nations.  Such  imitation  is,  in  many
cases,  an  imitation  of  the  war  spirit.

Only  in  case  we  keep  in  mind  both  the  vast
masses  of  popular  interest  and  the  very  high
grade  of  intelligence  which  are  now  devoted,
in  many  great  nations,  to  the  cultivation  of
warlike  motives,  and  to  the  preparation  for
war,  can  we  see  how  far  away  is  the  Utopia
of  universal  peace.

As  a  fact,  the  advance  of  civilization  not
only  brings  with  it  motives  which  tend  to
check  and  to  control  the  barbarous  aspects  of
war,  but  also  motives,  some  of  them  new,
which  tend  to  make  war  appear,  to  many
individuals  and  nations,  more  ideal,  more
righteous,  more  significant,  than  ever.  The
modern  world,  wherein  every  great  human
experience  of  passion,  of  sorrow,  and  of  love
arouses  a  warm  response  in  the  most  distant
parts  of  the  inhabited  earth,  —  this  same
world  echoes  the  warlike  passions  as  readily
as  it  does  the  humane  ones,  longs  to  imitate
the  powerful  peoples  as  well  as  to  relieve

8


THE  UTOPIA  OF  UNIVERSAL  PEACE

the  sufferers  from  an  earthquake,  and  is
stirred  by  its  far-reaching  rivalries  as  much  as
by  its  other  expressions  of  solidarity.  Its
social  problems  are  common  to  all  the  civ-
ilized lands ;  but  so  too  are  the  dispositions
to  encourage  and  to  feel  the  contrasts  of
races,  and  the  rivalries  of  commerce  and  of
cultivation.  The  democracies  are  vast;  but
so  too  are  the  conflicting  interests  for  which
these  democracies  are  ready  to  fight.  Science
brings  all  men  near  to  each  other ;  but  science
also  originates  new  industrial  arts,  and  these
arts  can  be  used  for  war  as  well  as  for  peace.
Civilization  makes  men  more  thoughtful  about
both  social  and  moral  issues.  But  such
thoughtfulness,  if  once  inspired  by  patriotism,
and  by  international  jealousies,  can  both
counsel  and  wage  war  deliberately,  and  with  a
self-righteous  assurance  such  as  our  element-
ally passionate  or  simply  superstitious  ances-
tors never  knew.

So,  of  themselves,  neither  cultivation,  nor
thoughtfulness,  nor  humane  breadth  of  sym-
pathies, nor  the  discoveries  of  science,  nor  the

9


WAR AND INSURANCE

aspirations  of  the  democracy,  have  been  able
to  make  wars  cease  on  the  earth.  Modern
wars  may,  as  we  now  know,  become  more
widespread,  more  democratic  in  spirit,  more
ideally  self-righteous,  than  ever  they  were
before.

Whoever  undertakes,  then,  to  plan  any
method  of  decreasing  the  evils  of  war,  must
take  account  of  these  facts  and  must  consider
how  deeply  rooted  in  civilized  man  the  ten-
dency towards  war  still  remains.  One  may
well  begin  such  an  enterprise  by  asking
whether  it  is  not  indeed  altogether  hopeless.
In  view  of  the  facts  thus  summarily  sketched,
is  not  this  great  disease  of  mankind,  the  love
of  war,  beyond  cure,  and  perhaps  beyond  any
lasting  relief  ?

And  yet :  The  spectator  who  to-day  wit-
nesses the  tragedy  entitled  "Man,"  watches
a  scene  wherein  both  the  events  and  the  char-
acters arouse,  side  by  side  with  many  old
emotions  and  reflections,  certain  wholly  new
movings  of  pity,  of  fear,  and  of  wonder.
Can  one  remain  a  merely  passive  spectator?

10


THE  UTOPIA  OF  UNIVERSAL  PEACE

Must  one  not  seek,  at  least  in  imagination,
some  more  active  means  whereby  he  may
transform  his  pity  into  charity,  his  fear  into
an  inspiring  hope,  his  wonder  into  some  sort
of  interpretation  of  the  meaning  of  what  he
witnesses  ?  In  such  an  effort  lies  the  task  of
this  essay.


11


n

THE  NEIGHBOR:  LOVE  AND  HATE


facts  just  cited,  the  prominence  of
warlike  motives  in  modern  men,  the
stubborn  survival  in  culture  of  the  ten-
dencies which  express  themselves  in  arma-
ments, in  the  jealousies  of  nations,  and  in
actual  wars,  —  all  these  things  call  for  further
characterization  in  terms  of  a  principle  which
shall  be  sufficiently  general  in  its  scope,  and
sufficiently  important  in  its  practical  appli-
cations, to  serve  as  a  guide  in  our  search  for
a  way  of  giving  to  humanity  a  measure  of
relief  from  its  most  dangerous  social  burdens.
The  higher  religions  have  long  sought  for
an  expression  of  such  a  principle.  Two  of
them  in  particular,  namely  Buddhism  and
Christianity,  have  found  and  used  a  formula
which  is,  in  fact,  extremely  general  in  its
statement,  and  very  highly  practical  in  its

12


THE  NEIGHBOR:  LOVE  AND  HATE

demands,  as  well  as  in  some  of  its  applications.
In  its  Christian  expression  this  formula  is  as
familiar  as  is  its  failure  to  guide  men,  and  lies
at  the  basis  of  the  counsel  which  Christian
teachers  of  the  most  various  creeds  daily  give
to  each  of  the  faithful  regarding  his  relation
to  his  fellow  man.  Just  because  of  this
familiarity  of  the  best  known  forms  of  the
Christian  formula,  we  may  be  aided  to  make
the  principle  in  question  momentarily  vivid
in  our  minds,  if  we  here  refer  to  one  of  the
simplest  and  most  popular  of  the  scriptures
of  the  original  Southern  Buddhism,  the  work
from  which  I  have  already  quoted  the  passage
about  those  who  find  the  night  long.  The
name  of  this  book  is  the  Dhammapada.
Let  me  cite  from  this  scripture  a  mere  frag-
ment of  a  single  text.  At  a  moment  when
the  world  is  at  war,  this  ancient  Buddhist
word  may  awaken,  by  the  very  contrast
between  its  spirit  and  that  of  the  passing
mood  of  modern  European  patriots,  a  com-
ment which  will  help  us  to  see  where  our  real
problem  lies :  —

13


WAR AND INSURANCE

"  *  He  abused  me,  he  beat  me,  he  defeated  me,  he
robbed  me ' ;  —  in  those  who  do  not  harbor  such
thoughts  hatred  will  cease.

"  For  hatred  does  not  cease  by  hatred  at  any  time  :
hatred  ceases  by  love,  this  is  an  old  rule." *

Such,  then,  is  the  formulation  of  the  greatest
of  human  practical  problems  by  the  Dham-
mapada ;  such  is  the  solution  of  this  problem
which  that  ancient  Buddhist  scripture  proposed,
several  hundred  years  before  Christ.  You
have  but  to  think  of  the  best  known  words
of  the  parables  and  of  the  Sermon  on  the
Mount  in  order  to  recall  other  and  now  dis-
tinctively Christian  forms  of  this  same  rule
for  ending  wars  and  for  saving  mankind.
"Little  children,  love  one  another:"  these
words,  in  another  part  of  the  New  Testament,
restate  this  view  of  the  escape  from  all  the
horrors  which  war  entails.  In  an  equally
simple,  and,  as  I  may  at  once  add,  in  an  equally
imperfect  shape,  Tolstoi's  version  of  the
Christian  spirit  not  long  since  filled  with  a
sad  longing  the  very  European  world  whose

1  MAX  MCLLER,  "Sacred  Books  of  the  East,"  Vol.  X,  p.  5.

14


THE  NEIGHBOR:  LOVE  AND  HATE

destinies  have,  since  then,  been  so  domi-
nated by  preparation  for  war,  and  by  acts
of  war.

Considered  by  itself,  and  apart  from  all
theological  formulations,  this  lore  which  is
common  to  Buddhism  and  to  Christianity  may
be  summed  up  in  the  assertion  that  the  moral
destiny  of  man  depends  upon  a  certain  pair
of  relations,  —  the  relation  of  love  towards
his  neighbor,  —  and  the  relation  of  hate.
In  so  far  as  man  is  dominated  by  the  hate-
relation,  this  doctrine  tells  us  that  he  is  lost.
In  so  far  as  the  love-relation  becomes  his
guide,  he  is,  according  to  the  same  teaching,
saved ;  for  then  he  enters  the  realm  of  inner
as  well  as  of  outer  peace,  and  his  life  wins  its
only  true  sense,  its  only  possible  fulfillment.
There  is,  then,  so  this  view  of  life  teaches,  a
good  relation  of  man  to  his  neighbor;  it  is
the  relation  of  lover  to  beloved.  There  is
a  relation  to  his  neighbor  which  is  not  only
dangerous,  but  deadly  to  man;  and  that  is
the  relation  of  an  enemy  to  the  neighbor
whom  he  hates.  The  whole  problem  of  life

15


WAR AND INSURANCE

lies  here.  Let  men  become  lovers,  and  then
whatever  men's  mere  fortunes  may  be,  all  is
well.  Let  them  remain  enemies,  and  then
not  only  wars  are  waged,  but  also  the  shadow
of  death  is  upon  the  whole  inner  and  outer
life  of  man.  The  dead  lie  waiting  burial.
The  mourners  wail  and  cannot  be  comforted.
Such,  I  say,  is  the  substance  of  that  view  of
our  problem  which  Christianity  and  Southern
Buddhism  share  in  common.

Now  this  doctrine  of  life  is  so  ancient,  and
is,  in  mere  words,  so  widely  accepted,  that
just  because  we  are  deadened  by  the  mere
repetition  of  such  words,  we  have  difficulty
in  making  very  vivid  to  our  minds  how  far
this  common  Buddhist  and  Christian  lore
is  from  telling  us  the  whole  truth  about  the
way  whereby  the  .winning  of  peace  and  the
fruitful  union  of  human  souls  is  to  be  sought,
if  ever  such  peace  and  union  is  to  take  place
in  the  world  of  daily  life  at  all.

In  order  to  illustrate  this  contrast  between
real  life  and  this  ideal  of  life,  let  us  simply
fancy  that  some  supernatural  stranger,  having

16


THE NEIGHBOR: LOVE AND HATE

an  angel's  tongue,  and  bearing  a  flag  of  truce,
appears  to-day  upon  a  battlefield  in  Belgium
or  in  Servia,  and,  having  first  somehow  mirac-
ulously caused  the  conflict  to  cease  for  a
time,  announces  to  all  present,  so  that  they
hear  him,  the  news  of  how  he  has  in  his  pos-
session the  formula  for  ending  all  wars,  includ-
ing the  present  strife  on  this  field.  Let  him
then  read,  over  the  heaps  of  the  wounded  and
of  the  dead  as  they  lie  there  the  words  I  have
just  read  from  the  Dhammapada :  —

"Hatred  does  not  cease  by  hatred;  hatred  ceases
by  love ;  this  is  an  old  rule."

As  soon  as  this  angel  of  peace  has  finished
his  message  and  has  departed,  the  warriors,
so  far  as  they  are  not  yet  helpless,  will  of
course  return  to  the  tasks  wherein  they  find
their  honor  and  their  duty,  as  well  as  their
own  fierce  joy  and  pain,  their  own  bitter
weariness,  and  their  own  passionate  obedience
and  devotion.  As  they  do  so,  will  they  not
feel,  along  with  us  the  spectators,  that  the
words  of  this  angel  visitant,  spoken  during
c  17


WAR AND INSURANCE

the  brief  truce,  are  not  only  impotent,  but
irrelevant  ?

In  fact,  these  words  do  not  even  touch,
by  themselves,  upon  the  real  practical  prob-
lem of  this  battlefield  and  of  all  battlefields.

This  problem  obviously  is :  how  shall  the
hate-relation  come  to  be  forgotten,  and  how
shall  the  love-relation  come  to  be  the  dominant
motive  of  a  human  life  such  as  is  ours  ?  When
not  only  our  worst  motives,  but  also  our
patriotism,  our  love  of  all  that  we  hold  dearest,
our  honor,  —  when  all  these  counsel  us,  if  we
be  men,  to  treat  as  enemies  those  who  are
the  foes  of  this  honor,  we  see  that  we  are  in
the  presence  not  only  of  passion,  but  of  fate ;
and  that  this  passive  form  of  the  law  of  love
can  successfully  address  its  words  only  to
those  who,  like  the  Buddhist  monks,  or  like
the  Christian  saints  of  the  desert,  have  first
abandoned,  as  Schopenhauer  said,  the  will
to  live,  have  parted  company  with  whatever
makes  a  man's  character  vigorously  active
and  unsparingly  and  constructively  creative;
have  also  parted  company  with  whatever

18


THE  NEIGHBOR:  LOVE  AND  HATE

makes  us  ready  to  be  like  those  angels  who
excel  in  strength.  Hate,  after  all,  is  but  one
aspect  of  war.  War's  other  aspect,  what
one  may  call  its  spiritual  aspect,  is  the  loyalty
to  which  it  gives  active  employment,  the  fear-
less faith  in  life  which  it  converts  into  works,
the  endurance  which  it  transforms  into  crea-
tive deeds.  In  this  other  aspect  of  war  lies
its  appeal  to  what  is  best  in  man.

The  real  problems  of  war  cannot  be  solved,
then,  merely  in  terms  of  this  contrast  between
the  love-relation  and  the  hate-relation,  and
in  terms  of  the  mere  condemnation  of  the
hate-relation.  For  there  are  human  relations
which  call  out  our  most  active  loyalty,  our
most  constructive  devotion,  our  highest
energy,  and  which  cannot  be  defined  merely
in  terms  of  the  contrast  between  loving  and
hating  a  man's  individual  neighbor.  Such
are  the  human  relations  which  are  exemplified
when  many  men  are  together  devoted  to
one  common  although  by  chance  unwarlike
task,  such  as  the  task  of  an  art,  or  of  a  science,
or  of  some  church  wherein  there  is  present  a

19


WAR AND INSURANCE

genuine  communion  of  the  faithful.  Such
tasks  may  indeed  be  called  tasks  of  love,  but
they  are  not  tasks  of  the  merely  self -forgetting
and  passive  love  which  the  Dhammapada
contrasts  with  hate.  They  are  the  tasks  of
a  sort  of  Pauline  charity  whose  object  is  not
merely  the  individual  neighbor,  but  a  whole
community  of  many  men  viewed  as  a  super-
personal,  and  yet  also  as  somehow  a  personal
being.  The  one  who  loves  in  this  spirit
loves  a  spiritual  body  wherein  individual
men  exist  as  members,  and  wherein  he  also
is  a  member.  He  seeks  not  his  own,  but  he
loves,  as  Paul  said,  "Not  after  the  flesh  but
after  the  spirit."  He  loves  as  Paul  also  said
that  Christ  loved  the  church.  Therefore  he
is  above  both  the  hates  and  the  loves  which
contrast  and  which  contend  on  the  battle-
field. When  a  company  of  artists  or  of  scien-
tific men  work  together  upon  the  common
tasks  of  their  calling,  they  are  not  merely,  as
"little  children,"  loving  one  another,  nor  yet
are  they  hating,  each  his  neighbor.  Their
human  relations  are  those  of  the  loyalty  of

20


THE  NEIGHBOR:  LOVE  AND  HATE

individuals  to  the  communities  wherein  the
true  tasks  of  life  are  found.  The  relation
which  is  here  present  is  expressed  in  the  devo-
tion of  the  individual's  life  to  the  spirit  of
some  community,  wherein  he  lives  and  moves
and  has  his  being.

Now  such  human  relations,  namely  those
which  bind  a  patriot  to  his  country,  a  warrior
to  his  service,  an  artist  to  the  community
of  all  who  love  art,  a  scientific  man  to  the
community  of  all  who  study  nature,  these
are  indeed,  as  we  have  said,  the  highest
human  relations.  These  express  the  best  in
man.  I  have  already  said  that  the  motives
underlying  these  human  relations  often  lead
to  the  worst  of  warlike  hatreds.  This  is  as
sad  a  fact  as  it  is  prominent  in  human  history.
But  we  have  gained  something  for  the  under-
standing of  our  problem  if  we  have  first  seen
that  this  problem  involves  not  merely  the
contrast  between  love  and  hate,  but  the  con-
trast between  those  relations  which  an  in-
dividual man  bears  to  his  individual  neighbor,
and  the  relation  which  a  patriot  bears  to  his

21


WAR AND INSURANCE

country,  or  the  individually  faithful  saint  to
the  visible  or  invisible  church  to  which,  as
he  believes,  all  the  faithful  belong.

It  is  therefore  not  by  mere  love  of  one's
neighbor  that  hatred  can  be  made  to  cease.
And  in  fact  historical  Christianity  has  never
been  merely  a  religion  of  such  passive  love.
The  Pauline  charity  involves  a  relation  of
the  individual  to  the  whole  mystical  body
of  the  faithful.  This  relation  is  viewed  by
Paul  as  so  important  that  he  tells  us  how,
without  this  charity,  without  this  relation
of  the  believer  to  the  whole  spiritual  body
of  the  faithful,  no  form  of  the  love  of  an
individual  man  for  his  neighbor,  no  giving
of  one's  body  to  be  burned,  would  really
profit  either  a  man  or  his  neighbor  in  any
respect.  The  Pauline  charity  involves  a  rela-
tion whose  type  profoundly  differs  from  the
type  which  the  author  of  the  Dhammapada
has  in  mind.  Paul  does  not  say:  "Think  of
that  neighbor  yonder,  and  love  him  ;  and  then
the  hate- thoughts  and  the  wars  will  cease."
Paul  says,  in  substance,  "Be  loyal  to  the

22


THE  NEIGHBOR:  LOVE  AND  HATE

spiritual  body  whereof  you  are  a  member.
Gird  on  the  whole  armor  of  loyalty. Practice,
meanwhile,  not  mere  self-sacrifice,  but  posi-
tive virtues  which,  in  form  at  least,  are  essen-
tially although not merely militant. And
then  you  will  rise  above  petty  hate  as  much
as  above  merely  private  and  individual  love.
/V\OM  will  perhaps  wage  war,  but  not  because
If  you  are  greedy ; rather  because  you  love  the
\ union,  the  community  of  all  the  loyal,  the
\  spiritual  body  of  those  who  are  one  in  faith
and  in  service. Then  you  will  be  a  man  with
a  country; and  for  your  country  you  will
be ready, on occasion, both to fight and
to  die.

If  our  angel  visitor  on  the  battlefield  pro-
claimed the  words  of  Paul  rather  than  those
of  the  Dhammapada,  he  would  express  what
I  believe  to  be  the  really  higher  spirit  of  his-
torical Christianity.  And  the  warriors,  beforf
they  returned  to  their  awful  tasks,  would
that,  while  he  had  not  indeed  justified  tl
slaughter  of  men  as  anything  that  is  in  its(
a  good,  he  had  given  them  some  glimpse  of

23


WAR AND INSURANCE

the  reason  why  the  warlike  spirit  has  its
spiritual  meaning,  as  well  as  its  tragic  horror
of  great  darkness.  He  would  have  hinted
that,  if  ever  relief  is  to  come  to  humanity's
great  woe  of  combat,  it  will  come  not  merely
through  a  cessation  of  hate  and  a  prevalence
of  love  for  individual  men,  but  through  the
growth  of  some  higher  type  of  loyalty,  which
shall  absorb  the  men  of  the  future  so  that  the
service  of  the  community  of  all  mankind  will
at  last  become  their  great  obsession,  while
this  world-patriotism,  when  it  comes,  will
remain  still  as  active,  and  on  occasion  as
militant  and  as  businesslike  in  its  plans  and
in  its  devotion  as  is  now  the  love  of  warring
patriots  for  their  mutually  hostile  countries.

In  facing  the  problem  as  to  how  this  possible
future  world-patriotism,  how  this  distant  but
eagerly  desired  result  can  ever  come  to  be,
I  will  not  say  reached,  but  gradually  ap-
proached, we  have  gained,  I  believe,  some-
thing, however  little,  by  seeing  that  we  have
not  here  chiefly  to  do  with  two  contrasting
relations  of  pairs  of  individual  men,  namely

24


THE  NEIGHBOR:  LOVE  AND  HATE

the  love-relation,  and  the  hate-relation.  Our
fiction  of  the  angel  visitant  on  the  Belgium
or  Servian  battlefield  helps  to  remind  us
wherein  consists  the  contrast  between  his
advice,  as  we  first  stated  it,  and  the  sort  of
counsel  which  we  ourselves  in  the  present
discussion  are  seeking.  He  says,  to  every
warrior:  "Love  your  neighbor,  even  if  he
has  thus  far  been  your  enemy.  Since  you
cannot  love  him  and  also  willfully  kill  him,  you
have  only  to  follow,  all  of  you  at  once,  my
word,  and  then  not  only  this,  but  all  battles
will  automatically  cease.  You  will  all  return
to  your  homes.  Then  peace  will  come  on
earth."

But,  as  we  have  seen,  the  instinctive  senti-
ment which  the  warriors,  after  their  momen-
tary truce,  and  even  while  the  thunders  of
the  captains  and  the  shouting  begin  again,
will  feel  (whether  they  have  wit  and  patience
to  articulate  their  reply  or  not),  —  this  senti-
ment may  well  take  the  form  of  saying:
"I  am  not  merely  related  to  my  neighbor
here,  who  seeks  my  life  as  I  seek  his,  and  who

25


WAR AND INSURANCE

is  a  hateful  man  hunter  as  I  also  am.  My
highest  and  deepest  relations  are  to  my  coun-
try and  to  its  allies  and  foes,  to  our  common
service,  to  my  honor,  and  (if  you  will)  to  our
forefathers  and  to  our  posterity,  yes  to  the
whole  world  of  man."

And  so,  for  the  warriors,  and  for  us  who
now  study  the  philosophy  of  war,  the  genuine
problem  relates  not  so  much  to  the  contrast
between  the  love-relation  and  the  hate-rela-
tion, as  to  the  contrast  between  our  relations
to  our  individual  neighbors,  and  our  relations
to  our  honor,  or  to  our  duty,  or  to  our  country,
or  to  mankind,  or  to  whatever  community
you  may  choose  to  consider.

Here,  at  length,  we  enter  the  region  where
the  issues  of  war  and  of  peace  must  be  faced
and  thought  out,  if  anywhere  we  are  to  find
a  reasonable  guide  towards  a  solution.  My
greatest  question  is  not:  "Do  I  love  my
neighbor  or  do  I  hate  him?"  but  "Have  I,  or
have  I  not  the  right,  the  worthy,  the  saving
relation  to  my  community,  to  my  family,  to
my  country,  to  mankind?"  If  we  want  to

26


THE  NEIGHBOR:  LOVE  AND  HATE

learn  to  answer  this  question,  we  next  need
to  consider  some  very  plain  and  familiar,  but
neglected,  facts  about  the  nature  of  com-
munities, and  about  the  social  relations  of
men.


Ill


THE DANGEROUS SOCIAL  RELATIONS  AND
COMMUNITIES

TT^ANT,  in  one  of  his  more  practical  and
popular  works,  has  used  a  well-known
expression,  which  has  often  been  cited,  but
which  has  little  been  heeded.  This  expression
bears  upon  the  natural  relation  of  the  individ-
ual man  to  his  individual  neighbor.  Hobbes,
in  the  seventeenth  century,  had  said:  "By
nature  every  man  is  at  war  with  his  neighbor.
Only  some  special  social  device  can  make  him
behave  as  if  he  were  a  peaceful  creature."
Rousseau,  in  Kant's  own  time,  had  asserted
that  by  nature  men  love  to  be  in  harmony
with  one  another,  so  that  only  the  artificial
customs  of  society  are  the  source  of  the  mutual
hatreds  and  rivalries  which  lead  to  war.  Kant,
in  the  remark  to  which  I  now  refer,  goes  deeper
than  both  of  these  conflicting  theses.  Kant

28


THE DANGEROUS SOCIAL RELATIONS

says,  in  substance:  "By  nature  man  both
hates  and  loves  his  neighbor."  And  Kant
goes  on  to  point  out  that,  in  real  life,  each  of
these  tendencies,  the  loving  tendency  as  well
as  the  hating  tendency,  actually  both  nour-
ishes and  inflames  the  other.

For  man,  as  a  social  animal,  cannot  do
without  his  neighbor.  In  solitude  he  pines
or  starves.  It  is  not  good  for  man  to  be  alone.
Yet,  if  you  give  man  a  companion,  it  is  equally
natural  that  the  two  should,  erelong,  quarrel !

Their  quarrel  need  not  be  due  to  the  fact
that  they  are  naturally  malicious.  But^per-
haps  by  mere  accident,  they  soon  get  in  each
other's  way.  Then  they  easily  begin  to
quarrel,  and  their  quarrel  tends  to  inflame  its
own  motives.  Hence  Kant's  formula  for  the
natural  relations  of  a  pair  of  human  beings
is  that  the  natural  man  can  "Neither  suffer
his  fellow  nor  do  without  him."  Deprive
a  man  of  his  mate,  and  he  finds  the  world
intolerably  lonesome.  Give  him  a  com-
panion, and  the  two  irritate  each  other.  For,
if  only  by  mere  accident,  they  erelong  become

29


WAR AND INSURANCE

rivals  in  some  quest ;  or  perhaps  they  interrupt
each  other  in  a  conversation  and  then  each,
if  sufficiently  eager,  begins  to  say  (out  of  pure
love  both  for  his  fellow  and  for  the  sound  of
his  own  voice):  "Do  not  interrupt  me.
Listen  to  me."  Herewith  begins  a  possible
quarrel.  Such  a  quarrel,  if  two  nations  were
concerned,  might  lead  to  war.

This  last  example  of  social  friction  is  not
Kant's  example,  but  it  well  illustrates  why  what
one  may  call  the  dyadic,  the  dual,  the  bilateral
relations  of  man  and  man,  of  each  man  to  his
neighbor,  are  relations  fraught  with  social  dan-
ger. A  pair  of  men  is  what  I  may  call  an
essentially  dangerous  community.

A  man  may,  at  any  time,  love  his  neighbor.
They  may  both  feel  kindly  towards  each  other.
It  may  be  that  neither  is  malicious,  that
neither  is,  as  people  say,  a  totally  selfish
creature.  All  that  is  needed,  however,  to
make  serious  friction  possible  between  the
two  men  is  that  each  shall  be  active,  and
watchful,  and  that  he  shall  have  some  sort
of  "business  and  desire,  such  as  they  are."

30


THE DANGEROUS SOCIAL RELATIONS

It  is  tolerably  certain  that,  if  this  condition
is  fulfilled,  the  business  and  desire  of  the  two
men  shall  be,  in  whatever  way  you  please,
different,  and  in  some  way  contrasting.  Even
if  they  love  each  other,  they  will  then  be  dis-
posed not  to  do  precisely  the  same  thing  at
the  same  time.  Or  if,  as  in  a  conversation
between  two  people,  each  of  them  does  desire
to  say,  at  any  moment,  the  very  same  thing
which  the  other  desires  to  say,  this  same  act
will  have  different  relations  to  the  conversation
according  to  the  intents  which  each  of  them
has  as  he  speaks  to  the  other.

Now,  in  any  such  case,  the  perfectly  natural,
and  in  fact  inevitable  contrast,  between  the
acts,  or  between  the  results  of  action,  on  the
part  of  the  two  neighbors  who  love  each  other,
will  of  itself  tend  to  create  friction.

A  certain  social  tension  is  therefore  a  per-
fectly natural  accompaniment  of  any  concrete
social  relation  between  two  people.  How-
ever friendly  they  are,  at  the  outset  of  a  social
task,  to  disagree  in  some  respect  is  the  normal
result  of  any  social  intercourse  between  two

31


WAR AND INSURANCE

neighbors.  If  two  men  are  neighbors,  each
of  them  inevitably  tends,  in  some  respect,
to  get  in  the  other's  way.

Let  the  two  eager  speakers,  who  long  to
talk  together,  but  who  automatically  tend
to  interrupt  each  other,  just  because  each
loves  to  have  the  other  as  his  listener,  let
them  serve  as  a  perfectly  elementary  example
of  a  tendency  which  you  find  assuming  all
grades  of  importance,  from  the  most  trivial
to  a  furious  quarrel  which  may  lead  to  a  death
grip  of  two  fighters,  or  to  a  war  between  two
nations.

There  is,  therefore,  a  law  of  the  social
intercourse  between  the  members  of  a  pair
of  individual  men,  or  (for  that  matter)  of  the
social  intercourse  between  the  members  of  a
pair  of  individual  groups  or  nations  of  men,  —
a  law  for  which  I  have  long  used  the  name :
The  law  not  only  of  the  danger,  but  also  of  the
original  sin,  of  the  dual,  or  dyadic  social  rela-
tions of  men.  The  law  is  this :  When  two
men,  or  two  consolidated  groups  of  men,  are
set  at  some  such  social  task  as  observing  each

32


THE DANGEROUS SOCIAL RELATIONS

other,  or  playing  a  game  together,  or  debating
a  question,  or  buying  and  selling,  or  borrowing
and  lending,  or  hunting  for  food,  or  even  when
they  explicitly  undertake  the  task  of  helping
each  other,  then,  at  any  one  stage  of  this
dual  or  bilateral  activity,  one  of  the  two
will  indeed  be  either  loving  the  other,  or
else  not  loving  him.  And  when  a  new  and
interesting  relation  to  a  neighbor  first  comes
in  sight,  love  is  quite  as  natural  as  is
antipathy.

But  as  the  two  individuals  pass  from  one
stage  to  another  of  the  activity  in  question,
the  natural  contrast  between  the  two  men  or
groups  tends  to  lead  to  some  mutual  interrup-
tion, of  jostling,  or  to  some  other  vexatious
contrast  of  behavior.  Each  therefore  tends,
in  some  fashion,  to  surprise  the  other  pain-
fully, to  snub  his  activities,  and  so  to  get  in
the  other's  way.  We  naturally  do  such  things
not  because  we  are  by  nature  either  mainly
selfish  or  primarily  malicious  or  even  greedy.
We  do  all  this  merely  because,  if  taken  in
pairs,  we  are,  in  each  pair,  two  different  and
D  33


WAR AND INSURANCE

contrasting  people  or  groups.  Our  whole
self-consciousness,  in  fact,  depends  upon  not-
ing how  different  from  our  neighbors  each  of
us  is.  But  contrasts  that  strongly  interest
us  can  easily  become  unpleasant.  There-
fore mutual  love  and  agreement  between  the
members  of  a  pair  of  human  beings  is  an  easily
interrupted  relation.  Our  differences  can
readily  come  at  any  moment  to  seem  mutual
challenges.  If  love  between  a  pair  of  friends
survives  such  endless  trials,  it  does  so  through
patience,  or  through  the  aid  of  other  rela-
tions which  are  naturally  more  stable,  or
because  love  takes  on  the  form  of  true  loyalty.
But  loyalty,  which  is  the  love  of  a  self  for  an
united  community,  always  involves  relations
which  concern  more  than  two  people.

Taken  by  itself,  the  mutual  love  of  a  mere
pair  of  people  tends,  like  physical  energy,  to
run  downhill ;  to  be  baffled  by  personal  con-
trasts, to  be  thwarted  by  mutual  interruptions,
to  give  place  to  a  consciousness  of  painful
differences,  to  be  worn  out  by  time.  As
Griselda  says  to  her  cruel  lord :  —

34


THE DANGEROUS SOCIAL  RELATIONS

"But  sooth  is  said;  algate  I  find  it  true,
For  in  effect  it  proved  is  on  me,
Love  is  not  old  as  when  that  it  is  new."


This  assertion  constitutes  the  first  half  of  the
law  of  the  original  sin  of  the  dyadic  human
relations.  Love,  when  it  is  a  merely  dyadic
relation  between  a  pair  of  lovers,  is  essentially
unstable  and  inconstant.  For  the  two  tend
in  the  long  run  to  interrupt,  to  bore,  or  collide
each  with  the  other.

The  second  half  of  our  law  is  easily  stated.
When  mutual  friction  once  arises  between
a  pair  of  lovers  or  of  rivals  or  of  individuals
otherwise  interestingly  related,  whether  they
be  men  or  groups  of  men,  the  friction  tends  to
increase,  unless  some  other  relation  inter-
venes, or  unless  more  than  a  pair  of  members
belong  to  the  community  wherein  mutual
love  ought  to  be  sustained,  or  mutual  jealousy
averted.

"Never  any  more
While  I  live,

Need  I  hope  to  see  his  face
As  before.

35


WAR AND INSURANCE

Once  his  love  grown  chill,
Mine  may  strive  —

Bitterly  we  reembrace,
Single  still."


So  laments  the  lonely  wife  in  Browning's
"  Men  and  Women."  The  situation  is  human.
It  daily  occurs,  and  is  even  commonplace.
It  illustrates  the  natural  fortune  of  a  pair
either  of  lovers  or  of  human  beings  otherwise
related,  who  remain  merely  a  pair.  When,
through  any  accident,  mutual  antipathy
chances  to  arise  in  such  a  pair,  then  each  of
the  members  of  the  now  distracted  community
of  two  irritates  the  other  to  new  antipathies.
Thus  in  such  cases  love  grows  old  while  hate
renews  its  impish  youth.

The  only  possible  renewal  of  the  youth  of
such  an  old  love  depends  upon  establishing
new  and  creative  social  ties  between  the  two
who  once  loved,  or  else  upon  enlarging  and
enriching  the  community,  so  that  it  is  no
longer  merely  a  community  of  two.

But  at  this  moment  we  are  reminded  of  a
new  consideration.  As  a  fact,  the  natural

36


THE DANGEROUS SOCIAL RELATIONS

unit  of  human  society,  in  all  its  stages  of  evo-
lution, is  the  family.  But  the  normal  family
is  not  a  pair,  but  is  at  the  least  a  triad,  a
group  of  three  persons :  Father,  Mother,
Child.  What  one  might  call  the  molecule  of
the  most  lasting  and  simply  instinctive  human
social  groups  is,  so  to  speak,  an  union  wherein
at  least  three  individual  persons,  three  social
atoms,  or,  in  higher  stages,  three  social  groups,
participate.  In  such  a  community  love  can
indeed  readily  assume  its  more  stable  forms,
and  can  turn  into  a  more  ideal  loyalty.  In
a  mere  pair  of  persons,  love,  while  frequently
both  present  and  intense,  is  essentially  un-
stable; while  hate,  when  once  it  appears,
tends  to  grow  with  what  it  feeds  on,  namely
with  the  natural  contrasts  between  individuals,
and  because  of  their  mutual  interruptions,
and  by  virtue  of  the  constantly  growing  con-
sciousness wherewith  each  of  the  two  anti-
pathetic persons  observes  how  the  other
regards  him.  But  in  the  family  triad,  the
winning  and  common  care  for  the  child
may  charm  away  many  of  the  most  beset-

37


WAR AND INSURANCE

ting influences that tend to wreck home
unity.

Let  us  sum  up  the  results  thus  far  reached :
The  advice  which  the  Dhammapada  gives
us,  about  love  and  hate,  ignores  an  essential
fact,  namely,  the  fact  of  the  dangerousness
of  the  dyadic  human  relations ;  and  forgets
this  reason  why  antipathy  is  so  readily
growing  a  weed  in  our  social  relations.  We
hate  not^merely  because  we  remember  injuries.
Many  of  our  sources  of  antipathy  seem  to  be,
in  the  single  case,  much  more  petty  than  is
a  desire  for  revenge;  but  are  actually  deeper
in  their  meaning  than  is  such  a  desire.  Very
often  we  tend  to  hate  simply  because  there
are  so  many  of  us,  and  because  we  are  so  dif-
ferent one  from  the  other;  and  so  because,
when  we  are  taken  in  pairs,  we  thus  appear
in  each  pair  as  interrupters  and  intruders,
each  member  of  the  pair  annoying  his  fellow
even  while  trying  to  express  whatever  love  he
chances  to  possess  for  the  other,  and  each  em-
phasizing his  own  hatred  when  he  feels  it,  by
dwelling  on  these  dual  or  bilateral  contrasts.

38


THE DANGEROUS SOCIAL  RELATIONS

Such  is  thus  far  our  result ;  here  then  is  the
fundamental  principle  of  the  philosophy  of
war.  The  deepest  reason  why  war  is  so  per-
sistent is  that  the  nations,,  thus  far  in  history,
are  related  chiefly  in  pairs,  —  pairs  of  com-
mercial rivals,  pairs  of  borrowers  and  lenders,
pairs  of  stronger  and  weaker  nations,  pairs  of
superiors  and  inferiors,  pairs  of  plunderers  who
do  not  understand  each  the  other,  —  pairs  of
plotters,  each  of  whom  suspects  his  opponent.

And  the  deepest  reason  why  what  is  best
in  individual  men  does  not  destroy  but  often
inflames  the  warlike  spirit,  lies  in  the  fact
that  the  best  in  individual  men  depends  upon
their  loyalty  to  their  own  groups,  upon  their
patriotism,  and  also  upon  their  interest  in
groups  which  are  not  mere  pairs.  In  such
interests  in  groups  which  are  larger  and  richer
than  pairs,  consists  men's  very  desire  for  human
solidarity.  For  human  unions  can  become
stable  and  fruitful  only  through  the  establish-
ment of  relations  which  are  very  different  from
the  dangerous  dyadic  relations  of  lovers,  of
rivals,  and  of  warriors.

39


WAR AND INSURANCE

The  sound  advice  to  men  is  then  not  com-
pletely expressed  by  the  word:  "Little
children,  love  one  another" ;  but  rather  by  the
Pauline  advice  to  love  some  united  community
which  has  the  characters  ascribed  by  Paul  to
the  church.  War  itself  persists  because  the
nations  still  cultivate  dyadic  relations  too  ex-
clusively .

We  have  thus  seen  wherein  lies  the  basis
of  the  problem  of  war.  War  is  simply  one
case  whereby  to  illustrate  how  dangerous  the
dyadic  relations  are  in  the  social  world ;
and  how  dangerous  a  community  is  one  which
has  the  form  of  a  pair  either  of  individual  men
or  individual  nations.

In  the  social  world  which  consists  of  pairs,
love  indeed  finds  many  temporary  dwelling
places;  but  it  also  finds  no  continuing  city,
and  so  has  to  seek  in  Utopia  for  a  city  out  of
sight;  while  hate  is  indeed  not  universal,
and  not  all  powerful,  but  is  grounded  in  the
natural  diversities  and  in  the  mutual  observa-
tions of  men,  and  is  therefore  always  ready  to
be  aroused  in  those  who  had  been,  until  it

40


THE  DANGEROUS  SOCIAL  RELATIONS

appeared,  friends  and  brothers;  while  if  once
aroused,  hate  tends  to  grow  more  intense  and
distracting  as  it  observes  its  own  life.  In
those  communities  which  are  mere  pairs,  time
is  the  consumer  of  love  but  the  nourisher  of
hate.  Love  between  the  members  of  a  mere
pair  tends  to  wax  old  as  does  a  garment;
while  hate,  when  once  it  comes,  flourishes  in
a  malicious  youth,  witch-like  and  death-
dealing.


41


IV

THE  COMMUNITY  OF  INTERPRETATION

r  I  THE  outlook  for  humanity  would  indeed  be
dark,  if  our  social  relations  were  limited
to  mere  pairs  of  individuals  or  of  nations  or
of  other  groups  of  men,  whether  petty  or
vast.  But,  as  a  fact,  this  is  not  the  case.

We  have  already  seen  that  there  is  at  least
one  human  community  which  has  characters
and  relations  such  as  no  mere  pair  of  human
beings  can  possibly  possess.  This  is  the  com-
munity consisting  of  father,  mother,  and  child.
This  natural  and  instinctively  originated  com-
munity is  never  perfect,  and  is  never  entirely
stable.  And  hate  can  find  a  place  in  it  as
well  as  love.  But  we  also  know  that  this
natural  community  possesses,  even  in  the  life
of  barbarous  and  uncultivated  man,  a  normal
stability,  and  a  normal  fruitfulness,  as  a  basis
of  family  peace  and  loyalty,  which  lies  at  the

42


COMMUNITY OF INTERPRETATION

root  of  many  very  vast  social  organizations.
Out  of  an  aggregation  and  perfectly  natural  in-
terconnection of  such  triadic  family  groups,  or
of  what  you  may  call  triadic  social  molecules,
a  patriarchal  social  order  can  be  built  such
as  several  very  great  and  stable  Oriental
civilizations  have  richly  illustrated.  Time
and  fecundity  favor  the  family.  Its  form
tends  to  abide.  It  favors  a  type  of  love  which
forms  a  model  for  all  the  loyal.

It  behooves  us  then  next  to  consider  whether
there  are  other  groups  of  human  beings,
other  communities,  perhaps  artificial,  but
essentially  sound  and  progressive,  which  have
characters  such  as  the  triadic  union  of  father,
mother,  and  child  illustrates.  And  here-
with our  quest  enters  upon  a  new  stage.
Pairs  are  dangerous  communities.  Are  there
triadic  communities  which  are  less  dangerous  ?
Are  there  many  instances  of  such  triads  ?
Can  we  name  such  ?

As  a  fact,  all  of  us  depend  for  the  opportu-
nity to  do  our  daily  business  upon  the  existence,
upon  the  stability,  and  upon  the  fruitfulness

43


WAR AND INSURANCE

of  such  relatively  peaceful  and  loyal  triadic
social  groups.  Let  us  name  a  few  of  them;
for  in  this  field  concrete  examples  are  espe-
cially instructive.  Let  us  talk  then  no  more
of  pairs  of  lovers  or  of  rivals.  Let  us  consider
some  communities  which  are  essentially  groups
of  three  individuals,  or  of  three  groups  of
men.

Suppose  that  somebody,  —  let  us  call  him
A,  —  desires  to  do  business  with  another  man,
whom  we  will  call  C.  So  far,  some  relation
involving  the  pair  consisting  of  A  and  C  is
sought.  But  perhaps  A  and  C  are  dwellers
in  different  cities,  or  in  different  countries.
Perhaps  they  are  not  on  speaking  terms.
Perhaps  they  speak  different  languages.  Per-
haps each  is  too  busy  about  his  own  affairs
to  dream  of  interrupting  the  other.  In  such
cases  the  dual  relation  whereby  A  might  do
business  with  C,  cannot  readily  be  established.
What  shall  A  do  ?

A  form  of  business  which  daily  grows,  in
the  modern  world,  more  and  more  important,
hereupon  suggests  itself  to  our  minds.  Sup-

44


COMMUNITY OF INTERPRETATION

pose  that  A  finds  some  third  man,  —  let  us
call  him  B,  —  who  undertakes  to  represent
A's  plans  to  C,  to  interpret,  to  explain,  to  urge
them  in  C's  presence;  to  act,  in  a  word,  as  the
agent  of  A  in  the  proposed  dealing  with  C.
Let  the  business  hereupon  be  carried  out
according  to  this  method.  That  is,  let  A
find  the  agent  B.  Let  this  agent,  let  B  do
the  proposed  work.

Hereupon  there  will  be  formed  a  community
consisting  essentially  of  three  persons,  A,  B,  C,
who  occupy  different  places  in  this  community.
Their  relations  will  be  not  merely  dual  or
dyadic,  but  treble  or  triadic.  And  each  will
have,  in  the  resulting  triadic  transaction,  an
unique  place.  Each  can  be  named  by  this,
his  special  function  in  this  triadic  community.

This  community  will  consist  of  what  is
usually  called  a  principal,  of  an  agent,  and  of
a  client,  or  other  such  man,  to  whom  the  agent
represents  the  principal.  The  relations  of  these
three  persons  are  such  as  need  to  be  expressed
in  triadic  terms.  This  community  cannot  be
reduced  to  a  mere  collection  of  pairs.  If  you

45


try  to  understand  its  structure,  you  will  find
that  you  have  to  think  in  terms  and  in  rela-
tions with  which  the  study  of  mere  pairs  of
persons  cannot  make  you  familiar.

And  now,  this  community  is  such  that  its
relations  have  a  most  instructive  practical
value.  To  observe  what  this  value  is,  you
have  first  to  observe  that  this  community
is  naturally  a  peace-loving  community.  Every
business  involving  a  stable  type  of  agency
depends  upon  mutual  respect  and  confidence.
And  you  then  have  also  to  remember  that  in
our  modern  world  we  daily  come  to  be  more
and  more  dependent  upon  finding  and  using
agents.  New  forms  of  agency,  new  classes  of
agents,  accompany  every  advance  of  civi-
lization. And  you  have  still  further  to  re-
member that  agents  tend  on  the  whole  to  further
international  as  well  as  personal  peace  and  good
will.

The  type  of  community  here  in  question
needs  in  view  of  its  vast  power,  effectiveness,
and  fruitfulness,  a  name  of  its  own.  Let  me
suggest  a  name.  I  need  a  very  general  name,

46


COMMUNITY OF INTERPRETATION

for  this  type  of  community  in  question  is  also
exemplified  by  triads  of  men,  or  groups  of
men,  whose  relations  you  would  hardly  think
of  defining  by  means  of  the  term  agent.  Com-
mon to  all  the  communities  of  this  type  is
their  tendency  to  further  peace,  good  will,
and  loyalty,  and  to  have  an  unifying  influence
both  upon  individuals  and  upon  nations.

I  venture  to  call  a  community  such  as
that  consisting  of  principal,  agent,  and  client
exemplifies,  a  Community  of  Interpretation.
It  is  a  community  having  a  very  wonder-
ful adaptation  to  the  most  various  social
tasks.  It  is  the  best  type  of  community
that  we  know,  just  because  of  its  general
tendency,  illustrated  in  widely  various  special
examples,  towards  stability,  unity,  and  practi-
cal effectiveness.  Our  most  productive  as
well  as  our  most  ideal  sorts  of  business  daily
require  us  either  to  become  members  of  some
sort  of  community  of  interpretation,  or,  when
we  are  already  members,  to  act  loyally  in
accordance  with  the  place  that  we  occupy
in  such  a  community.  Such  communities

47


WAR AND INSURANCE

are  not  merely  convenient.  They  are  indis-
pensable to  civilized  life.  They  are  not  merely
so  frequent  as  to  be  commonplace,  but  they
are  socially  so  potent  as  to  seem,  in  some  of
their  exemplifications,  almost  superhuman
in  the  skill  and  in  the  humane  sort  of  social
unity  which  they  create  and  sustain.  Having
begun  with  the  extremely  well-known  instance
of  the  community  consisting  of  a  principal,
an  agent,  and  a  man,  sometimes  called  a
client,  to  whom  the  agent  represents  the
principal,  we  may  at  once  characterize  in  very
general  terms  the  mere  form  which  any  com-
munity of  interpretation  possesses.

A  community  of  interpretation  consists
of  three  persons,  or  groups  of  persons,  who
are  its  members.  We  may  call  these  members
A,  B,  and  C.  We  may  first  think  of  them
as  individual  men.  We  shall  find,  however,
that  in  general,  each  of  the  members  of  a
community  of  interpretation  not  only  may
also  be  a  group  of  men ;  but  that  this  indi-
vidual group  in  such  a  community  may  be
much  more  numerous  than  is  any  now  exist-

48


COMMUNITY OF INTERPRETATION

ing  nation.  Our  present  interest  lies  in  the
form  of  the  community  of  interpretation,  in
its  relations  to  the  warlike,  to  the  peaceful,
and  to  the  loyal  tendencies  and  dispositions
of  men.  We  wish  to  show  that,  on  the  whole,
a  community  of  interpretation,  not  only  is,
in  itself,  a  peaceful  group  of  men,  but  also
may  be,  and  frequently  is,  a  very  highly
active  and  strenuous  and  creative  community ;
and  that  its  life '  essentially  tends  to  enrich
both  the  power  and  the  unity  of  mankind.
A  community  of  interpretation  is  a  sort  of
artificially  created  but  marvelously  fruitful
family.  Of  social  molecules,  each  of  which
consists  of  three  atoms,  or  individuals  united
in  a  community  of  interpretation,  the  most
potent  and  peaceful  and  reasonable  social
orders  in  the  modern  world  consist.

We  also  wish  to  show  that,  if  the  world's
peace  is  to  be  furthered,  such  progress  must  take
the  form  of  creating  and  sustaining  certain
definable  communities  of  interpretation.  We
shall  be  able  to  show  that  this  our  main  thesis,
in  this  paper,  is  at  once  a  philosophical  prin-
E  49


WAR AND INSURANCE

ciple,  and  a  perfectly  practical  and  business-
like proposal,  whose  truth  and  value  the  mar-
ket place  exemplifies  as  well  as  does  any
rightly  constituted  theory  of  society.  By
this  thesis  our  philosophy  of  war  will  be  at  a
stroke  converted  into  a  philosophy  of  peace,
and  that  without  our  confining  ourselves  to
any  merely  Utopian  dreams  or  plans.  We
shall  show,  not  indeed  how  universal  peace
is  at  once  to  be  attained,  but  how  the  human
world  is  now  actually  on  the  way  towards
a  possible,  even  if  very  distant,  universal
peace ;  and  we  shall  also  show  that  this  way
lies  along  the  very  lines  of  progress  which  the
form  and  the  functions  of  any  community
of  interpretation  exemplify.1

A,  B,  and  C,  the  members  of  any  community
of  interpretation,  work  together  upon  a  task

1  The  idea,  although  not  the  name  of  the  "Community  of
Interpretation,"  is  derived  by  me  from  certain  essays  of  the
late  logician,  Mr.  Charles  Peirce.  The  philosophical  bearing
of  this  idea,  and  its  relations  to  very  deep  and  far-reaching
philosophical  issues,  have  been  discussed  in  Vol.  II  of  my
recent  work  entitled  the  "Problem  of  Christianity"  (New
York,  1913).  The  present  application  of  Peirce's  theory  of
interpretation  to  the  philosophy  of  war  and  peace  is,  so  far  as
I  know,  new.

50


COMMUNITY OF INTERPRETATION

which  is  at  once  theoretical  and  practical,  —
at  once  businesslike  and  ideal,  —  a  task
which  may  be  as  unemotional  and  imper-
sonally stern  in  its  requirements  as  is  any
serious  business  of  men,  but  which  may  also
require  all  the  passionate  devotion,  and  all
the  eager  loyalty,  which  any  man  can  give.
This  task,  in  its  simplest  expression,  is  this.
A  and  C,  to  use  again  the  phrase  of  Ham-
let, have  their  own  individual  "business  and
desire,  such  as  they  are."  The  remaining
member  of  the  community,  whom  I  now  call
B,  has,  as  his  peculiar  business  in  this  com-
munity, the  task  of  addressing  C,  and  of
explaining  or  interpreting  to  C  what  A's
desire  or  business  is,  to  the  end  that  C  may
be  brought  into  some  definite  sort  of  coopera-
tion with  A.

This  cooperation,  if  it  occurs  at  all,  will
bring  A  and  C  into  some  kind  of  social  unity,
such  as  will  make  them  act  as  if  they  were,
in  a  certain  respect,  one  man.  To  bring
about  this  sort  of  solidarity,  and  this  cooper-
ation of  C  with  A,  is  the  interpreter's  main

51


WAR AND INSURANCE

aim  and  interest,  so  far  as  he  is  indeed
the  interpreter  of  this  community.  He
desires,  just  as  any  reasonable  agent  desires,
not  to  do  A's  will  alone,  nor  C's  will  alone,
but  at  once  to  create  and  to  make  conscious,
and  to  carry  out,  their  united  will,  in  so  far  as
they  both  are  to  become  and  remain  members
of  that  community  in  which  he  does  the  work  of
the  interpreter.

Since  B  has  this  united  will  of  A  and  C
as  his  aim  and  inspiration,  he  must  be  what
I  call  loyal.  That  is,  he  must  be  the  willing,
and,  for  the  purposes  of  this  special  task  of
interpretation,  the  thoroughgoing  servant
of  the  cause  of  uniting  the  will  of  C,  to  whom
he  represents  the  ideas  of  A,  with  the  plans
of  A,  whom  he  interprets.  B,  the  interpreter,
is  therefore  the  most  important  member  of
the  community  in  question.  For  he  both
defines  and  expresses  its  united  purpose.
He  brings  C  into  touch  with  A.  He  holds
them  together.  His  essential  aim  as  inter-
preter is  that  not  his  own  private  will,  but
the  will  of  the  whole  community,  should  be

52


COMMUNITY OF INTERPRETATION

done,  and  that  A  and  C  should  act  as  one  man,
while,  in  bringing  A  and  C  together,  he  usually
discovers  or  in  some  measure  creates  their
common  will.  Hence  B  is  above  all  the  most
obviously  and  explicitly  loyal  member  of  the
community.  On  the  other  hand,  —  "in  his
will,"  when  he  finds  and  expresses  it,  "is  the
peace"  both  of  A  and  of  C.  His  success  lies
in  this  peace.  His  "business  and  desire,"  if
he  is  indeed  a  successful  interpreter,  create,
sustain,  and  constantly  increase  their
harmony.  "To  this  end  he  comes"  into  this
community.  He  incarnates  and  furthers  and
enlightens  its  aims,  precisely  in  so  far  as  he
worthily  fulfills  his  business  as  interpreter.

In  the  single  case,  as  in  the  market  place
or  in  the  office,  the  business  or  the  idea  which
B  interprets  to  C,  and  the  common  will  of
the  community  of  interpretation  which  B
discovers,  expresses,  or  carries  out,  may  relate
to  matters  of  a  commonplace,  or  even  of  a
sordid  character ;  but  on  the  whole  there  is  no
ideal  activity  of  man  which  is  too  lofty  to  be
expressed  or  furthered  through  a  community

53


WAR AND INSURANCE

of  interpretation.  For  all  rational  plans  in-
volve the  cooperation  of  pairs  of  men,  —  the
union  and  the  unity  and  harmony  of  the
wills  of  those  who  are  to  cooperate.  But,  for
the  very  reasons  heretofore  pointed  out,  such
union  and  such  unity  cannot  be  stable,  secure,
and  enlightened,  unless  to  the  pair  of  men  who
are  to  cooperate  there  is  added  the  third  man
whose  business  and  desire  it  is  to  bring  and
to  keep  these  two  in  touch  each  with  the
other.  Such  a  mediator  is  precisely  an  inter-
preter of  one  of  the  two  men  to  the  other.
The  interpreter  has  then  the  function  to
transform  the  essentially  dangerous  pair  into
the  consciously  and  consistently  harmonious
triad.

Because  the  interpreter  B  at  once  discovers
or  creates  and  expresses  the  one  meaning  and
will  of  A  and  C,  I  have  called  him  "The  Spirit
of  the  Community."


54


SPECIAL  COMMUNITIES  OF  INTERPRETATION

T  ET  me  next  return  from  the  generaliza-
tion which  the  mention  of  the  ideal
business  of  an  agent  has  suggested  to  us,  to
further  special  examples  of  communities  of
interpretation.  Let  me  call  your  atten-
tion to  three  such  communities.  They  are
both  practical  and  ideal  in  their  nature.
They  are  both  businesslike  and  redeeming
in  their  influence.

The  civilized  world  has  long  depended,
for  some  of  its  most  characteristic  and  precious
life,  upon  one  of  these  communities.

The  two  other  communities  are  modern.
Until  very  recently  the  world  knew  only  the
most  rudimentary  beginnings  of  them.  But
they  have  already  transformed,  in  certain
profoundly  significant  respects,  the  modern
world.  They  dominate  our  social  order  more

55


WAR AND INSURANCE

and  more;  and  they  will  continue  to  do  so,
transforming  it  at  a  rate  which  promises  for
a  long  time  to  increase.

The three communities of interpretation
which  are  now  in  my  mind  are  these :  —

1.  The  judicial  community.

2.  The  banker's  community.

3.  The  community  of  insurance.

All  of  these  three  communities  are  coordinated
with  the  agent's  community,  and  cooperate
with  various  forms  of  the  latter,  so  that  you
may  say :  Our  present  civilization  depends,
for  all  its  most  peaceful,  worldly,  and  practical
activities,  upon  these  four  distinct  sorts  of
communities  of  interpretation.  If  you  re-
moved all  four  from  our  social  order,  then
this  our  human  world,  precisely  upon  its  most
practical  and  constructive  side,  would  degen-
erate into  a  vast  aggregate  of  the  dangerous
communities  which  are  pairs.  The  family
triads  aforesaid  would  indeed  remain  as  the
principal  basis  for  the  loyal  life  of  mankind ;
while  a  few  other  less  visible  and  less  obviously
practical  types  of  triads  would  characterize

56


COMMUNITIES OF INTERPRETATION

so  much  of  our  civilization  as  still  would  be
left  to  us.

Let  us  look  a  little  closer  at  the  communities
of  interpretation  now  before  us.  The  agent's
community  we  have  already  characterized.

The  judicial  community  consists  of  a  pair
of  contending  individuals  or  social  groups,
while  the  third  member  of  the  group  is  a  judge,
or  umpire,  or  arbiter,  or  mediator,  whose
office  consists  in  interpreting  to  a  defendant
the  will,  the  case,  and  the  legal  or  social
rights  of  a  complainant  or  plaintiff.

The  judicial  community  is  the  most  ancient
and  familiar  of  the  communities  of  inter-
pretation. Upon  the  dignity  and  authority
of  judges  and  umpires  the  social  world  de-
pends for  the  control  and  transformation  of
certain  well -known  consequences  of  the  original
sin  of  the  dyadic  relations.  From  social
conditions,  which,  if  uncontrolled,  directly
lead  to  elemental  warfare,  the  judicial  com-
munity actively  leads  the  way  to  other  social
conditions  which  constitute  peace.  The  peace
thus  won  is  not  in  general  the  peace  which

57


WAR AND INSURANCE

the  Dhammapada  advises  us  to  seek  by  sub-
stituting love  for  hate.  But  it  is  the  peace
which  incites  men  to  new  cooperations  as
soon  as  the  contention  is  thus  judicially  settled.
Hence  the  judicial  community  is  indispensable
to  civilization.

The  banker's  community  consists  of  a  bor-
rower, of  a  lender,  and  of  a  third  person  whose
life  and  interest  it  is,  in  general,  to  make  the
relation  of  the  borrower  and  the  lender  a  re-
lation that  is  profitable  to  both  of  them.  This
third  person  is  that  active  interpreter  of
credits,  that  expert  as  to  the  safety  of  loans,
who  is  known  as  a  banker.  The  lender  de-
posits with  the  banker.  The  banker  ac-
commodates the  borrower.  Or,  if  the  borrower
and  the  lender  are  that  very  dangerous  pair
consisting  of  persons  known  as  a  promoter
and  an  investor,  the  banker  may  then  appear
as  a  broker,  whose  business  it  is  to  bring  and
to  keep  investors  in  profitable  and  fruitful
touch  with  those  who  undertake  or  promote
novel  enterprises,  for  which  they  need  capital.

Apart  from  the  banker  or  broker,  acting  as
58


COMMUNITIES OF INTERPRETATION

interpreter,  the  pair  consisting  of  a  borrower
and  a  lender  is  a  peculiarly  dangerous  pair.
The  advice  of  the  Dhammapada,  the  "old
rule"  that  hatred  ceases  by  love,  becomes  not
merely  ineffective  but  bitterly  and  tragically
humorous,  when  applied  to  the  natural  re-
lations which  tend  to  arise  within  this  pair
consisting  of  borrower  and  lender.  The  an-
cient and  medieval  social  world  knew  of
borrowing  and  lending  mainly  as  calamitous
social  relations,  which  seemed  fatally  to  lead
to  avarice,  to  fraud,  and  to  the  bondage  of
those  debtors  whom  want  or  overconfidence
had  thrown  into  the  hands  of  their  creditors.

One  of  the  most  dramatic  of  all  social  trans-
formations has  been  that  which  has  been  due
to  the  appearance,  in  the  modern  world,  of
the  banker's  community  of  interpretation.
Out  of  an  aggregation  of  the  social  molecules
which  are,  in  one  way  or  another,  banker's
communities,  the  whole  vast  and  productive
system  of  modern  credit  has  grown.  The
result  is  that,  as  a  noted  publicist  some  years
ago  said  to  me :  "Ours  is  the  age,  and  ours  is

59


WAR AND INSURANCE

the  civilization  of  the  broker."  You  easily
see  what  this  publicist  meant.  You  all  know
how,  despite  all  the  unhappy  social  accidents
that  interrupt  the  workings  of  the  modern
system,  an4  that  mar  both  its  morals  and  its
success,  the  modern  credit  system  is,  on  the
whole,  both  a  result  of  loyalty  and  a  trainer
of  loyalty.

For,  necessary  to  the  great  banker's  endur-
ing success  is  his  steadfast  loyalty  to  his
function  as  interpreter  and  so  as  the  "spirit
of  his  community."  Just  as  he  may  other-
wise fail,  so  he  may  defraud.  But,  on  the
whole,  banking  has  made  not  only  for  thrift,
for  cooperation,  for  the  constant  increase  of
investment,  for  confidence,  and  so  for  the
unity  of  mankind,  but  it  has  also  made  for
loyalty;  and  has  in  fact  both  taught  loyalty
to  the  business  world  and  exemplified  loyalty,
as  only  the  work  of  a  community  of  inter-
pretation can  do.  The  banker's  community,
then,  is  the  social  molecule  of  a  vast  organism,
whose  life  is,  on  the  whole,  a  life  of  peaceful
construction,  and  in  that  sense  a  life  of  a  true

60


COMMUNITIES OF INTERPRETATION

love  of  mankind.  If  war  ever  ceases,  if  peace
ever  comes,  the  banker's  community  will
have  had  an  important  share  in  the  process.

It  remains  next  to  speak  of  the  community
of  insurance.  Everybody  knows  in  general
of  its  vast  and  transforming  influence,  and
of  its  recently  acquired  social  importance.
Few  notice  the  reason  why  it  has  become  so
important  Our  previous  study  of  the  general
characters  of  the  community  of  interpreta-
tion can  be  easily  applied  to  the  community
of  insurance.

Men  take  risks.  They  are  often  obliged
to  do  so.  Sometimes  they  take  them  merely
because  they  love  risks.  But  when  a  man
takes  a  risk  and  loses,  there  is  in  general  some-
body else  who  has  to  bear  the  consequences
of  this  loss.  It  may  be  his  creditor,  his  assign,
his  heir,  or  his  next  friend,  upon  whom  the
loss  falls ;  but,  since  nobody  liveth  unto  him-
self, and  nobody  dieth  unto  himself,  the  man
who  takes  a  risk  is  seldom  the  only  man  who
pays  for  the  loss.  Now  let  us  call  the  man  who
takes  the  risk  A.  Then  let  the  man  who  has

61


WAR AND INSURANCE

to  bear  the  loss  if  A  loses,  but  who  of  course
might  correspondingly  win  if  A  won,  be  named
C,  and  let  us  call  him  A's  possible  beneficiary,
who  of  course  may  be,  if  A  loses,  quite  the
opposite  of  a  receiver  of  benefits.

Now  the  relation  of  A  to  C,  the  relation  of
the  man  who  takes  the  risk,  to  the  man  who
may  win  if  A  wins,  but  who  will  lose  if  A  loses,
is  a  dyadic  relation.  Like  the  other  human
social  relations  of  pairs,  it  is  dangerous.  It
daily  embitters  the  relations  of  debtors  and
creditors.  It  daily  makes  some  people  penni-
less, and  inspires  others  with  hate.  Its  very
danger  makes  it  morbidly  fascinating  to  those
who  have  once  learned  to  gamble.  It  fills
the  social  order  with  fears  and  suspicions.
It  wrecks  souls.  And  you  cannot  escape
from  the  poison  of  this  dangerous  relation  by
merely  loving  the  man  whose  risks  lead  to
losses  which  you  have  to  bear.  Love  seldom
cures  any  such  fool  of  his  folly,  and  the  one
who  loves  him  suffers  the  more  because  of
the  love.

Now  the  community  of  insurance  comes  to
62


COMMUNITIES OF INTERPRETATION

exist  when  somebody,  let  us  call  him  B,  under-
takes to  bring  the  man  who  takes  the  risk
into  a  true  and  active  union  of  interest  with
his  possible  beneficiary.  The  members  of
the  community  of  insurance  are  the  ad-
venturer A,  that  is  the  man  who  takes  the  risk,
the  beneficiary  C,  and  the  insurer,  who  is  the
spirit  of  the  community,  and  who  is  commonly
incarnate  in  some  corporate  community.

The  insurer  B  estimates  or  interprets  the
insurable  value  of  the  risk  which  A  takes.
For  a  consideration  corresponding  to  this
insurable  value,  B  undertakes  to  make  C  not
only  A's  possible  beneficiary,  but  A's  actual
and  reasonably  secure  beneficiary.  That  is,
B  insures  the  beneficiary  C  against  any  loss
due  to  the  risk  which  A  takes.

For  reasons  which  can  only  be  stated  in
terms  of  the  theory  of  probability  this  result
can  be  reached  only  in  case  many  risks  are
estimated,  and  insured  by  the  same  insurer  B.
Hence  the  insurer's  community  tends,  far
more  than  even  the  banker's  community,  to
demand  some  larger  union  of  the  social

63


WAR AND INSURANCE

molecules  whereof  the  single  community  of
interpretation  consists.  In  consequence  in-
surance very  largely  takes  the  form  of  mutual
insurance.  It  brings  men  together  in  vaster
and  in  more  highly  organized  and  articulated
groups  than  the  banker's  world  knows.  It
leads  to  constantly  new  social  expressions.
It  contributes  to  peace,  to  loyalty,  to  social
unity,  to  active  charity,  as  no  other  community
of  interpretation  has  ever  done.  It  tends,  in
the  long  run,  to  carry  us  beyond  the  era  of
the  agent  and  of  the  broker  into  the  coming
social  order  of  the  insurer.  We  cannot  predict
all  that  it  will  yet  accomplish;  but  we  can
already  see  that  of  all  the  business  relations
and  of  all  the  practical  communities  yet  devised,
the  insurance  relations  and  the  insurance  com-
munities most  tend  to  bring  peace  on  earth,
and  to  aid  us  towards  the  community  of  mankind.


64


VI

MUTUAL  INTERNATIONAL  INSURANCE

TN  the  search  for  influences  that  might
further  the  cause  of  international  peace,
well-known  efforts  have  already  been  made  to
devise  practical  and  international  uses  of  the
judicial  community,  of  the  banker's  com-
munity, and  of  the  agent's  community.  Each
of  these  efforts  has  so  far  proved  both  con-
ditionally useful  and  frequently  disappoint-
ing. No  adequate  effort  has  yet  been  made  to
further  the  cause  of  peace  through  the  deliberate
application  of  the  form  of  the  insurer's  com-
munity to  international  business.  Now  this  is
what  I  propose  as  my  present  contribution  to
these  dark  problems.

The  foregoing  study  of  the  triadic  communi-
ties of  interpretation,  and  of  the  dangerous
character of those communities which are
pairs,  has  been  needed  to  enable  us  to  show
F  65


WAR AND INSURANCE

why  this  newest  of  the  great  communities  of
interpretation  has  so  rapidly  acquired  its
vast  influence  over  the  social  destinies  of  men
and  why  we  need  to  put  it  to  new  uses.

Our  whole  discussion  up  to  this  point  has
prepared  the  way,  therefore,  for  our  final
thesis,  which  is  this  :  —

There  is  a  still  untried  method  of  gradually
leading  towards  international  peace,  and  of
rendering  wars  progressively  less  destructive
and  less  willful.  This  is  the  method  to  which
I  call  your  attention.  It  is  in  general  the  method
of  undertaking  mutual  international  insurance
against  some  of  the  common  calamities  to  which
all  mankind,  or  certain  large  portions  of  man-
kind, are  subject.  Stated  in  terms  of  our
theory  of  the  communities  of  interpretation,
this  method  may  assume  the  form  of  a  maxim,
or  if  you  like,  of  a  proposed  constitution  or
international  agreement  upon  which  a  new
community  of  insurance  may  be  founded,  as
follows :  —

Apply  to  international  relations,  gradually
and  progressively,  that  principle  of  insurance

66


MUTUAL INTERNATIONAL INSURANCE

which  has  been  found  so  unexpectedly  fruitful
and  peaceful  and  powerful  and  unifying  in  the
life  and  in  the  social  relations  of  individual  men.

Begin  to  make  visible  the  community  of
mankind,  not  merely,  as  at  present,  in  the
form  of  alliances  which  are  ambiguous,  and
at  times  irritating,  and  of  arbitration  treaties
which  are  likely  to  be  broken  at  some  passion-
ate moment  when  they  are  most  needed,  but
in  the  form  of  a  sufficiently  large  board  of
financially  expert  trustees,  whose  membership
is  international,  whose  services  are  duly  com-
pensated from  the  funds  of  the  trust,  and  whose
conduct  is  guided  by  plainly  stated  rules
which  have  the  substantially  unanimous  con-
sent of  all  the  nations  concerned  in  the  plan
of  mutual  insurance  which  is  in  question.
Let  these  rules  be  changeable  only  by  the  sub-
stantially unanimous  consent  of  the  members
of  the  already  existing  community  of  insur-
ance, or  in  such  wise  as  not  to  abridge  rights
which  the  already  existent  body  of  rules  have
created.

Let  the  funds  of  the  mutual  insuranceorgani-
67


WAR AND INSURANCE

zation  in  question  be  put,  in  form,  into  the
charge  of  some  well-known  and,  so  to  speak,
essentially  neutral  power,  such  as  Sweden,  or
Switzerland.  Let  this  fund  be  protected  from
merely  predatory  assaults  by  the  fact  that
under  the  rules,  it  would,  from  the  first,  be
invested  by  the  board  of  international  trustees,
that  is  by  the  incorporated  insurance  com-
munity, in  decidedly  various  investments,  and
in  various  parts  of  the  world,  so  that  it  could
not  be  found  or  used  by  any  one  power  unless
this  power  had  first  violently  conquered  all  of
the  nations  that  had  contributed  to  the  trust,
and  that  had,  under  the  rules  thereby  acquired,
a  definite  interest  in  its  distribution.

Let  rules  be  formulated,  as  such  became
needful,  to  regulate  the  conditions  under
which  one  of  the  partners  in  the  plan  of  mutual
insurance  could  surrender,  with  or  without
notice,  its  already  acquired  rights  under  the
insurance  agreement.

Let  the  international  insurance  community
in  question  have  no  direct  political  powers  or
duties  whatever.  Let  it  be  purely  a  financial

68


MUTUAL INTERNATIONAL INSURANCE

and  fiduciary  body,  with  a  minimum  of  in-
evitable judicial  functions.

Let  its  fidelity  to  its  trust  and  to  its  rules
be  guaranteed  simply  by  the  size  of  its  con-
trolling board,  by  the  personal  character,  the
experience,  and  the  mode  of  selection  of  the
members  of  this  board,  and  by  the  entire
publicity  of  all  its  proceedings  and  official
acts.

Let  it  have  no  powers  as  an  arbitrator  in
case  of  international  disputes,  but  entire
autonomy,  under  general  rules,  regarding  those
judicial  decisions  which  it  would  inevitably
have,  from  time  to  time,  to  render,  when  disputes
arose  as  to  what  rights  the  individual  members
of  this  international  union  for  mutual  insurance
had  acquired  or  forfeited  by  their  own  acts  as
sovereign  powers.

Let  it  lay  down  no  arbitrary  rules  for  inter-
national morality;  let  it  not  undertake  to
codify  international  law;  let  it  hold  aloof
from  all  politically  colored  international  dis-
putes.

On  the  other  hand,  let  there  be  simply  no
69


WAR AND INSURANCE

appeal  from  its  deliberate  and  judicial  deci-
sions as  to  the  financial  and  fiduciary  matters
which  were  left  to  its  decision  and  discretion
by  the  international  agreement  for  mutual
insurance.

Let  any  and  all  the  sovereign  states  of  the
world,  great  or  small,  at  war  or  not  at  war,
whether  accused  or  not  of  present  or  past
barbarism  by  their  neighbors,  be  at  any  time
at  liberty  under  general  and  financially  pre-
cise rules,  to  enter  the  international  insurance
community  as  new  members,  to  contribute
to  its  fund,  and  to  receive  in  turn  an  amount
of  insurance  against  a  definite  sort  of  national
calamities  —  an  amount  which,  as  in  case  of
ordinary  mutual  insurance  companies,  should
be  duly  proportioned  to  the  deposit  made.1

Finally,  so  far  as  this  first  outline  sketch


1  Let  it  freely  cooperate,  when  it  chose  and  in  so  far  as  its
functions  permitted,  with  the  plans,  the  influences,  and  the
undertakings  of  the  Hague  tribunal.  But,  since  its  own
business  is  thus  financial  and  fiduciary,  let  it  not  itself  be
subject  to  the  Hague  tribunal  and  let  it  carefully  avoid,
so  far  as  possible,  the  actual  taking  part  in  arbitration  or
"judicial  settlement  of  international  disputes."

70


MUTUAL INTERNATIONAL INSURANCE

of  our  plan  is  concerned,  let  a  provision  be
made  for  emergencies  as  follows :  A  nation,
insured  under  the  agreement,  might  undergo
revolutions,  or  might  be  conquered  in  war,
or  might  be  divided  into  several  states,  or
might  be  lost  in  some  new  federation  of  vari-
ous states.  This  transformed  sovereign  state
might  already  have  acquired,  before  its  dis-
appearance, larger  or  smaller  rights  to  an
insurance  payment,  under  conditions  which
might  have  come  to  be  actually  realized.  In
this  case,  the  trustees  of  the  mutual  international
insurance  organization  would  have  sole  power
to  decide  what  state  or  states,  if  any,  had  inherited
the  insurance  payment  or  payments  due  to  the
state  which  had  thus  passed  away  from  the  now
visibly  represented  family  of  nations.  If,  how-
ever, the  trustees  of  the  fund  decided,  formally
and  judicially,  and  of  course  after  due  investi-
gation, and  quite  publicly:  "No  now  exist-
ing state  has  justly  inherited  the  insurance
rights  which  belonged  to  the  formerly  existing
state.  The  dead  state  is  now  unrecognizable
among  the  living  states"  —  then  the  insurance

71


WAR AND INSURANCE

rights  of  the  dead  state  would  simply  lapse;
and  its  insured  funds  would  return  to  the
general  fund,  to  be  used  by  the  remaining
members  of  the  community  of  mutual  insur-
ance under  the  general  rules.  Thus  a  motive
would  be  furnished  whereby  both  internal  revolu-
tions and  external  conquests  would  be  made  less
attractive  to  disturbers  of  the  social  or  of  the
international  peace  of  mankind.

Furthermore,  if,  at  the  end  of  a  war,  the
vanquished  power  had  some  right  under  the
mutual  insurance  agreement  to  certain  funds,
and  if  the  victor  hereupon  insisted  upon  forc-
ing the  vanquished  to  surrender,  as  a  spoil
of  war,  its  rights  under  the  contract  of  mutual
insurance  or  the  funds  due  to  it  under  these
rights,  then  a  treaty  thus  to  surrender  the  prop-
erty rights  or  the  money  due  to  the  vanquished
under  the  insurance  agreement,  would  auto-
matically make  void  the  whole  insurance  contract
which  the  vanquished  had  made.  From  the
moment  the  vanquished  had  been  forced  to
surrender  its  funds,  now  due,  or  its  rights
acquired  under  the  insurance  contract,  from

72


MUTUAL INTERNATIONAL INSURANCE

that  moment  the  insurance  trustees  would
simply  pay  nothing  of  the  funds  in  question
either  to  tfie  vanquished  power  or  to  any  other
single  power.  The  whole  fund  in  question  would
simply  return  to  the  common  fund,  and  be  used
for  the  common  benefit  of  all  the  nations  that
participated.

So  much  for  a  first  sketch  of  the  proposed
agreement  of  mutual  insurance.  You  will
ask:  Against  what  evils  should  this  mutual
international  insurance  company,  when  once
organized,  attempt  to  insure  its  clients?

In  answer,  first,  think  of  the  long  possible
list  of  evils  from  which  directly  or  indirectly
all  the  nations  suffer,  and  with  which,  in  the
first  place,  war  itself  has  perhaps  little,  —
perhaps  nothing  to  do.  Such  evils  are  widely
distributed,  have  an  incidence  which  affects
now  this  people  and  then  that  people,  are
capable  of  a  careful  statistical  study,  and  are
therefore  in  principle  insurable.  Individual
nations  cannot  in  general  insure  their  subjects
against  them.  A  community  of  nations  could
insure  an  individual  nation  against  them,  and

73


WAR AND INSURANCE

could  pay  over  a  guaranteed  sum  to  the  insured
and  suffering  nation.

A  brief  and  inadequate  list  of  such  calami-
ties is  as  follows  :  —

1.  Destructive earthquakes and volcanic
eruptions.

2.  Certain  of  the  migratory  pestilences,  and
in  particular,  certain  of  the  tropical  diseases.

3.  Some  of  the  destructive  storms  of  the
type  which  follow,  in  general,  known  tracks
but  strike  special  localities  by  chance  (such
for  instance  as  the  West  India  hurricanes,
and  the  China  Sea  typhoons).

4.  Recurrent famines and great crop
failures.

5.  Marine  disasters. (For  the  ocean  exacts
a  statistically  definable  toll  from  the  commerce
of  the  whole  world.)

Herewith  varying  a  little  the  type  of  cases,
we  may  further  mention :  —

6.  The  destruction  in  war  time  of  the  private
property  belonging  to  the  subjects  of  unques-
tionably neutral  states. (This  is  a  first  men-
tion of  the  "war  risks"  which  our  insurance

74


MUTUAL INTERNATIONAL INSURANCE

company  might  learn,  in  its  gradual  growth,
more  and  more  to  insure.)

Now  suppose  a  community  of  mutual
international  insurance  once  instituted  upon
such  general  lines.  To  the  foregoing  list
of  internationally  insurable  losses,  a  great
number  of  others  can  and  would  soon  be  added.
What  would  be  the  general  result  ?

The  mutual  insurance  community  would  be
sure  to  do  what  other  mutual  companies  have
done.

1.  It  would  proceed  carefully  to  investigate
such  losses  both  from  a  statistical  point  of  view
and  with  regard  to  their  causes.

2.  It  would  attempt  to  reduce  the  number  and
magnitude of  these causes. To this end it
would  use  all  possible  moral  influences  con-
sistent with  its  functions  as  a  trustee. Being
no  political  state,  and  having  no  protection
except  the  fact  that  its  funds  were  nearly
inaccessible  to  any  predatory  power,  it  could
use  none  indeed  but  moral  influences. But
on  the  other  hand,  being  no  Hague  tribunal,
although  often  cooperating  with  that  tribunal,

75


WAR AND INSURANCE

it  would  not  be  likely  to  irritate  its  clients
by  unwelcome  judicial  decisions  about  already
bitterly  controversial  matters.  It  would  need
to  ask  for  no  new  arbitration  treaties.  It
would  leave  to  the  Hague  tribunal  the  work
of  formulating  international  law.  Its  own
function  would  be  the  higher  one  of  cultivating
international  cooperation  through  mutual  in-
surance against  common  evils  and  thereby
teaching  by  example  the  meaning  and  the
attractiveness  of  the  loyalty  of  each  indi-
vidual nation  to  the  community  of  all  nations.
Mutual  insurance  would  make  this  community
visible.

3.  But  these,  its  non-controversial  and
purely  moral  influences,  would  still  be  influ-
ences whose  source  would  be  the  first  spirit  of  the
community  of  all  mankind  which  would  ever
yet  have  won  permanent  and  visible  presence
on  earth.  In  its  efforts  not  only  to  alleviate
but  to  prevent  pestilence  and  famine,  the
board  of  trustees,  representing  all  the  nations
in  the  community  of  insurance,  would  inspire
all  the  nations  actually  to  work  together,  at  once

76


MUTUAL INTERNATIONAL INSURANCE

in  a  charitable  and  in  a  businesslike  way,  as
they  have  never  worked  before.  As  the  spirit
of  this  triadic  community,  the  insurance  organi-
zation would  both  exemplify  and  teach  loyalty.
Now  the  nations,  living,  thus  far,  in  dangerous
pairs,  and  in  groups  of  pairs,  have  never  yet
had  any  chance  of  acquiring  international
loyalty.

We  have  then  a  vast  experience  of  business-
like activities  behind  us  when  we  assert  that
this  triadic  community,  once  founded,  would
ceaselessly  tend  to  increase,  to  discover  new
powers,  and  to  exercise  new  and  peaceful
influences.

But  you  will  ask :  Could  it  go  farther  ?
Could  it  insure  its  members  against  any  of  the
evils  of  actual  war?  And  if  it  did  so,  would
that  still  more  directly  tend  towards  the
diminishing  of  wars  ?

I  answer  that,  if  large  enough,  this  com-
munity of  mutual  international  insurance  could
insure  its  members  progressively  against  more
and  more  of  the  evils  and  destructive  calamities
due  to  war,  by  the  simple  addition  of  one  very

77


WAR AND INSURANCE

important  rule  to  the  rules  so  far  laid  down :
If  a  nation  had  a  war  with  another,  the  insur-
ance trustees  would  never  directly  inquire
as  to  the  moral  justification  of  this  war,  but
would  ask :  Who  committed  the  first  act  of  war?
No  nation  would  receive  insurance  compensation
for  any  expenses  due  to  a  war  in  which  it  com-
mitted the  first  act  of  war.  This  rule  would,
in  each  case,  require  judicial  interpretation.
But  this  again  would  be  no  arbitration  of  a
Hague  tribunal,  but  purely  a  financier's
decision  as  to  whether  or  no  an  insurance
policy  was  at  least  temporarily  or  in  a  single
case  vitiated  by  an  act  of  a  nature  known
beforehand.1

For  the  rest,  in  so  far  as  our  insurance  com-
pany undertook  to  pay  any  war  expenses,  it
would  get  a  businesslike  interest  in  averting
the  causes  of  war  which  would  express  the
will  of  all  the  insuring  nations,  and  which
would  possess  a  fecundity,  an  ingenuity,  and
a  wisdom  of  which  we  shall  know  nothing
until  we  get  such  a  community  of  interpre-
tation formed  to  teach  the  nations,  by  the  potent

78


MUTUAL INTERNATIONAL INSURANCE

devices  of  mutual  insurance,  the  art  of  loyalty
to  the  community  of  mankind.

But  you  will  say,  such  a  community  would
need  to  begin  with  very  vast  financial  re-
sources. How  shall  the  nations,  now  absorbed
in  greed  and  in  rivalries,  the  dangerous  pairs,
be  induced  to  invest  their  funds  in  so  prodi-
gious and  humane  an  undertaking  ?

To  this  question  the  present  moment  fur-
nishes the  fitting  answer.  Herein  lies  the  very
core  of  the  present  practical  proposal.  For,
when  the  present  war  is  ended,  one  side
will  be  the  victor.  That  side  will  include
more  than  one  nation.  The  victors  will  jointly
or  severally  demand  an  indemnity  or  several
indemnities  from  the  vanquished,  and  might
raise  some  new  quarrel  over  the  division  of
the  spoils.  Well,  —  let  the  victors  make  their
demand  together.  Let  them  demand  one  indem-
nity from  all  the  vanquished.  When  it  is  paid,
let  the  victors  at  once  begin  and  actively  establish
the  first  mutual  international  insurance  com-
pany against  national  calamities,  including
wars.  Let  them  devote  this  whole  indemnity

79


WAR AND INSURANCE

to  forming  the  initial  fund  of  this  company.
Let  them  deposit  the  fund  with  the  trustees,
and  under  the  formal  care  of  Switzerland  or  of
Sweden.  Then  let  them  draw  up  their  rules,
and  thenceforth  invite  all  sovereign  states,  great
or  small,  including  the  vanquished  states,  to
insure  by  payments  and  enjoy  all  the  advan-
tages of  the  insurance.  This  act  of  thus  using
the  war  indemnity  will  be  much  less  wasteful
than  to  waste  it  in  preparations  for  future  war.
The  vanquished  will  not  hope  to  make  it  an
object  of  future  plunder.  It  will  henceforth
be  the  fund  of  the  community  of  all  mankind.
And  this  community  of  all  mankind  will  begin
to  take  on  visible  form,  presence,  and  power  to
save.

Lincoln  on  a  famous  occasion  used  a  triadic
phrase.  He  spoke  of  "government  of  the
people,  by  the  people,  and  for  the  people."

My  thesis  is  that  whenever  insurance  of  the
nations, by  the  nations,  and  for  the  nations  begins,
it  will  thenceforth  never  vanish  from  the  earth,
but  will  begin  to  make  visible  to  us  the  holy  city
of  the  community  of  all  mankind.  To  such  a

80


MUTUAL INTERNATIONAL INSURANCE

vision  perhaps  we  have  a  right,  even  while
the  slain  lie  awaiting  burial.  Let  us  dwell
upon  this  vision,  at  once  ideal  and  practical.
Let  us  say  of  this  vision,  of  this  holy  city,  —
"Even  so,  come  quickly.  For  then,  none  of
these  dead  will  have  died  wholly  in  vain."


81


NOTES

I. (See  page  2)

STEINMETZ'S  "PHILOSOPHY  OF  WAR'*
Sebald  Rudolf  Steinmetz  is  professor  of  Ethnology
at  the  University  of  Amsterdam.  His  "Philosophic
des  Krieges"  was  first  published  in  1907  and  has  much
influenced  the  train  of  thought  which  was  first  set
forth  in  the  present  writer's  "Philosophy  of  Loyalty
(New  York,  1908),  "and  which  has  gradually  led,  through
a  series  of  intermediate  books,  to  the  present  Address.
That  this  influence  has  partly  been  due  to  my  own  op-
position to  certain  of  the  theses  of  Steinmetz  is  obvious.
But  I  hope  that  Section  II  of  this  Address  clearly  shows
that  in  certain  respects  I  stand  greatly  indebted  to  Stein-
metz for  some  of  his  views  regarding  the  war-like  aspects
of  human  nature.

II. (See  page  28)

KANT'S  DOCTRINE  CONCERNING  "ANTAGONISM"  AS  A
SOURCE  OF  SOCIAL  DEVELOPMENT

The  Kantian  views  cited  in  the  text  of  this  Address,
are  outlined  in  his  essay  of  1784  entitled:  "An  Idea
of  an  Universal  History  from  a  Cosmo-political  Point
of  View."  The  "  Fourth  Principle  "  which  Kant  defines

83


NOTES

regarding  "the  means  which  nature  uses  to  bring  hu-
man powers  to  full  development,"  declares  that  this
means  is  furnished  especially  by  the  "Antagonism  of
men  in  society."  Kant  continues,  "I  mean  by  Antag-
onism the  anti-social  sociability  of  mankind,  that  is,  the
tendency  of  man  to  enter  social  relations,  accompanied
as  this  tendency  is  with  a  constant  resistance  which
perpetually  threatens  the  very  society  thus  formed."
A  little  further  on  Kant  continues:  "It  is  this  inner
conflict  which  stirs  all  a  man's  powers  and  forces  him
to  overcome  his  own  natural  sloth  so  that,  driven  by
the  love  of  fame,  or  of  power  over  other  men,  or  of
greed,  he  seeks  to  win  a  rank  among  his  fellow  men,
whom  he  can  neither  endure  nor  do  without."  "  Thus
begin  the  first  true  steps  from  crudity  to  cultivation.
For  cultivation  consists  in  the  social  worth  of  man."

Somewhat  parallel  considerations  are  urged  by
Steinmetz  in  his  study  of  the  way  in  which  the  warlike
spirit  of  early  man  was  the  source  of  all  his  early  virtues,
including  his  kindliness,  and  his  disposition  to  help  his
comrades  in  war  and  his  dependents  at  home.  A  little
later  in  the  passage  just  cited  from  Kant's  essay,  Kant
says,  that  without  the  distinctly  unamiable  qualities
involved  in  this  inner  conflict  of  human  nature,  primi-
tive man  might  have  lived  in  some  arcadian  form  as
shepherds  live,  or  as  sheep.  But,  as  Kant  adds,  on
the  basis  of  such  an  amiable  nature  men  would  hardly
have  reached  a  life  of  higher  value  than  the  life  of  their
cattle  possesses.  "Let  us  thank  nature,"  says  Kant,

84


NOTES

"that  man  was  quarrelsome  and  vain,  greedy  and  a
lover  of  power  !  Without  these  qualities  all  man's
noblest  natural  powers  would  have  remained  forever
slumbering.  Man  desires  harmony ;  but  nature  knows
better  what  is  good  for  a  race  such  as  the  human  race
is.  Nature  demands  conflict.  Man  longs  to  live  in
comfort  and  pleasure,  but  nature  gives  him  labor  and
painful  strife,  even  in  order  that  he  may  find  the  means
of  raising  himself  beyond  these  sorrows."  Kant  closes
the  passage  with  a  sketch  of  the  way  in  which  these
unamiable  tendencies  of  men,  leading  to  conflict,  and
even  thereby  beyond  conflict,  fit  man  for  a  rational
life  of  peace.

III. (Seepages?)

LOVE  FOR  COMMUNITIES

The  definition  of  Loyalty  as  a  willing  and  practical
devotion  of  a  self  to  a  community  has  formed  the
theme  of  several  of  my  own  recent  philosophical  dis-
cussions. Without  accepting  Kant's  account  of  strife
as  the  main  source  of  human  reasonableness,  I  have
endeavored  to  make  use  of  his  view  that  the  inner
conflicts  of  the  individual  man  as  well  as  the  dual  con-
flicts of  man  and  man,  arouse  problems  for  which  the
solution  is  found  only  when  a  loyalty  takes  the  place
of  this  natural  turbulence.  The  present  Address  differs
from  any  of  my  former  efforts  to  define  the  nature  of
loyalty  through  its  very  explicit  use  of  the  ideas  of
Charles  Peirce,  with  special  application  to  some  com-

85


NOTES

munities  of  the  social  and  business  world,  and  to  the
sort  of  devotion  —  at  once  prosaically  businesslike,  and
capable  of  the  most  exalted  piety  —  which  communi-
ties of  this  type  especially  exemplify.  The  more  highly
theoretical  problems  connected  with  the  communities
of  interpretation  find  their  place  in  the  second  volume
of  my  recent  book,  "The  Problem  of  Christianity."


IV.

EFFORTS  ALREADY  MADE  TO  USE  THE  FOUR

COMMUNITIES  OF  INTERPRETATION  IN

INTERNATIONAL  AFFAIRS

The  oldest  of  the  communities  of  interpretation,  the
judicial  community,  has  very  naturally  been  the  one
to  which  recent  advocates  of  "the  substitution  of
judicial  methods  for  warlike  methods  in  the  settle-
ment of  international  disputes"  have  most  appealed.
Here  the  highest  hopes  of  the  so-called  "Pacificists"
have  centered.  The  Hague  tribunal  undertakes  to
play  its  part  in  such  a  judicial  community.  It  is  no
part  of  the  purpose  of  this  Address  to  ignore,  or  in  any
way  to  slight  the  importance  of  such  judicial  com-
munities in  international  undertakings.  Arbitration
has  played  already  a  great  part  in  the  movement
towards  peace.  It  will  in  future  come  to  play  a  still
greater  part.  But  I  believe  that  it  needs  auxiliaries.
It  is  one  main  purpose  of  this  Address  to  insist  upon
the  fact  that  the  modern  social  and  business  world

86


NOTES

already  possesses  such  auxiliaries  in  the  form  of  the
other  types  of  communities  of  interpretation.

The  limitations  of  the  judicial  communities  as  a
means  of  ending  war  have  been  skillfully  pointed  out
by  Steinmetz.  Stated  in  my  own  terms,  these  limita-
tions are  as  follows  :  (1)  International  disputes  often  con-
cern matters,  which,  at  the  moment,  appear  to  those
concerned  too  passionate  in  their  interest  to  admit  of
arbitration.  Even  if  previous  arbitration  treaties  have
been  made,  the  "dangerous  pair"  which  happens  to
be  involved  in  a  given  controversy  may  be  too  much
disturbed  in  its  relations  to  take  for  the  moment  any
interest  in  its  former  treaties.  (2)  At  such  moments
the  lover  of  peace  may  be  disposed  to  appeal  to  national
honor.  But  without  entering  upon  any  of  the  endless
controversies  as  to  what  individual  modern  nations
have  behaved  most  honorably,  or,  on  the  other  hand,
have  broken  most  treaties,  it  is  enough  to  say  that,  in
the  relations  of  contending  individual  men,  who  happen
to  be  members  of  the  same  social  order,  the  judicial
community  appeals  to  the  consciences  of  disputants,
especially  because  they  are  already  clearly  aware  of
some  sort  of  loyalty,  which  they  owe  to  then*  own  social
order,  as  it  is  represented  to  them  by  their  clan,  by
their  nation,  by  their  gods,  or  by  their  patriotism.  If
the  contending  individuals  are  nations,  they  at  present
do  not  form  a  community  to  which  the  most  of  them
are  consciously  and  practically  loyal.  But  where  no
conscious  loyalty  exists  to  a  community  to  which  an

87


NOTES

individual  nation  belongs,  it  is  simply  idle  to  talk  of
"national  honor,"  because  nobody  can  define  "national
honor"  except  in  terms  which  presuppose  the  recogni-
tion of  a  definite  loyalty  on  the  part  of  an  individual
nation  to  a  community  of  nations.  The  present  inter-
national problem  is  to  form  such  a  community.  The
judge,  where  individual  men  are  concerned,  is  espe-
cially able  to  bring  the  contending  parties  loyally
together,  because  he  has  other  forms  of  loyalty  to  the
social  order  to  which  he  may  appeal  and  which  he  may
use  as  aids.  Otherwise  the  litigants  may  simply  decline
to  acknowledge  his  authority.  If  hereupon  he  appeals
to  promises  which  they  have  formerly  made,  they  may
very  naturally  say  that,  unless  the  judge  and  the  dis-
putants already  possess  a  common  country,  a  common
social  order,  a  common  devotion  to  recognized  reli-
gions or  customs,  they,  the  contending  litigants,  see
nothing  binding  in  their  former  promises.  In  fact,
as  soon  as  the  judge  has  to  contend  with  one  of  the
litigants  with  regard  to  the  litigant's  obligation  to  sub-
mit the  cause  of  contention  to  the  judge,  the  rebellious
litigant  and  the  judge  become  a  dangerous  pair.  In
brief,  the  judicial  community  is  very  important  in
securing  peace  at  the  moment  when  its  general  authority
is  already  recognized.  It  is  less  capable  than  are  the
other  communities  of  interpretation  of  advancing  its
powers,  and  increasing  the  love  which  contentious  and
passionate  individuals,  or  nations,  may  entertain  for  its
value  and  for  its  dignity.

88


NOTES

But  if  the  judicial  community  finds  that  at  some
moment  the  passions  of  the  contending  parties  lead
them  to  disregard  its  authority,  and  to  fail  to  realize
that  their  former  agreements  honorably  bind  them  to
submit  to  its  decision ;  then  the  international  tribunal,
like  the  judge  who  sees  before  him  a  litigant  in  con-
tempt of  court,  must  if  possible  appeal  to  force.
Whence,  however,  can  the  international  court  derive
its  force  ?  From  an  international  army  ?  But  the
great  moral  forces  upon  which  armies  depend  for  their
existence  are  forces  of  the  sort  now  represented  by
patriotism.  Will  it  be  easy  for  the  international  army
to  arouse  the  enthusiasm  which  patriots  now  give  to
such  demands  as  their  country  makes  upon  them  for
service  ?  In  other  words,  when  the  great  stresses  come,
the  international  tribunal  has  to  depend  upon  motives
which  seem,  at  best,  drearily  reasonable  just  at  the  mo-
ment when  they  most  need  to  seem  ideally  inspiring.
We  may  look  to  the  future  for  an  alteration  of  this
situation,  and  for  a  gradual  evolution  of  a  genuine  de-
votion to  institutions  such  as  those  which  the  Hague
tribunal  represents.  But  the  community  of  mankind
has  first  to  be  formed,  to  become  visible,  and  so  to  be-
come a  factor  in  the  daily  business  of  the  nations.

Steinmetz  further  insists  that  since  the  nations,  if
prosperous,  are  constantly  growing,  in  wealth,  in  popu-
lation, and  in  undertakings,  new  problems  will  con-
stantly arise.  International  law  cannot  be  settled
once  for  all.  It  must  adjust  itself  to  constantly  chang-

89


NOTES

ing  matters  of  controversy.  An  international  court
cannot  undertake  to  do  all  the  work  of  a  legislator.
But  if  there  are  no  legislative  bodies,  new  controversies
will  constantly  arise  in  which  the  two  litigants,  if  they
consent  to  arbitrate  at  all,  will  come  before  the  inter-
national court  with  some  such  case  as  this :  "We  both
of  us  want  that  to  which,  under  existing  international
laws,  neither  of  us  has  any  clearly  definable  right."
The  comparatively  recent  controversy  between  Japan
and  Russia  concerning  the  future  of  Korea,  suggests  a
type  of  controversy  which  is  not  easily  to  be  ruled  out
of  the  world,  if  various  nations  continue  to  prosper  at
all.  Under  such  circumstances  the  international  court
may  follow  either  one  of  two  courses.  It  may  decide
arbitrarily  in  favor  of  one  of  the  litigants  as  against
the  other.  It  may  rule  that  they  are  both  of  them
wrong  and  that  they  are  required  to  compromise  the
question.  But  then  it  may  be  precisely  the  wise  com-
promise upon  which  nobody  can  agree  with  his  neigh-
bor. At  this  point  we  do  not  say  that  arbitration  must
necessarily  fail.  We  can  say,  however,  that  we  should
like  to  find  and  use  some  other  sort  of  community  of
interpretation  as  an  auxiliary  to  the  work  of  the  tri-
bunal.

The  banker's  community  has  been  proposed  as  an
aid  by  a  number  of  recent  students  of  the  problem  of
peace.  In  the  long  run,  as  many  argue,  war  will
cease,  because  a  limit  will  come  to  the  willingness  of
the  banker  to  advance  the  necessary  expenses.  Thus

90


NOTES

bankers  will  be  the  peacemakers  of  the  future.  The
questions  here  involved  are  enormously  complex.  If
a  limit  exists,  and  a  permanent  limit,  not  merely  a  tem-
porary hindrance,  to  the  power  of  bankers  to  advance
money  for  warlike  purposes,  such  a  limit  does  not  very
clearly  appear  visible  to  the  unaided  eye.  Not  merely
the  interest  but  the  duty  of  the  banker  tends  to  make
him  willing,  in  the  long  run,  to  advance  money  to  a
nation  for  purposes  which  he  himself  views  as  legitimate,
in  case,  acting  as  the  interpreter  of  his  banking  com-
munity, he  believes  that  the  loan  can  be  disposed  of
in  the  open  market.  Therefore,  so  long  as  the  patriot-
ism and  the  prosperity  of  a  nation  enable  it  and  perhaps
inspire  it  to  pay  the  interest  on  new  bonds,  the  banker
will  not  permanently  interfere  with  the  power  of  this
nation  to  express  its  will  through  warfare.  The
bankers'  community  is  itself  a  useful  auxiliary  to  peace,
but  it  certainly  needs  such  a  supplement  as  shall  render
the  community  of  mankind  not  only  visible,  but  a
community  doing  a  daily  and  interesting,  a  reasonably
united  form  of  business,  and  of  business  which  involves
at  any  moment  a  far-reaching  cooperation  among  the
nations.

Hereupon,  one  may  very  naturally  think  of  the
numerous  different  forms  of  the  agent's  community.
As  a  fact,  the  agent's  community  is  a  powerful  factor
in  the  promotion  of  the  motives  that  lead  towards
peace.  It  will  constantly  become  more  powerful.
Commerce  aids  mutual  understanding  in  ways  which

91


NOTES

began  to  be  potent  at  the  very  outset  of  civilization,
and  which  increase  some  of  the  most  beneficent  of
their  powers,  as  we  use  agents  more  and  more.  But
the  agent's  community  does  not  of  itself  lead  to  that
consolidation  of  various  agent's  communities  into  one
system  —  that  consolidation  which  is  characteristic
of  the  banker's  community.  A  large  increase  in  the
number  and  complexity  of  agent's  communities  is  com-
patible with  a  large  increase  in  the  rivalries  of  these
communities.  There  are  various  dangerous  pairs  of
such  communities  which  one  finds  in  the  commercial
world;  and  these  have  emphasized  a  large  number  of
international  jealousies.

Before  the  minds  of  all  lovers  of  humanity  there  has
long  stood  a  vision  of  a  Federal  State  formed  on  the
basis  of  the  existing  states.  Kant  discussed  this
Federal  Union  of  the  future  in  his  well-known  essay  on
"Universal  Peace."  But  the  history  of  federal  gov-
ernment, and  the  modern  rise  of  the  intensely  vigorous
national  consciousness  which  characterizes  the  world
of  to-day,  and  the  connection  of  this  modern  national
patriotism  with  the  rise  of  an  intelligent  democracy,
and  with  those  very  forms  of  human  solidarity  which
otherwise  seem  most  encouraging,  —  all  these  considera-
tions taken  together  make  the  Federal  State  of  man-
kind seem  farther  away  to-day  than  it  could  have  seemed
to  Kant.  It  is  not  likely  that  the  world  peace  will  come
in  the  form  of  a  political  federation  of  all  the  principal
nations  of  mankind.

92


NOTES

The  lesson  is  that  we  need  to  consider  whether  the
community  of  mankind  cannot  become  visible  in  the
form  of  some  other  union  than  an  international  tri-
bunal can  adequately  represent,  than  the  growth  and
importance  of  banking  can  fully  exemplify,  than  the
evolution  and  significance  of  the  modern  communities
of  agency  can  insure,  or  than  any  political  union
of  venous  nationalities  can  sufficiently  exemplify.

This  is  why  the  community  of  insurance,  and  the
international  board  of  trustees,  with  its  wholly  non-
political  type  of  union,  and  with  its  freedom  from  the
obligations  of  an  international  court  of  arbitration,  seem
worthy  of  consideration.

V. (See  page  78)
"THE  FIRST  ACT  OF  WAR"

I  lay  no  stress  upon  any  detail  regarding  the  formula-
tion of  the  rule  which  I  thus  tentatively  state.  I  my-
self do  not  know  how  to  define  with  any  generality
wherein  a  first  act  of  war  should  consist.  For  the  pur-
poses of  the  present  Address  I  lay  no  stress  whatever
upon  any  question  regarding  the  moral  guilt  of  any
nation  that  is  supposed  to  begin  a  war.  It  would  be
no  part  of  the  interests  which  the  international  board
of  insurance  would  represent,  to  read  to  the  nations
any  moral  lesson  regarding  the  rights  and  wrongs  of
their  past  and  future  wars.  The  whole  case  upon
which  the  present  Address  insists  is  this  :  —

93


NOTES

The  nations  will  gradually  acquire  a  definite  loyalty
to  the  community  of  nations,  and  a  definite  conscience
regarding  their  obligations  to  one  another  whenever
they  begin  doing  such  business  with  one  another,  as
insurance  at  present  best  exemplifies  and  tends  to  foster.
Whenever  such  forms  of  business  come  to  exist,  the
reasons  why  a  wise  nation  will  be  indisposed  to  make
warlike  trouble  for  itself  and  for  other  nations  will
become,  with  time,  clearer  and  clearer.  On  the  other
hand,  as  soon  as  the  nations  are  in  a  position  to  begin
any  form  of  the  business  which  insurance  represents,
there  will  be  more  and  more  objects  coming  into  sight
to  which  such  forms  of  business  can  be  extended.  The
process  thus  initiated  will  be  cumulative.  If  such  a
process  once  were  initiated,  it  would  not  be  subject
to  the  explosive  accidents,  which  have  suddenly,  and
with  a  discouraging  violence,  interrupted  the  advances
heretofore  made  towards  substituting  judicial  settle-
ment of  disputes  for  war.  For  this  cumulative  pro-
cess would  not  wholly  be  founded  upon  the  authority
of  judges,  nor  upon  the  fragile  interests  which  might
for  a  time  make  some  form  of  international  federation
attractive,  but  which  would  be  only  too  likely  to  be
interrupted,  whenever  dangerous  pairs  of  peoples  or
of  races  became  too  conscious  of  their  hostilities,  and
hence  reasoned  that  these  hostilities  must  be  "holy."
The  cumulative  tendency  towards  organization  which  a
board  of  trustees  would  exemplify,  —  when  once  it
had  been  made  trustworthy  (which  is  humanly  pos-

94


NOTES

sible),  safe,  and  independent  of  political  responsibilities,
—  this  cumulative  tendency  would  not  be  subject  to
such  explosions  and  catastrophes  as  have  beset  all  the
forms  of  international  organization  thus  far  devised.

In  order  to  form  a  plan  for  making  this  type  of  organ-
ization efficacious  in  discouraging  the  beginning  of
war,  I  have  proposed,  merely  as  one  of  numerous  pos-
sible provisions,  the  plan  of  writing  the  international
policies  subject  to  some  such  rule  as  the  one  mentioned
regarding  the  "first  act  of  war."  Any  other  formula-
tion which  made  a  desirable  policy  such  that  it  would
be  vitiated  in  case  the  nation  holding  the  insurance
rights  in  question  voluntarily  did  anything  which
experience  showed  to  be  productive  of  an  actual  war  —
any  other  formulation  of  an  analogous  rule  —  would
serve  the  purpose  here  in  question.  This  purpose  would
be  not  directly  to  vindicate  the  moral  law,  or  any  partic-
ular principle  of  international  law,  but  to  issue  a
policy  of  a  form  that  tended  to  discourage  the  begin-
ning of  a  war.  For  the  best  teaching  of  international
morality  must  take,  at  present,  indirect  forms.

The  principles  of  the  insurance  trustees  would  be
wholly  business  principles.  They  would  teach  loyalty
by  keeping  loyally  their  trusts  themselves,  both  to
the  nations  that  were  their  clients  and  to  mankind;
and  by  putting  the  nations,  so  far  as  they  could,  in
such  business  relations  with  one  another  that  the  na-
tions concerned  would  find  it  advantageous  to  behave
in  a  businesslike  fashion.  The  nations  have  grown

95


NOTES

self-conscious  enough  to  form  at  present  pairs  that
are  more  dangerous  than  ever  before  in  the  world's
history.  I  propose,  by  certain  devices,  to  get  them
to  do  plain  and  profitable  business  with  one  another
by  means  of  some  community  of  interpretation.  I
emphasize  the  community  of  insurance  simply  upon
empirical  grounds.  That  community  has  now  proved
itself  the  most  fruitful  of  all  communities  of  interpre-
tation, in  substituting  businesslike  motives  which  turn
out  to  be  both  reasonable  and  ideal,  for  motives  which,
until  insurance  was  invented,  were  hopelessly  subject
to  capricious  interferences  and  to  dangerous  conflicts.

If  any  other  community  of  interpretation  can  be
named  which  will  serve  this  purpose  better  than  a
community  of  insurance,  and  an  international  board
of  trustees,  the  purpose  of  this  Address  and  of  these
Notes  will  have  been  wholly  accomplished,  so  soon  as
any  one  can  successfully  define  such  a  community  and
induce  a  group  of  nations  to  give  it  suitable  work.


96


''I  "'HE  following  pages  contain  advertisements  of  a
few  of  the  Macmillan  books  on  kindred  subjects


The  Problem  of  Christianity

IN  TWO VOLUMES
By  JOSIAH  ROYCE,  LL.D.,  Litt.  D.

Professor  of  the  History  of  Philosophy,  Harvard  University;  Author  of  "  Out-
lines of  Psychology,"  "  The  Philosophy  of  Loyalty,"  "  William  James,"  etc.

Vol.  I. The  Christian  Doctrine  of  Life.

Vol.  II. The  Real  World  and  the  Christian  Ideas.

Cloth,  I2mo,  Set,  $3.50  net;  carriage  extra

A  work  of  great  importance  to  all  students  of  religion  and  philosophy
and  to  the  general  reader  who  keeps  abreast  with  progress  in  these  fields
is  Dr.  Josiah  Royce's  "The  Problem  of  Christianity,"  in  two  volumes,
the  first,  "The  Christian  Doctrine  of  Life,"  and,  the  second,  "The  Real
World  and  the  Christian  Ideas."

Volume  I  is  a  study  of  the  human  and  empirical  aspects  of  some  of  the
leading  ideas  of  Christianity;  Volume  II  deals  with  the  technically
metaphysical  problems  to  which  these  ideas  give  rise.  The  two  volumes
are  contrasted  in  their  methods,  the  first  discussing  religious  experience,
the  second  dealing  with  its  metaphysical  foundations.  They  are,  how-
ever, closely  connected  in  their  purposes,  and  at  the  end  the  relations
between  the  metaphysical  and  the  empirical  aspects  of  the  whole  under-
taking are  reviewed.

The  "Christian  Ideas"  which  Dr.  Royce  treats  as  "leading  and  es-
sential" are,  first,  the  Idea  of  the  "  Community,"  historically  represented
by  the  Church;  second,  the  Idea  of  the  "Lost  State  of  the  Natural  Man,"
and  the  third,  the  Idea  of  "Atonement,"  together  with  the  somewhat
more  general  Idea  of  "Saving  Grace."

"These  three,"  Dr.  Royce  says,  "have  a  close  relation  to  a  doctrine
of  life  which,  duly  generalized,  can  be,  at  least  in  part,  studied  as  a  purely
human  'philosophy  of  loyalty'  and  can  be  estimated  in  empirical  terms
apart  from  any  use  of  technical  dogmas  and  apart  from  any  metaphysical
opinion.  .  .  .  Nevertheless  no  purely  empirical  study  of  the  Christian
doctrine  of  life  can,  by  itself,  suffice  to  answer  our  main  questions.  It  is
indeed  necessary  to  consider  the  basis  in  human  nature  which  the  religion
of  loyalty  possesses  and  to  portray  the  relation  of  this  religion  to  the
social  experience  of  mankind.  To  this  task  the  first  part  of  these  lectures
is  confined,  but  such  a  preliminary  study  sends  us  beyond  itself.

The  second  part  of  these  lectures  considers  the  neglected  philosophical
problem  of  the  sense  in  which  the  community  and  its  Spirit  are  realities."


PUBLISHED  BY

THE  MACMILLAN  COMPANY

Publishers 64-66  Fifth  Avenue New  York


"  A  POWER  IN  THE  BUSINESS  OF  LIVING,"  says  the  New  York  Tribune  of

The  Philosophy  of  Loyalty

By  JOSIAH  ROYCE,  Ph.D.,  LL.D.

Professor  of  the  History  of  Philosophy,  Harvard  University ;  author  of

"  Outlines  of  Psychology,"  "  The  Conception  of  God,"

"  The  World  and  the  Individual,"  etc.

Cloth,  i2tno,  $1.50  net;  postage  extra

"The  ethical  value  of  loyalty  needed  discussion,  especially  as  so
much  so-called  loyalty  is  mere  self-delusion.  To  be  loyal  in  mere
words,  or  negatively,  to  the  shell  of  an  outworn  convention  is  not  to  be
loyal  at  all,  or  wise.  Moreover,  true  loyalty  must  express  itself  practi-
cally, in  the  way  of  a  man's  life,  in  his  deeds.  Cherished  without  rea-
soning, and  to  no  really  practical  purpose,  it  avails  nothing.  The  drift
of  circumstances  that  may  make  a  man  of  high  and  strong  personal
qualities  a  power  for  lasting  good  in  a  community,  or  develop  him  as  a
harmful  influence  to  society,  does  not  escape  Professor  Royce's  attention.
The  present  significance  of  his  book,  therefore,  is  evident.  .  .  .  The
author  disclaims  the  idea  of  making  a  text-book  or  an  elaborately  tech-
nical work  of  philosophical  research.  The  appeal  of  the  book  is  to  all
readers." — New  York  Times.

"  A  thoroughly  sincere  attempt  to  set  clearly  before  the  American
people  the  need  for  aiming  at  the  highest  ethical  ideals  in  their  daily
life,  in  their  intercourse  with  one  another,  and  in  their  relations  with
the  outside  world.  Believing  that  certain  present-day  conditions  and
tendencies  indicate  a  lowering  of  individual  and  national  standards,
Professor  Royce  gives  himself  resolutely  to  the  task  of  remedial  and
constructive  criticism.  His  programme  of  reform  is  summed  up  in  the
single  phrase  —  the  cultivation  of  a  spirit  of  loyalty.  .  .  .  His  work  is
immediately  and  concretely  inspiring  to  the  man  not  at  all  concerned
with  the  subtleties  of  metaphysical  disquisition,  but  very  much  concerned
in  the  affairs  of  every-day  existence.  It  helps  him  to  appreciate  the
poverty  of  egotistical  ideals  —  such  as  the  ideal  of  power  —  and  it
plainly  propounds  means  whereby  life  may  be  made  really  worth
living."  —  The  Outlook.

"  It  gives  beautiful  and  forceful  expression  to  ethical  idealism,  and
grandly  fulfils  its  purpose  '  to  simplify  men's  moral  issues,  to  clear  their
vision  for  the  sight  of  the  eternal,  to  win  hearts  for  loyalty.'  .  .  .  There
is  moral  enthusiasm  in  it,  there  is  patriotism  in  it,  there  is  love  of  hu-
manity in  it.  It  comes  from  the  heart  of  a  man,  from  the  big  heart  of  a
big  man,  from  a  fine  loyal  soul.  Fichte  never  spoke  with  greater  fer-
vor and  eloquence  than  does  this  idealist  of  Cambridge,  and  it  is  to  be
hoped  that  his  words  will  sink  deep  into  the  hearts  of  the  nation."  —
DR.  FRANK  THILLY  in  The  Philosophical  Review.


PUBLISHED  BY

THE  MACMILLAN  COMPANY

64-66  FIFTH  AVENUE,  NEW  YORK


BY  THE SAME  AUTHOR
"THE GOSPEL OF  IDEALS"

William  James  and  Other  Essays
On  the  Philosophy  of  Life

Cloth,  izmo,  $f.jo  net ;  postage  extra
"  The  Essays  are  full  of  interest  and  sympathy."  —  The  Continent.

"  For  students  this  volume  will  have  abounding  interest,  and  serious
readers,  even  if  not  technically  trained,  will  follow  the  discussions  with
profit.  Professor  Royce  has,  with  Professor  James,  the  rare  gift  of  translat-
ing the  thinking  of  the  scholar  into  the  language  of  the  plain  people."  —
Chicago  Record-Herald.

"  All  of  the  Essays  are  keen,  eloquent,  and  suggestive."  —  Boston  Herald.
"A  BOOK  FOR  EVERY  PARENT  AND THINKER"

Outlines  of  Psychology

AN ELEMENTARY  TREATISE WITH
SOME PRACTICAL  APPLICATIONS

Cloth,  I2mo,  379  pages,  $2^5  net

"  Obviously  a  treatise  upon  psychology  that  deals  with  the  subject  with
this  broad,  free,  strong  handling  is  suggestive  and  constructive ;  helps  us
to  organize  our  ideas ;  throws  out  new  light ;  cannot  be  disregarded  by  the
students  of  the  mind.  The  treatise,  however,  has  a  special  value  in  practical
applications.  These  are  not '  helps  to  the  teacher,'  they  are  criticisms  upon
life  and  society  and  are  helps  to  the  thinker  who  is  a  teacher."  —  W.  E.
CHANCELLOR  in  the  Journal  of  Pedagogy.

"  The  reader  of  this  book,  who,  wishing  to  make  an  elementary  study
of  the  inner  mind  of  the  world,  takes  Professor  Royce  for  his  guide,  will
find  himself  increasingly  in  serious  companionship  with  a  winsome  as  well
as  a  knowing  leader."  —  Chicago  Tribune.


THE MACMILLAN  COMPANY

Publishers  64-66  Fifth  Avenue  New  Tork


Race  Questions,  Provincialism,  and  Other
American  Problems

By  JOSIAH  ROTCE

Professor  of  the  History  of  Philosophy,  Harvard  University;  author
of  "The  Philosophy  of  Loyalty,"  etc.

Cloth,  i2tno,  $1.25  net;  postage  extra

"This  volume  makes  a  plain  and  important  appeal  to  any
intelligent  man  or  woman,  and  should  be  read  by  many."  —  The
Nation.

"  The  point  of  view  and  discussion  are  original  and  refreshing."
• —  Chicago  Record-Herald.

"  A  book  of  original  thought."  —  Argonaut.

"  These  essays  are  fearless  and  profound  studies  of  our  Ameri-
can civilization."  —  Philadelphia  Public  Ledger.

"  It  should  appeal  to  any  person  who  has  the  least  bit  of  inter-
est in  his  country,  as  it  reveals  a  wider  field  of  vision  than  many
enjoy,  every  page  opening  a  vista  of  life." — Boston  Globe.


OTHER  WORKS  BT  THE  SAME  AUTHOR

The  World  and  the  Individual.  Two  volumes

Gifford  Lectures  delivered  before  the  University  at  Aberdeen

First  Series :  The  Four  Historical  Conceptions  of  Being $3.00  net
Second  Series :  Nature,  Man,  and  the  Moral  Order  $2.25  net


THE  MACMILLAN  COMPANY

Publishers  64-66  Fifth  Avenue  New  York


TWO  IMPORTANT  BOOKS  ON  INSURANCE

Insurance  and  the  State

By W. F. GEPHART,  Ph.D.

Professor  of  Economics,  Washington  University;  Author  of
"  Principles  of  Insurance  "

Cloth,  i2tno,  index,  $1.25  net ;  postage  extra

Professor  Gephart  is  already  well  known  as  the  author  of
"  The  Principles  of  Insurance. "  In  the  present  volume  he
presents  with  equal  clearness  a  comprehensive  and  impartial
discussion  of  the  various  relations  of  insurance  to  the  body
politic.  The  arguments  for  and  against  a  State  monopoly  of
insurance  are  carefully  stated,  and  the  diverse  views  of  legis-
lators and  the  insurance  fraternity  on  the  question  of  the
proper  relation  of  the  State  to  the  insurance  business  are
discussed  fairly,  analyzed  thoroughly.  Legislators,  insurance
men,  policy  holders,  and  the  general  public  will,  therefore,
find  in  this  book  an  interesting  description  and  discussion
of  facts  and  conditions  upon  a  knowledge  of  which  they  may
form  their  own  conclusions.

BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR

The  Principles  of  Insurance

Cloth,  izmo,  313  pages,  index,  $f.6o  net ;  postage  extra

"  It  is  a  book  along  distinctively  new  lines  in  that  it  in-
cludes in  one  volume  a  concise  and  logical  treatment  of  the
fundamental  principles  and  practices  of  life  insurance  to-
gether with  a  chapter  on  Health  and  Accident  Insurance
and  a  chapter  on  Employer's  Liability  Insurance."  —  S.  E.
STILWELL,  Ph.D.,  F.A.S.,  Actuary  of  the  Ohio  Insurance
Department.


THE  MACMILLAN  COMPANY

Publishers  64-66  Fifth  Avenue  New  Tork


Sea  Insurance  According  to  British  Statute

By WILLIAM  GOW, M.A., Ph.D.

Author  of  "  Marine  Insurance  "

Cloth,  $4.25  net;  postage  extra

FROM  THE  PREFACE

The  passing  of  the  Marine  Insurance  Act  of  1906  (6  Edw.  VII.  Ch.  41)
was  the  commencement  of  a  new  era  in  the  law  and  practice  of  Marine  In-
surance in  Britain.  ...  It  has  therefore  appeared  to  the  writer  that  in  the
present  state  of  opinion  the  most  useful  kind  of  guide  to  the  law  and  prac-
tice of  Marine  Insurance  would  be  a  detailed  statement  of  the  provisions
of  the  Marine  Insurance  Act  with  a  supplement  consisting  of  the  essential
parts  of  the  leading  judgments  upon  which  the  Act  has  confessedly  been
constructed.  It  is  thought  that  such  a  supplement  may  be  of  value,  not  only
historically,  but  as  affording  an  explanation  of  points  in  the  Act  which  may
in  the  course  of  years  become  less  clear  than  they  were  to  the  framers  of  the
Bill  and  to  the  various  authorities  and  bodies  to  whom  it  was  submitted
before  it  assumed  its  final  form.


CONTENTS

MARINE  INSURANCE  ACT,  1906.

MARINE  INSURANCE  (GAMBLING  POLICIES)  ACT,  1909.

HISTORICAL  SKETCH.

COMMENTARY  ON  THE  MARINE  INSURANCE  ACT,  1906.

NOTE  ON  THE  MARINE  INSURANCE  (GAMBLING  POLICIES)  ACT,  1909.

ALPHABETICAL  LIST  OF  LEADING  CASES.

CHRONOLOGICAL  LIST  OF  LEADING  CASES.

SUBJECT  LIST  OF  LEADING  CASES.

INDEX  OF  CASES  CITED  IN  THE  COMMENTARY.

INDEX  OF  EXTRACTS  FROM  JUDGMENTS  IN  LEADING  CASES  ON  MA-
RINE INSURANCE.

EXTRACTS  FROM  JUDGMENTS  IN  LEADING  CASES.

SUPPLEMENTARY  EXTRACTS  FROM  JUDGMENTS  IN  LEADING  CASES
ON  GENERAL  AVERAGE.

GENERAL  INDEX.


THE MACMILLAN  COMPANY

Publishers  64-66  Fifth  Avenue  New  York


THE GREAT WAR IN ALL ITS PHASES

The  following  books,  covering  all  sides  of  the  war,  make  up  a  small  yet
complete  reference  library,  touching  on  the  history,  policy,  military  strength
and  tactics,  and  the  geographical  peculiarities  of  the  various  powers  in-
volved. Supplementing  these  works  are  many  books  of  a  more  general
character  showing  the  effect  of  war  on  property,  commerce,  and  trade,  and
treating  such  topics  as  the  Far  East  Question  and  international  law.


The  Case  of  Belgium  in  the  Present  War

Paper,  izmo,  $  .25  net

An  account  of  the  violation  of  the  neutrality  of  Belgium  and  of  the  laws  of
war  on  Belgian  territory,  published  for  the  Belgian  delegates  to  the  United
States.

Why  Britain  is  at  War

By Sir  EDWARD  COOK

Paper,  izmo,  $  .JO  net

Set  out  in  brief  form,  from  the  Diplomatic  Correspondence  and  Speeches
of  the  Ministers.

ADAMS,  GEORGE  B. The  Growth  of  the  French  Nation.

Maps izmo,  #1.25  net

ALTHAM,  (Major  General)  E.  A.  Principles  of  War.

VoL  I.  With  maps  bound  separately  .  .  .  8mo,  #3.50  net

BASTABLE,  C.  F.  Theory  of  International  Trade.  4th

Ed. izmo,  $1.00  net

BECA,  (Colonel).  A  Study  of  the  Development  of  In-
fantry Tactics I2mo,  $  .75  net

BETHELL,  (Colonel)  H.  A.  Modern  Artillery  in  the

Field 8mo,  $2.50  net

BUXTON,  NOEL. With  the  Bulgarian  Staff . . . I2mo,  #1.25  net

COXE,  W.  History  of  the  House  of  Austria.  Portraits.

4  vols.  each I2mo,  $1.00  net

CROSS,  ARTHUR  LYON.  A  History  of  England  and

Greater  Britain.  Maps 8mo,  $2.50  net

DENISON,  (Colonel)  GAGE  T.  The  Struggle  for  Im-
perial Unity 8mo,  $2.50  net

A  History  of  Cavalry  from  the  Earliest  Times.

ad  Ed . 8mo,  $3.00  net

Full  descriptions  of  any  of  the  above  books  sent  on  request.


DILKE,  (Sir)  CHARLES. Greater  Britain . . .  8mo.  $1.10  net
FORD,  EDWARD,  and  HOME,  GORDON. England  In-
vaded 8mo,  $2.00  net

GARNETT,  LUCY  M.  J. Home  Life  in  Turkey . .  i2mo,  $1.75  net

Gow,  WILLIAM. Marine  Insurance ....  izmo,  $1.25  net

HASSALL,  ARTHUR. European  History  (476-1910) .  i2mo,  $2.25  net

HENDERSON,  E.  FLAGG. A  Short  History  of  Germany  8mo,  $2.50  net
HENGELMULLER,  (Baron)  LADISLAS. Hungary's  Fight
for  National  Existence. Maps. With  Introductions

by  the  Rt.  Hon.  James  Bryce  and  Colonel  Roosevelt  8mo,  $3.25  net
HERSHEY,  AMOS  S. The  Essentials  of  International

Public  Law 8mo,  $3.00  net

JAMES,  HERMAN  GERLACH. Principles  of  Prussian

Administration i2mo,  $1.50  net

LATIFI,  ALMA. Effects  of  War  on  Property . .  8mo,  $1.50  net
LAWRENCE,  THOMAS  J. A  Handbook  of  Public  Inter-
national Law. 8th  Ed.  rev i6mo,  $  .75  net

War  and  Neutrality  in  the  Far  East . . .  8mo,  $1.10  net

LOWELL,  A.  LAWRENCE. The  Government  of  Eng-
land. Rev.  ed. 2  vols .  8mo,  $4.00  net

LYDE,  LIONEL  W. The  Continent  of  Europe . .  8mo,  $2.00  net

The  Balkan  Peninsula. Maps ....  i2mo,  $1.40  net

Making  of  Nations,  Series  —

France. By  C.  HEADLAM ......  8mo,  £2.00  net

Germany. By  A.  W.  HOLLAND 8mo,  $2.00  net

MARRIOTT,  J.  A.  R. The  Remaking  of  Modern  Eu-
rope (1789-1878) I2mo,  $  .75  net

Makers  of  Modern  Italy i2mo,  $  .50  net

MAURICE, (Sir) FREDERIC. Russo-Turkish War

(1877). Maps izmo,  $1.60  net

OGG,  FREDERICK  A. Social  Progress  in  Contemporary

Europe I2mo,  $1.50  net

The  Government  of  Europe 8mo,  $3.00  net

ORMOND,  S.  W.  T. Peeps  at  Belgium. Col.  111.  . .  i2mo,  $  .55  net

PATTISON,  D. Leading  Figures  in  European  History  .  i2mo,  $1.60  net

PHILLIPS,  W.  A. Modern  Europe  (1815-1909) . .  i2mo,  $1.60  net

PRATT,  S.  C. Saarbruck  to  Paris  (1870). Maps. .  12010,  $1.60  net
RAPPAPORT,  (Dr.)  ANGELO  S. Home  Life  in  Russia.

Ill 8mo,  $1.75  net

Full  descriptions  of  any  of  the  above  books  sent  on  request.


REMINGTON, (Major-General) M. F. Our Cavalry

(British) 8mo,  $1.50  net

RICHARD,  ERNST. History  of  German  Civilization .  8mo,  $2.00  net

ROYCE,  JOSIAH. War  and  Insurance ....

SEDGWICK,  (Capt.)  F.  R. The  Russo-Japanese  War —

First  Period  —  The  Concentration. Maps . . .  i2mo,  $1.60  net

The  Campaign  in  Manchuria  (1904-5). 2  vols. Maps  i2mo,  $3.20  net

SHAW,  STANLEY. William  of  Germany. Frontispiece.  8mo,  $2.50  net
SIDGWICK,  (Mrs.)  ALFRED. Home  Life  in  Germany.

Ill 12010,  $1.50  net

SIME,  J. Geography  of  Europe i2mo,  $  .80  net

SMYTH,  W. Lectures  on  Modern  History . . .  12010,  $1.00  net

SPAIGHT,  J.  N. War  Rights  on  Land ....  8mo,  $3.50  net

Aircraft  in  War 8mo,  $2.00  net

Statesman's  Year  Book. Statistical  and  Historical

Annual  of  the  States  of  the  World,  1914  .  .  .  i2mo,  $3.00  net
STOBART,  (Mrs.)  ST.  GLAIR.  War  and  Women:  From

Experience  in  the  Balkans  and  Elsewhere.  111.  .  12010,  $1.50  net

WALLIS,  B.  C.  A  Geography  of  the  World.  111.  .  .  i2mo,  $  .90  net

WEALE,  B.  L.  PUTNAM. The  Coming  Struggle  in  East-
ern Asia. 2d  Ed. Ill 8mo,  $3.50  net

Manchu  and  Muscovite  (1903) ....  8mo,  $3.00  net

The  Reshaping  of  the  Far  East. 2  vols. 111. .  8mo,  $6.00  net

The  Conflict  of  Colour i2mo,  $2.00  net

The  Truce  in  the  Far  East  and  its  Aftermath .  $3.50  net

IMPORTANT  FICTION  HAVING  A  DIRECT  BEARING
ON  THE  PRESENT  WAR

LUTHER,  MARK  LEE. The  Sovereign  Power. 111. .  i2mo,  $1.30  net

WELLS,  H.  G. The  War  in  the  Air. 111. ...  i2mo,  £1.50  net

ZOLA,  EMILE. The  Downfall i2mo,  $1.50  net

Full  descriptions  of  any  of  the  above  books  sent  on  request.


THE MACMILLAN  COMPANY

Publishers  64-66  Fifth  Avenue  New  York


D/


THE  LIBRARY

UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA
Santa  Barbara


STACK  COLLECTION


THIS  BOOK  IS  DUE  ON  THE  LAST  DATE
STAMPED  BELOW.


=8


30m-8,'65(F6447s4)9482


UC  SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY


A 001  443  748 7
