The Quatrains of Omar Khayyam (Omar Khayyam; E. H. Whinfield (trans.), 1882)
==========================================================
The complete 500 quatrains of Omar Khayyam — Persian text with English verse translation — by E. H. Whinfield (Trubner's Oriental Series, 1882): the full scholarly alternative to Fitzgerald's famous selection, with introduction and notes. Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/quatrains00omaruoft).

Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive

in  2009  with  funding  from

University  of  Toronto


http://www.archive.org/details/quatrainsOOomaruoft


TRUBNER'S   ORIENTAL   SERIES.


"  A  knowledge  of  the  commonplace,  at  least,  of  Oriental  literature,  philo-
sophy, and  religion  is  as  necessary  to  the  general  reader  of  the  present  day
as  an  acquaintance  with  the  Latin  and  Greek  classics  was  a  generation  or  so
ago.  Immense  strides  have  been  made  within  the  present  century  iu  these
branches  of  learning;  Sanskrit  has  been  brought  within  the  range  of  accurate
philology,  and  its  invaluable  ancient  literature  thoroughly  investigated  ;  the
language  and  sacred  books  of  the  Zoroastrians  have  been  laid  bare  ;  Egyptian,
Assyrian,  and  other  records  of  the  remote  past  have  been  deciphered,  and  a
group  of  scholars  speak  of  still  more  recondite  Accadian  and  Hittite  monu-
ments ;  but  the  results  of  all  the  scholarship  that  has  been  devoted  to  these
subjects  have  been  almost  inaccessible  to  the  public  because  they  were  con-
tained for  the  most  part  in  learned  or  expensive  works,  or  scattered  through-
out the  numbers  of  scientific  periodicals.  Messrs.  T&DBHEB  &  Co.,  in  a  spirit
of  enterprise  which  does  them  infinite  credit,  have  determined  to  supply  the
constantly-increasing  want,  and  to  give  in  a  popular,  or,  at  least,  a  compre-
hensive form,  all  this  mass  of  knowledge  to  the  world." — 7


Second  Edition,  post  8vo,  pp.  xxxii.—  748,  with  Map,  cloth,  price  21s.

THE   INDIAN   EMPIRE  :
ITS  PEOPLE,  HISTORY,  AND  PRODUCTS.

By  the  Ho.v.  Sik  W.  \V.  HUNTER,  K.C.S.I.,  C.S.I.,  C.I.E.,  LL.D.,

Member  of  the  Viceroy's  Legislative  Council,

Director-General  of  Statistics  to  the  Government  of  India.

Being  a  Revised  Edition,  brought  up  to  date,  and  incorporating  the  general
results  of  the  Census  of  188 1.

"  It  forms  a  volume  of  more  than  70a  pages,  and  i-  a  nibination  of

literary  condensation  and  research.      It  Rives  a  complete  account  of  the  India;.
Empire,   its  history,    |  -   the  worthy  out<

.seventeen  years  of  labour  with  exceptional  opportunities  for  renderii
fruitful.     Nothing  could  be  more  lucid  than  Sir  William  Hunter'.-  expoeitioi
economic  and  political  condition  of  India  at  the  present  time,  or  more  in;
than  his  scholarly  history  of  the  India  of  the  past.'' — 1'lu   I


TRUSTER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES.


THE   r<>U.<>\\l\<;    WORKS  HAVE  ALREADY  APPEARED:—
Third  Edition,  post  Bvo,  cloth,  pp.  xvi.—  428,  price  16s.

ESSAYS  ON  THE  SACRED  LANGUAGE,  WRITINGS,

AND  RELIGION  OF  THE  PARSIS.

BY  MARTIN  HAUG,  Ph.D.,

Late  of  the  Universities  of  Tubingen,  Giittingen,  and  Bonn  ;  Superintendent

of  Sanskrit  Studies,  and  Professor  of  Sanskrit  in  the  Poona  College.

Edited  and  Enlaboed  by  Dr.  E.  W.  WEST.

To  which  is  added  a  Biographical  Memoir  of  the  late  Dr.  Haug

by  Prof.  E.  P.  Evans.

I.  History  of  the  Researches  into  the  Sacred  Writings  and  Religion  of  the

1 '.11  sis,  from  the  Earliest  Times  down  to  the  Present.
II.  Languages  of  the  Parsi  Scriptures.

III.  The  Zend-Avesta,  or  the  Scripture  of  the  Parsis.

IV.  The  Zoroastrian  Keligion,  as  to  its  Origin  and  Development.

"  '  Essays  on  the  Sacred  Language,  Writings,  and  Religion  of  the  Parsis,'  l>y  the
late  Dr.  Martin  Bang,  edited  by  Dr.  B.  W.  West.  The  author  intended,  on  his  return
from  India,  to  expand  the  materials  contained  in  this  work  into  a  comprehensive
account  of  the  Zoroastrian  religion,  but  the  design  was  frustrated  by  his  untimely
death.  We  have,  however,  in  a  concise  and  readable  form,  a  history  of  the  researches
into  the  Bacred  writings  and  religion  of  the  Parsis  from  the  earliest  times  down  to
the  present— a  dissertation  on  the  lamruagea  of  tbe  Tarsi  Scriptures,  a  translation
of  the  Zend  A  vesta,  or  the  Scripture  of  the  l'arsis,  and  a  dissertation  on  the  Zoroas-
trian religion,  with  especial  reference  to  its  origin  and  development." — Times.


Post  8vo,  cloth,  pp.  viii. — 176,  price  7s.  6d.

TEXTS    FROM    THE    BUDDHIST    CANON
COMMONLY  KNOWN  AS  "  DHAMMAPADA."

With  Accompanying  Narratives.

Translated  from  the  Chinese  by  S.  SEAL,  B.A.,  Professor  of  Chinese,

University  College,  London.

The  Dhammapada,  as  hitherto  known  by  the  Pali  Text  Edition,  as  edited
by  Fansboll,  by  Max  Midler's  English,  and  Albrecht  Weber's  German
translations,  consists  only  of  twenty-six  chapters  or  sections,  whilst  the
Chinese  version,  or  rather  recension,  as  now  translated  by  Mr.  Beal,  con-
sists of  thirty-nine  sections.  The  students  of  Pali  who  possess  Fausboll's
text,  or  either  of  the  above  named  translations,  will  therefore  needs  want
Mr.  Beal's  English  rendering  of  the  Chinese  version;  the  thirteen  above-
named  additional  sections  not  being  accessible  to  them  in  any  other  form  ;
for,  even  if  they  understand  Chinese,  the  Chinese  original  would  be  un-
obtainable by  them.

"Mr.  Beal's  rendering  of  the  Chinese  translation  is  a  most  valuable  aid  to  the
critical  study  of  the  work.  It  contains  authentic  texts  gathered  from  ancient
canonical  l»'oks,  and  generally  connected  with  some  incident  in  the  history  of
Buddha.  Their  great  interest,  however,  consists  in  the  light  which  they  throw  upon
everyday  life  in  India  at  the  remote  period  at  which  they  were  written,  and  upon
the  method  of  teaching  adopted  by  the  founder  of  the  religion.  The  method
employed  was  principally  parable,  and  the  simplicity  of  the  tales  and  the  excellence
of  the  morals  inculcated,  as  well  as  the  strange  hold  which  they  have  retained  upon
the  minds  of  millions  of  people,  make  them  a  very  remarkable  study."-   i

"  Mr.  Deal,  by  making  it  accessible  in  an  English  dress,  has  added  to  the  great  ser-
vices he  has  already  rendered  to  the  comparative  study  of  religious  history." — Academy.

•'Valuable  as  exhibiting  the  doctrine  of  the  Buddhists  in  its  purest,  least  adul-
terated form,  it  brings  the  modern  reader  face  to  face  with  that  simplecreed  and  rule
of  conduct  which  won  its  way  over  the  minds  of  myriads,  and  which  is  now  nominally
professed  by  145  millions,  who  have  overlaid  its  austere  simplicity  with  innumerable
ceremonies,  forgotten  its  maxims,  perverted  its  teaching,  and  so  inverted  its  leading
principle  that  a  religion  whose  founder  denied  a  God,  now  worships  that  founder  as
*  god  himself." — Scotsman.


tku/ix/:as  ORIENTAL     .


ad  Edition,  |  loth,  pp.  rxiv.  -360,  pries  km.  I  d

THE  HISTORY  OF  INDIAN  LITERATURE.

r.v  AliBBECHT  WEBER.

Translated  from  the  Second  German  Edition  by  Johh  Mash,  M.A.,  and
laioi>OB  Zaohabiax,  Ph.]  >.,  with  the  Banotioo  of  the  Author.

Dr.  Buhlbr,  Inspector  of  Schools  in  India,  writes : — "  When  I  was  Pro
fomor of  Orients]  Languages  in  Elphinstone  College,  I  Frequently  felt  the
wanl  of  rooh  ■  work  to  wiiicli  I  could  refer  the  students."

Professor  Cowbll,  of  Oambridge,  writes  s— "It  will  be  espeoially  useful
to  the  students  in  our  Indian  colleges  and  universities.  1  osed  to  long  for
such  a  book  when  I  was  teaching  in  Calcutta.  Hindu  students  arc  intensely
interested  in  the  history  of  Sanskrit  literature,  and  this  volume  will  supply
them  with  all  they  want  on  the  subject."

Professor  WHITNEY,  Yale  College,  Newhaven,  Conn.,  U.S.A.,  writes:—
"  I  was  one  of  the  class  to  whom  the  work  was  originally  given  in  the  form
of  academic  lectures.  At  theii  first  appearance  they  were  bj  fax  the  most
le.ii  led  and  able  treatment  of  their  subject  ;  and  with  their  recent  additions
they  still  maintain  decidedly  the  same  rank."

•■  [a  perhaps  the  most  comprehensive  and  lucid  survey  of  Sanskrit  literature
extant.  The  essays  contained  in  the  volume  were  originally  delivered  as  academic
lectures,  and  at  tiio  time  of  their  first  publication  were  acknowledged  to  be  by  far

I  si  learned  and  able  treatment  of  the  subject.     They  have  new  been   brought

u)i  to  date  by  the  addition  of  all  the  most  important  results  of  recent  research.  —


Post  8vo,  cloth,  pp.  xii. — 198,  accompanied  by  Two  Language
Maps,  price  7s.  6d.

A  SKETCH  OF
THE  MODERN  LANGUAGES  OF  THE  EAST  INDIES.

liv  ROBERT  N.  CUST.

The  Author  has  attempted  to  fill  up  a  vacuum,  the  inconvenience  of
which  pressed  itself  on  his  notice.  Much  had  heen  written  about  the
languages  of  the  East  Indies,  but  the  extent  of  our  present  knowledge  had
not  even  been  brought  to  a  focus.  It  occurred  to  him  that  it  might  be  of
use  to  others  to  publish  in  an  arranged  form  the  notes  which  he  had  collected
for  his  own  edification.

-  implies  a  deficiency  which  lias  long  been  felt." — Times.
"  The  book  before  us  is  then  a  valuable  contribution  to  philological  science.     It
passes  under  review  a  vast  number  of  languages,  and  it  gives,  or  professes  to  give,  in
every  ca  ind  substance  of  the  opinions  and  judgments  of  the  bestdnfomied

writers." — Saturday  Jieview.

Second  Corrected  Edition,  post  8vo,  pp.  xii. — 116,  cloth,  price  5s.

THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

A  Poem.     Bt  KALIDASA.

Translated  from  the  Sanskrit  into  English  Verse  by
Ralph  T.  H.  Griffith,  M.A.

"A  very  spirited  rendering  of  the  Kumdrasambhava,  which  was  first  published
twenty.six  years  ago,  and  which  we  are  glad  to  see  made  once  more  accessible." —
Tint*.

"  Mr.  Griffith's  very  spirited  rendering  is  well  known  to  most  who  are  at  all
interested  in  Indian  literature,  or  enjoy  the  tenderness  of  feeling  and  rich  creativo
imagination  of  its  author."— Indian  Antiquary.

"  WO  are  very  glad  to  welcome  a  second  edition  of  Professor  Griffith's  admirable
translation.     Few  translations  deserve  u  secoud  edition  bett;r." — Athena  urn.


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES.


Tost  8vo,  pp.  4^2,  clotli,  price  j6s.

A  CLASSICAL   DICTIONARY  OF  HINDU  MYTHOLOGY
AND  RELIGION,  GEOGRAPHY,  HISTORY,  AND
,       LITERATURE.

By  JOHN  DOWSON,  M.R.A.S.,

Late  Professor  of  Hindustani,  Staff  College.
"This  not  only  forms  an  indispensable  book  of  referei  uts  of  Indian

literature,  but  is  also  of  greai  general  interest,  as  it  gives  in  a  com

:   leform  all  that  need  be  known  about  the  personages  of  Hindu  myl

0  familiar,  but  of  whom  so  little  is  known  outside  the  limited

"  it  is  no  Blight  gain  when  such  subjects  are  treated  fairly  and  fully  in  a  moderate
space;  and  we  need  only  add  that  the  few  wants  which  we  may  hope  to  Bee  supplied

in  new  editions  detract  but  little  from  the  general  excellence  of  Mr.  Dowson's  work.'
— Saturday  R

Post  8vo,  with  View  of  Mecca,  pp.  cxii. — 172,  cloth,  price  9s.

SELECTIONS  FROM  THE  KORAN.
By  EDWARD  WILLIAM  LANE.

Translator  of  "  The  Thousand  and  One  Nights;"  &c,  *c.

A  New  Edition,  Revised  and  Enlarged,  with  an  Introduction  by

Stanley  Lane  Poole.

"...  Ha5;  been  Ion,;  esteemed  in  this  country  as  the  compilation  of  one  of  the
greatest  Arabic  scholars  of  the  time,  the  late  Mr.  Lane,  the  well-known  translator  "t"
the  'Arabian  Nights.'  .  .  .  The  present  editor  has  enhanced  the  value  of  his
relative's  work  by  divesting  the  text  of  :\  great  deal  of  extraneous  matter  introduced
by  way  of  comment,  and  prefixing  an  introduction." — T

"  Mr.  Poole  is  both  a  generous  and  a  learned  biographer.  .  .  .  Mr.  Poole  tells  us
the  facts  .   .  .   so  far  as  it  1-  in .ssjl>le  for  industry  an. 1  rail  lertain  them,

and  lor  literary  skill  to  present  them  in  a  condensed  and  readable  f<jrui."—£it'jtish-
man,  Calcutta.

Post  8vo,  pp.  vi. — 368,  cloth,  price  14s.

MODERN  INDIA  AND  THE  INDIANS,

BEING  A  SERIES  OF  IMPRESSIONS,  NOTES,  AND  ESSAYS.

By  MONIER  WILLIAMS,  D.C.L.,
Hon.  LL.D.  of  the  University  of  Calcutta,  Hon.  Member  of  the  Bombay  Asiatic
Society,  Boden  Professor  of  Sanskrit  in  the  University  of  Oxford.
Third  Edition,  revised  and  augmented  hy  considerable  Additions,
with  Illustrations  and  a  Map.
"  In  this  volume  we  have  the  thoughtful  impressions  of  a  thoughtful  man  on  some
of  the  most  important  questions  connected  with  our  Indian  Empire \n  en-
lightened observant  man.  travelling  among  an  enlightened  observant  people,  1'
Monier  Williams  has  brought  before  the  public  in  a  pleasant  form  m<  ire  of  the  manners
and  customs  of  the  Queen's  Indian  subjects  than  we  ever  remember  to  have  seen  in
any  one  work.     He  not  only  deserves  the  thanks  of  every  Englishman  for  this  able
contribution  to  the  study  of  Modern  India — a  subject  with  which  we  should  be
specially  familiar — but  he  deserves  the  thanks  of  every  Indian,  Parsee  or  Hindu,
Buddhist  and  Moslem,  for  his  clear  exposition  of  their  manners,  their  creeds,  and
their  necessities." — Times.

Post  8vo,  pp.  xliv. — 376,  cloth,  price  14s.

METRICAL  TRANSLATIONS  FROM  SANSKRIT
WRITERS.

With  an  Introduction,  many  Prose  Versions,  and  Parallel  Passages  from
Classical  Authors.
By  J.  MUIR,  CLE.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,  Ph.D.
"...  An  agreeable  introduction  to  Hindu  poetrv." — 7"

"...  A  volume  which  maybe  taken  as  a  fair  illustration  alike  of  the  religions
and  moral  sentiments  and  of  the  legendary  lore  of  the  best  Sanskrit  writers.'' —
Edinburgh  Daily  Jieview.


7     ,     '.


ad  Edition,  post  8vo,  pp.  sivi     344,010th,  price  lOd  od.

THE      GULISTAN;

Ob,  ROSE  GARDEN  OF  si  IKK.  11  Misll  uri>-I>IN  SADI  OP8HIKAZ.

Traaulated  foe  tl  ■  into  Prose  and  Verse,  with  an  Introductory

Preface,  and  a  life  <>f  the  Author,  from  the  Atish  Kadah,

Bt  EDWARD  B.   EASTW1CK,  C.R.,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  .M.k.A.s.

"  It  is  a  very  fall  f  the  original." — Timet.

"  Tlio  new  edition  has  long  1 n  desired,  and  will  be  welcomed  by  all  who  talcs

any  interest  in  Oriental  poetry.  iris  a  typical  Persian  verse-book  of  the

■  order.     Mr.  1  bymed  translation  ...  has  long  established  itself  in

finest  work." — AcaiUmy.
"  It  is  lnjth  faithfully  and  gracefully  executed."—  Tablet.


In  Two  Volumes,  post  8vo,  pp.  viii. — 408  and  viii. — 348,  cloth,  price  28s.

MISCELLANEOUS    ESSAYS    RELATING     TO    INDIAN

SUBJECTS.

By.  BRIAN  HOUGHTON  HODGSON,  Esq.,  F.H.S.,

ding  Member  of  tbe  Institute ;  Chevalier
■  I  tbe  Legion  ol  Honour  ;  .ate  British  Minister  at  tne  Court  <<f  Nepal,  Ac.,  kc.

CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  I.
Section  I.— On  the  Koccb,   Bodo,   and   Dhimal   'I'rilies.— Part   I.    Vocabulary. —
Part  II.  Grammar. — Part   III.  Their  Origin,  Location,  Numbers,  Creed,  Customs,

Character,  and  Condition,  with  a  General  Description  ot  the  Climate  they  dwell  in
—Appendix.

.  II      On  Himalayan  Ethnology. — I.  Comparative  Vocabulary  of  the  Lan
!  of  the  Broken  Tribes  of  Nepal. —  II.  Vocabulary  of  the  Dialects  of  the  Kirant
go.-  III.  Grammatical  analysis  Of  the  Vayu  Language.    The  Vayu  Grammar.
IV.   Analysis  of  the  Bahing  Dialect  ol  the  Kiraiiti  Language.     The  lialiing  Gram-
mar.— V.  (m  the  Vayu  or  Hayu  'tribe  of  the  Central  Himalaya. — VI.  On  tue  Kiranti
Trihe  of  the  Central  Himalaya.

CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  II.
Section-  HI. — On  the  Aborigines  of  North-Eastern  India.    Comparative  Vocabulary
of  the  Tibetan,  Bodo,  and  Garo  Tongues.

is  (V. — Aborigines  of  the  North-Eastern  Frontier,
ton  V. — Aborigines  of  the  Eastern  Frontier.

oh  VI  —The  Indo-Chinese  Borderers,  and  their  connection  with  the  Hima-
I  .  parative  Vocabulary  «.f  Indo-Chinese  Borderers  In  Arakan.

I  native  Vocabulary  ot  Indo-Chinese  Borderers  in  Teuasserim.

m  VII.—  The  Mongolian  Affinities  of  the  Caucasians. — Comparison  and  Ana-
lysis of  Caucasian  and  Mongolian  Words.
Section  VIII.— P.  of  Tibetans.

Section-  IX. — The  Aborigines  of  Central  India. — Comparative  Vocabulary  of  the
Aboriginal  Lai  ofO  ntral  India. — Aborigines  i.f  the  Eastern  Ghats. — Vocabu-

lary of  some  ot  tbe  Dialeots  of  the  Hill  and  Wandering  Tribes  in  the  Northern  Sircars.
of  the  Nilgirls,  with  Remarks  on  their  Affinities. — Supplement  to  the
Nilgirian  Vocabularies. — The  Aborigines  of  Southern  India  and  Ceylon.

v  X — Route  of  Nepalese  Mission  to  Pekin,  with  Remarks  on  the  Water-
Shed  and  Plateau  of  Tibet.

Bxctioh  XI.     Route   from   Kathmandu,  the  Capital  of  Nepal,  to  Darjeeling  in
Sihim. — Memorandum  relative  to  the  Seven  Coais  of  Nep&l.

.  XII. — Some  Accounts  of  the  Systems  of  Law  and  Police  as  recognised  in
the  State  of  Nepal.

Section  XIII. — The  Native  Method  of  making  the  Paper  denominated  Hindustan,

Nepalese.

EOK  XIV.— Pre-eminence  of  the  Vernaculars;  or,  the  Anglicists  Answered;
I  be!    ucation  of  the  People  of  India,

"  For  the  study  ol  I  India  Mr.  Brian  Hodgson's  '  Miscellane-

iys  '  will  be  found  very  valuable  both  to  the    hilului'ist  aud  the  ethnologist."

/


TR  tr II. VERS  ORIENTAL  SERIES.


Third  Edition,  Two  Vols.,  post  8vo,  pp.  viii. — 268  and  viii. — 326,  cloth,
price  2I8.

THE  LIFE  OR  LEGEND  OF  GAUDAMA,

THE  BUDDHA  OF  THE  BURMESE.     "With  Annotations.

The  Ways  to  Neihban,  and  Notice  on  the  Phongyies  or  Burmese  Monks.

By  the  Right  Rkv.  P.  EIGANDET,

Bishop  of  Ramatha,  Vicar-Apostolic  of  Ava  and  Pegu.

"The  work  is  furnished  with  copious  notes,  wnich  not  only  illustrate  the  subject-
in  it  t.r,  but  form  a  perfect  encyclopedia  of  liuddhist  lore." — Timi   .

"  A  work  which  will  furnish  European  students  of  Buddhism  with  a  most  valualilo
help  in  the  prosecution  of  their  Investigations." — Edinburgh  Daily  Review.

"Bishop  Bigandet's  invaluable  work." — Indian  Antiquary.

"Viewed  to  this  light,  its  importance  is  sufficient  to  place  students  of  the  subject
under  a  deep  obligation  to  its  author." — Calcutta  Revieie.

"This  work  is  one  of  the  greatest  authorities  upon  Buddhism." — Dublin  Review.


Post  8vo,  pp.  xxiv.  — 420,  cloth,  price  18s.

CHINESE    BUDDHISM.

A  VOLUME  OF  SKETCHES,  HISTORICAL  AND  CRITICAL.

By  J.  EDKINS,  D.D.

Author  of  "  China's  Place  in  Philology,"  "Religion  in  China,"  &c,  &c.

"  It  contains  a  vast  deal  of  important  information  on  the  subject,  such  as  is  only
to  be  gained  by  long-continued  study  on  the  spot." — Athena: am.

"  Upon  the  whole,  we  know  of  no  work  comparable  to  it  for  the  extent  of  its
original  research,  and  the  simplicity  with  which  this  complicated  system  of  philo-
sophy, religion,  literature,  and  ritual  is  set  forth." — British  Quarterly  Review.

"  The  whole  volume  is  replete  with  learning.  ...  It  deserves  most  careful  study
from  all  interested  in  the  history  of  the  religions  of  the  world,  and  expressly  of  those
who  are  concerned  in  the  propagation  of  Christianity.  Dr.  Edkins  notices  in,  terms
of  just  condemnation  the  exaggerated  praise  bestowed  upon  Buddhism  by  recent
English  writers." — Record.


Post  8vo,  pp.  496,  cloth,  price  10s.  6d.

LINGUISTIC   AND   ORIENTAL   ESSAYS.

"Written  from  the  Year  1846  to  1878.
By  ROBERT  NEEDHAM  CUST,

Late  Member  of  Her  Majesty's  Indian  Civil  Service  ;  Hon.  Secretary  to

the  Royal  Asiatic  Society;

and  Author  of  "The  Modern  Languages  of  the  East  Indies."

"  We  know  none  who  has  described  Indian  life,  especially  the  life  of  the  natives,
with  so  much  learning,  sympathy,  and  literary  talent." — Academy.

"  They  seem  to  us  to  be  full  of  suggestive  and  original  remarks." — St.  James's  Gazette.

"  His  book  contains  a  vast  amount  of  information.  The  result  of  thirty-five  years
of  inquiry,  reflection,  and  speculation,  and  that  on  subjects  as  full  of  fascination  aa
of  f 1  for  thought."— Tablet.

"  Exhibit  such  a  thorough  acquaintance  with  the  history  and  antiquities  of  India
as  to  entitle  him  to  speak  as  one  having  authority." — Hamburgh  Daily  Review.

"  The  author  speaks  with  the  authority  of  personal  experience It  is  this

Constant  association  with  the  country  and  the  people  which  gives  such  a  vividness
to  many  of  the  pages." — Athenaeum.


■


•  •>.  pp.  civ.     348,  eloth,  pi  1.     1

BUDDHIST   BIRTH  STORIES;    or,  JaLaka  Tales.

Th.-  Oldest  Collection  of  Folk-lore.  Extant  :

BEING    THE    -I  ATA  K  ATT  II  .WAN  N  A  N  A,

For  the  liist  time  Edited  in  the  original  J'.ili.

I'.v  V.  FATJSBOLL;

And  Translated  by  T.   W.  1 1 u  % .-;  Davids.

Translation.    Volume  I.

"These  are  tales  supposed  to  have  been  told  by  the  Buddha  of  wbat  he  liad  seen
and  heard  in  his  previous  births.     They  are  probably  the  m  otatives

of  the  original  Aryan  Btorles  from  winch  sprang  the  folk-lore  of  Europe  as  well  as
India.  The  Introduction  contains  a  most  Interesting  disquisition  on  the  migrations
.  tracing  their  rea]  In  the  various  groups  <>f  folk-lore  legends.

Among  other  old  friends,  we  meet  with  a  version  of  the  Judgmentof  Solomon."

"It  is  now  some  years  since  Mr.  Rhys  Davi  i  his  right  to  he  heard  on

this  subject  by  his  able  article  on  Buddhism  in  the  new  edition  of  the  '  Kucyclopajdia
Britannic  1.' "  -Leedi  8f<

"All  who  are  interested  in  Buddhist  literature  ought  to  feel  deeply  indebted  to
Mr.  Rhys  Davids,  His  well-established  reputation  as  a  Pali  scholar  is  a  sufficient
guarantee  for  the  fidelity  of  his  version,  and  the  style  of  his  translations  is  deserving
of  high  praise." — Aca

•'  No  more  competent  expositor  of  Buddhism  could  be  found  than  Mr.  Rhys  Davids.

in  the  Jataka  book  we  have,  then,  a  priceless   rd   of  the  earliest  imaginative

literature  of  our  race;  and  ...  it  presents  to  us  a  nearly  complete  picture  of  the
social  life  and  customs  and  popular  beliefs  of  the  common  people  of  Aryan  tribes,
n  lated  to  ourselves,  just  as  they  were  passing  through  the  first  stages  of
civilisation. " — St.  James's  Gazette.


Post  8vo,  pp.  xxviii. — 362,  cloth,  price  14s.

A    TALMUDIC    MISCELLANY;

Oh,  A  THOUSAND  AND  ONE  EXTRACTS  FROM  THE  TALMUD,

THE  MIDRASHIM,  AND  THE  KABRALAH.

Compiled  and  Translated  by  PAUL  ISAAC  HERSHON,

Author  of  "  Genesis  According  to  the  Talmud,"  &o.

With  Notes  and  Copious  Indexes.

"To  obtain  in  so  coneise  and  handy  a  form  as  this  volume  a  general  idea  ol  the
Talmud  is  a  boon  to  Christians  at  least." — Times.

"  Us   peculiar  and  popular  character  will  make  it  attractive  to  general  readers.
Mr    Herahon  is  a  vory  competent  scholar.  .  .  .  Contains  samples  of  the  good,  had,
and  indifferent,  and    especially  extracts   that  throw  light  upon  the  Scriptures."
British  Quarterly  Bi

"  Will  convey  to  English  readers  a  more  complete  and  truthful  notion  of  the
Talmud  than  any  other  work  that  has  yet  appeared." — Daily  News.

"  Without  overlooking  in  the  slightest  the  several  attractions  of  the  previous
volumes  of  the  '  Oriental  Series,'  we  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  this  surpasses
tli.  in  all  in  interest." — Edinburgh  Imii>i  Review.

"  Mr.  Sershon  has  .  .  .  thus  given  English  readers  what  is,  we  believe,  a  fair  set
of  specimens  which  they  can  test  for  themselves." — The  Recm  I,

"This  hook  is  by  far  the  best  fitted  in  the  present  state  of  knowledge  to  enable  the
general  reader  to  gain  a  fair  and  unbiassed  conception  of  the  multifarious  contents
of  the  wonderful  miscellany  which  can  only  be  truly  understood — so  Jewish  pride
r- — by  the  lifelong  devotion  of  scholars  of  the  Chosen  People." — Inquirer.

"  The  value  and  Importance  of  this  volume  consisi  in  the  fact  that  scarcely  a  single

extract  is  given   in  its  pages  but  throws  some  light,  direct  or  refracted,  upon  those
Scriptures  which  are  the  cm  in  on  heritage:  of  .lew  and  Christian  alike." — John  Bull.

1  It  i  1      imi  n  of  Bebrew  scholarship;  a  monument  of  learned,  loving,

light-giving  labour." — Jewish  Herald,  t


TRUBlfER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES.


Post  8vo,  pp.  xii.— 228,  cloth,  price  7s.  6d.

THE  CLASSICAL  POETRY  OF  THE  JAPANESE.

By    BASIL    HALL    CHAMBERLAIN,

Author  of  "  Yeigo  Henkaku  Shiran."

"  A  very  curious  Tolume.  The  author  has  manifestly  devoted  much  labour  to  the
task  of  studying  the  poetical  literature  of  the  Ja]  mese,  and  rendering  characteristic
aa  into  English  verse." — Daily  .'

"  Mr.  Chamberlain's  volume  is,  so  tar  as  we  are  aware,  the  first  attempt  which  has
been  made  to  interpret  the  literature  of  the  Ja]  Western  world.     It  Isto

the  classical  poetry  of  Old  Japan  that  we  must  turn  for  indigenous  Japanese  thought,
and  in  the  volume  before  us  we  have  a  selection  from  that  poetry  rendered  into
graceful  English  verse."—  i

"It  is  undoubtedly  one  of  the  best  translations  of  lyric  literature  which  has
appeared  during  the  close  of  the  last  year." — Celeetia

"  Mr.  Chamberlain  set  himself  a  difficult  task  when  he  undertook  to  reproduce
Japanese  poel  ry  in  an  English  form.  Hut  he  has  evidently  laboured  con  amort,  and
his  efforts  are  successful  to  a  degree." — London  and  China  Express.


Post  8vo,  pp.  xii. — 164,  cloth,  price  10s.  6d.

THE  HISTORY  OF  ESARHADDON  (Son  of  Sennacherib),
KING  OF  ASSYRIA,  B.C.  681-668.

Translated  from  the  Cuneiform  Inscriptions  upon  Cylinders  and  Tablets  in
the  British  Museum  Collection ;  together  with  a  Grammatical  Analysis
of  each  Word,  Explanations  of  the  Ideographs  by  Extracts  from  the
Bi-Liugual  Syllabaries,  and  List  of  Eponyms,  &c.

By  ERNEST  A.  BUDGE,  B.A.,  M.R.A.S.,
Assyrian  Exhibitioner,  Christ's  College,  Cambridge.

"Students  of  scriptural  archaeology  will  also  appreciate  the  '  History  of  Esar-
haddon.' " — Times.

"  There  is  much  to  attract  the  scholar  in  this  volume.  It  does  not  pretend  to
popularise  studies  which  are  yet  in  their  infancy.  Its  primary  object  is  to  translate,
but  it  does  not  assume  to  be  more  than  tentative,  and  it  offers  both  to  the  professed
Assyriologist  and  to  the  ordinary  non-Assyriological  Semitic  scholar  the  means  of
controlling  its  results." — Academy.

"Mr.  Budge's  book  is,  of  course,  mainly  addressed  to  Assyrian  scholars  and
students.  They  are  not,  it  is  to  be  feared,  a  very  numerous  class.  But  the  more
thanks  are  due  to  him  on  that  account  for  the  way  in  which  he  has  acquitted  himself
in  his  laborious  task." — Tablet.


Post  8vo,  pp.  448,  cloth,  price  21s.

THE    MESNEVI

(Usually  known  as  The  Mesneviyi  Sherif,  or  Holy  Mesneti)

of

MEVLANA   (OUR  LORD)  JELALU  'D-DIN  MUHAMMED  ER-RUML

Book  the  First.

Together  with  some  Account  of  the  Life  and  Acts  of  the  Author.

of  his  Ancestors,  and  of  his  Descendants.

Illustrated  by  a  Selection  of  Characteristic  Anecdotes,  as  Collected

by  their  Historian,

Mevlana  Shemsu-'D-Din  Ahmed,  el  Eflaki,  el  'Aeifi.

Translated,  and  the  Poetry  Versified,  in  English,

By   JAMES   W.    REDHOUSE,    M.R.A.  S.,   &c.

"  A  complete  treasury  of  occult  Oriental  lore." — Saturday  Review.

"This  book  will  be  a  very  valuable  help  to  the  reader  ignorant  of  Persia,  who  i9
desirous  of  obtaining  an  insight  into  a  very  important  department  of  the  literature
extant  in  that  language." — Tablet.


CO,  pp.  wi. -  280,  cloth,  price  6s.

EASTERN    PROVERBS   AND   EMBLEMS

I I.I.i  stb  \llN«.   <  11. i>  T]

Bi  Rev.  J.  U
If  ember  of  the  Bengal  Asiatic  Society,  F.R.G

iad  attentive
"  It  is  full  of  interesting  mat

Tost  8vo,  pp.  viii. — 270,  clotb,  price  7s.  6d.

INDIAN     POETRY;

Containing  a  New  Edition  of  tin-  "  Indiaj  from  the  Sanscrit

of  the  "Gita  Govinda"  of  Jayadeva;  Two  Books  from  "The  Iliad  of
India"  (Mahabharata),  "Proverbial  Wisdom"  from  the  Shlokas  of  the
Hitopadesa,  and  other  Oriental  Poems,
];v  EDWIN  ABNOLD,  O.S.L,  Aathor  of  "The  Light  of  Asia."

'•  In  this  new  vol  b,  Trtlbners  Oriental  Series,  Mr.  Edwin  Arnold  docs

rvice  by  illusl  ough  the  medium  of  his  musical  English  melodies,

the  power  of  Indiai  ir  European  1

re.      Mr.  Arnold  will  have  introduced  it  among  |
Nothing  could  be  more  graceful  and  delicate  than  tl
which  Krishna  la  portrayed  in  the  gradual  process  of  being  weaned  by  the  love  of

'  Beautiful  Radha,  jasmine-bosomed  Radha,'
from  the  allurements  of  the  forest  nymphs,  in  whom  the  five  senses  are  typified." —

'•  No  other  English  poet  lias  ever  thrown  his  genius  and  his  art  so  thoroughly  into
the  work  of  trai  Blating  Eastern  ideas -as  Mr.  Arnold  has  done  in  ids  splendid  para-
phrases of  language  contained  in  these  miyhty  epics."— Daily  Telegraph.

"The  -  h  imagery  of  Eastern  luxurious!

air  seems  laden  with  the  spicy  odours  of  the  tropics,  and  the  verse  has  a  richness  ami
t  melody  sufficient  to  captivate  I  the  dullest." — Stan*

"The  translator,  while  producing  a  very  enjoyable  poem,  has  adhered  with  toler-
able fidelity  to

"We  certainly  wish  Mr.  Arnold  success  in  his  attempt  'to  popularise  Indian
classics,'  that  being,  as  Ids  preface  tells  us,  the  goal  towards  which  he  bends  his
efforts." — Allen'*  Indian  Mail.


Post  8vo,  pp.  xvi. — 296,  cloth,  price  10s.  6d.

THE  MIND  OF  MENCIUS  ;
Ok,  POLITICAL  ECONOMY  FOUNDED  UPON  MOEAL

PHILOSOPHY.

A  Systematic  Digest  of  the  Doctrines  of  the  Chinese  Philosopher
Men  ci  us.

Translated  from  the  Original  Text  and  Classified,  with
Comments  and  Explanations,

By  •  KliXST  FABER,  Rhenish  Mission  Society.

Translated  from  the  German,  with  Additional  Notes,

By  the  Rev.  A.  B.  HUTCHINSON,  C.M.S.,  Church  Mission,  Hong  Kong.

"  Mr.  Faber  is  already  well  known  in  the  field  of  I  ids  digest  of

the  doctrines  of  (  onfucius.  The  value  of  this  work  will  be  perceived  when  it  is
remembered  that   at  no  time  since  relation-  >  en   China  and   the

West  has  the  former  been  so  powerful-  we  had  almost  said  aggressive— as  now.
For  those  who  wdll  give  it  careful  study,  Mr.  Faber's  work  is  one  of  the  most
valuable  of  the  excellent  series  to  which  it  belongs." — Kature.

A   2


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES.


Post  8vo,  pp.  336,  cloth,  price  16s.

THE    RELIGIONS  OF    INDIA.
By  A.  BARTH.

Translated  from  the  French  with  the  authority  and  assistance  of  the  Author.

The  author  has,  at  the  request  of  the  publishers,  considerably  enlarged
the  work  for  the  translator,  and  has  added  the  literature  of  the  subject  to
date  ;  the  translation  may,  therefore,  be  looked  upon  as  an  equivalent  of  a
new  ami  improved  edition  of  the  original.

"  Is  not  only  a  valuable  manual  of  the  religions  of  India,  which  marks  a  distinct
step  in  tin  treatment  of  the  subject,  but  also  a  useful  work  of  reference."— Academy.

"This  volume  is  a  reproduction,  with  corrections  and  additions,  of  an  article

contributed  by  the  learned  author  two  years  ago  to  the  '  Encyclopedic  des  Sciences

Religieuses.'    "it  attracted   much   notice  when  it   first   appeared,   and    is  generally

admitted  to  present  the  best  summary  extant  of  the  vast  subject  with  which  it

."—Tablet.

"  This  is  not  only  on  the  whole  the  best  but  the  only  manual  of  the  religions  of
India,  apart  from  Buddhism,  which  we  have  in  English.  The  present  work  .  .  .
-bows  not  only  great  knowledge  of  the  facts  and  power  of  clear  exposition,  but  also
great  insight  into  the  inner  history  and  the  deeper  meaning  of  the  great  religion,
for  it  is  in  reality  only  one,  which  it  proposes  to  describe." — Modem  Revii  v.

"  The  merit  of  the  work  has  been  emphatically  recognised  by  the  most  authoritative
Orientalists,  both  in  this  country  and  on  the  continent  of  Europe,  But  probably
there  are  few  Indianists  (if  we  may  use  the  word)  who  would  not  derive  a  good  deal
of  information  from  it,  and  especially  from  the  extensive  bibliography  provided  in
the  notes." — Dublin  Review.

"  Such  a  sketch  M.  Barth  has  drawn  with  a  master-hand."—  Critic  (New  York).


Post  8vo,  pp.  viii.  — 152,  cloth,  price  6s.

HINDU   PHILOSOPHY.

The  SANKHYA  KAEIKA  of  IS'WARA  KKISHNA.

An  Exposition  of  the  System  of  Kapila,  with  an  Appendix  on  the
Nyaya  and  Vais'eshika  Systems.

BY  JOHN  DAVIES,  M.A.  (Cantab.),  M.R.A.S.

The  system  of  Kapila  contains  nearly  all  that  India  has  produced  in  the
department  of  pure  philosophy.

"The  non-Orientalist  .  .  .  finds  in  Mr.  Davies  a  patient  and  learned  guide  who
leads  him  into  the  intricacies  of  the  philosophy  of  India,  and  supplies  him  with  a  clue,
that  he  may  not  be  lost  in  them.  In  the  preface  he  states  that  the  system  of
Kapila  is  the  '  earliest  attempt  on  record  to  give  an  answer,  from  reason  alone,
to  the  mysterious  questions  which  arise  in  every  thoughtful  mind  about  the  origin  of
the  world,  the  nature  and  relations  of  man  and  his  future  destiny,'  and  in  his  learned
and  able  notes  he  exhibits  'the  connection  of  the  Sankhya  system  with  the  philo-
sophy of  Spinoza,'  and  '  the  connection  of  the  system  of  Kapila  with  that  of  Schopen-
hauer and  Von  Hartmann.'  " — Foreign  Church  Chronicle.

"  Mr.  Davies's  volume  on  Hindu  Philosophy  is  an  undoubted  gain  to  all  students
of  the  development  of  thought.  The  system  of  Kapila,  which  is  here  given  in  a  trans-
lation from  the  Sankhya  Karika,  is  the  only  contribution  of  India  to  pure  philosophy.
.  .  .  Presents  many  points  of  deep  interest  to  the  student  of  comparative  philo-
sophy, and  without  Mr.  Davies's  lucid  interpretation  it  would  be  difficult  to  appre-
ciate these  points  in  any  adequate  manner." — Saturday  Review.

"  We  welcome  Mr.  Davies's  book  as  a  valuable  addition  to  our  philosophical
library.'' — Notes  and  Queries.


TRffiXFR'S  ORIFXTAL  SFRIFS.


:il  Edition.      Post8vo,  pp.  \.      i  yj,  sloth,  i>  rice  6s.

A  MANUAL  OF  HINDU  PANTHEISM.    VEDANTASARA

Translated,  with  copious  Annotations,

Bi  Uajob  <;.  A.  JACOB,

Bombay  Staff  < lorpa  ;  Inspector  of  Army  Sch<

The  design  of  tliis  little  work  is  to  provide  for  missionaries,  and  f<>r
others  who,  like  them,  have  little  leisure  for  original  research,  an  accurate
summary  of  the  doctrines  of  the  Vedanta,

of  Major  Jacob's  work  conveys  bat  an  inadequate  idea  "f  the

■Miit  of  research  embodied  in  bis  notes  t"  the  lext  of  the  vedantasara.    so

-.  indeed,  are  .  much  collateral  matter  do  the;  bring  t < »  bear  on

e  diligent  student  will  rise  from  their  perusal  with   a  fairly

view  of  Hindu  philosophy  generally.     His  work  .  .  .  is  one  of  the  best  of

its  kmd  that  we  have  seen."— Ckzi


Post  8vo,   pp.   xii.  — 154,   cloth,  price  78.  6d.

TSUNI—  I  I  GO  AM:
The  Supreme  Brora  of  the  Khoi-Khoi.

Bi  THEOPHILUS  HAHN,  Ph.D.,

Custodian  of  the  Grey  Collection,  Cape  Town  ;  Corresponding  Member

of  the  Geogr.  Society,  Dresden  ;  Corresponding  Member  of  the

Anthropological  Society,  Vienna,  &c,  kc.

"The  first  instalment  of  Dr.  Halm's  labours  will  be  of  interest,  not  at  the  Cape
only,  but  in  every  University  of  Europe.  It  is,  in  fact,  a  most  valuable  contribution
to  the  comparative  study  of  religion  and  mythology.  Accounts  of  their  religion  and
mythology  were  scattered  about  in  various  books;  these  have  been  carefully  col-
lected by  Or.  Habn  and  printed  in  his  second  chapter,  enriched  and  improved  by
what  be  has  been  able  to  collect  himself." — Prof.  Max  MiUler  in  the  Nineteenth
Century.

"  It  is  full  of  good  tilings." — St.  James's  Gazette.


In  Four  Volumes.      Post  8vo,  Vol.   I.,   pp.  xii. — 392,  cloth,  price  12s.  6d.,

Vol.  II.,  pp.  vi. — 408,  cloth,  price  12s.  6d.,  Vol.  III.,  pp.  viii. — 414,

cloth,  price  123.  6d.,  Vol.  IV.,  pp.  viii. — 340,  cloth,  price  10s.  6d.

A  COMPREHENSIVE   COMMENTARY  TO  THE   QURAN.

To  which  is  prefixed  Sale's  Preliminary  Discourse,  with
Additional  Notes  and  Emendations.

Together  with  a  Complete  Index  to  the  Text,  Preliminary
Discourse,  and  Notes.

By  Rev.  B.  M.  WHERRY,  M.A.,  Lodiana.

"  As  Mr.  Wherry's  bunk  is  intended  for  missionaries  in  India,  it  is  no  doubt  well
that  they  should  be  prepared  to  meet,  if  they  can,  the  ordinary  arguments  and  inter-
pretations, and  for  this  purpose  .Mr.  Wherry's  additions  will  prove  useful." — Saturday
Review.


TRUB\rER,S  ORIENTAL  SERIES.


Second  Edition.     Post  8vo,  pp.  vi.  —  208,  cloth,  price  8s.  6d.

THE  BHAGAVAD-GITA.

Translated,   with  Introdactioii  and  Nut'.-.

By  JOHN  DAVIES,  M.A.  (Cantab.)

"  Lot  us  add  that  his  translation  of  the  Bhagavad  Gita  is,  as  we  judge,  the  best
thai  has  as  \  ■  I  ippi  iri  1  Ln  English,  and  thai  his  Philological  Notes  are  of  quite
peculiar  value." — Dublin  Review.


Post  8vo,  pp.  96,  cloth,  price  5s.

THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.

Translated  by  E.   H.  AVI1  INFIELD,  M.A.,
Barrister-at-Law,  late  H.M.  Bengal  Civil  Service.


Post  8vo,  pp.  xxxii.— 336,  cloth,  price  10s.  6d.

THE   QUATRAINS    OF    OMAR    KHAYYAM.

The  Persian  Text,  with  an  English  Verse  Translation.
By  E.  H.  WHINFIELD,  late  of  the  Bengal  Civil  Service.

"  Mr.  Whinfield  has  executed  a  difficult  task  with  considerable  success,  and  his
version  contains  much  that  will  be  new  to  those  who  only  know  Mr.  Fitzgerald's
delightful  selection."— Acad*  my.

■■  The  most  prominent  features  in  the  Quatrains  arc  their  profound  agnosticism,
combined  with  a  fatalism  based  more  on  philosophic  than  religious  grounds;  their
Epicureanism  and  the  spirit  of  universal  tolerance  and  charity  which  animates  them."
— Calcutta  Revieic.

Post  8vo,  pp.  xxiv. — 268,  cloth,  price  9s.

THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UPANISHADS  AND
ANCIENT  INDIAN  METAPHYSICS.

As  exhibited  in  a  series  of  Articles  contributed  to  the  Calcutta  Review.

By  ARCHIBALD  EDWARD  GOUGH,  M.A.,   Lincoln  College,  Oxford;
Principal  of  the  Calcutta  Madrasa.

'•  For  practical  purposes  this  is  perhaps  the  most  important  of  the  works  that  have
thus  far  appeared  in  'Trflbner's  Oriental  Series.'  .  .  .  We  caunot  doubt  that  for  all
who  may  take  it  up  the  work  must  be  one  of  profound  interest." — Saturday  E


Iu  Two  Volumes.    Vol.  I.,  post  8vo,  pp.  xxiv. — 230,  cloth,  price  7s.  6d.

A  COMPARATIVE  HISTORY  OF  THE  EGYPTIAN  AND

MESOPOTAMIAN  RELIGIONS.

By  Dr.  C.  P.  TIELE.

Vol.  I. — History  of  the  Egyptian  Religion.

Translated  from  the  Dutch  with  the  Assistance  of  the  Author.

By  JAMES  BALLINGAL.

"  It  places  in  the  hands  of  the  English  readers  a  history  of  Egyptian   I:
which  is  very  complete,  which  is  based  on  the  best  materials,  and  which  has  been
illustrated  by  the  latest  results  of  research.     In  this  volume  there  is  a  greal
iuformation,  as  wed  as  independent  investigation,  for  the  trustworthiness  of  which
D        dele's   name   is  in  itself   a   guarantee;  and  the  description  of  the  succi

ions  under  the  Old  Kingdom,  the  Middle  Kingdom,  aid  the  New  Kingdom,  is
given  in  a  manner  which  is  scholarly  and  minute." — Scottman.


■ !  '.  .


Bvo,  pp.  xii  —  v-',  cloth,  prioe  8a.  6d.

YUSUF  AND  ZULAIKHA.

A  l'"i  m  i'.v  .1  AMI.

Translated  from  the  Persian  into  English  Vent.

Bl   RALPH  T.   II.  GRIFFITH.

Griffith,  who  lin-i  done  already  delator  into  verse  from  the

Sanskrit,  baa  done  further  g 1  work  in  this  translation  from  the  .  and  lie

•  lently  shown  not  a  Utile  skill  in  his  rendering  the  quaint  and  very  oriental
style  ..f  his  author  Into  our  mow  oage,  .  .  .  The  work.

-  its  intrinsic  merits,  is  of  Importance  as  being  oni  I  popular  and

famous  poems  of  Persia,  ami  that  winch  is  read  in  nil  the  independent  native  schools
of  India  when


Post  8vo,  pp.  viii. — 266,  cloth,  price  9s.

LINGUISTIC   ESSAYS.

Bl  CARL  ABEL.

••  An  entirely  novel  method  of  dealing  with  philosophical  questions  and  impart  a
real  human  interest  to  the  other?  liti      Df  the  science." — Standard

"Dr.  Abel  i-  an  opponent  from  whom  it  i>  pleasant  to  differ,  tor  he  writes  with

per,  and  his  ma8tery  over  the  English  language  tits  him  to  lie  a

i  unpopular  doctrines." — .;


Post  8vo,  pp.  ix. — 281,  cloth,  price  10s.  6d.

THE    SARVA  -  DARSANA  -  SAMGRAHA  ;

Oh,  REVIEW  OF  THE  DIFFERENT  SYSTEMS  OF  HINDU

PHILOSOPHY.

By  MADHAVA  ACHARYA.

Translated  by  E.  B.  COWELL,  M.  A.,  Professor  of  Sanskrit  in  the  University

of  Cambridge,  and  A.  E.  GOUGH,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Philosophy

iu  the  Presidency  College,  Calcutta.

This  work  is  an  interesting  specimen  of  Hindu  critical  ability.  The
author  successively  passes  in  review  the  sixteen  philosophical  systems
current  in  the  fourteenth  century  in  the  South  of  India ;  and  he  gives  what
appears  to  him  to  be  their  most  important  tenets.

"The  translation  is  trustworthy  throughout.  A  protracted  sojourn  in  India,
where  there  is  a  living  tradition,  has  familiarised  the  translators  with  Indian
thought." — Athenaeum.


Post  8vo,  pp.  lxv. — 368,  cloth,  price  14s.

TIBETAN  TALES  DERIVED  FROM  INDIAN  SOURCES.

Translated  from  the  Tibetan  of  the  Kah-Gyuk.

By  F.  ANION*  VON  SCHIEFNER.

Done  into  English  from  the  German,  with  an  Introduction,

BY  W.  R.  S.  RALSTON,  M.A.

"Mr.  Ralston,  whose  name  is  so  familiar  to  all  lovers  of  Russian  folk-lore,  has

supplied  some  interesting  Western  analogies  and  parallels,  drawn,  lor  the  most  part)

from  Slavonic  sources,  to  the  Eastern  folk-tales,  culled  from  ttie  Kahgyur,  one  of  the

divisions  of  the  Tibetan  sacn  d  hooks." — Acadi  my.

"The  translation  .  .  .  could  scarcely  have  fallen  into  hotter  hands.  An  Introduc-
tion .  .  .  gives  the  leading  facts  in  the  lives  of  those  scholars  who  have  eriven  their
attention  to  gaining  a  knowledge  of  the  Tibetan  literature  and  language." — Calcutta

nt  to  interest  all  who  care  for  the  Fast,  for  amusing  stories,  or  for  comparative
folk-lore."—  /'ml  Mali  Gas


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES.


Post  8vo,  pp.  xvi. — 224,  cloth,  price  9s.

UDANAVARGA.

A  Collection  «of  Verses  from  the  Buddhist  Canon.

Compiled  by  DHARMATRATA

Being  the  NORTHERN  BUDDHIST  VERSION  of  DHAMMArADA.

Translated  from  the  Tibetan  of  Bkah-hgyur,  with  Notes,  and
Extracts  from  the  Commentary  of  Pradjuavannan,

By  W.  WOODVILLE  ROCKHILL.

"  Mr.  Roekh  ill's  present  work  is  the  first  from  which  assistance  will  be  gained
fur  a  inciie  accurate  understanding  of  the  Pali  text;  it  is,  in  fact,  as  yet  tne  only
term  of  comparison  available  to  vis.  The  ' Udanavarga,' the  Thibetan  version,  was
originally  discovered  by  the  late  M.  Schiefner,  who  published  the  Tibetan  text,  and
had  intended  adding  a  translation,  an  intention  frustrated  by  his  death,  but  winch
has  been  carried  out  by  Mr.  Rockhill.  .  .  .  Mr.  Rockhill  may  be  congratulated  for
having  well  accomplished  a  difficult  task." — Saturday  Review.


In  Two  Volumes,  post  3vo,  pp.  xxiv. — 566,  cloth,  accompanied  by  a
Language  Map,  price  18s.

A  SKETCH  OF  THE  MODERN  LANGUAGES  OF  AFRICA.

By  ROBERT  NEEDHAM  CUST,

Barrister-at-Law,  and  late  of  Her  Majesty's  Indian  Civil  Service.

"  Any  one  at  all  interested  in  African  languages  cannot  do  better  than  get  Mr.
Cost's  book.  It  is  encyclopaedic  in  its  scope,  and  the  reader  gets  a  start  clear  away
in  any  particular  language,  and  is  left  free  to  add  to  the  initial  sum  of  knowledge
there  collected." — fiatal  Mercury.

"  Mr.  (Just  has  contrived  to  produce  a  work  of  value  to  linguistic  students." —
Mature.


Third  Edition.     Post  8vo,  pp.  xv.-25o,  cloth,  price  7s.  6d.

OUTLINES  OF  THE  HISTORY  OF  RELIGION  TO  THE

SPREAD  OF  THE  UNIVERSAL  RELIGIONS.

By  C.  P.  TIELE,

Doctor  of  Theology,  Professor  of  the  History  of  Religions  in  the

University  of  Leyden.

Translated  from  the  Dutch  by  J.  Estlin  Carpenter,  M.A.

"  Few  books  of  its  size  contain  the  result  of  so  much  wide  thinking,  able  and  laho^
rious  study,  or  enable  the  reader  to  gain  a  better  bird's-eye  view  of  the  latest  results
of  investigations  into  the  religious  history  of  nations.  As  Professor  Tiele  modestly
says,  '  In  this  little  book  are  outlines— pencil  sketches,  I  might  say— nothing  more."
J  lot  there  are  some  men  whose  sketches  from  a  thumb-nail  are  of  far  more  worth
than  an  enormous  canvas  covered  with  the  crude  painting  of  others,  and  it  is  easy  to
see  that  these  pages,  full  of  information,  these  sentences,  cut  and  perhaps  also  dry,
short  and  clear,  cundense  the  fruits  of  long  and  thorough  research." — Scotsman.


1


v.p,  pp.  \ii.-  312,  with  Bfapi  and  Plan,  cloth,  prioe
A  HISTORY  OF   BURMA.
Including  Barmn   Proper,  Pega,  Taangn,  Tenasserim,  and  Axakan.     Prom
tin-  Earliest  Tun.'  to  the  Bud  of  the  Firal  War  with  British  India.

Bl  I. in  r.-Gi  s.  Bib  ABTHUB  P.  PHAYEE.G.C.M.G.,  K.O.S.I.,  andCB.,

Meiubre  Oorreapondaat  de  la  Socidte  Aeademique  Indo-Chinoiae

de  France.

"Sir  Arthur  Pbayre's  contribution  toTrttbner's  Oriental  Beries  supplicH  1

nised  want,  and  ita  appearance  has  been  looked  forward  to  for  many  years

Qoneral  Phayre  deserves  p  1  atience  and  industry  which  baa  resulted

in  this  History  oi  Burma.  — Saturday  A


Third  Edition.     Post  8vo,  pp.  276,  cloth,  price  7s.  6d.

RELIGION      IN      CHINA.
By  JOSEPH  EDKINS,  D.D.,  PmilG.

Containing  a  Brief  Account  of  the  Three  Keligions  of  the  Chinese,  with
Observations  on  the  Prospects  of  Christian  Conversion  amongst  that
People.
"  Dr.  Edkins  has  been  most  careful  in  noting  the  varied  and  often  complex  phases
of  opinion,  so  as  to  give  an  account  of  considerable  value  of  the  subject." — &

■■  .\s  a  missionary,  it  has  been  part  of  Dr.  Edkins'  duty  to  study  the  existing
religions  In  china,  and  his  long  residence  in  the  country  has  enabled  trim  to  acquire
an  intin  1  je  of  them  as  they  at  present  exist." — Saturday  !:•  vit  10.

•'  l>r.  Edkins'  valuable  work,  of  which  this  is  a  second  and  revised  edition,  has,
from  the  time  that  it  was  published,  been  the  standard  authority  upon  the  subject
of  which  it  treats." — Soncon/or

"  Dr.  Edkins  .  .  .  may  now  be  fairly  regarded  as  among  the  first  authorities  on
Chinese  religion  and  language." — Britisk  Quarterly  Si


Post  8vo,  pp.  X.-274,  cloth,  price  9s.

THE  LIFE  OF  THE  BUDDHA  AND  THE  EARLY
HISTORY  OF  HIS  ORDER.

Derived  from  Tibetan  "Works  in  the  Bkah-hgyur  and  Bstan-hgyur.

Followed  by  notices  on  the  Early  History  of  Tibet  and  Khoteu.

Translated  by  W.  W.  110CKHILL,  Second  Secretary  U.  S.  Legation  in  China.

"The  volume  bears  testimony  to  the  diligence  and  fulness  with  which  the  author
has  consulted  and  tested  the  ancient  documents  bearing  upon  his  remarkable  sub-
ject."—  Ti  //it.s.

"  Will  be  appreciated  by  those  who  devote  themselvestotho.se  Buddhist  studies
which  have  of  late  years  taken  in  these  Western  regions  so  remarkable  a  develop-
ment. Its  matter  possesses  a  special  interest  as  being  derived  from  ancient  Tibetan
works,  some  portions  of  which,  here  analysed  and  translated,  have  not  yet  attracted
the  attention  of  scholars.  The  volume  is  rich  in  ancient  stories  bearing  upon  the
renovation  and  the  origin  of  castes,  as  recorded  in  these  venerable  autho-
rities."— Daily  Ntw».

Third  Edition.     Post  Svo,  pp.  viiL-464,  cloth,  price  16s.

THE  SANKHYA  APHORISMS  OF  KAPILA,

With  Illustrative  Extracts  from  the  Commentaries.

Translated  by  J.  E.  BALLANTYNE,  LL.D.,  late  Principal  of  the  Benares

Colli
Edited  by  FITZEDWARD  HALL.

The  work  displays  a  vasl  expenditure  of  labour  and  scholarship,   for  which

students  of  Hindoo  philosophy  have  every  reason  to  be  grateful  to  Dr.  Hall  and  the
publishers." — Calcutta  Jieview.


TK  MINER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES.


In  Two  Volumes,  post  8vo,  pp.  cviii.-242,  and  viii.-370,  cloth,  price  24s.
Dedicated  by  permission  to  II.B.H.  the  Prince  of  Wales.

BUDDHIST  RECORDS  OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD,

Translated  from  the  Chinese  of  Hiuen  Tsiang  (a.d.  629).

By  SAMUEL  BEAL,  B.A.,

(Trin.  Coll.,  Camb.) ;  R.N.  (Retired  Chaplain  and  N.I.)  ;  Professor  of  Chinese,
University  College,  London  ;  Hector  of  Walk,  Northumberland,  &c.

An  eminent  Indian  authority  writes  respecting  this  work: — "Nothing
more  can  be  done  in  elucidating  the  History  of  India  until  Mr.  Beal's  trans-
lation of  the  'Si-yu-ki'  appears."

"  It  is  a  strange  freak  of  historical  preservation  that  the  best  account  of  the  con-
dition of  India  at  that  ancient  period  has  come  down  to  us  in  the  bonks  of  travel
written  by  the  Chinese  pilgrims,  of  whom  Hwen  Thsaug  is  the  best  known." — Time*.


Post  8vo,  pp.  xlvirL-398,  cloth,  price  12s.

THE    ORDINANCES    OF    MANU.

Translated  from  the  Sanskrit,  with  an  Introduction.

By  the  late  A.  C.  BUENELL,  Ph.D.,  CLE.

Completed  and  Edited  by  E.  W.  HOPKINS,  Ph.D.,
of  Columbia  College,  N.Y.

•'  This  work  is  full  of  interest ;  while  for  the  student  of  sociology  and  the  science
of  religion  it  is  full  of  importance.  It  is  a  great  boon  to  get  so  notable  a  work  in  so
Lble  a  form,  admirably  edited,  and  competently  translated." — Scotsman.

"  Few  men  were  more  competent  than  Burnell  to  give  us  a  really  good  translation
of  this  well-known  law  book,  first  rendered  into  English  by  Sir  William  Jones.
Burnell  was  not  only  an  independent  Sanskrit  scholar,  but  an  experienced  lawyer,
and  he  joined  to  these  two  important  qualifications  the  rare  faculty  of  being  able  to
express  his  thoughts  in  clear  and  trenchant  English.  .  .  .  We  ought  to  feel  very
grateful  to  Dr.  Hopkins  for  having  given  us  all  that  could  be  published  of  the  trans-
lation left  by  Burnell." — F.  Max  Miller  in  the  Academy.


Post  8vo,  pp.  XU.-234,  cloth,  price  9s.

THE  LIFE  AND  WORKS  OF  ALEXANDER
CSOMA  DE  KOROS,

Between  1819  and  1842.  With  a  Short  Notice  of  all  his  Published  and  Un-
published Works  and  Essays.  From  Original  and  for  most  part  Unpub-
lished Documents.

By  THEODORE  DUKA,  M.D.,  F.R.C.S.  (Eng.),  Surgeon-Major
H.M.'s  Bengal  Medical  Service,  Retired,  &c.

"  Xot  too  soon  have  Messrs.  Trubner  added  to  their  valuable  Oriental  Series  a
history  of  the  life  and  works  of  one  of  the  most  gifted  and  devoted  of  Oriental
students,  Alexander  Csoma  de  Koros.  It  is  forty-three  years  since  his  death,  and
though  an  account  of  his  career  was  demanded  soon  after  his  decease,  it  lias  only
Dow  appeared  in  the  important  memoir  of  his  compatriot,  Dr.  Duka." — Book  fill-  r


\L  SERIES


In  Two  V.iluiiirs,  post  Bro,  i>i>.  \ii.  310  and  ri.  31a,  oloth,  juice  ais.

MISCELLANEOUS   PAPERS  RELATING  TO
INDOCHINA.

Reprinted  from  "  Dalryraple's  Oriental  Repertory, "  "Asiatic  l:
and  the  "Journal  of  the  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal."

CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  I.

I      Bom    aooounts  of  Quedata.    By  Michael  Toppi

IL— Report  made  to  the  Chief  and  Council  of  Balambangan,  by  Lieut.
Barton,  of  his  several  Burvi  ya.

[IL  — Substanoe  of  ■  Letter  to  the  Court  of  Directors  from  Mi
July  20,  1775,  at  Borneo  Proper.

IV. — Formation  of  the  Establishment  of  Poolo  Peeuang.

v.—  Trif  Gold  of  Limong.     By  John  M

VI.—  On  Three  Natural  Productions  ol  Sumatra.     By  John  Macdonald.

Vll—  on  the  Traces  of  the  Hindu  Language  and  Literature  extant  amongst  the
William  Marsden.

VIII.— Some  Account  of  the  Elastic  Gum  Vine  of  Prince- Wats  Island    ByJa a

Howison.

IX.  -A.  Botanical  Description  of  Drceola  Elastica,  or  Caoutchouc  Vine  of  Sumatra
and  Pulo-Pinang.     By  William  Roxburgh,  M.D.

X.  —  An  Account  of  the  Inhabitants  of  the  Poggy,  or  Nassau  Islands,  lying  off
Sumatra.     By  John  Crisp.

XI      Remarks  on  the  Species  of  Pepper  which  are  found  on  Prince- Wales  Island
By  William  Hunter,  M.D.

XIL— On  the  Languages  and  Literature  of  the   Indo-Chinese   Nations.     By  J
Lerden,  M.D.

XIII.— Some  Account  of  an  Orang-Outang  of  remarkable  height  found  on  the  Island
of  Sumatra     By  Clarke  Abel,  M.D.

XIV.  —observations  on  the  Geological  Appearances  and  General  Features  of  Por-
tions of  the  Malayan  Peninsula.     By  Captain  .lames  Low.

XV.— Short  Sketch  of  the  Geology  of  Pulo-Pinang  and  the  Neighbouring  Islands
By  T.  Ware.

XVI.— Climate  of  Singapore.

XVII.  —Inscription  on  the  Jetty  at  Singapore.

XVI II. — Extract  of  a  Letter  from  Colonel  J.  Low.

XIX. — Inscription  at  Singapore.

XX  —An  Account  of  Several  Inscriptions  found  in  Province  Wclleslcy.     By  Lieut  .-
CoL  James  Low.

XXI. —Note  on  the  Inscriptions  from  Singapore  and  Province  WeUesley.    By  J.  W
Laid  lay.

XXII  —On  an  Inscription  from  Keddah.     By  Lieut. -Col.  Low.

XXII 1. — A  Notice  of  the  Alphabets  of  the  Philippine  l-i

XXIV.—  Succinct  Reviewof  the  Observations  of  the  I  Indian  Archi]

XXV.  — Report  on  the  Tin  of  the  Province  of  Mergui.     By  Capt.  G,  B    !

XXVI.  — Report  on  the  Mai  Mergui  Province.    By  Capt. G.  B.  Tremenheere.

XXVII. — Paragraphs  to  bo  added  to  Capt.  C.  B.  Treineiihecre's  Report.

XXVIII. — Second  Report  on  the  Tin  of  M  pt.  G.  B.  Tremenheere.

XXIX.— Analysis  of  Iron  Ores  from  Tavoy  and  Mergui,  and  of  Limestone  from
Mergui.    By  Hr.  A.  Ore.

XXX.— Report  of  a  Visit  to  the  Pakcban  River,  and  of  a  >mi  Tin  Localities  in  the
Southern  Portion  of  the  Tenasst  rim  Provinci  -.     By  Capt.  G.  l>.  Tremenheere.

XXXI. — Report  on  a  Route  from  the  Mout  1  ban  to  Krau,  and  thence

I  'no  Isthmus  of  Krau  to  the  Gulf  of  Siam.     By  Capt.  Al.  I' laser  and  Cap
Furlong.

XXXII. — Report,  Ac.,  from  Capt.  G.  B.  Tremenheere  on  thePric  1  in  Ore.

XXXIII. -  Remarks  on  the  Different  Species  of  Orang-utan.    By  I..  Blyth.

XXXIV.— Further  Remarks.    By  B.  Blyth.


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES.


MISCELLANEOUS  PAPERS  RELATING  TO  INDO-CHINA-

continued.


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  II.

XXXV.—  Catalogue  of  Mammalia  inhabiting  the  Malayan  Peninsula  and  Islands.
By  Theodore  Cantor,  M.D.

XXX  VI.  —I  111  the  Local  and  Relative  Geology  of  Singapore.     By  J.  R.  Logan.

XXXVII.  -Catalogue  of  Reptiles  inhabiting  the  Malayan  Peninsula  and  Islands.
By  Theodore  Cantor,  M.D.

XXXVIII.— Some  Recount  of  the  Botanical  Collection  brought  from  the  Eastward,
in  1841,  by  Dr.  Cantor.     By  the  late  W.  Griffith.

XXXIX.—  On  the  Plat-Horned  Taurine  Cattle  of  S.E.  Asia.     By  E.  Blyth.

XL.— Note,  by  Major-General  G.  B.  Tremenheere.

General  Index.

Index  of  Vernacular  Terms.

Index  of  Zoological  Genera  and  Sub-Genera  occurring  in  Vol.  II.

"The  papers  treat  of  almost  every  aspect  of  Indo-China— its  philology,  economy,
geography,  geology— and  constitute  a  very  material  and  important  contribution  to
our  accessible  information  regarding  that  country  and  its  people. " — Contemporary
Review.

Post  8vo,  pp.  xiL-72,  cloth,  price  5s.

THE    SATAKAS    OF    BHARTRIHARI.

Translated  from  the  Sanskrit

By  the  Rev.  B.  HALE  WORTHAM,  M.R.A.S.,

Rector  of  Eggesford,  North  Devon.

"  A  very  interesting  addition  to  Triibner's  Oriental  Series." — Saturday  Iievieir.
"  Many  of  the  Maxims  111  the  book  have  a  Biblical  ring  and  beauty  of  expression."
— St.  James'  Gazette.

Post  8vo,  pp.  xii.-i3o,  cloth,  price  6s.

ANCIENT  PROVERBS  AND  MAXIMS  FROM  BURMESE
SOURCES ;

Or,  THE  NITI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA.

By  JAMES  GRAY,

Author  of  "Elements  of  Pali  Grammar,"  "Translation  of  the
Dhammapada, "  &c.

The  Sanscrit-Pali  word  Niti  is  equivalent  to  "conduct"  in  its  abstract,
and  "  guide "  in  its  concrete  signification.  As  applied  to  books,  it  is  a
general  term  for  a  treatise  which  includes  maxims,  pithy  sayings,  and
didactic  stories,  intended  as  a  guide  to  such  matters  of  every-day  life  as
form  the  character  of  an  individual  and  influence  him  in  his  relations  to  his
fellow-men.  Treatises  of  this  kind  have  been  popular  in  all  ages,  and  have
served  as  a  most  effective  medium  of  instruction.


Post  8vo,  pp.  xxxii.  and  330,  cloth,  price  7s.  6d.

MASNAVI    I    MA'    NAVI:

THE  SPIRITUAL  COUPLETS  OF  MAULANA  JALALU-'D-DIN
MUHAMMAD  I  RUMI.

Translated  and  Abridged  by  E.  H.  WHINFIELD,  M.A.,
Late  of  H.M.  Bengal  Civil  Service.


'


Pad  Bro,  pp.  viii.  :i u. I  346,  doth,  price  io«.  6<1.

MANAVA-DHARMA-CASTRA:
THE   CODE   OF   MANU.

OBIOIHAL  Kan-krit  Text,  with  CbITICAL  NOT!  -.
Bl  .1.  JOLLY,   Ph.D.,

lit  in  the  University  of  Wursburg  ;  late  Tagorc  IV
of  Law  in  the  University  of  Calcutta.

The  dftte  assigned  by  Sir  William  Jones  to  this  Code — the  well-known
l.iw  Book  "t  the  Hindus — is  1250  500  B.O.,  although  the  rnlei  and
precepts  oontained  in  it  had  probably  existed  as  tradition  tor  counth  -
before.  There  has  been  no  reliable  edition  of  the  Text  for  Students  tor
many  year-  past,  and  it  is  helieved,  therefore,  that  Prof.  Jolly's  work  will
supply  a  want  long  felt.


Post  8vo,  pp.  215,  cloth,  price  7s.  6d.

LEAVES  FROM   MY   CHINESE   SCRAP-BOOK.

By  FREDERIC  EENRY  BALFOUR.

Author  of  ''Waifs  and  Strays  from  the  Far  East."  "Taoist  Texts,"
'•  Idiomatic  1'hrases  iu  the  Peking  Colloquial,"  &c.  &c.


Post  8vo,  pp.  xvi.-543,  with  Six  Maps,  cloth,  price  21s.

LINGUISTIC    AND    ORIENTAL    ESSAYS.

"Written  from  the  Year  1847  to  1887.     Second  Scries.

By  ROBERT  NEEDHAM  CUST,  LL.D.,

Barrister-at-Law  ;  Honorary  Secretary  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society;
Late  Member  of  Her  Majesty's  Indian  Civil  Service.


In  Two  Volumes,  post  8vo,  pp.  X.-308  and  vL-314,  cloth,  price  25s.

MISCELLANEOUS  PAPERS  RELATING  TO

INDO  CHINA.

Edited  by  R.  ROST,  Ph.D.,  &c.  kc,

Librarian  to  the  India  Office.

Second  Series.

Reprinted  for  the  Straits  Branch  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society  from  the
Malayan  "Miscellanies,''  the  "Transactions  and  Journal"  of  the  Batavian
Society,  and  the  "Journals"  of  the  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal,  and  the
Royal  Geographical  and  Royal  Asiatic  Societies.


Post  8vo,  pp.  xii.-5i2,  price  16s.

FOLK-TALES    OF    KASHMIR.

By  the  Rev.  J.  JUNTOS  KN< AVLES,  F.R.G.S.,  M.R.A.S,  &c.

(C. M.S.)  Missionary  to  the  Kashmiris.


TRU/SXER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES.


In  Two  Volumes,  post  8vo,  pp.  xiu-336  and  X.-352,  cloth,  price  21s.

MEDIEVAL  RESEARCHES  FROM  EASTERN  ASIATIC

-       SOURCES.

Fragments  Towards  the  Knowledge  op  the  Geography  and  History
OF    CENTRAL    and   Western   Asia   FROM   the   THIRTEENTH    TO   THE

Seventeenth  Century.

By  E.  BRETSCHNEIDER,  M.D.,
Formerly  Physician  of  the  Russian  Legation  at  Pekin.

In  Two  Volumes,  post  8vo,  pp.  I.-408  and  431,  cloth,  price  36s.

ALBERUNI'S    INDIA:

AN  ACCOUNT  OF  ITS  RELIGION,  PHILOSOPHY,  LITERATURE,
GEOGRAPHY,  CHRONOLOGY,  ASTRONOMY.  CUSTOMS,  LAW,
AND  ASTROLOGY  (about  a.d.  1031).

Translated  into  English.

With  Notes  and  Indices  by  Prof.  EDWARD  SACHAU,
University  of  Berlin.

%*  The  Arabic  Original,  with  an  Index  of  the  Sanskrit  Words,  Edited  by
Professor  SACHAU,  is  in  the  press.


Post  8vo,  pp.  xxxvii.-2i8,  cloth,  price  10s.

THE   LIFE    OF    HIUEN    TSIANG.

By  the  SHAMANS  HWUI  LI  and  YEX-TSUNG.

With  a  Preface  containing  an  account  of  the  Works  of  I-Tsing.

By  SAMUEL  EEAL,  B.A.

(Trin.  Coll.,  Carnb.) ;  Professor  of  Chinese,  University  College,  London  ;

Rector  of  Wark,  Northumberland,  kc.
Author  of  "  Buddhist  Records  of  the  Western  World,"  "  The  Romantic

Legend  of  Sakya  Budda,"  &c.
When  the  Pilgrim  Hiueu  Tsiang  returned  from  his  travels  in  India,  he
took  up  his  abode  in  the  Temple  of  ' '  Great  Benevolence  ;  "  this  convent  had
been  constructed  by  the  Emperor  in  honour  of  the  Empress,  Wen-te-hau.
After  Hiuen  Tsiang's  death,  his  disciple,  Hwui  Li,  composed  a  work  which
gave  an  account  of  his  illustrious  Master's  travels ;  this  work  when  he  com-
pleted he  buried,  and  refused  to  discover  its  place  of  concealment.  But
previous  to  his  death  he  revealed  its  whereabouts  to  Yen-tsung,  by  whom  it
was  finally  revised  and  published.  This  is  "  The  Life  of  Hiuen  Tsiang."  It
is  a  valuable  sequel  to  the  Si-yu-ki,  correcting  and  illustrating  it  in  many
particulars.

IN  PREPARATION:—
Post  8vo.

A  SKETCH  OF   THE  MODERN  LANGUAGES  OF
OCEANIA.

By  R.  N.  CUST,  LL.D.

Author  of  "  Modern  Lauguages  of  the  East,"  "  Modern  Languages  of

Africa,''  &c.


LONDON  :  TRUBNER  &  CO.,  57  and  59  LUDGATE  HILL.

100 — 29/8/89.


TRUBNER'S

ORIENTAL   SERIES.


•BaUantpne  -press

BALLANTYNE,    HANSON   AND  CO.
EDINBURGH   AND   LONDON


■£w


THE    OUATRAINS


OMAR  KHAYYAM.


TRANSLATED    INTO    ENGLISH    VERSE


E.    H.    WHINE  I  ELD,    MA.

LATE   OF   THE   BENGAL  CIVIL   SERVICE.


LONDON:

TRUBNEK    &    CO.,    LUDGATE    HILL.

1882.

[All  righta  reserved.]


■


'  An  aching  body,  and  a  mind
Not  wholly  clear,  nor  wholly  blind,
Too  keen  to  rest,  too  weak  to  find,
That  travails  sore,  and  brings  forth  wind."

— M.  Arnold.


CONTENTS.


Introduction
Quatrains—

Alif
Be     .
Te     .

He  and  Khe
Dal  .
Re  .
Ze  .
Sin  .
Shin

Kaf  and  Lam
Mim  .
Nuw  •
Wav.
He  .
Ye  .
Notes


TA'-F.
I


7
9
10
26
27
43
45
49
5o
5i
53
60

64
66
69
79


1 X 'PRODUCTION.


Omar  Khayyam  (the  tent-maker)  was  born  about  the
middle  of  the  fifth  centuiy  of  the  Hejirah,  corresponding
to  the  eleventh  of  the  Christian  era,  in  the  neighbourhood
of  Naishapur,  the  capital  of  Khonisan,  and  died  in  517
a.h.  (=1122  A.i".)  His  life  thus  extended  through  the
reigns  of  the  Seljuk  kings,  Alp  Arslan,  Malik  Shah,
Mahniud,  Barkiarok,  and  Muhammad.

"What  is  known  of  his  life  is  contained  in  the  following
authorities : —

First,  the  "Wasiyat.  or  Testament  of  the  celebrated
Xizdm  ul  Mulk,  minister  of  Alp  Arslan  and  Malik  Shah.
This  was  written  about  480  a.h.,  and  an  extract  from  it  is
preserved  in  Mirkhond's  Rauzat  us  Safa  (written  about
900  a.h.),  and  in  the  Dabistan  i  Mazahib.1  This  extract
tells  how  Xizdm  ul  Mulk  in  his  youth  studied  under  the
great  Sunni  doctor  Imam  Muaffik  of  Naishapur,  and  there
formed  a  close  friendship  with  two  of  his  fellow-pupils,
Omar  Khayyam  and  Hassan  Sabbah.  The  three  friends
entered  into  a  compact,  that  whichever  of  them  first
attained  wealth  and  power  should  share  his  fortune  witli

1  The  text  of  Mirkhond,  with  a  French  translation,  may  be  found  in
"Notices  et  Extraita  des  MSS."  xi.  143,  and  the  passage  in  the  Dabistan
at  vol.  ii.  p.  423.  of  Shea  and  Troyer'a  translation.

A


2  INTRODUCTION.

the  others.  When  Nizam  ul  Mulk  became  minister  to
Alp  Arslan,  he  was  as  good  as  his  word,  and  gave  Hassan
a  place  at  court.  The  result  was  that  Hassan  intrigued
against,  and  tried  to  ruin  him ;  but,  failing  in  his  attempt,
retired  from  court,  and  joined  the  sect  of  Ismailians  or
Batinians,  and  finally  established  the  notorious  order  of
Assassins,  with  headquarters  at  Almiit  on  the  Caspian.
Malcolm  (Hist,  of  Persia,  i.  245)  mentions  a  story  that
one  of  the  modes  Hassan  adopted  to  stimulate  the  fana-
ticism and  secure  the  devotion  of  his  followers,  was  to
give  them  from  time  to  time  a  foretaste  of  the  delights
of  the  Muhammadan  paradise.  This  he  used  to  effect
by  administering  strong  doses  of  opium,  and  when  the
patients  were  fast  asleep,  he  had  them  conveyed  into  a
splendid  palace  with  beautiful  gardens,  where  they  were
regaled  for  a  day  or  two.  A  second  dose  of  opium  then
produced  a  second  sleep,  during  which  they  were  carried
back  to  their  homes.  Hassan  acquired  unbounded  in-
fluence over  his  followers,  and  used  it  to  procure  the
assassination  of  every  one  who  had  incurred  his  dislike,
and  amongst  others,  of  his  old  benefactor  Nizam  ul  Mulk.
Defremery,  in  his  memoir  on  Barkiarok  (p.  51),  notes,
on  the  authority  of  Ibn  Athir,  that  a  furious  war  between
the  various  sects  in  Naishapur  took  place  in  the  year
488  a.h.  It  seems  not  unlikely  that  these  examples  of
fanaticism  and  superstition  may  have  had  some  share  in
producing  in  Omar  that  feeling  of  antagonism  to  the
popular  religion,  expressed  in  so  many  of  his  quatrains,
which  seem  to  breathe  the  spirit  of  that  line  of  Lucretius —

"  Tantuni  religio  potuit  suadere  rualoruru."


INTRODUCTION.  3

Bat  to  return  to  the  "Testament"  of  Nizam  ul  Mulk,
d  to  Bay,  that  when  the  minister  offered  a
at  court  to  Omar,  he  declined  it  on  the  ground  that  he

I  to  remain  in  a  private  station,  on  which  .\
ul  Mulk  conferred  on  him  an  annual  Btipend  of  twelve
hundred  pieces  of  gold,  secured  on  the  revenues  of
Naishapur.  And  later,  in  the  reign  of  Malik  Shall,
Omar  was  summoned  to  Merv,  and  given  a  post  worthy
of  his  abilities  and  attainments.

The  next  authority  is  the  Tarikh  ul  Hukama,  written
about  647  a. li.1  In  tins  it  is  stated  that  Omar  Khayyam
was  the  most  learned  man  of  his  age,  and  thoroughly  versed
in  all  the  Greek  sciences,  especially  philosophy  and  astro-
'.  He  exhorted  his  disciples  to  seek  the  one  God  by
self-purification.  Subsequently  the  Sufis  accommodated
his  poems  to  their  own  doctrines,  making  them  a  frequent
subject  of  discussion  in  their  assemblies.  The  marrow  of
his  teaching  consisted  of  axioms  of  universal  religion.
His  outspoken  criticism  of  the  popular  theology  raised
such  a  storm  against  him,  that  he  was  fain  to  make  the
pilgrimage  to  Mecca,  and  to  be  more  regular  in  his
religious  observances  during  the  latter  part  of  his  life.

The  next  authority  to  be  mentioned  is  the  geographer
and  historian,  Abulfeda,  who  lived  from  672  to  732
a.h.  He  records  that  Omar  Khayyam  was  placed  by
Nizam  ul  Mulk  in  charge  of  the  royal  observatory,  and
whilst  holding  that  post,  superintended  the  reform  of  the
old  calendar,  established  in  Persia  before  the  Muhammadan

1  The  passage  is  given  in  full  in  Wopke'a  "  Algebre  d'Omar  Khayyam,"
Preface,  p.  v.


4  INTRODUCTION.

invasion.  The  new  calendar  called  Tarikh  i  Jalali,  accord-
ing to  M.  Eeinaud,  is  considered  by  some  superior  to  the
Gregorian.1  Omar,  for  the  purpose  of  this  work,  drew  up
some  astronomical  tables  called  Zij  Malikshahi,  mentioned
in  Haji  Khalfa's  dictionary  (iii.  570).  But,  adds  Abulfeda,
Omar  was  too  much  addicted  to  poetry  and  pleasure,  and
seemed  not  to  set  much  store  by  his  astronomical  labours.

There  is  a  story  about  Omar  having  predicted  where
he  should  be  buried,  quoted  by  Mr.  Fitzgerald  from  the
Tarikh  ul  Kudama,  and  by  D'Herbelot  (article  Khiam,
ii.  436),  from  a  book  called  Majma  un-Navadir ;  probably
not  the  modern  Persian  book  of  that  name,  in  which  I
have  failed  to  trace  it.

Finally,  there  are  short  notices  of  Omar's  life,  containing
nothing  more  than  what  has  already  been  said,  in  the
Safina  i  Khusgu  (written  in  1147  A.H.),  and  in  the
Atish  Kedah  (written  in  1 1 34  a.h.)  2

Besides  his  quatrains,  Omar  has  left  some  works  on
mathematics  in  Arabic.  One  of  these,  a  treatise  on
Algebra,  has  been  edited  and  translated  by  M.  Woepke,
of  Bonn  (Paris,  185 1),  and  from  that  work  it  seems
Omar's  full  name  was  Ghias  ud  din  Abul  fathah  Omar
bin  Ibrahim  Al  Khayyam.

The  editions  of  the  quatrains  which  have  been  used  for
this  translation  are  the  following : —

I.  That  of  M.  Nicolas,  containing  464  quatrains  (Paris,
1867),  references  to  which  are  indicated  by  the  letter  1ST.

II.  That  of  Moulvi  Muhammad  Sadik  Ali  of  Lucknow

1  Eeinaud,  "  Geographie  d' Abulfeda,"  Prolegomena,  p.  ci.
2  Sprenger's  Catalogue,  p.  464.


INTRODUCTION.  5

(Lucknow,  1S7S),  containing  nearly  Soo  quatrains,  indi-
r  by  the  Letter  L.

111.  The   B   ".  ian  MS.,  No.  140  of  the  I  Col-

li, containing  15S  quatrains.  It  was  written  at
Shiraz  in  S65  a. 11.,  and  is  indicated  by  the  letter  B.

Reference  has  also  been  made  to  three  smaller  collec-
tions of  the  quatrains,  viz.,  Whalley's  edition  (Moradabad,
iS/o),  that  of  Abdallah  Ansari  (Teheran,  1277  A.H.),  and
the  3 1  quatrains  cited  in  the  Atish-kedah.  The  readings
in  the  various  editions  differ  very  greatly.  I  have  selected
those  which  seemed  the  best.

The  Rabai,  or  quatrain  used  by  Omar,  is  a  short  poem
of  four  lines,  of  which  the  first  two  and  the  fourth  always
rhyme,  and  sometimes  the  third  line  as  well.  What  may
be  regarded  as  the  normal  line  consists  of  thirteen  syllables,
seven  long  and  six  short.  But  whenever  two  short
syllables  come  together,  they  may  be  contracted  into  one
long  syllable,  and  the  result  is,  that  Persian  prosodians
reckon  no  less  than  twenty-four  different  variations  of
the  line,  the  shortest  of  which  consists  of  ten  syllables  all
long.  But,  as  may  be  supposed,  this  last  form  of  the  line
is  of  very  rare  occurrence.  The  nearest  English  equivalent
to  a  normal  Rabai  line  would  be  such  an  Alexandrine  as
the  following  of  Mr.  Matthew  Arnold,  with  accents  on
the  second,  fifth,  tenth,  and  twelfth  syllables  : —

"  We  mark  not  the  world's  course,  but  would  have  it  take  o&rs."

Mr.  Fitzgerald  in  his  brilliant  translation  has,  however,
adopted  the   decasyllable,  with  three  rhymes,  and   that


6  INTRODUCTION.

metre  has  been  stamped  with  approval  by  Mr.  Swinburne,
who  has  used  it  in  one  or  two  of  his  minor  poems,  with
the  difference,  that  he  makes  the  three  rhyming  lines  of
one  quatrain  rhyme,  with  the  third  line  of  the  preceding
quatrain.  This  modification  is  not  admissible  in  the  case
of  Omar,  as  all,  or  nearly  all,  his  poems  are  entirely  isolated
in  sense  from  those  preceding  and  following.

There  is  another  reason  why  the  decasyllable  metre
seems  most  suitable,  viz.,  that  it  is  the  metre  of  the  Eliza-
bethan sonnet,  which  is  perhaps  the  nearest  English
equivalent  to  Omar's  verse.

Of  the  German  translators  of  Omar,  Hammer  has  used
both  the  Alexandrine  and  the  decasyllable  ;  and  the  most
recent  translation,  that  of  Herr  Bodenstedt  (Breslau,  1881),
is  in  various  metres.

It  may  be  added,  that  Mr.  C.  J.  Lyall,  of  the  Bengal
Civil  Service,  is  now  editing  for  the  Calcutta  Asiatic
Society  a  new  edition  of  the  Quatrains,  in  which  the
materials,  left  by  that  excellent  Persian  scholar,  the  late
Professor  Blochmann,  are  to  be  worked  up.


ATRAIXS  OF   OMAR   KHAYYAM.


aw.


Wl  sojourn  here  for  one  short  day  or  two,
And  all  the  gain  we  get  is  grief  and  woe,

And  then,  leaving  life's  problems  all  unsolved,
And  harassed  by  regrets,  we  have  to  go.

N.  4.

11.

Since  no  one  can  assure  thee  of  the  morrow,
Eejoice  thy  heart  to-day,  and  banish  sorrow

With  sparkling  wine,  fair  moon,  for  heaven's  moon
"Will  look  for  us  in  vain  on  many  a  morrow.

X.  8,  L.  B.
III.

Men  say  the  Koran  is  the  word  divine,
Though  'tis  not  oft  they  care  to  read  a  line ;

One  lucid  text  there  is,  whereon  they  pore
At  every  time  and  place,  and  that  is  wine.

N.  11,  B.  L.


THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.

IV.

What  though  'tis  fair  to  see,  this  form  of  man,
What  caused  Thee,  0  heavenly  Artisan,

To  paint  these  tulip  cheeks  and  cypress  forms
Here  on  the  lowly  walls  of  earth's  divan  ?

n.  13,  L.


Thus  spake  the  idol  to  his  worshipper  :

"  Why  dost  thou  worship  this  dead  stone,  fair  sir  ? "

"  'Tis  because  He  who  gazeth  through  thine  eyes
Doth  some  part  of  His  charms  on  it  confer."

L.

VI.

Whate'er  thou  doest,  never  grieve  thy  brother,
Nor  raise  a  fume  of  wrath  his  peace  to  smother.

Dost  thou  desire  to  taste  eternal  bliss  ?
Vex  thine  own  heart,  but  never  vex  another.

B.


THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.


QBc.


VII.

At  first  ensnare  all  hearts  with  kindly  art,
Then  let  thine  heart  seek  its  pure  counterpart,

A  hundred  Kaabas  equal  not  one  heart ;
Seek  not  the  Kaaha,  rather  seek  a  heart.

x.  15,  L.

VIII.

Here  in  this  tavern  haunt  I  make  my  lair,
And  pawn  for  wine  the  raiment  that  I  wear,

"Without  a  hope  of  bliss,  or  fear  of  bale,
Rapt  above  water,  earth,  and  fire,  and  air.

x.  19,  L.  B.

IX.

Quoth  fish  to  duck :  "  'Twould  be  a  sad  affair,
Should  this  brook  ever  leave  his  channel  bare."

To  whom  the  duck :  "  When  I  am  dead  and  roasted,
The  ocean  may  run  dry  for  aught  I  care."

L.


io         THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.


Ce.


X.

From  doubt  to  clear  assurance  is  a  breath,
A  breath  from  infidelity  to  faith ;

Oh !  precious  breath,  enjoy  it  while  you  may,
'Tis  all  that  life  can  give,  and  then  comes  death.

N.  20,  L.

XI.

Ah !  wheel  of  heaven,  who  run  a  course  so  blind,
'Twas  e'er  your  wont  to  show  yourself  unkind ;

And  cruel  earth,  if  one  should  cleave  your  breast,
"What  store  of  buried  jewels  would  he  find !

N.  21,  L.

XII.

My  life  lasts  but  a  day  or  two,  and  fast
Sweeps  by,  like  torrent  stream  or  desert  blast ;

Howbeit,  of  two  days  I  take  no  heed —
The  day  to  come  and  that  already  past.

X.  22,  B.  L.


THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.         u

XIII.

v  with  its  joyous  prime  my  spring  is  rife,
I  quaff  this  wine,  and  list  to  lute  and  fife  ;
Chide  not  at  wine  for  all  its  bitter  taste,
Its  bitterness  sorts  well  with  human  life.

N.  24,  B.  L.

XIV.

0  soul,  whose  lot  it  is  to  bleed  with  pain,
And  daily  blows  of  fortune  to  sustain,

Into  this  body  wherefore  didst  thou  come,
Seeing  thou  must  so  soon  depart  again  ?

N.  25,  L.

xv.

To-day  is  thine  to  spend,  but  not  to-morrow,
Counting  on  morrows  breedeth  bankrupt  sorrow  ;
Oh,  squander  not  this  breath  that  heaven  hath  lent
thee,
Make  not  too  sure  another  breath  to  borrow.

N.  26,  B.
XVI.

Art  not  ashamed  thus  to  all  doors  to  crawl  ?
Take  thy  good  fortune,  and  thy  bad  withal ;

Know  for  a  surety  each  must  play  his  game,
As  fortune's  dice  from  heaven's  dice-box  may  fall.

N.  27,  L.


\


THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.

XVII.

This  jug  did  once,  like  me,  love's  sorrows  taste,
In  bonds  of  beauty's  tresses  chained  fast ;

This  very  handle  pendent  on  its  neck
Has  many  a  time  twined  round  a  slender  waist.

N.  28,  B.  L.

XVIII.

Days  changed  to  nights  ere  you  were  born  or  I,
And  heavens  did  run  their  course  continually ;
See  you  tread  gently  on  this  dust,  perchance
'Twas  once  the  apple  of  some  beauty's  eye.

x.  29,  L.

xix.

Pagodas  are,  like  mosques,  true  homes  of  prayer ;
'Tis  prayer  that  church  bells  waft  upon  the  air ;

Kaaba  and  temple,  rosary  and  cross,
All  are  but  divers  tongues  of  world-wide  prayer.

X.  30,  L.

xx.

The  "  tablet "  all  our  fortunes  doth  contain,

Writ  by  the  "  pen  "  that  heeds  not  bliss  nor  bane ;

'Twas  writ  at  first  whatever  was  to  be,
To  grieve  or  strive  is  labour  all  in  vain.

N.  31,  B.  L.


THE  QUATRAIK  VAR  KHAYYAM.         13

XXI.

You  m  d  yourself  to  heaven1

With  meo  alone  avails  hypocrisy;

ill  the  wiles  that  cunning  e'er  devised
help  you  to  outwit  your  destiny.

N.  34,  i-

XXII.

Behold  these  cups,  he  takes  such  pains  to  make  them,
And  then  enraged  lets  ruin  overtake  them ;

So  many  shapely  feet,  and  heads,  and  hands,
What  love  drives  him  to  make,  what  wrath  to  break
them  ?  X.  38,  B.  L

XXIII.

Death's  terrors  spring  from  foolish  fantasy ;
Death  yields  the  tree  of  immortality ;

Since  Isa  breathed  new  life  into  my  soul,
I  wash  my  hands  of  fear  and  dare  to  die.

N.  39,  L.

XXIV.

Khayyam,  why  weep  you  that  your  life  is  bad  ?
What  boots  it  thus  to  mourn  ?     Rather  be  glad,

He  that  sins  not,  no  title  makes  to  grace,
Sin  entails  grace,  then  prithee  why  so  sad  ?

N.  43,  B.  L.


14         THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.

XXV.

Still  doth  the  "  veil "  man's  utmost  ken  impede,
And  all  our  fond  conjecturings  mislead  :

Our  only  prospect  is  earth's  quiet  breast ;
'lis  given  to  none  the  dark  beyond  to  read.

N.  44,  B.

XXVI.

In  synagogue  and  cloister,  mosque  and  school,
Hell's  terrors  and  heaven's  lures  men's  bosoms  rule ;
But  they  "who  pierce  the  secrets  of  "  The  Truth,"
Sow  not  such  empty  chaff  their  hearts  to  fool.

N.  46,  B.  L.

XXVII.

Thus  spake  the  sage :  "  Wherefore  thy  days  consume
In  sleep  ?     Did  ever  sleep  make  roses  bloom  ?

Forgather  not  with  death's  twin-brother,  sleep ;
Thou  wilt  have  sleep  enough  within  thy  tomb."

x.  48,  B.  L.

XXVIII.

If  the  heart  knew  earth's  secrets  here  below,
At  death  'twould  know  heaven's  secrets  too,  I  trow ;
But  if  you  know  naught  here,  while  still  yourself,
To-morrow,  stripped  of  self,  what  can  you  know  ?

x.  49,  L.


THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.         15

XXIX.

My  law  it  is,  my  own  sweet  will  to  obey,
My  creed,  to  shun  the  fierce  sectarian  fray ;

I  wedded  luck,  and  offered  her  a  dower,
She  said,  "  I  want  none,  so  thy  heart  be  gay."

x.  56,  L.

xxx.

These  raging  passions  their  poor  lords  oppress,
As  dogs  with  noisy  barks  the  house  distress,
Foxes  are  they  in  craft,  and  hares  in  sloth,
In  fury  tigers,  wolves  in  wantonness.

x.  58,  L.

XXXI.

See  how  the  grass  yon  river  marge  doth  grace,
So  springs  the  down  upon  a  cherub's  face,

Tread  not  this  grass  with  scorn,  perchance  it  springs
From  some  poor  buried  beauty's  cold  embrace.

x.  59,  L.

xxxir.

Hearts  with  the  light  of  love  illumined  well,
"Whether  in  mosque  or  synagogue  they  dwell,

Have  their  names  written  in  the  book  of  love,
Unvexed  by  hopes  of  heaven  or  fears  of  hell.

N.  60,  L.


1 6  THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.

XXXIII.

If  wine  be  an  unpardonable  sin,

God  help  Khayyam  and  his  wine-bibbing  kin  !

If  all  poor  drouthy  souls  be  lodged  elsewhere,
Heaven's  plains  must  be  as  bare  as  maiden's  chin.

N.  64,  L.

xxxiv.

"What  is  the  world  ?  a  caravanserai,
A  pied  pavilion  of  night  and  day,

A  feast  whereat  a  thousand  Jamsheds  sat,
A  couch  whereon  a  thousand  Bahrams  lay.

x.  67,  L.

xxxv.

Here  in  this  palace,  where  Bahrain  held  sway,
The  wild  does  drop  their  young,  and  tigers  stray,

And  that  great  hunter  king,  ah  !  well-a-day,
Now  to  the  hunter  death  is  fallen  a  prey.

x.  69,  L.

xxxvi.

That  bosom  friend,  on  whom  you  so  rely,
Seems  to  clear  wisdom's  eyes  an  enemy,

Choose  not  your  friends  from  this  rude  multitude,
Their  converse  is  a  plague  'tis  best  to  fly.

X.  75,  B.  L.


THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.  i7

XXXVII.

This  body  La  a  tent,  which  for  a  space

Dotli  the  pure  soul  with  kingly  presence  grace,

When  lie  departs,  comes  the  tent-pitcher,  death,
Strikes  it,  and  moves  to  a  new  halting-place.

N.  SO,  L.
XXXVIII.

Khayyam,  who  long  time  stitched  the  tents  of  learning,
Has  fallen  into  a  furnace,  and  lies  burning,

Fate's  shears  have  cut  his  thread  of  life  asunder,
And  brokers  cast  his  lumber  out  with  spurning.

N.  81,  B.  L.

XXXIX.

All  a  long  summer's  day  here  Khayyam  lies
On  this  green  sward,  gazing  in  Houris'  eyes,

Yet  Mollas  say  he  is  a  graceless  dog,
Who  never  "ives  a  thought  to  Paradise.

N.  82,  B.  L.

XL.

0  soul,  so  soon  to  leave  this  coil  below,
And  pass  the  dread  mysterious  curtain  through,
Be  of  good  cheer,  and  joy  you  while  you  may,
You  wot  not  whence  you  come,  nor  whither  go.

N.  85,  B.  L.


iS  THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.

XLI.

Time  is  one  point  in  our  long  weary  years,
Jihun  a  drop  beside  our  floods  of  tears,

Hell  but  a  fire  enkindled  of  our  griefs,
And  heaven  a  moment's  peace  stolen  from  our  fears.

N.  90,  L.

XLII.

If  men  rebel,  what  of  omnipotence  ?
And  if  they  wander,  what  of  providence  ?

If  heaven  be  earned  by  works,  as  wages  due,
"What  room  for  mercy  and  benevolence  ?

x.  91,  L.

XLIII.

Khayyam  his  own  true  lineage  cannot  tell,
Whether  derived  from  heaven  or  from  hell ;

Howbeit  he  will  not  renounce  his  wine,
Nor  cash  in  hand  for  promised  credit  sell.

X.  92,  B.  L.

XLIV.

From  right  and  left  grave  Mollas  came,  and  stood,
Saying,  "  Eenounce  this  wine,  this  foe  of  good ; "

But  if  wine  be  my  foe,  as  they  declare,
I  swear  by  Allah  I  must  drink  his  blood.

X.  93,  L.


THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.  [9

XI. v.

The  good  and  evil  with  thy  nature  blent,

The  weal  and  woe  that  heaven's  decrees  have  sent,

Impute  them  not  to  motions  of  the  skies, —
Skies  than  thyself  ten  times  more  impotent.

N.  95,  B.  L.

XLVI.

"When  Allah  mixed  my  clay,  he  knew  full  well
My  future  acts,  and  could  each  one  foretell ;

'Twas  he  who  did  my  sins  predestinate,
Yet  thinks  it  just  to  punish  me  in  hell.

N.  99,  L.

XLVII.

To  him  who  all  the  week  his  thirst  allays
To  drink  on  Friday  too  is  no  dispraise ;

Adopt  my  creed,  and  count  all  days  the  same,
Be  worshippers  of  God  and  not  of  days.

N.  IOO.
XLVIII.

The  breezes  waft  Thy  fragrance,  and  it  takes
My  heart  so  that  his  master  he  forsakes,

And  him  forgetting,  pants  and  leaps  to  Thee,
And  so  himself  a  part  of  Thee  he  makes.

L.


-o         THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.

XLIX.

Did  no  fair  rose  my  paradise  adorn,

I  would  make  shift  to  deck  it  with  the  thorn ;

And  if  I  lacked  these  prayer-mats  and  these  beads,
Those  Christian  bells  and  stoles  I  would  not  scorn.

L.

L.

To  lover's  eyes  what  matters  dark  or  fair,
Or  if  the  loved  one  silk  or  sackcloth  wear,

Or  lie  on  dust  or  down,  or  rise  to  heaven,
Yea,  though  she  sink  to  hell,  he  seeks  her  there.

L.
LI.

To  friends  and  eke  to  foes  true  kindness  show :
No  kindly  heart  unkindly  deeds  will  do,

Harshness  will  alienate  a  bosom  friend,
And  kindness  reconcile  a  deadly  foe.


LEG.

The  potter  did  himself  these  vessels  frame,

What  makes  him  cast  them  out  to  scorn  and  shame  ?

If  he  has  made  them  well,  why  should  he  break  them  ?
And  though  he  marred  them,  they  are  not  to  blame.

L.


THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.         2

1  in.

By  fate  full  many  a  hi

And  many  a  Bprightly  rose  made  woebegone;
Plnme  thee  nut  on  thy  lusty  youth  and  strength,

Full  many  a  bud  is  blasted  ere  'tis  blown.

L.

L1V.

Gold  yields  not  wit,  yet  to  wit  lacking  bread
Earth's  flowery  carpet  seems  a  dungeon  bed :

'Tis  his  full  purse  that  makes  the  rose  to  smile,
Their  empty  hands  make  violets  hang  the  head.

L.
LV.

Drink  wine,  and  then  as  Mahmud  thou  wilt  reign,
And  list  to  music  passing  David's  strain ;

Think  not  of  past  or  future,  seize  to-day,
Then  one  to-day  will  not  be  lived  in  vain.

L.

»
LVL

Drink  wine,  of  human  travail  sweetest  meed,
Fruitage  of  youth  and  balm  of  aged  need ;

With  boon  companions,  and  with  wine  and  rose,
Rejoice  thy  spirit — that  is  life  indeed.

l.  B.


22  THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.

LVII.

Dame  Fortune's  smiles  are  full  of  guile.     Beware !
Her  scimitar  is  sharp  to  smite.     Take  care !

When  she  doth  drop  a  sweetmeat  in  thy  mouth,
'Tis  poisonous,  to  swallow  it  forbear !

B.  L.

LVIII.

Where'er  you  see  a  rose  or  tulip  bed,

Know  that  some  mighty  monarch's  blood  was  shed ;

And  where  the  violet  rears  its  purple  tuft,
Be  sure  some  blackmoled  maiden  rests  her  head.

B.  L.
LIX.

Wine  is  a  melting  ruby,  cup  its  mine,
Cup  is  the  body,  whose  pure  soul  is  wine ;

These  crystal  cups  which  smile  with  ruddy  wine
Example  tears,  the  which  heart's  blood  enshrine.

B.  L.
LX.

Long  must  you  sleep  within  your  silent  tomb,
Apart  from  friends,  in  solitary  gloom ;

Hark  while  I  whisper  softly  in  your  ear,
"  Never  again  may  withered  tulips  bloom."

B.  L.


THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.


I. XI.


They  preach  how  sweet  those  Ilouri  brides  will  be,
But,  Look  you,  so  is  wine  sweet,  taste  and  see.

Hold  fast  this  cash,  and  let  the  credit  be,
And  shun  the  din  of  empty  drums  with  me.


B.  L


LXII.

Thou'rt  bound  to  hide,  0  heavenly  Artisan,
From  foolish  creatures  Thy  mysterious  plan ;

Yet  while  Thou  treatest  him  with  such  reserve,
What  prescience  canst  Thou  expect  from  man  ?

b.

LXIII.

Once  and  again  my  soul  did  me  implore
To  teach  her,  if  I  might,  the  inspired  lore ;
I  bade  her  learn  the  Alif  well  by  heart,
Who  knows  that  letter  well  need  learn  no  more.

B.
LXIV.

I  came  not  hither  of  my  own  free  will,
And  go  against  my  wish,  a  puppet  still ;

Cup-bearer !  gird  thy  loins,  and  fetch  some  wine,
To  purge  the  world's  despite  my  goblet  fill.

B.  L.


24  THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.


LXV.


How  long  must  I  make  bricks  upon  the  sea?
Beshrew  this  vain  task  of  idolatry ;

Call  not  Khayyam  a  denizen  of  hell —
One  while  in  heaven  and  one  in  hell  is  he.


B.  L.


LXVI.


Sweet  is  the  breath  of  spring  to  rose's  face,

And  thy  sweet  face  adds  charm  to  this  fair  place ;

To-day  is  sweet,  but  yesterday  is  sad,
And  sad  all  mention  of  its  parted  grace.


B.  L.


LXVII.


To-night  thou'lt  sing  to  me  some  dulcet  air,
And  I  upon  thy  lips  will  hang,  0  fair !

Pour  me  some  wine  as  rosy  as  thy  cheeks,
My  mind  is  troubled  like  thy  ruffled  hair.


LXVIII.

Pen,  tablet,  heaven,  and  hell  I  looked  to  see
Above  the  skies  from  all  eternity;

At  last  the  master  sage  instructed  me  :
"  Pen,  tablet,  heaven,  and  hell  are  all  in  thee."

B.  L.


THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.  25

I.XIX.

The  fruit  of  certitude  you  cannot  pluck,
The  path  that  hails  thereto  you  never  struck,

Xor  ever  shook  the  bough  with  strenuous  hand  ;
To-day  is  lost,  hope  for  to-inorrow's  luck.

B.  L.

I.XX.

Now  springtide  showers  its  foison  on  the  land,    ^
And  lively  hearts  wend  forth,  a  joyous  band,

For  Isa's  breath  wakes  the  dead  earth  to  life,
And  trees  gleam  white  with  flowers,  like  Musa's  hand.

B.

I.XXI.

Alas  for  those  cold  hearts  that  never  burn
"With  love,  and  his  distracting  bondage  spurn ;
The  days  misspent  with  no  redeeming  love,
More  wasted  than  all  days, — most  wasted,  mourn.

B.  L.


26  THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.


!£e  ant)  iki)c.


LXXII.

0  fair  !  whose  cheeks  checkmate  red  eglantine,
And  draw  the  game  with  those  fair  maids  of  Chin ;

You  played  a  glance  against  the  King  of  Babel,
And  took  his  pawns  and  knights,  and  rooks  and  queen.

B.  L.

LXXIII.

"When  life  is  spent,  who  recks  of  joy  or  pain  ?
Or  cares  in  Naishapur  and  Balkh  to  reign  ?

Come,  quaff  your  wine,  for  after  we  are  gone,
Moons  will  still  wane  and  wax,  and  wax  and  wane.

N.  105,  B.  L.


THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.


3}al.


LXXIV.


The  sun  dotli  smite  the  roofs  with  Orient  ray,
And,  Kkosru-like,  his  wine-red  sheen  display ;

Arise,  and  drink,  the  herald  of  the  dawn
Proclaims  the  advent  of  another  day.


i..


LXXV.

He  who  the  world's  foundations  erst  did  lay,
Doth  bruise  full  many  a  bosom  day  by  day,

And  many  a  ruby  lip  and  musky  tress
Doth  coffin  in  the  earth,  and  shroud  with  clay.

n.  107,  l.

LXXVI.

Comrades,  I  pray  you,  physic  me  with  wine,
Make  this  wan  amber  face  like  rubies  shine,
And  if  I  die,  use  wine  to  wash  my  corpse,
And  frame  my  coffin  out  of  planks  of  vine.

N.  109,  B.  L.


28  THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.

LXXYII.

When  Allah  yoked  the  coursers  of  the  sun,
And  launched  the  Pleiades  their  race  to  run,

My  lot  was  fixed  in  fate's  high  chancery,
Then  why  blame  me  for  wrong  that  fate  has  done  ?

N.  1 10,  L.

LXXVIII.

0  thou  who  wouldst  thy  sins  extenuate,
Hear  what  all  pious  men  reiterate :

"  To  call  God's  prescience  the  cause  of  sin,
In  wisdom's  purview  is  mad  folly's  prate."

X.  1 1 6,  L.
LXXIX.

Whilom,  ere  youth's  conceit  had  waned,  methought
Answers  to  all  life's  problems  I  had  wrought;
But  now,  grown  old  and  wise,  too  late  I  see
My  life  is  spent,  and  all  my  lore  is  naught.

N.  113.

LXXX.

They  bring  us  hither  to  our  sore  undoing,

And  while  we  stay,  we  find  but  grief  and  rueing ;

And  last  we  go  against  our  wills,  nor  know
The  reason  of  our  coming,  nor  our  going.

N.  1 17,  L.


THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.         29

I. XX  XI.

When  I  recall  my  grievous  sins  to  mind,

Fire  burns  my  breast,  and  tears  my  vision  blind;

Yet,  when  a  slave  repents,  is  it  not  meet
His  lord  should  pardon,  and  again  be  kind  '.

N.  Il8,  L.

I.XXXII.

They,  at  'whose  lore  the  wide  world  stands  amazed,
Whose  thoughts  above  high  heaven's  self  are  raised,

Strive  to  know  Thee  in  vain,  and,  like  heaven's  wheel,
Their  heads  are  turning,  and  their  brains  are  dazed.

N.  120,  L.

LXXXIII.

This  world  will  last  long  after  Khayyam's  fame
Has  passed  away,  yea  and  his  very  name  ;

Aforetime  we  were  not,  and  none  did  heed,
When  we  are  dead  and  gone,  'twill  be  the  same.

N.  123.

LXXXIV.

The  sages  who  have  compassed  sea  and  land,
And  all  the  marvels  of  the  heavens  scanned,

What  think  you,  do  they  really  understand
The  scheme  on  which  this  universe  is  planned?

x.  124,  L.


3o'        THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.

LXXXV.

'Tis  passing  strange,  those  full-fed  noblemen
Find  their  own  lives  a  burden  sore;  but  when

They  meet  with  poorer  men,  not  slaves  to  sense,
They  hardly  deign  to  reckon  them  as  men.

N.  126.

LXXXVI.

Now  is  the  volume  of  my  youth  outworn,
And  all  my  springtide's  blossoms  rent  and  torn.

Ah,  bird  of  youth !  I  marked  not  how  you  came,
Nor  how  you  fled  and  left  me  thus  forlorn.

N.  128,  L.
LXXXVII.

These  fools,  by  dint  of  ignorance  most  crass,
Think  they  in  wisdom  all  mankind  surpass ;

And  glibly  do  they  damn  as  infidel
Whoever  is  not,  like  themselves,  an  ass.

N.  130.
?■

LXXXVIII.

Until  the  Loved  One  grants  the  boon  embrace,
The  heavens  will  shower  no  kisses  on  thy  face ;

They  say,  "  Eepent  while  there  is  time."   But  how
Can  I  repent  till  Allah  gives  me  grace  ?

N.  134,  L.


THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.         31

I. XXXIX.

When  I  am  dead,  take  me  and  grind  me  small,
So  that  I  bo  a  caution  unto  all ;

And  knead  me  into  clay  with  wine,  and  then
Use  me  to  stop  the  winejar's  mouth  withal.

N.  136,  L.

xc.

"What  though  the  sky,  with  his  blue  canopy,
Doth  close  us  in,  so  that  we  cannot  see  ?

In  the  Etern  Cupbearer's  wine,  methinks,
There  float  some  thousand  bubbles  such  as  we.

N.  137.

XCI.

Glad  hearts  who  seek  not  notoriety,
Nor  flaunt  in  gold  and  silken  bravery,

Haunt  not  the  shades  of  earth  like  gloomy  owls,
But  wing  their  way  Simurg-like  to  the  sky.

N.  I40,  L.

XCII.

The  tavern  drudge  to  wash  in  wine  is  fain,

"When  names  are  tarnished,  none  can  purge  the  stain ;

The  perfect  veil  of  innocence  once  torn,
Not  all  man's  labours  can  make  whole  again.

N.  141,  B.  L.


THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.
XCIII.

What  adds  my  service  to  Thy  majesty  ?
Or  how  can  sins  of  mine  dishonour  Thee  ?

Oh  pardon,  then,  and  punish  not ;  I  know
Thou'rt  slow  to  wrath,  and  prone  to  clemency.

N.  148,  L.

XCIV.

To-day  how  sweetly  breathes  the  temperate  air,
The  rains  have  newly  laved  the  parched  parterre,

And  bulbuls  cry,  in  notes  of  ecstasy,
"  Thou,  too,  0  pallid  rose,  our  wine  must  share."

N.  153,  L.
XCV.

Ere  you  succumb  to  shocks  of  mortal  pain,
Your  roses  gather,  and  your  winecups  drain ;

You  are  not  gold,  and  once  entombed  in  earth,
No  one  will  care  to  dig  you  up  again.

N.  156,  L.

XCVI.

Say,  did  my  coming  profit  thee,  0  sky  ?
Or  will  my  going  swell  thy  majesty  ?

Coming  and  going  put  me  to  a  stand,
Ear  never  heard  their  wherefore  or  their  why.

N.  157,  B.  L.


77/F  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.         35

x«vir.

The  heavenly  Sage,  whose  wit  exceeds  compare,
Doth  count  eacli  vein  and  number  every  hair ;
Fraud  and  pretences  may  prevail  with  men,
But  not  with  Him  to  whom  all  hearts  are  hare.

N.  158,  L

xcvui.

This  love  of  yours  is  feigned  and  incomplete,
And,  like  a  half-spent  blaze,  lacks  light  and  heat ;

True  love  is  his  who  through  long  days  and  nights
Eests  not,  nor  sleeps,  nor  craves  for  drink  or  meat.

N.  164,  B.  L.

xcix.

Some  feed  false  hopes  on  that  vain  fantasy
Of  Houris  feigned  in  Paradise  to  be ;

But  when  the  veil  is  lifted,  they  will  see
How  far  they  are  from  Thee,  how  far  from  Thee.

N.  167,  B.  L.


In  Paradise  are  Houris,  as  you  know,

And  fountains  that  with  wine  and  honey  flow;

If  these  be  lawful  in  the  world  above,
What  harm  to  love  the  like  down  here  below  ?

N.  168,  L.
C


34  THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.

CI.

My  spirit  doth  her  prisoned  state  bemoan  ;
Her  earthly  partner  she  would  fain  disown
And  quit,  did  not  the  stirrup  of  the  law
Upbear  her  foot  from  dashing  on  the  stone.

N.  171,  L.
CII.

What  sage  the  eternal  tangle  e'er  unravelled,
Or  one  short  step  beyond  his  nature  travelled  ?

From  pupils  to  the  masters  turn  your  eyes,
And  see  each  mother's  son  alike  is  gravelled.

N.  175,  B.  L.

cm.

Would  you  be  happy,  curb  your  carnal  will,
Sigh  not  for  lack  of  good  nor  stress  of  ill ;

Take  heart,  these  heavens  have  their  date  like  you,
They  roll  a  round  or  two  and  then  lie  still.

N.  176,  B.  L.
CIV.

What  eye  can  pierce  the  veil  of  heaven's  decrees,
Or  read  the  riddle  of  earth's  destinies  ?

Pondered  have  I  for  years  threescore  and  ten,
But  still  am  baffled  by  these  mysteries.

N.  177,  L.


THE  QUATRAINS  OP  OMAR  KHAYYAM.         35

cv.

Drink  wine  to  root  up  metaphysic  weeds

And  tangle  of  the  two  and  seventy  creeds ;
Do  not  forswear  that  wondrous  alchemy,
Twill  turn  to  gold  and  furnish  all  your  needs.

x.  179,  B.  L.

CVI.

To  drain  two  beakers  is  my  fixed  design,

Two  double  beakers  brimmed  with  heady  wine ;

Old  faith  and  reason  thus  will  I  divorce,
And  take  to  wife  the  daughter  of  the  vine.

x.  181,  L.

cm

True,  I  drink  wine,  like  every  man  of  sense,
For  I  know  Allah  will  not  take  offence ;

Before  time  was  He  knew  that  I  should  drink,
And  who  am  I  to  thwart  His  prescience  ?

X.  182,  B.  L.

'VIII.

When  false  dawn  streaks  the  east  with  cold  grey  line,
Arise  and  quaff  the  firstf ruits  of  the  vine ;

The  truth,  they  say,  tastes  bitter  in  the  mouth —
This  is  a  token  that  "  the  Truth  "  is  wine.

x.  185,  L.


36         THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.

CIX.

Now  spring  with  boscage  green  the  earth  embowers,
The  trees,  like  Musa's  hand,  grow  white  with  flowers,

As  'twere  by  Isa's  breath  the  plants  revive,
While  clouds  brim  o'er,  like  tearful  eyes,  with  showers.

n.  i  S6,  L.

ex.

The  showers  of  grape  juice  which  cupbearers  pour
Quench  fires  of  grief  in  many  a  sad  heart's  core ;

Praise  be  to  Allah,  who  hath  sent  this  balm
To  heal  sore  hearts  and  spirits'  health  restore.

N.  1 88,  B.  L.

CXI.

Can  alien  Pharisees  Thy  sweetness  tell

Like  us,  Thy  intimates,  who  nigh  Thee  dwell  ?

Thou  say'st,  "All  sinners  will  I  burn  in  hell ! "
Say  that  to  strangers,  we  know  Thee  too  well.

.  N.  190.
CXII.

When  the  sad  day  of  Khayyam's  death  comes  round,
Let  your  regrets,  0  friends,  in  wine  be  drowned  ;

And  when  the  wine-cups  reach  his  vacant  seat,
Let  one  deep  draught  be  poured  upon  the  ground.

N.  I92,  B.  L.


THB  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.         37

(XIII.

For  me  heaven's  sphere  do  music  ever  made,
Nor  jarring  discords  in  my  life  allayed;

Nor  granted  me  one  moment's  peace,  but  straight
Into  the  hands  of  grief  again  betrayed.

N.   193,  L.

IV.

Sooner  with  crusts  of  bread  contented  be,
And  water  from  the  well,  and  liberty,

Than  crouch  and  fawn  and  bend  the  vassal  knee
To  one  who  is  nothing  worth  compared  with  thee.

N.  462,  L.

cxv.

"While  moon  and  constant  stars  in  heaven  dwell,
No  starlike  ruby  can  bright  wine  excel ;

0  foolish  publicans,  what  can  you  buy
One  half  so  precious  as  the  goods  you  sell  ?

N.  463,  L.

cxvi.

The  shining  lights  of  this  our  age,  who  keep
Ablaze  the  torch  of  art  and  science  deep,

Never  see  day,  but,  whelmed  in  endless  night,
Recount  their  dreams  and  get  them  back  to  sleep.

N.  464,  L.


33  THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.

CXVII.

Sense  seeking  happiness  bids  us  pursue
All  present  joys  and  present  griefs  eschew ;
She  says  we  are  not  as  the  meadow  grass,
Which,  when  they  mow  it  down,  springs  up  anew.

B.  L.

CXVIII.

Slaves  of  vain  wisdom  and  philosophy,
Who  toil  at  Being  and  Nonentity,

Parching  your  brains  like  dry  and  shrivelled  grapes,
Be  wise  in  time  and  drink  grape-juice  like  me !

B.

cxix.

The  joyous  souls  who  quaff  potations  deep,
And  saints  who  in  the  mosques  sad  vigils  keep,

Are  lost  at  sea  alike,  and  find  no  shore  ;
One  only  wakes,  all  others  are  asleep.

B.  L.

cxx.

The  stars,  who  dwell  on  heaven's  empyreal  stage,
Still  mock  the  wise  diviners  of  our  age ;

Take  heed,  hold  fast  the  rope  of  mother  wit,
These  augurs  all  distrust  their  own  presage.

B.  L.


THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.

CXXL

.  not  one  whom  death  doth  much  dismay  ;

Life's  terrors  all  death's  terrors  far  outweigh  ;

This  life,  that  heaven  hath  lent  me  for  a  day,
I  will  pay  back,  when  it  is  time  to  pay.

B.  L.

CXXII.

Ah  :  what  hast  thou  to  do  with  me,  fair  foe  ?
Who  snarest  my  poor  head,  though  white  as  snow  ;

Thou'st  wrecked  the  mansion  long  resolve  did  build,
Ami  rent  the  vesture  penitence  did  sew.

B.

CXXIII.

Like  as  the  skies  rain  down  sweet  jessamine,
And  sprinkle  all  the  meads  with  eglantine ;
Eight  so,  from  out  this  jug  of  violet  hue
I  pour  in  lily  cups  this  rosy  wine.


cxxiv.

To  please  the  righteous  life  itself  I  sell,

And,  though  they  tread  me  down,  never  rebel ;

Ye  say,  "  Inform  us  what  and  where  is  hell !  "
111  company  Mill  make  this  earth  a  hell.

L.


4o  THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.

CXXV.

Hearts  are  like  tapers,  which  at  beauty's  eyes
Kindle  a  flame  of  love  that  never  dies ;

And  beauty  is  a  flame  where  hearts,  like  moths,
Offer  themselves  a  burning  sacrifice.

L.

cxxvi.

My  true  condition  will  I  thus  explain

In  two  short  verses,  which  the  whole  contain ;

"  From  love  to  Thee  I  now  lay  down  my  life,
In  hope  Thy  love  will  raise  me  up  again."

L.

CXXVII.

Thousands  of  skulls  like  bowls  the  potter  made,
And  thus  his  own  similitude  portrayed;

Tate's  bowl  has  poured  a  scanty  mess  for  thee,
And  on  my  board  full  flowing  bowls  arrayed.

L.
CXXVIII.

On  the  dread  day  of  final  scrutiny
They  rate  men's  value  by  their  quality ;
Get  wisdom  and  fair  qualities  to-day,
For  as  trees  fall  so  must  they  ever  lie.


THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.         41

iXXIX.

These  folk  are  asses,  laden  with  conceit,
And  noisy  drums  that  empty  sounds  repeat;
And  slaves  are  they  of  flashy  empty  names,
lire  a  name,  and  lo !  they  kiss  thy  feet.

L.

cxxx.

tell  of  these  skies  stories  without  number,
And  string  uncounted  beads  of  learned  lumber,

But  never  solve  the  riddle  of  the  skies,
So  sound  the  drum  and  march  away  to  slumber.

L.

CXXX  I.

"When  the  pure  spirit  doth  this  house  vacate,
Its  elements  assume  their  primal  state,

And  all  the  silken  furniture  of  life
Is  then  dismantled  by  the  blows  of  fate.

L.

CXXXII.

Man's  seed  is  water  from  the  void  sea  spray,
And  on  his  heart  grief's  fire  doth  ever  prey,

And  blown  is  he  bike  wind  about  the  world,
And  last  his  crumbling  earth  is  swept  away.

L.


THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.

CX  XXIII.

When  the  great  Founder  cast  me  in  his  mould,
He  mixed  much  baser  metal  with  my  gold,

I  left  his  crucible  with  all  these  flaws
And  blemishes  and  faults  you  now  behold.

L.


THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.         43


Be.


CXXXIV.

Wherefore  waste  thought  on  fate  and  destiny,
And  vainly  rack  thy  brain  to  find  the  key  ?
Give  respite  to  thy  brain,  and  let  fate  be ;
When  fate  was  fixed,  they  ne'er  consulted  thee.

x.  197,  L.

exxxv.

If  you  fulfil  the  ordinance  divine,
If  to  the  poor  the  legal  tithes  assign,

And  never  injure  one,  nor  yet  abuse,
I  guarantee  you  heaven,  and  now  some  wine.

N.  200,  B.
CXXXVI.

The  world  is  baffled  in  its  search  for  Thee,
Wealth  cannot  find  Thee,  no,  nor  poverty ;

Thou'rt  very  near  us,  but  our  ears  are  stopped,
Our  eyes  are  blinded  that  we  may  not  see.

x.  204.


44  THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.

CXXXVII.

I  saw  a  busy  potter  by  the  way
Kneading  with  might  and  main  a  lump  of  clay ;
And  lo  !  the  clay  cried,  "  Use  me  gently,  pray,
I  was  a  man  myself  but  yesterday."

N.  211,  B.  L.

CXXXYIII.

Oh  !  wine  is  richer  than  the  realm  of  Jam,
More  luscious  than  the  food  of  Miriam ;

Sweeter  are  sighs  that  drunkards  heave  at  morn
Than  strains  of  Bu  Sa'id  and  Bin  Adham.

N.  215,  B.  L.

CXXXIX.

Deep  in  the  rondure  of  the  empyreal  blue
There  lies  a  cup,  hid  from  all  mortal  view,

Which  comes  to  all  in  turn ;  oh !  sigh  not  then,
But  drink  it  boldly  when  it  comes  to  you.

L.


THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.         45


Zt.


CXL.

0  heakt  !  this  world  is  but  a  fleeting  show,
Why  let  its  empty  griefs  distress  thee  so  ?

Bear  up  and  face  thy  fate  ;  the  eternal  pen
Will  not  unwrite  his  roll  for  thee,  I  trow.

N.  216,  B.  L.

CXLI.

Who  e'er  returned  of  all  that  went  before
To  tell  of  that  long  road  they  travel  o'er  ?

Set  not  your  heart  on  earth,  you  too  must  go,
And,  when  you  go,  you  will  return  no  more.

N.  217,  L.

CXLII.

In  taverns  oft  Thy  presence  I  discern,

When  dwellers  in  the  mosques  Thy  absence  mourn ;

0  Thou,  the  first,  the  last,  the  all  in  all,
'Tis  Thine  to  save  or,  an  Thou  list,  to  burn !

N.  222,  a  L.


46         THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.

CXLIII.

I  flew  here  as  a  bird  from  the  wild,  in  aim
Towards  a  higher  seat  my  course  to  frame ;

But,  finding  here  no  guide  who  knows  the  way,
Fly  out  by  that  same  door  through  which  I  came.

N.  225,  L.

cxliv.

He  binds  us  fast  in  nature's  cogent  chain,
And  yet  bids  us  our  natures  to  restrain ;

These  counter  precepts  how  can  we  obey  ?
"  Hold  the  jar  slant,  but  yet  the  wine  retain."

N.  226,  L.
CXLV.

They  go  away,  and  none  is  seen  returning
To  teach  the  after-life's  mysterious  learning ;

'Twill  not  be  shown  for  dull,  mechanic  prayers,
For  prayer  is  naught  without  deep  heartfelt  yearning.

N.  227,  L.

CXLVI.

Go  to !     Cast  dust  on  those  deaf  skies,  who  spurn
Thy  orisons  and  bootless  cries,  and  learn

To  drain  the  wine-cup  and  adore  the  fair.
Of  all  who  go  dost  thou  see  one  return  ?

N.  228,  L.


THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.         47

(XI. VII.

Khayyam  Btrings  not  the  fair  pearls  of  good  deeds,
N.t  sweeps  from  off  his  soul  sin's  noisome  weeds ;

N'  7(  rthele88  he  humbly  hopes  for  grace,
Seeing  that  One  as  two  he  ne'er  misreads.

L.  b.  x.  229  (except  line  4).

CXI.VIII.

W(  •  are  but  chessmen,  who  to  move  are  fain
Just  as  the  great  Chessplayer  doth  ordain ;

He  moves  us  on  life's  chessboard  to  and  fro,
And  then  in  death's  box  shuts  us  up  again.

N.  231,  B.  L.
CXLIX.

I  put  my  lips  to  the  cup,  for  I  did  yearn
The  secret  of  the  future  life  to  learn ;

And  from  his  lip  I  heard  a  whisper  drop,
"  Drink  !  for  once  gone  you  never  will  return."

B.  L.
CL.

We  lay  in  the  void  inane,  asleep  and  still ;

He  said,  "  Awake  !     Taste  the  world's  good  and  ill ;  "

Here  we  are  puzzled  by  the  strange  command,
From  slanted  jars  no  single  drop  to  spill.

L


48  THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.

CLI.

What  is  this  soul  that  tenants  heart  and  brain  ?
Though  'tis  not  easy,  I  will  make  it  plain ;

'Tis  but  a  breath  blown  from  the  vasty  deep,
And  then  blown  back  to  that  same  deep  again.

L.


THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.         49


gm


CLII.

0  Thou  who  know'st  the  hearts  of  one  and  all,
In  hours  of  need  who  aidest  one  and  all,

Grant  me  repentance,  and  accept  my  plea,
Who  dost  accept  the  pleas  of  one  and  all.

N.  236,  L.

CLIII.

1  saw  a  bird  perched  on  the  walls  of  Tus,
Before  him  lay  the  skull  of  Kai  Kaiiis,

And  thus  he  made  his  moan,  "  Alas !  poor  king,
Thy  drums  are  hushed,  thy  clarions  have  sung  truce."

N.  237,  L.

CLIV.

What  launched  that  golden  orb  his  course  to  run,
What  wrecks  his  bases  when  his  course  is  done,

Was  never  weighed  in  reason's  balances,
Nor  proved  by  touch  of  keenest  wit's  touchstone.

L.

D


5o         THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.


^f)in*


CLV.

0  friend  !  to  Khayyam's  counsel  lend  thine  ear,
To  don  the  garb  of  hypocrites  forbear,

This  life  a  moment  is,  the  next  all  time,
Sell  not  eternity  for  worldly  gear.

N.  240,  b.  L.

CLYI.

Once  in  a  potter's  shop  a  company
Of  goodly  cups  and  jars  I  did  espy,

And  when  they  saw  me,  one  cried  out  and  said,
"  Who  made,  who  sells,  who  buys  this  crockery  ? "

N.  243,  B.  L.

CLYII.

Although  the  creeds  number  some  seventy-three,

1  hold  with  none  but  that  of  loving  Thee ;
What  matter  faith,  unfaith,  obedience,  sin  ?

Thou'rt  all  we  need,  the  rest  is  vanity.

K  248.


THE   QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.


Eaf  antJ  Earn,


CLVIII.

See  !  the  dawn  breaks  and  rends  night's  canopy ;
Arise  and  drain  a  morning  draught  with  me ;

Away  with  gloom,  full  many  a  dawn  will  break
Looking  for  us,  and  we  not  here  to  see.

N.  255,  L.
CLIX.

This  world  a  hollow  pageant  you  should  deem,
For  wise  men  know  things  are  not  what  they  seem ;

Be  of  good  cheer  and  drink,  and  so  shake  off
These  vain  delusions  of  a  baseless  dream.

N.  256.
CLX.

The  etern  "  Has  been  "  and  that  etern  "  To  be  "
Mock  man's  experience  and  man's  theory ;
Away  with  science,  wine  is  worth  it  all,
To  all  these  riddles  wine  affords  a  key.

B.  L.


52  THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.


CLXI.


I  solved  all  problems  down  from  Saturn's  wreath
Into  the  deepest  heart  of  earth  beneath,

And  leaped  out  free  from  bonds  of  fraud  and  lies ;
Yea,  every  knot  was  loosed  save  that  of  death.


L.


CLXII.

'Twill  not  be  shown  to  pride  of  lofty  thought,
Nor  yet  with  lavished  gold  may  it  be  bought ;

But  if  you  sacrifice  your  fifty  years,
Haply  some  glimpse  of  "  Truth  "  may  then  be  caught.

L.


THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.  53


W  i  m-


t'Lxin.


IIeak  my  complaint,  ye  ever-rolling  skies,
And  loose  me  from  your  chain  of  tyrannies ;
If  none  but  fools  your  favours  may  enjoy,
Then  favour  me, — I  am  not  over  wise.


N.  263,  L.


CLXIV,


Come,  fill  your  cups  and  leave  anxiety,
For  -what  is  past  and  what  is  yet  to  be,

Our  prisoned  spirits,  lent  us  for  a  day,
A  while  from  reason's  bondage  shall  go  free.

N.  265,  L.

CLXV.

These  circling  heavens,  which  make  us  so  dismayed,
I  liken  to  a  lamp's  revolving  shade ;

The  sun  the  candlestick,  the  earth  the  shade,
And  men  the  trembling  forms  thereon  portrayed.

N.  267,  B.  L.


54         THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.

CLXVI.

Who  was  it  that  did  mix  my  clay  ?     Not  I.
Who  wove  my  web  of  silk  and  dross  ?     Not  I.

Who  wrote  upon  my  forehead  all  my  good
And  all  my  evil  deeds  ?     In  sooth  not  I.

n.  368,  L.

CLXVII.

Ah,  why  forecast  to-morrow's  hopes  and  fears  ?
To-day  at  least  is  ours,  0  cavaliers ;

To-morrow  we  shall  quit  this  inn,  and  march
With  comrades  who  have  marched  seven  thousand  years.

N.  269,  L.

CLXVIII.

Beshrew  these  baleful  skies  who  circling  run ;
Beshrew  my  nature's  imperfection,

Not  wise  enough  to  vanquish  carnal  lusts,
And  all  too  weak  the  world's  allures  to  shun.

N.  273,  L.

CLXIX.

On  earth's  green  carpet  many  sleepers  lie,
And  hid  beneath  it  others  I  descry ;

And  others,  not  yet  come  or  passed  away,
People  the  wide  waste  of  Nonentity.

N.  274,  L.


THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.         55

\\.

Think  not  I  dread  to  see  my  spirit  fly
Through  the  dark  gates  of  fell  mortality;

]  teath  has  no  terrors  when  the  life  is  true,
"lis  living  ill  that  makes  us  fear  to  die.

N.  276.

CLXXI.

Let  us  shake  off  dull  reason's  incubus,
Our  tale  of  years  or  days  cease  to  discuss,

And  take  our  jugs,  and  plenish  them  with  wine,
Before  grim  potters  make  their  jugs  of  us.

N.  277,  b.  L.

CLXXII.

Against  my  lusts  I  war,  alas  !  in  vain,
And  grievous  overthrows  ever  sustain  ;

I  trust  Thou  wilt  assoil  me  of  my  sins,
But  even  so  my  shame  will  still  remain.

N.  282,  B.  L.
CLXXIII.

In  these  twin  compasses,  0  soul !  you  see
One  body  with  two  heads,  like  you  and  me,

Which  wander  round  one  centre  circlewise,
But  at  the  last  in  one  same  point  agree.

N.  283,  L.


56         THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.

CLXXIV.

I  went  into  a  mosque  the  other  day,
But,  by  great  Allah,  it  was  not  to  pray ;

No,  but  to  steal  a  prayermat,  now  'tis  worn
I  go  to  filch  another  mat  away.

N.  285,  B.  L.

CLXXT.

When  death  has  trod  to  dust  my  lifeless  brain,
And  shed  my  lively  plumage  on  the  plain,

Then  mould  me  to  a  cup,  and  fill  with  wine,
Haply  its  scent  may  make  me  breathe  again.

N.  29O,  B.

CLXXVI.

All  my  life  long  from  drink  I  have  not  ceased,
And  drink  I  will  on  Kader's  holy  feast,

And  throw  my  arms  about  the  winejar's  neck,
And  kiss  its  lip,  and  clasp  it  to  my  breast.

N.  298,  L.

CLXXVII.

I  know  what  is,  and  what  is  not,  I  know
The  lore  of  things  above  and  things  below ;

But  all  this  lore  will  cheerfully  forego,
If  one  a  deeper  lore  than  drink  can  show.

N.  300,  B.  L.


THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR   KHAYYAM.  57

01 XXVIII.

Though  I  drink  vine,  I  am  no  libertine,
Xor  am  I  grasping  save  of  cups  of  wine,

I  scrapie  to  adore  myself,  like  you,
And  so  adore  the  daughter  of  the  vine.

x.  301,  L.

CLXXIX.

^Ye  make  the  wine-jar's  lip  our  place  of  prayer,
And  drink  in  lessons  of  true  manhood  there,
And  pass  our  lives  in  taverns,  if  perchance
The  time  misspent  in  mosques  we  may  repair.

N.  303.

CLXXX.

With  fancies,  as  with  wine,  our  heads  we  turn,
Aspire  to  heaven,  and  earthly  trammels  spurn,
Eut  when  we  drop  this  fleshly  clog,  we  learn
From  dust  we  came,  and  back  to  dust  return.

N.  305.
CLXXXI.

I  never  drank  of  joy's  sweet  cordial,

Eut  grief  did  spoil  the  draught  with  added  gall,

Nor  dipped  my  bread  in  pleasure's  piquant  salt,
Eut  salt  remorse  did  make  me  smart  withal.

x.  310.


5 8  THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.

CLXXXII.

One  hand  with  Koran,  one  with  winecup  (light,
I  half  incline  to  wrong,  and  half  to  right,

A  sorry  Moslem,  yet  not  heathen  quite, —
Holds  heaven's  blue  duomo  such  another  wight  ?

N.  315.  L.

CLXXXIII.

Present  my  compliments  to  Mustafa,
And  ask  if  he  will  condescend  to  say,

Why  it  has  pleased  him  to  prohibit  wine,
When  he  allows  us  all  to  drink  sour  whey  ?

N.  316,  L.

CLXXXIV.

Tell  Khayyam,  for  a  master  of  the  schools,
He  strangely  misinterprets  my  plain  rules,

Where  have  I  said  that  wine  is  wrong  for  all  ?
"lis  lawful  for  the  wise,  but  not  for  fools.

N.  317,  L.
CLXXXV.

I  studied  with  the  masters  long  ago,
And  long  ago  did  master  all  they  know ;

What  is  the  end  and  issue  of  it  all  ?
I  came  like  water,  and  like  wind  I  go.

b.  L.


77//:'  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.


CL  xxx  vi.


O  queen,  with  your  attacks  so  obstinate,
Yon  make  this  poor  king  quite  disconsolate,

You  move  your  pawns,  and  knights,  and  rooks  about,
And  drive  him  to  and  fro,  and  then  checkmate.


L


CI.XXXVII.


To  find  the  cup  of  Jamshed's  treasury

I  laboured  long,  and  compassed  land  and  sea,

And  last  I  asked  the  seer,  who  answer  made,
"  Jamshed's  world-mirror  is  displayed  in  thee."


CLXXXVIII.


Death  finds  us  soiled,  though  we  were  pure  at  birth,
With  grief  we  go,  although  we  came  with  mirth,

Watered  with  tears,  and  burned  by  fires  of  woe,
And  casting  life  to  the  winds,  we  rest  in  earth.


L.


CLXXXIX.


Quoth  rose,  "  I  am  the  Yusuf  flower,  I  swear,
For  in  my  mouth  rich  golden  gems  I  bear."

I  said,  "  Show  me  another  proof."     Quoth  she,
"  Behold  this  blood-stained  vesture  that  I  wear."


[,.


6o  THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.


5l2un.


cxc.

0  man,  creation's  glorious  summary,
Gaining  and  spending  too  much  trouble  thee,

Arise  and  quaff  the  Etern  Cupbearer's  wine,
And  live  from  life's  annoys  for  ever  free.

x.  319,  L.

CXCI.

Make  smooth  for  me  the  world,  this  stony  place,
With  fell  dishonour  blacken  not  my  face,

And  grant  me  peace  to-day,  but  for  the  morrow

1  leave  it  in  Thy  hands,  and  hope  for  grace.

sr.  321,  l.

CXCII.

Souls,  that  are  well  informed  of  this  world's  state,
Its  weal  and  woe  with  equal  mind  await,

For  be  it  woe  we  meet,  or  be  it  weal,
The  weal  doth  pass,  and  woe  too  hath  its  date.

x.  322,  B.  L.


THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.         61
cxrin.

Lament  not  fortune's  mutability.

But  seize  her  fickle  favours  ere  they  flee,

If  others  never  mourned  departed  bliss,
How  should  a  turn  of  fortune  come  to  thee  ?

X.  325,  L

CXCIV.

Khayyam's  advice,  0  comrades,  bear  in  mind,
Shun  not  the  revellers,  though  they  be  maligned,
Cast  down  the  gates  of  abstinence  and  prayer,
And  beg  or  steal  some  drink,  but  aye  be  kind.

N.  327,  B.  L.

cxcv.

This  world  a  body  is,  and  God  its  soul,
And  angels  are  its  senses,  who  control

Its  limbs, — the  creatures,  elements,  and  spheres ;
Such  Unity  informs  and  rules  the  whole.

N.  328,  L.

CXCVI.

"Wouldst  thou  have  fortune  bow  her  neck  to  thee  ?
Then  feed  thy  soul  with  joy,  and  drink  like  me,

And  hold  a  creed  like  mine,  and  thou  shalt  drain
The  cup  of  wine,  not  that  of  misery.

N.  330.


62  THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.

CXCVII.

You  have  no  thought,  no  care,  no  shame,  I  trow,
For  good  you  leave  undone,  for  ill  you  do ;

Suppose  by  rascal  sleights  you  gain  the  world,
You  cannot  take  it  with  you  when  you  go.

N.  335,  l-

CXCVIII.

Some  look  for  truth  in  creeds  and  rites  and  rules,
Some  grope  for  doubts  or  dogmas  in  the  schools ;

But  from  behind  the  veil  a  voice  proclaims,
"  Your  road  lies  neither  here  nor  there,  0  fools  ! "

N.  337,  L.

CXCIX.

One  bull  is  seen  in  heaven  named  Parwin,
Another  lurks  beneath  the  earth  unseen,

And  thus  to  wisdom's  eyes  mankind  appear
A  drove  of  asses  two  fat  bulls  between.

N.  338,  l.

cc.

Had  I  the  right  great  Allah  to  advise,
I  would  bid  him  sweep  away  this  earth  and  skies,
And  build  a  better,  where,  unclogged  and  free,
The  clear  soul  might  essay  her  high  emprise.

N.  340,  L.


THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.         63

1  1  1.

I  do  not  undervalue  fair  renown,

Yet  scorn  to  truckle  to  the  vulgar  frown;

Better  to  lie  in  taverns,  drunk  with  wine,
Than  feign  devotion  to  secure  a  crown.

N.  345,  L.

ecu.

What  scurvy  tricks  this  wheel  of  heaven  doth  play !
How  he  doth  love  to  tear  our  friends  away !

Seize  ye  this  fleeting  moment  ere  'tis  gone ;
Fear  not  to-morrow,  mourn  not  yesterday.

B.

CCIII.

Nor  you  nor  I  can  read  our  destiny ;
To  that  dark  riddle  we  can  find  no  key.

They  talk  of  you  and  me  behind  the  veil,
But  when  the  veil  is  lifted,  where  are  we  ?


64         THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.


CO  a  to-


CCIV.

Blame  not  this  ball,  impelled  by  bat's  hard  blows,
That  now  to  right  and  now  to  left  it  goes ;

That  One  who  wields  the  bat  and  smites  the  strokes,
He  knows  what  drives  thee,  yea,  He  knows,  He  knows.

L.

CCV.

The  wheel  of  heaven  still  holds  his  set  design
To  take  away  thy  life,  0  love,  and  mine.

Sit  we  on  this  green  turf,  'twill  not  be  long
Ere  turf  will  hide  my  dust  along  with  thine.

N.  348,  L.

ccvi.

Yon  palace  whose  roofs  touch  the  empyreal  blue,
Where  kings  bowed  down  and  rendered  homage  due,

The  ringdove  is  its  only  tenant  now,
And  perched  aloft  she  wails,  "  Coo  Coo,  Coo  Coo."

N.  350>  l.


THE  Ql\ !  TIL  I  INS  OF  OM.  1 R  KII.  1 1  1  J  M.  65

CCVII.

We  come  and  go,  but  for  the  gain,  where  is  it  ?
And  spin  the  woof,  but  for  the  warp,  where  is  it  ?

And  many  a  weary  soul  has  burned  to  dust
In  heaven's  blue  rondure,  but  their  smoke,  where  is  it  ?

L.  b.  n.  351  (except  line  2).


66         THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.


Ipe.


CCVIII.

Tis  well  all  other  blessings  to  forego

For  wine,  best  gift  that  heaven  did  e'er  bestow,

Kalenders'  raptures  pass  all  things  that  are
From  moon  on  high  down  unto  fish  below.

N.  358,  B.  L.

ccix.

See  how  these  heavens,  like  an  inverted  cup,
Stoop  down,  and  how  mankind  keep  gaping  up ;

So  this  jug,  stooping  o'er  his  love  the  cup,
Drops  grapeblood  in  her  mouth,  for  her  to  sup.

N.  363,  B.  L.

ccx.

The  drop  wept  for  his  severance  from  the  sea,
But  the  sea  smiled,  for,  "  I  am  all,"  said  he,

"  And  naught  exists  outside  my  unity,
My  one  point  circling  apes  plurality."

N.  365-


THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.         67

CCXI.

I'.ulbuls,  doting  on  roses,  oft  complain

How  froward  breezes  rend  their  veils  in  twain ;

Sit  we  beneath  this  rose,  full  many  a  rose
Has  sprung  from  earth,  and  fallen  to  earth  again.

x.  370,  B.  L.

CCXII.

Suppose  you  hold  the  world  in  fee,  what  then  ?
When  life's  last  page  is  read  and  turned,  what  then?

You  may  outlive  this  present  century,
And  haply  see  the  next,  but  what  comes  then  ?

N.  372,  L.

ccxur.

Alone  of  all  the  vegetable  tribe,
Cypress  and  lily  men  as  "  free  "  describe,

This  has  a  hundred  tongues  yet  holds  her  peace,
And  that  as  many  hands  which  grasp  no  bribe.

N.  373,  L-

CCXIV.

"We  rest  our  hopes  on  Thy  free  grace  alone,
Nor  seek  by  merits  for  our  sins  to  atone,

Mercy  drops  where  it  lists,  and  estimates
111  done  as  undone,  good  undone  as  done.

N.  379,  L.


68  THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.

CCXV.

0  thou  who  hast  done  ill,  and  ill  alone,
Think  not  to  find  forgiveness  at  the  throne  ;
Hope  not  for  mercy,  for  good  left  undone
Cannot  he  done,  nor  evil  done  undone.

N.  361,  L.

ccxvi.

0  unenlightened  race  of  humankind  !
Ye  are  a  vapour,  a  mere  breath  of  wind,

An  empty  nothing  hovering  in  the  abyss,
A  void  before  you,  and  a  void  behind.

L.

CCXVII.

Pilgrim,  thy  back  is  bent,  thy  powers  fail,
Oblivion  o'er  thy  name  doth  draw  its  veil,

Thy  nails  are  thickened  like  a  horse's  hoof,
Thy  beard  is  ragged  as  an  ass's  tail.

L.


QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.         69


gc-


CCXVIII.

0  SOUL  !  could  you  but  doff  this  tiesh  and  bone,
You  would  soar  a  sprite  about  the  heavenly  throne;

Had  you  no  shame  to  leave  your  starry  home,
And  drop  to  earth  like  some  poor  downcast  stone  ?

B.  L.

CCXIX.

Why  nourish  bootless  grief  and  vain  despair  ?
Walk  justly  in  this  naughty  world,  0  fair !

And  since  the  substance  of  this  world  is  naught,
Think  you  are  not,  and  so  shake  off  dull  care.

B.  L.

CCXX.

1  never  would  have  come,  had  I  been  asked ;
I  would  as  lief  not  go,  if  I  were  asked ;

And,  to  be  short,  I  would  annihilate
All  comiug,  being,  going,  were  I  asked.

B.  L.


70         THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.

CCXXI.

0  heart !  canst  thou  the  darksome  riddle  read  ?
When  wisest  men  have  failed,  wilt  thou  succeed  ?

Quaff  wine,  and  make  thy  heaven  here  below,
"Who  knows  if  heaven  above  will  be  thy  meed  ?

N.  383,  B.  L.

ccxxn.

They  that  have  passed  away  and  gone  before
Sleep  in  delusion's  dust  for  evermore ;

Go,  boy,  and  fetch  some  wine,  this  is  the  truth—
Their  dogmas  were  but  air,  and  wind  their  lore.

N.  384,  B.  L.

CCXXIII.

Slave  of  four  elements  and  sevenfold  heaven,
Who  aye  bemoan  the  thrall  of  these  eleven,

Drink !  I  have  told  you  seventy  times  and  seven,
Once  o-one,  nor  hell  will  send  vou  back,  nor  heaven.

N.  389,  L.

CCXXIV.

Thou  dost  with  frequent  snare  beset  the  way
The  pilgrim's  wandering  footsteps  to  betray,

And  all  poor  wretches  tangled  in  thy  snares
Dost  seize  as  prisoners  and  as  rebels  slay.

N.  390>  b.


THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.         71

1  cxxv.

All,  potter,  stay  thine  hand!     With  ruthless  art
Put  not  to  such  base  use  man's  mortal  part ;
See,  thou  art  mangling  on  thy  cruel  wheel
ieridun's  fingers  and  Kai  Khosru's  heart.

N.  395,  l.

LCXXVI.

From  the  world's  kitchen  crave  not  to  obtain
Thoss  dainties,  seeming  real,  but  really  vain,

Wnich  greedy  worldlings  gorge  to  their  own  loss ;
Renounce  that  loss,  so  loss  shall  prove  thy  gain.

N.  397,  15.  L.

CCXXYII.

Cloud  not  thy  fellows'  hearts  with  dark  despite,
So  that  they  cry  to  God  the  livelong  night ;

Nor  plume  thee  on  thy  wealth  and  might,  which  thieves
May  steal  by  night,  or  death,  or  fortune's  might.

N.  398.

CCXXV1II.

This  soul  of  mine  was  once  Thy  cherished  bride,
What  caused  Thee  to  divorce  her  from  Thy  side  ?

Is  it  Thy  purpose  to  forsake  her  quite,
That  Thou  dost  doom  her  in  this  world  to  abide  ?

N.  399,  L.


72  THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.

CCXXIX.

Ah  !  would  there  were  a  place  of  rest  from  pain,
Which  we  poor  pilgrims  might  at  last  attain,

And  after  many  thousand  wintry  years
Renew  our  youth  like  flowers,  and  bloom  again.

N.  400,  L.

ccxxx.

Molla !  give  heed,  if  thou  true  Moslem  be,
Quit  saintly  show  and  feigned  austerity,

And  quaff  the  wine  that  blessed  Ali  pours,
And  sport  with  Houris  'neath  this  shady  tree.

N.  ^03.
CCXXXI.

Last  night  I  dashed  my  cup  against  a  stone
In  a  mad  drunken  freak,  as  I  must  own,

And  lo !  the  cup  cried,  "  You  who  treat  me  so
One  of  these  days  you  shall  be  overthrown."

N".  404,  B.  L.

CCXXXII.

Audit  yourself,  your  true  account  to  frame ;
See,  you  go  empty,  as  you  empty  came ;

You  say,  "  I  will  not  drink  and  peril  life,"
But,  drink  or  no,  you  must  die  all  the  same.

N.  408,  L.


THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.  77,

ccxxxnr.

Open  the  door  of  Truth,  0  Usher  purest !

And  guide  the  way,  0  Thou  of  guides  the  surest !

Directors  born  of  rneu  shall  not  direct  me,
Their  counsel  conies  to  naught,  but  Thou  endurest.

N.  409,  L.

(CXXXIV.

Give  me  a  flask  of  wine,  a  crust  of  bread,
A  quiet  mind,  a  book  of  verse  to  read,

With  thee,  0  love,  to  share  my  lowly  roof,
I  would  not  take  the  Sultan's  crown  instead.

n.  413,  B.  L.

ccxxxv.

Whilst  thou  dost  wear  this  fleshly  livery
Step  not  beyond  the  bounds  of  destiny ;

Bear  up,  though  puissant  Eustam  be  thy  foe,
And  crave  no  guerdon  e'en  from  Hatim  Tai.

N.  416,  L.

CCXXXVL

Behold,  where'er  you  turn  your  ravished  eyes,
Sweet  verdure  springs,  and  crystal  Kausars  rise,

And  plains,  once  bare  as  hell,  now  smile  as  heaven ;
Enjoy  this  heaven  with  maids  of  Paradise.

n.  420,  B.  L.


74  THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.

CCXXXVII.

When  morning  silvers  the  dark  firmament,
Why  shrills  the  bird  of  dawning  his  lament  ?
It  is  to  show  in  dawn's  bright  looking-glass
How  of  thy  careless  life  a  night  is  spent.

N.  426.

CCXXXVIII.

Cup-bearer,  come,  from  thy  full-throated  ewer
Pour  blood-red  wine,  the  world's  despite  to  cure ;

Where  can  I  find  another  friend  like  wine,
So  genuine,  so  solacing,  so  pure  ?

N.  427  L.

ccxxxix.

Though  you  should  sit  in  wise  Aristu's  room,
Or  rival  Csesar  on  his  throne  of  Bum,

Drain  Jamshed's  goblet,  for  your  end  is  the  tomb,
Yea,  were  you  Bahrain's  self,  your  end  is  the  tomb.

n.  430.

CCXL.

Last  night  into  a  potter's  shop  I  strayed,

Who  turned  his  wheel,  and  deftly  plied  his  trade,

And  out  of  monarchs'  heads  and  beggars'  feet
Fair  heads  and  handles  for  his  pitchers  made.

N.  431,  l.


THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.         75

CCXI.I.

0  love!  before  'tis  time  for  us  tu  go,

And  potters  make  their  jugs  of  me  and  you,

Pour  from  this  jug  some  wine  of  headache  void,
And  fill  your  cup,  and  fill  my  goblet  too.

N.  433.  L-

CI  XLII.

Who  framed  the  lots  of  quick  and  dead  but  Thou?
Who  turns  the  wheel  of  baleful  fate  but  Thou  ?
We  are  Thy  slaves,  our  wills  are  not  our  own,
We  are  Thy  creatures,  our  Creator  Thou !

N.  436.
CCXLIII.

A  Molla  spied  a  harlot,  and  quoth  he,
"  You  seem  a  slave  to  drink  and  lechery,"

And  she  made  answer,  "  What  I  seem  I  am,
But,  Molla,  are  you  all  you  seem  to  be  ? "

N.  441,  L.

CCXLIV.

Now  in  thick  clouds  Thy  face  Thou  dost  immerse,
And  now  display  it  in  this  universe ;

Thou  the  spectator,  Thou  the  spectacle,
Sole  to  Thyself  Thy  glories  dost  rehearse.

x.  443,  L.


76         THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.

CCXLV.

]  tetter  to  make  one  soul  rejoice  with  glee,
Than  plant  a  desert  with  a  colony ;

Sooner  one  freeman  bind  with  chains  of  love,
Than  set  a  thousand  chained  captives  free.

N.  444.  L.

CCXLYI.

0  man,  whoe'er  thou  art,  if  thou  be  fain
To  seek  thy  pleasure  in  another's  pain,

Then  mourn  the  funeral  of  thy  pleasant  wit,
Which  thou  thyself  with  thine  own  hand  hast  slain.

N.  446,  L.

ccxlvii.

Come,  brim  my  cup  with  foaming  head  of  wine,
And  bring  a  hunch  of  bread,  a  mutton  chine,
And  sit  you  by  me,  0  sweet  tulip  cheeks ;

1  would  not  change  the  Sultan's  state  for  mine.

N.  448,  L.

CCXLYIII.

They  call  you  "  wicked  "  if  you  are  widely  known,
And  "  sly  intriguer  "  if  you  live  alone ;

Trust  me,  though  you  were  Khizer  or  Elias,
'Tis  best  to  know  none  and  be  known  of  none.

N.  449.


rill    QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.         77

here  am  I  with  wine  and  fexea  again !
I  did  repent,  l»ut  ah.!  cannot  refrain;

Preach  not  to  me  of  Noah  and  his  flood,
Bnt  ponr  a  flood  of  wine  to  drown  my  pain.

N.  452,  L.

1  of  joyful  foot !  the  dawn  is  nigh,
Pour  wine,  and  lift  thy  tuneful  voice  on  high;

Sing  how  Jamsheds  and  Khosrus  bit  the  dust,
Whelmed  by  the  rolling  months  from  Tir  to  Dai.

N.  455-  L.
CCLI.

Allah  !  rebuild  the  world  in  fairer  guise,
And  do  it  on  the  spot  before  my  eyes,

And  either  raze  my  name  from  off  Thy  roll,
(  )t  make  me  better,  happier,  more  wise.

N.  457.

CCLII.

0  Soul !  when  on  the  Loved  One's  sweets  you  feed,
You  lose  your  self,  yet  find  your  Self  indeed ;

And  when  you  drink  of  His  entrancing  cup,
You  hasten  your  escape  from  quick  and  dead.

N.  386,  L.


78  THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.

CCLIII.

Khayyam  of  burning  heart,  perchance  to  burn
In  hell,  and  feed  its  balefires  in  thy  turn,
Presume  not  to  teach  Allah  clemency,
For  who  art  thou  to  teach,  or  He  to  learn  ?

n.  459,  l.


N  0  T  E  S.


Quatrain  vii.

Kaaba,  the  square  temple  or  sanctuary  at  Mecca,  described
by  Gibbon,  ix.  245.

XI.
Wheel  of  heaven,  i.e.,  fate.

XIX.

Omar,  like  the  Sufis,  is  a  great  advocate  for  toleration.
Sadi,  in  his  "Bostan,"  tells  the  following  story  about  Abraham
and  a  Gueber  : —

"  It  chanced  for  a  whole  week  no  '.son  of  the  road  '
In  Abraham's  guest  diouse  his  face  had  showed;
The  kind  prophet  was  vexed,  and  hroke  not  his  fast,
Baying,  '  Why  has  no  traveller  this  way  passed?'
One  day  he  went  out,  and  searched  all  around,
And  at  last  in  the  desert  an  old  man  found.
Like  a  willow  was  hent  the  hack  of  that  sage,
And  Ins  hair  it  was  white  with  the  snow  of  old  age.
The  prophet  addressed  him  in  accents  mild,
And  welcomed  that  weary  one  found  in  the  wild  ;
Saying,  '  Tarry  a  while,  sir  ;  in  my  tent  make  a  halt,
And  deign  to  partake  of  my  bread  and  my  salt.'
The  stranger  agreed  nothing  loth,  for  indeed
He  knew  the  kind  Ahraham  (peace  on  his  head).
Then  the  slaves  and  attendants,  all  standing  erect,
Gave  place  to  that  old  man  with  utmost  respect;
And  the  tables  were  set,  and  the  banquet  displayed,
And  the  company  round  all  in  order  arrayed.
But  when  they  began  the  Bismillah  to  say,
That  old  man  was  dumb, — not  a  word  would  he  pray.
So  Abraham  said  to  that  infidel  sage,
4  Thou  forgettest  the  conduct  befitting  old  age  ;
When  thou  takest  thy  victuals  'tis  wrong  to  be  dumb,
And  not  to  bless  Him  from  whom  blessings  come.'
He  replied,  '  'Tis  my  custom  no  prayers  to  recite,


So  NOTES.

Save  those  which  the  Magian  priests  think  right.'
Then  Abraham  knew  (and  great  was  his  ire)
That  the  wretched  old  dotard  worshipped  the  lire  ;
So  he  drove  him  away  forthwith  to  the  wild,
For  one  cannot  touch  pitch  without  being  defiled.
But  a  voice  came  from  heaven,  in  accents  stern,
Saying,  '  Abraham,  truly  you  have  much  to  learn  ;
I  have  Buffered  this  old  man  for  years  fourscore,
And  cannot  you  bear  him  a  minute  or  more  ?
That  he  worships  the  lire  you  well  may  bewail,
But  let  not  the  hand  of  your  charity  fail.'"

This  story  took  the  fancy  of  Dr.  Franklin,  who  published
it  in  1774  as  an  imaginary  chapter  of  Genesis;  and  about  a
hundred  years  previously  it  had  been  told  by  Bishop  Jeremy
Taylor,  in  his  "  Discourse  of  the  Liberty  of  Prophesying."
(Forbes,  Persian  Grammar,  p.  165.)

XXIII.

The  Persian  poets  frequently  mention  the  breath  of  Jesus
as  the  instrument  by  which  He  raised  the  dead  to  life.

XXIV.

A  satire  on  the  doctrine  of  free  grace,  when  so  preached  as
to  countenance  antinomianism.

XXVI.

The  Sufi  view  here  indicated  is  that  souls,  reabsorbed  in
the  divine  essence,  have  no  concern  with  a  material  heaven  or
hell.    Lahiji,  the  commentator  on  the  Gulshan  i  raz,  says —

"  While  heaven  and  hell  stand  in  your  way,
How  is  your  soul  cognisant  of  the  mystery  ?  "

Though  not  a  Sufi  himself,  Khayyam  evidently  held  many
Sufi  doctrines.

XXXII.

According  to  the  Sufis,  all  true  worshippers  are  animated  by
love  for  the  "  Friend,"  and  desire  for  reunion  with  Him.  Cf.
Hafiz,  79 —

"  Between  the  love  of  the  cloister  and  that  of  the  tavern  is  no  differ-
ence,
For  wherever  love  is  there  is  the  light  of  the  face  of  the  Beloved.''


N0T1  S.  Si

XXXIV.

Jamshed,  or  Jam,  was  the  fifth  king  of  the  Peshdadian
dynasty;  Bahrain  or  Bahrain  Gor,  one  of  the  Sasaanian
dynasty,  who  Lb  Baid  to  have  met  his  death  whilst  hunting
the  wild  as&     (Gor.)

XXXIX.

A  jatire  on  Muhammad's  paradise —

'•  Ami  theirs  Bhall  bo  the  Houris,  with  large  dark  eyes,  like  pearls
hidden  in  their  shells,  in  recompense  of  their  labours  past." — Koran

lvi.  22.

XLI.

Jihun.  tliu  Oxus.

XLIV.

Alluding  to  Koran  ii.  187 —

"  And  kill  them  (your  foes)  wherever  ye  Bhall  find  them."

XLVI.

A  satire  on  the  doctrine  of  absolute  predestination.  Cf.
Koran  lxxxvi.  9 —

"  Verily  Allah  misleadeth  whom  He  will,  and  guideth  whom  He
will."

And  Koran  xvi.  38 —

■  me  of  them  there  were  whom  Allah  guided,  and  there  were
others  doomed  to  err."

XLVII.

Drinking  on  Friday  was  considered  a  more  heinous  offence
than  drinking  on  other  days,  because  Friday  is  the  Muham-
madan  "  day  of  assembly,"  or  Sabbath.

XLVIII.

This,  like  many  other  cpuatrains,  may  bear  either  a  natural
or  a  spiritual  signification.     Cf.  Hafiz,  1  —

"  Since  first  the  zephyr  wafted  here  the  fragrance   of  that  musky

tress.

My  heart  still  bleeds  with  strong  desire  to  see  its  tangled  loveli-
nes

F


82  NOTES.

LV.

Mahmud,  the  celebrated  king  of  Ghuzni,  to  whom  the
Shahnama  was  dedicated.

LXIII.

Alif  signifies  the  number  one,  and  also  Allah  (God).  The
sense  is  that  he  who  knows  the  sole  existent  One  knows  all.
Cf.  Hafiz,  Ode  416  (Bicknell's  translation) —

"  My  Loved  one's  Alif  form  stamps  all  my  thought,
Save  that,  what  letter  has  my  master  taught  ?  "

LXVIII.

The  decrees  of  fate  are  written  on  the  "tablet"  by  the
"  pen."  The  sense  seems  to  be  that  predestination  and  a
material  paradise  are  only  human  figments.

LXX.

Alluding  to  the  life-giving  breath  of  Jesus  before  mentioned,
and  to  Moses'  hand  which  he  "drew  forth  white  as  snow"
(Exod.  iv.  6).

LXXIII.

Cf  Sadi,  Gulistan,  lib.  i.  (Eastwick's  translation) —

"  What  matters,  when  the  spirit  seeks  to  fly,
If  on  a  throne  or  on  hare  earth  we  die  ? "

LXXIV.

Kai  Khosru,  third  king  of  the  Kaianian  dynasty,  usually
identified  with  Cyrus.  Firdusi  says  he  was  possessed  of
the  cup  or  mirror  of  Jamshed,  wherein  the  whole  world  was
reflected,  and  which,  according  to  Hafiz,  was  no  other  than  a
wine-cup.

LXXVII.  AND  LXXVIII.

These  are  the  first  of  several  antithetical  quatrains,  scattered
over  Omar's  Diwan.     It  may  be  that  the  second  was  written


XOTES.  83

on   tlf   margin  of  the   MS.  by  some   pious   reader,   as    a

rind  the  first,  and  afterwards  found  its  way  into

the  text     Or  it  may  l>e  that  Omar  wrote  it  himself  when  in

a  repentant  m 1.     If  so,  the  two  together  may  be  regarded

as  a  poem  of  "  The  Two  Voices."

LX  XXVIII.

Alluding  to  Koran  xxxi.  29 —

"But  will  it  ye  shall  nut  (to  walk  in  the  straight  path),  unless  Allah
willeth  it."

The  same  words  recur  in  lxxvi.  30.

XCI.

Simurg,  a  bird  said  to  dwell  on  Mount  Kaf,  which  makes  a
great  figure  in  Persian  poetry,  as  the  type  of  the  Deity.

XCII.
Another  allusion  to  the  doctrine  of  predestination.

XCIX.   AND  C.

Both  these  contrasted  quatrains  may  well  have  come  from
Omar's  pen,  one  attacking  the  Muhammadan  paradise  in  the
language  of  grave  rebuke,  the  other  in  that  of  ridicule.  The
Sufis  are  never  tired  of  inveighing  against  the  absurdities  of
the  Muhammadan  paradise.     See  Gulshan  i  rdz,  701.

CI.

The  meaning  is  that  he  would  commit  suicide  were  it  not
for  the  "Almighty's  canon  'gainst  self-slaughter."

Cli.
Cf.  Hafiz,  Ode  355—

"  For  how  can  our  eyes  behold  Thee  as  Thou  art  ?
As  our  sight  is  so  see  we,  and  only  in  part.'


84  NOTES.

And  Persius —

"  Tecum  habita,  et  ndria  quam  sit  tibi  curta  supellex."

CV.

The  author  of  the  Sharh  ul  Muwakif  (quoted  in  Pocock's
Specimen  Historian  Arabum,  p.  210)  mentions  the  following
saying  of  Muhammad  : — "  It  shall  come  to  pass  that  my  people
shall  be  divided  into  three-and-seventy  sects,  all  of  which,
save  only  one,  shall  have  their  portion  in  the  fire."  Sharastani
says  that  the  reason  why  the  prophet  pitched  on  the  number
seventy-three,  was  that  the  Magians  were  divided  into  seventy
sects,  the  Jews  into  seventy-one,  and  the  Christians  into
seventy-two.     Cf.  Hafiz  (Radif  Dal) —

"  Consider  the  battle  of  the  seventy-two  sects  as  mischief  ;
Since  they  see  not  Truth,  they  give  way  to  fables.  "

CVI.
Daughter  of  the  vine,  i.e.,  wine.

CVIII.

"  False  dawn"  is  the  faint  light  in  the  East  which  precedes
sunrise,  the  true  dawn.     (Nicolas.)

CXI.

The  word  Zdhid,  here  translated  Pharisee,  corresponds  to
Burns'  "unco  guid."

CXII.

It  is  the  custom  of  Persian  poets  to  introduce  their  own
names  in  their  verses ;  so  Donne —

"If  myself  I've  Avon
To  know  my  rules,  I  have  and  you  have  Bonne."

CXVIII.

Being  and  Not  being,  or  Nonentity,  are  subjects  on  which  the
Sufis  have  much  to  say.     They  identified  Being  with  the  sole


NOTES.  85

existent  divine  One,  and  Not  h<iiig  with  the  world  of  pheno-
menal    Evil,  they  said,  proceeded  from  Not  being,  jnsi
Augustine  said  evil  was  a  negation.


(XXIV.

This  quatrain  is  also  ascribed  to  Hafiz.

cxxxn.

This  introduction  of  the  four  elements  is  what  is  termed  a
Mutazadd  or  opposition.  Mr.  Bicknell,  in  his  "  Hafiz,"  p.  191,
quotes  a  similar  quatrain  of  Ahul  Faraj  Rumi —

••  Air  art  Thou  entering  my  frame  as  breath,
Fire  art  Thou  burning  hearts  with  love  till  death  ;
Water  art  Thou  by  which  all  creatures  grow,
Earth  also  art  Thou  to  which  all  must  go."

CXXXV.

Almsgiving  (Zahit)  is  one  of  what  are  termed  the  "five
foundations  of  religious  "practice."  The  amount  to  be  given
is  a  tenth  of  cattle,  but  less  of  other  property.  Legal  ordi-
nances or  Farz  are  those  duties  enjoined  by  the  Koran,  as
opposed  to  Wdjlb,  duties  resting  on  tradition  or  other  less
binding  authority.  Hence  the  Wahabis  or  Muhammadan
Puritans  have,  in  Eastern  Bengal,  taken  the  name  of  Ferazis.

CXXXVIII.

Abu  Sa'ld  Abul  Khair  and  Ibrahim  bin  Adham  were  two
celebrated  Sufis,  whose  lives  may  be  read  in  the  Muhammadan
"  Acta  Sanctorum,"  the  Nafhat  ul  Uns  of  Jami.  The  qua-
trains of  the  former,  which  are  of  a  highly  devotional  and
mystical  character,  are  very  popular  in  Persia.  In  a  little
chapbook  printed  at  Teheran  in  1277  A.H.,  each  quatrain  is
accompanied  by  directions  for  its  use  as  an  ejaculation  or
prayer.  The  food  of  Miriam  (Mary)  was  that  provided  for
her  in  the  desert  by  the  angel  Gabriel  (Koran  xix.)


86  NOTES.

CXLIV.

Cf.  Lord  Brooke's  "  Mustapha"  (1609  a.d.) —

"  Oh,  wearisome  condition  of  humanity  !
Born  under  one  law,  to  another  hound,
Vainly  hegot,  and  yet  forhidden  vanity,
Created  sick,  commanded  to  he  sound  ;
What  meaneth  nature  hy  these  diverse  laws  ?  "

CXLVII.

The  Sufis,  whilst  holding  with  other  Muhammadans  the  great
central  doctrine  of  Islam,  the  Tauhid,  or  unity  of  God,  gave  it
a  mystical  extension.  Whilst  with  ordinary  Muhammadans
it  means  only,  "  There  is  no  god  but  God  ; "  the  Sufis  inter-
preted it  as  meaning,  "There  is  no  Being — no  real  existence
— but  God."  Everything  but  God  is  phenomenal  and  non-
existent.    Thus  Hafiz,  Ode  465 —

"  Hafiz  !  when  preaching  Unity,  with  unitarian  pen
Blot  out  and  cancel  every  page  that  tells  of  spirits  or  men."

CLIII.

Kai  Kaius,  the  second  king  of  the  Kaianian  dynasty,  pro-
bably Cyaxares,  who  reigned  at  Tiis,  and  figures  in  the  Shah-
nama.

CLXII.

The  Truth  (Al  Hakk)  is  the  Sufi  term  for  the  One  sole
existent  divine  Being.

CLXXIII.

Mr.  Fitzgerald  has  quoted  a  similar  comparison  used  by
the  poet  Donne  (1610  a.d.)  It  may  be  found  in  "Ward's
English  Poets,"  i.  562.

CLXXIV.

M.  Nicolas  says  that  "stealing  a  prayer-mat"  is  a  pro-
verbial  expression  to   signify   hypocrisy,    or   attending  the


NOTES.  87

mosque  to  Lain  reputation.   Hie  quatrain  is  evidently  a  satire
on  Bome  hypocrite  of  Omar's  acquaintance,

CL  XXVI.

Cader,  the  "  night  of  power,"  the  19th  <>r  21st  of  the  month
Ramzan,  directed  to  be  kept  holy.     See  Koran  xcvii. —

■■  Verily  we  senl  down  the  Koran  00  the  night  of  Kader.  .  .  .
Therein  do  the  angels  descend."

This  quatrain  was  evidently  written  in  a  very  impenitent  mood.

CLXXXIII.

"  Mustafa"  (Chosen)  is  one  of  the  titles  given  to  Muhammad.
This  quatrain  recalls  Burns'  protest  against  "  the  curst  restric-
tions on  aquavitae."

CLXXXV.

The  last  line  in  this  quatrain  may  very  probably  have  been
suggested,  as  Mr.  Fitzgerald  thinks,  by  the  dying  exclamation
of  Omar's  friend,  Nizam  ul  Mulk,  recorded  in  the  Mantic  ut
Tair  of  Farid  ud  Din  'Attar  (line  4620) —

"  When  Nizani  ul  Mulk  was  in  his  death  agony,
He  said,  '  0  God,  I  am  going  in  the  hands  of  the  wind.'  "

CLXXXIX.

Yusuf  or  Joseph  is,  with  Persian  poets,  the  type  of  manly
beauty.  His  adventures  with  Zuleikha  or  Potiphar's  wife
form  the  subject  of  a  poem  by  Jami.  The  golden  gems,  or
yellow  stamens  of  the  rose,  are  compared  to  Joseph's  teeth  !
Jami  speaks  of —

"  The  pearly  teeth  within  his  ruhy  lips
Like  lightning  flashing  in  an  evening  sky."


CXC.

"Wine   signifies   in   Sufi   phraseology   the    rapture  of   the
beatific  vision,  which  makes   the  mystic    "  beside   himself,"


88  NOTES.

annihilates  his  phenomenal  self  and  absorbs  him  in  the  One
Being.     See  Gulshan  i  raz,  p.  79  of  my  edition.

CXCIII.

This  was  a  saying  of  Kisra  Parwiz,  one  of  the  Sassanian
kings.  His  favourite  sultana  once  exclaimed,  "  Would  that
the  joys  of  kings  might  last  for  ever ! "  He  replied,  "  If  the
happiness  of  our  predecessors  had  not  passed  away,  how
could  ours  have  followed  1 "     (Bicknell's  Hafiz,  p.  73.)

cxcv.

This  quatrain  recalls  the  often-quoted  lines  of  Pope- —

"  All  are  but  parts  of  one  stupendous  whole,
Whose  body  nature  is,  and  God  the  soul,"  &c.

And  Wordsworth's  lines —

' '  And  I  have  felt
A  presence  that  disturbs  me  with  the  joy
Of  elevated  thoughts  :  a  sense  sublime  «

Of  something  far  more  deeply  interfused,
Whose  dwelling  is  the  light  of  setting  suns,
And  the  round  ocean  and  the  living  air,
And  the  blue  sky,  and  in  the  mind  of  man,
A  motion  and  a  spirit  that  impels
All  thinking  things,  all  objects  of  all  thought,
And  rolls  through  all  tilings."

CXCVIII.

The  sense  is  that  "  The  Truth  "  is  hidden  alike  from  the
popular  theologian  and  from  the  philosopher,  and  is  only
revealed  to  the  "  illuminated  "  mystic.  See  Gulshan  i  raz,
p.  11.

CXCIX.

Parwin,  the  constellation  Taurus.  The  "  bull  beneath  the
earth  "  is  that  on  which  the  earth  was  fabled  to  rest.  Omar
would  seem  to  have  been  of  the  same  opinion  as  Carlyle
regarding  the  intellectual  powers  of  his  countrymen.


NOTES.


n  VI.

K  means  in  Persian  "where?"  Mr.  Fitzgerald  notes  tliat
Mr.  Binning  found  this  quatrain  inscribed  on  the  ruins  of
Perw  i >< >lis.     So  Firdusi —

••  The  spider  weaves  his  \\cli  in  liis  palace  of  CsBsar,
The  <>wl  stands  sentinel  on  the  watchtowerof  Afrasiab."

ccvur.

Kalenders,  wandering  dervishes,  usually  considered  rogues.
Fish,  i.e.,  that  on  which  the  earth  was  fabled  to  rest.

ccx.

The  single  point  of  the  One  Being  whirled  about  produces
the  illusion  of  the  world  of  phenomena.  So  Gulshan  i  raz,
line  710 —

•'  Go  !  -whirl  round  one  spark  of  fire,

And  from  its  quick  motion  you  will  see  a  circle."

•    CCXIII.

Of.  Sadi's  "Gulistan"  by  Eastwick,  p.  306  :— "They  asked
a  philosopher  why,  when  God  Most  High  had  created  so
many  famous,  fruitful  trees,  the  cypress  alone  was  called
'  free,'  which  bore  no  fruit  1  He  replied,  '  Every  tree  has  its
appointed  time  and  season  wherein  it  flourishes,  and  when
that  is  past  it  droops.  But  the  cypress  is  not  exposed  to
either  of  these  vicissitudes,  and  is  at  all  times  fresh  and
green,  and  this  is  the  condition  of  the  free."

CCXIV.

In  the  Nafhat  ul  Uns  the  Shaikh  of  Islam  is  quoted  as
saying,  "  God  is  veiled  from  the  heart  of  him  who  relies  on
his  own  good  works."

CCXVII.

A  good  example  of  the  rhetorical  figure  known  to  us  as
"  bathos,"  for  which  the  Persians  seem  to  have  no  name.

G


9o  NOTES.

CCXX.
This  is  the  climax  to  all  Omar's  "  gloomy  epigrams."

ccxxx.

Cf.  Koran  xxxvii.  40 —

"A  banquet  shall  they  have  of  fruits,  and  honoured  shall  they  he
in  the  gardens  of  delight,  upon  couches  face  to  face.  A  cup  shall  he
borne  round  among  them  from  a  fountain,  limpid,  delicious  to  those
who  drink."

According  to  tradition,  Ali,  the  prophet's  son-in-law,  was  the
celestial  cupbearer,  and  the  fountain  was  named  Kausar.

cexxxv.

Eustam,  the  Persian  Hercules,  whose  exploits  are  narrated
in  the  Shahnatna.  Hatim  Tai,  an  Arab  chief  famed  for  his
liberality.

cexxxix.

Aristu  :  Aristotle.  Jamshed,  as  before  stated,  was  sup-
posed to  have  been  the  inventor  of  wine.

CCXLI.

"  Wine  of  headache  void  "  is  an  allusion  to  Koran  lvi.  17 —

"Aye-blooming  youths  go  round  about  to  them  with  goblets  and
ewers  and  a  cup  of  flowing  wine  :  Their  brows  ache  not  from  it,  nor
fails  the  sense."

CCL.
Tir  and  Dai :  April  and  December.

CCLII.

This  quatrain  sets  forth  the  favourite  mystical  doctrine,
"  Die  to  self,  to  live  eternally  in  God."  Compare  Max  Miiller,
Hibbert  Lectures,  p.  375 —

"  The  (Brahman's)  highest  knowledge  was  expressed  in  the  words
tat  tvam,  '  thou  art  It,'  thou  thyself,  thy  own  true  Self,  that  which


NOTES.  i

<. in  never  be  taken  from  thee  :  when  everything  else  thai  seemed  t"
be  thine  disappears;  when  all  that  was  created  vanishes  again  like
a  dream,  thy  own  true  Self  belongs  to  the  Eternal  Self;  the  Aiuum,
or  x'li'  within  thee,  is  tin-  trne  Brahman,  from  whom  thon  \\.i-t
estranged  fur  a  time  through  birth  ami  death,  but  who  receives  thee
hack  again  as  scum  as  thon  retnrnesl  t<>  ■  Him  <>r  t<»  It.' "

The  "  cnp "  is  t  be  spiritual  intoxication  <>r  ecstasy  which  annihilates
the  phenomena]  self.

CCLIII.

For  the  last  line  of  this  quatrain  I  am  indebted  to   Mr.
Fitzgerald.


THE   END.


PRINTED  BY  BALLANTYNE,  HANSON  AND  CO
EDINBURGH  AND  LONDON


A

CATALOGUE  OF  IMPORTANT  W0BK8,


PUBLISHED   BY


TRXJBMER     cSc     OO-
57  and  59  LUDGATE  HILL.


ABEL.— Linguistic  Essays.  By  Carl  Abel.  Contents:  Language  as  the  Expres-
sion of  National  Modes  of  Thought — The  Conception  of  Love  in  some  Ancient  and
Modern  Languages— The  English  Verbs  of  Command — The  Discrimination  of
Synonyms— Philological  Methods— The  Connection  between  Dictionary  and  Gram-
mar—The  Possibility  of  a  Common  Literary  Language  for  the  Slav  Nations  —
Coptic  Intensification — The  Origin  of  Lmguage  —  Tiie  Order  and  Position  of  Words
in  the  Latin  Sentence.     Post  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  282,  cloth.     1882.     9s.

ABEL.— Slavic  and  Latin.  Ilchester  Lectures  on  Comparative  Lexicography.
Delivered  at  the  Taylor  Institution,  Oxford.  By  Carl  Abel,  Ph.D.  Post  8vo.
pp.  vi.-124,  cloth.     1883.     5s.

ABRAHAMS.— A  Manual  of  Scripture  History  for  Use  in  Jewish  Schools  am>
Families.  By  L.  B.  Abrahams,  15.  A.,  Principal  Assistant  M.ister,  Jews'  Free
School.  With  Map  and  Appendices.  Third  Edition.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and
102,  cloth.     1883.     Is.  6d.

AGASSIZ  -  An  Essay  on  Classification.  By  Louis  Agassiz.  8vo,  pp.  vii.  and
3S1,  cloth.     1859.    12s.

AHLWARDT. — Thf.  Divans  of  toe  Six  Ancient  Arabic  Poets,  Ennabiga.  'Antara,
Tharafa,  Zcfiair,  'Ai.q,uama,  and  Imruulquals  ;  chiefly  according  to  the  MSS.
of  Paris,  Gotha,  and  Levden,  and  the  Collection  of  their  Fragments,  with  a
List  of  the  various  Readings  of  the  Text.  Edited  l>y  W.  Ahlwardt,  Professor
of  Oriental  Languages  at  the  University  of  Greifswald.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  xxx.  and
340,  sewed.    1870.    12s.

AHN. —Practical  Grammar  of  the  German  Lanocaoe.  By  Dr.  F.  Ahn.  A  New
Edition.  By  Dr.  Dawson  Turner,  and  Prof.  F.  L.  Weinmann.  Crown  8vo,  pp.
cxii.  and  430,  cloth.    1878.     3s.  Od.

AHN.— New,  Practical,  and  Easy  Metiiod  of  Learning  tfie  German  Language.  By
Dr.  F.  Ahn.  First  and  Second  Course.  Bound  in  1  vol.  12mo,  pp.  80  and  120,
cloth.    1866.   3s.

AHN. —Key  to  Ditto.    12mo,  pp.  40,  sewed.     8d.

AHN.  —  Manual  of  German  and  Bhqlisb  Conversations,  or  Vade  Mecum  for  Eng-
lish Travellers.    12mo,  pp.  x.  and  137,  cloth.    1875.    Is.  W.


2  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works,

AHN. — New,  Practical,  and  Easy  Method  of  Learning  the  French  Language.

By  Dr.  F.  Aim.    First  Course  and  Second  Course.    12mo,  cloth.    Each  Is.  6d.    The

Two  Courses  in  1  vol.  12mo,  pp.  114  and  170,  cloth.    1865.    3s.
AHN.— New,  Practical,  and  East  Method  of  Learning  the  French  Language.

Third  Course,  containing  a  French  Reader,  with  Notes  and  Vocabulary.      By  H.

W.  Ehrlich.    12mo,  pp.  viii.  and  125,  cloth.    I860.    Is.  Gd.

AHN. — Manual  of  French  and  English  Conversations,  for  the  use  of  Schools
and  Travellers.    By  Dr.  F.  Ahn.     12mo,  pp.  viii.  and  200,  cloth.     18G2.    2s.  6d.

AHN. — New,  Practical,  and  Easy  Method  of  Learning  the  Italian  Language,
By  Dr.  F.  Ahn.    First  and  Second  Course.    12mo,  pp.  198,  cloth.     1872.     3s.  6d.  '

AHN. — New,  Practical,  and  Easy  Method  of  Learning  the  DuTcn  Language,
being  a  complete  Grammar,  with  Selections.  By  Dr.  F.  Ahn.  12mo,  pp.  viii.
and  166,  cloth.    1862.    3s.  6d.

AHN. — Ahn's  Course.  Latin  Grammar  for  Beginners.  Bv  W.  Ihne,  Ph.D.  12mo,
pp.  vi.  and  184,  cloth.    1864.     3s.

ALABASTER. —The  Wheel  of  the  Law:  Buddhism  illustrated  from  Siamese
Sources  by  the  Modern  Buddhist,  a  Life  of  Buddha,  and  an  Account  of  the  Phra
Bat.  By  Henry  Alabaster,  Esq.,  Interpreter  of  Her  Majesty's  Consulate-General
in  Siam.     Demy  8vo,  pp.  lviii.  and  324,  cloth.     1871.     14s.

ALL— The  Proposed  Political,  Legal,  and  Social  Reforms  in  the  Ottoman
Empire  and  other  Mohammedan  States.  By  Moulavi  Cheragh  Ali,  H.H.  the
Nizam's  Civil  Service.     Demy  8vo,  pp.  liv.  and  184,  cloth.     1883.     8s.

ALLAN-FRASER. — Christianity  and  Churchism.  By  Patrick  Allan-Fraser.
Second  (revised  and  enlarged)  Edition.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  52,  cloth.     1884.     Is.

ALLEN. — The  Colour  Sense.  See  English  and  Foreign  Philosophical  Library,
Vol.  X.

ALLIBONE.— A  Critical  Dictionary  of  English  Literature  and  British  and
American  Authors  (Living  and  Deceased).  From  the  Earliest  Accounts  to  the
latter  half  of  the  19th  century.  Containing  over  46,000  Articles  (Authors),  with
40  Indexes  of  subjects.     By  S.  A.  Allibone.     In  3  vols,  royal  8vo,  cloth.     £5,  8s.

ALTHAUS.— The  Spas  of  Europe.  By  Julius  Althaus,  M.D.  8vo,  pp.  516,  cloth.
1862.     7s.  6d.

AMATEUR  Mechanic's  Workshop  (The).  A  Treatise  containing  Plain  and  Concise
Directions  for  the  Manipulation  of  Wood  and  Metals  ;  including  Casting,  Forg-
ing, Brazing,  Soldering,  and  Carpentry.  By  the  Author  of  "The  Lathe  and  its
Uses."  Sixth  Edition.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  vi.  and  148,  with  Two  Full-Page  Illus-
trations, on  toned  paper  and  numerous  Woodcuts,  cloth.     1880.     6s.

AMATEUR  MECHANICAL  SOCIETY.— Journal  of  the  Amateur  Mechanical
Society.  8vo.  Vol.  i.  pp.  344  cloth.  1871-72.  12s.  Vol.  ii.  pp.  vi.  nnd  290,
cloth.     1873-77.     12s.     Vol.  iii.  pp.  iv.  and  246,  cloth.     1878-79.     12s.  6d.

AMERICAN  Almanac  and  Treasury  of  Facts,  Statistical,  Financial,  and
Political.  Edited  by  Ainsworth  R.  Spofford,  Librarian  of  Congress.  Crown
8vo,  cloth.    Published  yearly.     1878-1884.    7s.  6d.  each.

AMERY. — Notes  on  Forestry.  By  C.  F.  Amery,  Deputy  Conservator  N..W.  Pro-
vinces, India.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  120,  cloth.     1875.     5s,

AMBERLEY. — An  Analysis  of  Religious  Belief.  By  Viscount  Amberley.  2  vols,
demy  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  496  and  512,  cloth.     1876.     30s.

AMONGST  MACHINES.  A  Description  of  Various  Mechanical  Appliances  used  in
the  Manufacture  of  Wood,  Metal,  and  other  Substances.  A  Book  for  Boys,
copiously  Illustrated.  By  the  Author  of  "The  Young  Mechanic."  Second
Edition.     Imperial  lCmo,  pp.  viii.  and  336,  cloth.     1878.     7s.  6d.


Published  by  Triibm  r  ct  Co.


ANDERSON.  —  Fractical  Mercantile  Correspondence.     A  Collection  of  Modern
■  ■-.  «!ih  Notes,  Critical  and  Explanatory,  and  an  Appendix,
containing  a  Dictionary  of  Commercial  Technicalities,  pro  forma  Invoices,  Ac-
count Sales,  Kills  of  Lading,  and  Hills  of  Exchange;  also  an  Explanation  of  the
Germ  tale.     24th  Edition,  revised  and  enlarged.     Ky  William  Anderson.

Lfmo,  pp.  888,  cloth.    ">s.

ANDERSON  and  TUGMAN.— Mercantile  Correspondence,  containing  a  Collection
of  Commercial  Letters  in  Portuguese  and  English,  with  their  translation  on  opposite
pages,  for  the  use  of  Business  Men  and  of  Students  in  either  of  the  Languages,  treat-
ing in  modern  style  of  the  system  of  Kusiness  in  the  principal  Commercial  Cities
of  the  World.  Accompanied  by  pro  forma  Accounts,  Sales,  Invoices,  Kills  of
Lading,  Drafts,  &c.  With  an  Introduction  and  copious  Notes.  Ky  William
Anderson  and  James  E.  Tuginan.     12mo,  pp.  xi.  and  193,  cloth.     1867.     6s.

APEL.—  Prose  Spbcimkns  for  Translation  into  German,  with  copious  Vocabularies
and  Explanations.     Ky  H.   Apel.     12mo,  pp.  viii.  and  246,  cloth.     1862.     4s.  6d.

APPLETON  (Dr.)— Lira  and  Literary  Relics.  See  English  and  Foreign  Philoso-
phical Library,  Vol.  XIII.

ARAGO  —  Lks  Aristocraties.  A  Comedy  in  Verse.  Ky  Etienne  Arago.  Edited,
with  English  Notes  and  Notice  on  Etienne  Arago,  by  the  Rev.  E.  P.  H.  Rrette,  R.D.,
Head  Master  of  the  French  School,  Christ's  Hospital,  Examiner  in  the  Universitj
of  London.     Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  244,  cloth.     1868.     4s.

ARMITAGE. — Lectures  on  Painting  :  Delivered  to  the  Students  of  the  Royal
Academy.  Kv  Edward  Armitage,  R.A.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  256,  with  29  Illustra-
tions, cloth.     1883.     7s.  6d.

ARNOLD.— Indian  Idylls.  From  the  Sanskrit  of  the  Mahabharata.  Ky  Edwin
Arnold,  C.S.L,  &c.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  282,  cloth.     1883.     7s.  6d.

ARNOLD. — Pearls  of  the  Faith  ;  or,  Islam's  Rosary  :  being  the  Ninety-nine  beau-
tiful names  of  Allah.  With  Comments  in  Verse  from  various  Oriental  sources
as  made  bv  an  Indian  Mussulman.  Ky  Edwin  Arnold,  C.S.L,  &c.  Third
Edition.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  320,  cloth.     1884.     7s.  6d.

ARNOLD.— The  Light  of  Asia  ;  or,  The  Great  Renunciation  (Mahabhinish-
kramana).  Keing  the  Life  and  Teaching  of  Gautama,  Prince  of  India,  and  Founder
of  Ruddhism  (as  told  iu  verse  by  an  Indian  Kuddhist).  Ky  Edwin  Arnold,
M.A.,  ac.  Twenty-fifth  Edition.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  240,  limp  parchment.
1885.  3s.  6d.  Library  Edition.  1883.  7s.  6d.  Illustrated  Edition.  Small  4to,
pp.  xx.-196,  cloth.     1881.     21s.

ARNOLD. — The  Secret  of  Death  :  Keing  a  Version,  in  a  popular  and  novel  form,
of  the  Katha  Upanishad,  from  the  Sanskrit.  With  some  Collected  Poems.  Ky
Edwin  Arnold,  M.A.,  &c.  Third  Edition.  Crown  8vo.  pp.  viii. -406,  cloth
1885.     7s.  6d.

ARNOLD.— The  Song  Celestial  j  or,  Rhagavad-GitI  (from  the  Mahabharata).
Keing  a  Discourse  between  Arjuna,  Prince  of  India,  and  the  Supreme  Keing  under
the  form  of  Krishna.  Translated  from  the  Sanskrit  Text.  Ky  Edwin  Arnold,
M.A.     Second  Edition,  crown  8vo,  pp.  192,  cloth.     1885.     5s.

ARNOLD.  — The  Iliad  and  Odyssey  of  India.  Ky  Edwin  Arnold,  M.A.,  F.R.G.S.,
kc. ,  kc.     Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  24,  sewed.    Is.

ARNOLD.— A  Simple  Transliteral  Grammar  of  the  Turkish  Lanquagf.
Compiled  from  Various  Sources.  With  Dialogues  and  Vocabulary.  Ey  Edwin
Arnold,  M.A.,  C.S.L,  F.K.G.S.     Post  8vo,  pp.  80,  cloth.     1877.     2s.  6d.

ARNOLD.— Indian  Poetry.     See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series.

ARTHUR. — The  Coparceners:  Being  the  Adventures  of  two  Heiresses.  Ky  F.
Arthur.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  it. -512,  cloth.     1885.     10s.  6d.

ARTOM.— Sermons.  Ky  the  Rev.  R.  Artom,  Chief  Rabbi  of  the  Spanish  and  Por-
tuguese Congregations  of  England.  First  Series.  Second  Edition.  Crown  8vo
pp.  viii.  and  314,  cloth.     1876.     6s.


4  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works,

ASIATIC  SOCIETY  OF  BENGAL.     List  of  Publications  on  application.

ASIATIC  SOCIETY.— Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society  of  (treat  Britain

and  Ireland,  from  the  Commencement  to  1863.    First  Series,  complete  in  20  Vols.

8vo,  with  many  Plates.     £10,  or  in  parts  from  4s.  to  6s.  each.
ASIATIC  SOCIETY.— Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society  of  Great  Britain

and  Ireland.     New  Series.     8vo.     Stitched  in  wrapper.     1864-84.

Vol.  I.,  2  Parts,  pp.  iv.  and  490,  16s.— Vol.  II.,  2  Parts,  pp.  522,  16s.— Vol.  III.,  2  Parts,
pp.  516,  with  Photograph,  22s.— Vol.  IV.,  2  Parts,  pp.  521,  16s.— Vol.  V..  2  Parts  PP-  463,  with
10  full-page  and  folding  Plates,  18s.  6d.— Vol.  VI.,  Part  1,  pp.  212,  with  2  Plates  and  a  Map,  8s.
—  Vol.  VI.  Part  2,  pp  272,  with  Plate  and  Map,  Ss.— Vol.  VII.,  Part  1,  pp.  194,  with  a  Plate,
Ks  — Vol.  VII.,  Part  2,  pp.  204,  with  7  Plates  and  a  Map,  8s.— Vol.  VIII.,  Part  1,  pp.  156,  with
3  Plates  and  a  Plan,  8s.— Vol.  VIII.,  Part  2,  pp.  152,  8s.—  Vol.  IX.,  Part  1,  pp.  154,  with  a
P. ate,  8s.— Vol.  IX.,  Part  2,  pp.  292,  with  3  Plates,  10s.  6d.— Vol.  X.,  Part  1,  pp.  156,  wirh  2
Plates  and  a  Map,  8s.— Vol.  X.,  Part  2,  pp.  146,  6s.— Vol.  X.,  Part  3,  pp.  204,  8s  —Vol.  XI.,
Part  1,  pp.  128,  5s.— Vol.  XI  ,  Part  2,  pp.  158,  with  2  Plates,  7s.  6d.  — Vol.  XI,  Part  3,  pp.  250,
8s. —Vol.  XII.,  Part  1,  pp.  152,  5s.— Vol.  XII.,  Part  2,  pp.  182,  with  2  Plates  and  Map,  6s.—
Vol.  XII.,  Part  3,  pp.  10U,  4s.— Vol.  XII.,  Part  4,  pp.  x.,  152.,  cxx.,  16,  8s.— Vol.  XIII.,  Part  1,
pp.  120,  5s.— Vol.  XIII.,  Part  2,  pp.  170,  with  a  Map,  8s.— Vol.  XIII.,  Part  3,  pp.  178,  with  a
Table,  7s.  6d.— Vol.  XIII.,  Part  4,  pp.  282,  with  a  Plate  and  Table,  10s.  6d.— Vol.  XIV.,  Part  1,
pp.  124,  with  a  Table  and  2  Plates,  5s.— Vol.  XIV.,  Part  2,  pp.  164.  with  1  Table.  7s.  6d.— Vol.
XIV.,  Parts,  pp.  2(16,  with  6  Plates,  8s.— Vol.  XIV.,  Part  4,  pp.  492,  with  1  Plate,  14s.— Vol.
XV,  Part  1,  pp.  136,  6s.  ;  Part  2,  pp.  158,  with  3  Tables,  5s.  :  Part  3,  pp.  192,  6s.  ;  Part  4,  pp.
140,  5s.— Vol.  XVI.,  Part  1,  pp.  138,  with  2  Plates,  7s.  Part  2,  pp.  184,  with  1  Plate,  9s.
Part  3,  July  18S4,  pp.  74-clx.,  10s.  6d.  Part  4,  pp.  132,  8s.— Vol.  XVII.,  Part  1,  pp.  144,  with
6  Plates,  10s.  6d.     Part  2,  pp.  194,  with  a  Map,  9s.

ASPLET. — The  Complete  French  Course.    Part  II.     Containing  all  the  Rules  of
French  Syntax,  &c,  &c.     By  Georges  C.  Asplet,  French  Master,  Frome.     Fcap.
8yo,  pp.  xx.  and  276,  cloth.     1880.     2s.  6d.
ASTON.— A  Short  Grammar  of  the  Japanese  Spoken  Language.     By  W.  G.  Aston,

M.A.     Third  Edition.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  96,  cloth.     1873.     12s.
ASTON.— A  Grammar  of  the  Japanese  Written  Language.    By  W.  G.  Aston,
M.A.,  Assistant  Japanese  Secretary  H.B.M.'s  Legation,  Yedo,   Japan.     Second
Edition.    8vo,  pp.  306,  cloth.     1877.     28s.
ASTONISHED  AT  AMERICA.    Being  Cursory  Deductions,  &c,  &c.    By  Zigzag.

Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  xvi.-108,  boards.     1880.     Is.
AUCTORES  SANSCRITI.

Vol.  I.  The  Jaiminiya-NyAya-MalA-Vistara.     Edited  for  the  Sanskrit  Text
Society,  under  the  supervision  of  Theodor  Goldstiicker.     Large  4to,  pp.  582,
cloth.     £3,  13s.  6d.
Vol.  II.  The  Institutes  of  Gautama.     Edited,  with  an  Index  of  Words,  by  A.
F.  Stenzler,  Ph.D.,  Prof,  of  Oriental  Languages  in  the  University  of  Breslau.
8vo,  pp.  iv.  and  78,  cloth.     1876.     4s.  6d.     Stitched,  3s.  6d.
Vol.  111.  VaitAna  Sutra  :  The  Ritual  of  the  Atharva  Veda.    Edited,  with
Critical  Notes  and  Indices,  by  Dr.  R.   Garbe.     8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  120,  sewed.
1878.     5s.
Vols.   IV.  and  V. — Vardhamana's  Ganaratnamahodadht,  with  the  Author's
Commentary.     Edited,  with  Critical  Notes  and  Indices,   by  Julius  Eggeling,
Ph.D.      8vo.     Part  I.,  pp.  xii.  and  240,  wrapper.    1879.    6s.    Part  II.,  pp.  240,
wrapper.    1881.     6s.
AUGIER.  — Diane.     A  Drama  in  Verse.     By  Emile  Augier.     Edited  with  English
Notes  and  Notice  on  Augier.    By  T.  Karcher,  LL.  B. ,  of  the  Royal  Military  Academy
and  the  University  of  London.     12mo,  pp.  xiii.  and  146,  cloth.     1867.  2s.  6d.
AUSTIN. — A  Practical  Treatise  on  the  Preparation,  Combination,  and  Applica-
tion of  Calcareous  and  Hydraulic  Limes  and  Cements.     To  which  is  added  many
useful  Recipes  for  varions  Scientific,  Mercantile,   and  Domestic  Purposes.     By
James  G.  Austin,  Architect.     12mo,  pp.  192,  clcth.     1862.     5s.
AUSTRALIA. — The  publications  of  the  various  Australian  Government  Lists  on

application.
AUSTRALIA.— The  Year  Book  of  Australia  for  1885.    Published  under  the
auspices  of  the  Governments  of  the  Australian  Colonies.     Demy  8vo,  pp.  774;
with  6  Large  Maps ;  boat  ds.     5s.


Published  by  Trilbncr  .0  Co.  5

AXON.-  Thf  Mechanic's  Fiuenh.     A  Collection  of  Receipts  and  Practical  Sug-
to  Aquaria,  Bronzing,   Cements,  Drawing,   Dyea,    Electricity,

•  iihliii^r,  Glaaa-worldng,  ke.    Numerona  Woodcate.     Edited  bv  W.  EL  A.  Axon,

M.K.s.I..,  l'.S.S.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  3:'''.  cloth.     L875.     4.  «d.
BABA.— Au  Elementary  Grammar  of  the  Japanese  Language,  with  Ban  Progmttva

Exercises.     By  Tatui  Baba.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  xiv.  and  92,  cloth.     1
BACON.— The  LlFl  and  Tom  01  F&AjfCU  Baoon.     Extracted  from  the  Kdition  of

his  Occasional  Writings  by  James  Speckling.     2  vols,  post  8vo,  pp.  XX.,  710,  and

xiv.,  708,  cloth.     1878.     21a,
BADEN-POWELL  —  PBOTB OtIOH  and   Bad  Times,    with  Special  Reference  to   the

Political   Economy  of  English  Colonisation.     By  George   Baden-Powell,   M.A.,

F.  K.A.s..  F.S.S.,  "Author  of  "New  Homes  for  the  Old  Country,"  &c,  &c.     8vo,

pp.  xii.-376,  cloth.     1879.     Cs.  Od.
BADER.—  The  Natural  and   Morbid  Changes  of  the    Human  Eye,  and  their

Treatment.     By  C.  Bader.     Medium  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  506,  cloth.     186S.     16a.
BADER. — Plates  illustrating  the  Natural  and  Morbid  Changes  op  the  Human

Kye.     By  C.  Bader.     Six  ahromo-lithographic  Plates,  each  containing  the  figures

of  six  Eyes,  and  four  lithographed  Plates,  with  figures  of  Instruments.     With  an

Explanatory  Text  of  32  pages.    Medium  8vo,  in  a  portfolio.    21s.     Price  for  Text

and  Atlas  taken  together,  £1,  12s.
BADLEY.— Indian  Missionary  Record  and  Memorial  Volume.    By  the  Rev.  B.

H.    Badley,   of  the  American  Methodist  Mission.     8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  230,  cloth.

1876.     10s.  6d.
BALFOUR. —  Waifs  and  Strays  from  the  Far  East;  being  a  Series  of  Disconnected

Eaaaya  on  Matters  relating  to  China.     By  Frederick  Heurv  Balfour.     Demy  8vo,

pp.  224,  cloth.     1S76.     10s.  6<L
BALFOUR.— The  Divine  Classic  of  Nan-Hua  ;  being  the  Works  of  Chuang  Tsze,

Taoist  Philosopher.     With  an  Excursus,  and  Copious  Annotations  in  English  and

Chinese.     By  F.  H.  Balfour.     8vo,  pp.  xlviii.  and  426,  cloth.     1881.     14s.

BALFOUR.— Taoist  Texts,  Ethical,  Political,  and  Speculative.  By  F.  H.  BALFOUR,
Editor  of  the  North-China  Herald.     Imp.  8vo,  pp.  vi.-118,  cloth.     10s.  6d.

BALL. — The  Diamonds,  Coal,  and  Gold  of  India  ;  their  Mode  of  Occurrence  and
Distribution.  By  V.  Ball,  M. A.,  F.G.S.,  of  the  Geological  Survey  of  India.
Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  136,  cloth.     1881.     5s.

BALL.  — A  Manual  of  the  Geology  of  India.  Part  III.  Economic  Geology.  By
V.  Ball,  M.A.,  F.G.S.  Royal  8vo,  pp.  xx.  and  640,  with  6  Maps  and  10  Plates,
cloth.     1881.     10a.

BALLAD  SOCIETY* — Subscriptions,  small  paper,  one  guinea;  large  paper,  two  guineas
per  annum.     List  of  publications  on  application.

BALLANTYNE.—  Elements  of  Hindi  and  Bkaj  Bhakha  Grammar.  Compiled  for
the  use  of  the  East  India  College  at  Haileybury.  By  James  R.  Ballantyne.  Second
Edition.    Crown  8vo,  pp.  38,  cloth.    1868.     5s.

BALLANTYNE.— First  Lessons  in  Sanskrit  Grammar;  together  with  an  Introduc-
tion to  the  Hitopades'a.  Fourth  Edition.  By  James  R.  Ballantyne,  LL.D.,  Libra-
rian of  the  India  Office.     8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  110,  cloth.    1884.     3s.  6d.

BALLANTYNE.— The  Sankhya  Aphorisms  of  Kapila.  See  Triibner's  Oriental
Series.

BARANOWSKL— Vade  Mecum  de  LA  Langue  Francaise,  redige  d'apres  les  Dic-
tionnaires  classiques  avec  les  Exemples  de  Bonnes  Locutions  que  donne  l'Academie
Franchise,  on  qu'on  trouve  dans  les  ouvrages  (les  plus  celubres  auteurs.  Par  J.  J.
Baranowski,  avec  l'approbation  de  M.  E.  Littr<?,  Senateur,  &c.  Second  Edition.
32mo,  pp.  224.     1883.    Cloth,  2s.  6d.

BARANOWSKI.— Anglo-Polish  Lexicon.  By  J.  J.  Baranowski,  formerly  Under-
Secretary  to  the  Bank  of  Poland,  in  Warsaw.  Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  492,  cloth.
1883.     6s.


6  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works,

BARANOWSKI. — Slownik  Polsko-Angielski.  (Polish-English  Lexicon.)  By  J.
J.  Baranowski.     Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  iv.-  402,  cloth.     1884.    6s.  6d.

BARENTS'  RELICS.— Recovered  in  the  summer  of  1876  by  Charles  L.  W.  Gardiner,
Esq.,  and  presented  to  the  Dutch  Government.  Described  and  explained  by  J.
K.  J.  de  Jonge,  Deputy  Royal  Architect  at  the  Hague.  Published  by  command
of  His  Excellency,  W.  F.  Van  F.R.P.  Taelman  Kip,  Minister  of  Marine.  Trans-
lated, with  a  Preface,  by  S.  R.  Van  Campen.  With  a  Map,  Illustrations,  and  a
fac-simile  of  the  Scroll.     8vo,  pp.  70,  cloth.     1877.     5s.

BARRIERE  and  CAPENDU.— Les  Faux  Bonshommes,  a  Comedy.  By  Theodore
Barriere  and  Ernest  Capendu.  Edited,  with  English  Notes  and  Notice  on  Bar-
riere,  by  Professor  Ch.  Cassal,  LL.D.,  of  University  College,  London.  12mo,  pp.
xvL  and  304,  cloth.     1868.    4s.

BARTH. — The  Religions  of  India.     See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series.

BARTLETT.  — Dictionary  of  Americanisms.  A  Glossary  of  Words  and  Phrases
colloquially  used  in  the  United  States.  By  John  Russell  Bartlett.  Fourth
Edition,  considerably  enlarged  and  improved.  8vo,  pp.  xlvi.  and  814,  cloth.
1877.     20s.

BATTYE. — What  is  Vital  Force?  or,  a  Short  and  Comprehensive  Sketch,  includ-
ing Vital  Physics,  Animal  Morphology,  and  Epidemics ;  to  which  is  added  an
Appendix  upon  Geology,  Is  the  Dentrital  Theory  of  Geology  Tenable?  By
Richard  Fawcett  Battye.    8vo,  pp.  iv.  and  336,  cloth.     1877.     7s.  6d.

BAZLEY.—  Notes  on  the  Epicyclodial  Cutting  Frame  of  Messrs.  Holtzapffel  k
Co.  With  special  reference  to  its  Compensation  Adjustment,  and  with  numerous
Illustrations  of  its  Capabilities.  Bv  Thomas  Sebastian  Bazley,  M.A.  8vo,  pp.
xvi.  and  192,  cloth.     Illustrated.     1872.     10s.  6d.

BAZLEY.  —The  Stars  in  Their  Courses  :  A  Twofold  Series  of  Maps,  with  a
Catalogue,  showing  how  to  identify,  at  any  time  of  the  year,  all  stars  down  to  the
5.6  magnitude,  inclusive  of  Heis,  which  are  clearly  visible  in  English  latitudes.
By  T.  S.  Bazley,  M.A. .  Author  of  "Notes  on  the  Epicycloidal  Cutting  Frame."
Atlas  folio,  pp.  46  and  24,  Folding  Plates,  cloth.     1878.     15s.

BEAL. — A  Catena  of  Buddhist  Scriptures  from  the  Chinese.  ByS.  Beal,  B.A.,
Trinity  College,  Cambridge ;  a  Chaplain  in  Her  Majesty's  Fleet,  &c.  8vo,  pp.
xiv.  and  436,  cloth.     1871.     15s.

BEAL. — The  Romantic  Legend  of  Sakya  Buddha.  From  the  Chinese-Sanskrit.
By  the  Rev.  Samuel  Beal.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  408,  cloth.     1875.     12s.

BEAL. — Dhammapada.     See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series.

BEAL. — Buddhist  Literature  in  China  :  Abstract  of  Four  Lectures,  Delivered  by
Samuel  Beal,  B.A.,  Professor  of  Chinese  at  University  College,  London.  Demy
8vo,  pp.  xx.  and  186,  cloth.     1882.     10s.  6d.

BEAL.— Si-Yu-Kl.  Buddhist  Records  of  the  Western  World.  See  Triibner's
Oriental  Series.

BEAMES.  — Odtlines  of  Indian  Philology.  With  a  Map  showing  the  Distribution
of  Indian  Languages.  By  John  Beames,  M.R.A.S.,  B.C. S.,  &c.  Second  enlarged
and  revised  Edition.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  96,  cloth.     1868.     5s.

BEAMES. — A  Comparative  Grammar  of  the  Modern  Aryan  Languages  of  India,
to  wit,  Hindi,  Panjabi,  Sindhi,  Gujarati,  Marathi,  Oriya,  and  Bengali.  By  John
Beames,  B.C.S.,  M  R.A.S.,  &c  ,  &c.  Demy  8vo.  Vol.  I.  On  Sounds.  Pp.  xvi.
and  360,  cloth.  1872.  16s.— Vol.  II.  The  Noun  and  the  Pronoun.  Pp.  xii.  and
348,  cloth.  1875.  16s.— Vol.  III.  The  Verb.    Pp.  xii.  and  316,  cloth.     1879.     16s.

BELLEW. — From  the  Indus  to  the  Tigris.  A  Narrative  of  a  Journey  through
Balochistan,  Afghanistan,  Khorassan,  and  Iran  in  1872  ;  together  with  a  Synoptical
Grammar  and  Vocabulary  of  the  Brahoe  Language,  and  a  Record  of  the  Meteorolo-
gical Observations  on  the  March  from  the  Indus  to  the  Tigris.  By  Henry  Walter
Bellew,  C.S.I.,  Surgeon,  B,S.C.     8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  496,  cloth.     1874.     14s.


FVUUhd  by  Trainer  A  Co.  7

BELLEW— Kashmir  and  Kashohar  :  a  Narrative  of  the  Journey  of  the  Embassy
to  Kashghar  in  1873-74.  By  II.  W.  Bellew,  C.S.I.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  xxxii.  ami
4L'0,  cloth.     1875.     16s.

BELLEW.  Tin:  ELlOBS  Off  Afghanistan.  Being  a  Brief  Account  of  the  Principal
Nations  Inhab  ranter.     By  Surgeon- Major  II.  W.  Bellew,  C.S. I.,  late

on  Special  Politioal  Dutv  at  Kabul.    8vo,  pp.  124,  cloth.     1880.    7s.  6d.

BELLOWS.  — EsGLisn  Outline  Vocabulary  for  the  use  of  Students  of  the  Chinese,
Japanese,  and  other  Languages.  Arranged  by  John  Bellows.  With  Notes  on  the
Writing  of  Chinese  with  Human  Letters,  by  Professor  Summers,  King's  College,
London.   Crown  8vo,  pp.  vi.  and  368,  cloth.     1867.    6s.

BELLOWS.— Outline  Dictionary  for  tub  usb  op  Missionaries,  Explorers,  and
Students  op  Language.  By  Mai  Mailer.  MA.,  laylorian  Professor  in  the  Uni-
versity of  Oxford.  With  an  Introduction  on  the  proper  use  of  the  ordinary
Euglish  Alphabet  in  transcribing  Foreign  Languages.  The  Vocabulary  compiled
by  John  Bellows.    Crown  8vo,  pp.  xxxi.  and  368,  limp  morocco.    1867.    7s.  6d.

BELLOWS. — Toes  les  Verbes.  Conjugations  of  all  the  Verbs  in  the  French  ami
English  Languages.  By  John  Bellows.  Revised  by  Professor  Beljame,  B.A.,
LL.B.,  of  the  University  of  Paris,  and  Official  Interpreter  to  the  Imperial  Court,
and  George  B.  Strickland,  late  Assistant  French  Master,  Royal  Naval  School,
Loudon.  Also  a  New  Table  of  Equivalent  Values  of  French  and  English  Money,
Weights,  and  Measures.    32mo,  76  Tables,  sewed.    1867.    Is.

BELLOWS.  — French  and  English  Dictionary  for  the  Pocket.  By  John  Bellows
Containing  the  French-English  and  English-French  divisions  on  the  same  page  '
conjugating  all  the  verbs  ;  distinguishing  the  genders  by  different  types ;  giving
numerous  aids  to  pronunciation  ;  indicating  the  liaison  or  non-liaison  of  terminal
consonants ;  and  translating  units  of  weight,  measure,  and  value,  by  a  series  of
tables  differing  entirely  from  any  hitherto  published.  The  new  edition,  which  is
but  six  ounces  in  weight,  has  been  remodelled,  and  contains  many  thousands  of
additional  words  and  renderings.  Miniature  maps  of  France,  the  British  Isles.
Paris,  and  London,  are  added  to  the  Geographical  Section.  Second  Edition.  32mo,
pp.  608.  roan  tuck,  or  persian  without  tuck.    1877.    10s.  6d.  ;  morocco  tuck,  12s.  6d.

BENEDLX  — Der  Vetter.  Comedy  in  Three  Acts.  By  Roderich  Benedix.  With
Grammatical  and  Explanatory  Notes  by  F.  Weinmann,  German  Master  at  the
Royal  Institution  School,  Liverpool,  and  G.  Zimmermann,  Teacher  of  Modern
Languages.     12mo,  pp.  128,  cloth.    1863.    2s.  6d.

BENFEY. — A  Practical  Grammar  op  thf.  Sanskrit  Language,  for  the  use  of  Early
Students.  By  Theodor  Benfey,  Professor  of  Sanskrit  in  the  University  of  Gottin-
gen.  Second,  revised,  and  enlarged  Edition.  Royal  8vo,  pp.  via.  and  296,  cloth.
1868.     10s.  6d.

BENTHAM. — Theory  op  Legislation.    By  Jeremy  Bentham.     Translated  from  the

French  of  Etienne  Dumont  by  R.  Hildreth.     Fourth  Edition.     Post  8vo,  pp.  xv.

and  472,  cloth.     1882.     7s.  6<L
BETTS.—  See  Valdes.
BEVERIDGE.— The  District  op  Bararganj.     Its  History  and  Statistics.     By  H.

Beveridge,  B.C.S.,  Magistrate  and  Collector  of  Bakarganj.      8vo,  pp.   xx.  and

460,  cloth.     1876.    21s.
BHANDARKAR.— Early  History  of  the  Dekkan  down  to  the  Mahomedan

Conquest.     By  Ramkrishna  Gopal  Bhandarkar,  M.A.,  Hon.  M.R.  A.S.,  Professor

of  Oriental  Languages,  Dekkan  College.     Written  for  the  Bombay  Gazette.     Royal

8vo,  pp.  128,  wrapper.     1884.     5s.
BICKNELL.— See  Hapiz.

BLERBAUM.— History  of  the  English  Language  and  Literature. —By  F.  J.

Bierbaum,  Ph.D.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  270,  cloth.     1883.     3s.
BIGANDET.— The  Life  of  Gaudama.     See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series.


8  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works,

BILLINGS.— The  Principles  of  Ventilation  and  Heating,  and  their  Practical
Application.  By  John  S.  Billings,  M.D.,  LL.D.  (Edinb.),  Surgeon  U.S.  Army.
Demy  8vo,  pp.  x.  and  216,  cloth,     1884.     15a.

BIRCH.— Fasti  Monastici  Aevi  Saxonici  ;  or,  An  Alphabetical  List  of  the  Heads  of
Religious  Houses  in  England  previous  to  the  Norman  Conquest,  to  which  is  pre-
fixed a  Chronological  Catalogue  of  Contemporary  Foundations.  By  "Walter  de
Gray  Birch.     8vo,  pp.  vii.  and  114,  cloth.     1873.     5s.

BIRD.— Physiological  Essays.  Drink  Craving,  Differences  in  Men,  Idiosyncrasy,  and
the  Origin  of  Disease.  By  Robert  Bird,  M.  D.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  246,  cloth.  1870.  7s.  6d.

BIZYENOS.— AT0IAEE  AYPAI.  Poems.  By  George  M.  Bizyenos.  With  Frontis-
piece Etched  by  Prof.  A  Legros.  Royal  8vo,  pp.  viii.-312,  printed  ou  hand-made
paper,  and  richly  bound.     1883.     £1,  lis.  6d.

BLACK.— Young  Japan,  Yokohama  and  Yedo.  A  Narrative  of  the  Settlement
and  the  City,  from  the  Signing  of  the  Treaties  in  1858  to  the  Close  of  1879;  with
a  Glance  at  the  Progress  of  Japan  during  a  Period  of  Twenty-one  Years.  By  J.
R.  Black,  formerly  Editor  of  the  "  Japan  Herald,"  &c.  2  vols,  demy  8vo,  pp.
xviii.  and  418  ;  xiv.  and  522,  cloth.     1881.     £2,  2s.

BLACKET.—  Researches  into  the  Lost  Histories  of  America  ;  or,  The  Zodiac
shown  to  be  an  Old  Terrestrial  Map,  in  which  the  Atlantic  Isle  is  delineated ;  so
that  Light  can  be  thrown  upon  the  Obscure  Histories  of  the  Earthworks  and
Ruined  Cities  of  America.  By  W.  S.  Blacket.  Illustrated  by  numerous  En-
gravings.    8vo,  pp.  336,  cloth.     1883.     10s.  6d.

BLADES. —Shakspkre  and  Typography.  Being  an  Attempt  to  show  Shakspere's
Personal  Connection  with,  and  Technical  Knowledge  of,  the  Art  of  Printing  ;  also
Remarks  upon  some  common  Typographical  Errors,  with  especial  reference  to  the
Text  of  Shakspere.  By  William  Blades.  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  78,  with  an  Illustra-
tion, cloth.    1872.    3s.

BLADES.— The  Biography  and  Typography  of  William  Caxton,  England's  First
Printer.  By  W.  Blades.  Founded  upon  the  Author's  "  Life  and  Typography  of
William  Caxton."  Brought  up  to  the  Present  Date.  Elegantly  and  appropriately
printed  in  demy  8vo,  on  hand-made  paper,  imitation  old  bevelled  binding.  1877.
£1,  Is.     Cheap  Edition.     Crown  8vo,  cloth.     1881.     5s.

BLADES.— The  Enemies  of  Books.  By  William  Blades,  Typograph.  Crown  8vo,
pp.  xvi.  and  112,  parchment  wrapper.     1880.

BLADES. — An  Account  of  the  German  Morality  Play  entitled  Depositio
Cornuti  Typographici,  as  Performed  in  the  Seventeenth  and  Eighteenth  Cen-
turies. With  a  Rhythmical  Translation  of  the  German  Version  of  1648.  By
William  Blades  (Typographer).  To  which  is  added  a  Literal  Reprint  of  the
unique  Original  Version,  written  in  Plant  Deutsch  by  Paul  de  Wise,  and  printed
in  1621.  Small  4to,  pp.  xii.-144,  with  facsimile  Illustrations,  in  an  appropriate
binding.     1885.     7s.  6d.

BLAKEY. — Memoirs  of  Dr.  Robert  Blakey,  Professor  of  Logic  and  Metaphysics,
Queen's  College,  Belfast.  Edited  by  the  Rev.  Henry  Miller.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xii.
and  252,  cloth.     1879.     5s.

BLEEK.—  Reynard  the  Fox  in  South  Africa;  or,  Hottentot  Fables  and  Tales,
chiefiv  Translated  from  Original  Manuscripts  in  the  Library  of  His  Excellency  Sir
George  Grey,  K.C.B.  By  W.  H.  I.  Bleek,  Ph.D.  Post*  8vo,  pp.  xxvi.  and  94,
cloth.    1864.   3s.  6d.

BLEEK.— A  Brief  Account  of  Bushman  Folk  Lore,  and  other  Texts.  By  W.  H.
I.  Bleek.  Ph.D.     Folio,  pp.  21,  paper.     2s.  6d.

BLUMHARDT.— See  Charitabali.

BOEHMER.—  See  Valdes,  and  Spanish  Reformers.

BOJESEN. — A  Guide  to  the  Danish  Language.  Designed  for  English  Students.
By  Mrs.  Maria  Bojesen.     12mo,  pp.  250,  cloth.    1863.    5a.


Published  by  Trubner  d-  Co.  9

BOLIA. — The  German  Cw.igraphist  :    Copies  for  German  Handwriting.     By  C.
i  ibkmg  4(o,  tewed.    Is.

BOOLE—  KfMAOl  01  Psychic  Science  10  Mothers  and  Nurses.  Bj  Mary
Boole.     Crown  8ro,  pp.  xiv.  and  200,  cloth.    188;}.    5s.

BOTTRELL.  — Sn>RUs  and  FOLK-LOBl  Of  West  GOBHWAI  l.  By  "William  Bottrell.
"With  Illustrations  by  Joseph  Blight.  Thud  Series.  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  200,
cloth.     1N<4.     6s.

BOY  ENGINEERS.— See  under  Lukin.

BOYD.  — NAV;.(nanda  ;  or,  the  Joy  of  the  Snake  "World.  A  Buddhist  Drama  in  Five
Acts.  Translated  into  English  Prose,  with  Explanatory  Notes,  from  the  Sanskrit
of  Sa-Harsha-Deva.  By  Palmer  Boyd,  B.A.,  Cambridge.  "With  an  Introduction
by  Professor  Cowell.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  100,  cloth.     1872.     4s.  Gd.

BRADSHAW.— Dictionary  of  Bathing  Places  and  Climatic  Health  Resorts.
Much  Revised  and  Considerably  Enlarged.  "With  a  Map  in  Eleven  Colours.
Third  Edition.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  lxxviii.  and  304,  cloth.     1884.     2s.  6d.

BRENTANO.— On  the  History  and  Development  of  Gilds,  and  the  Origin  of
Trade-Unions.  By  Lujo  Brestano,  of  Aschaffenburg,  Bavaria,  Doctor  Juris
Utriusque  et  Philosophise.  1.  The  Origin  of  Gilds.  2.  Religious  (or  Social)
Gilds.  3.  Town-Gilds  or  Gild-Merchauts.  4.  Craft-Gilds.  5.  Trade-Unions.
8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  136,  cloth.     1870.     3s.  6d.

BRETSCHNEJDER. — Early  European  Researches  into  the  Flora  of  China.
By  E.  Bretschneider,  M.D.,  Physician  of  the  Russian  Legation  at  Peking.  Demy
pp.  iv.  and  194,  sewed.     1881.     7s.  6d.

BRETSCHNEIDER.— Botanicon  Sinicum.  Notes  on  Chinese  Botany,  from  Native
and  "Western  Sources.  By  E.  Bretschneider,  M.D.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  228,  wrapper.
1882.    10s.  6d.

BRETTE.  —  French  Examination  Papers  set  at  the  University  of  London  from
1838  to  1871.  Arranged  and  edited  by  the  Rev.  P.  H.  Ernest  Brette,  B.D.
Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  278,  cloth.     3s.  6d.;  interleaved,  4s.  6d.

BRITISH  MUSEUM.— List  of  Publications  of  the  Trustees  of  the  British
Museum,  on  application.

BROWN.— The  Dervishes  ;  or,  Oriental  Spiritualism.  By  John  P.  Brown,
Secretary  and  Dragoman  of  the  Legation  of  the  United  States  of  America  at  Con-
stantinople.   Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  416,  cloth,  with  24  Illustrations.    1868.    14s.

BROWN.— Sanskrit  Prosody  and  Numerical  Symbols  Explained.  By  Charles
Philip  Brown,  M.R.  A.S..  Author  of  a  Telugu  Dictionary,  Grammar,  &c,  Professor
of  Telugu  in  the  University  of  London.     8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  56,  cloth.    1869.    3s.  6d.

BROWNE.— How  to  use  the  Ophthalmoscope;  being  Elementary  Instruction  in
Ophthalmoscopy.  Arranged  for  the  use  of  Students.  By  Edgar  A.  Browne,  Sur-
geon to  the  Liverpool  Eye  and  Ear  Infirmary,  &c.  Second  Edition.  Crown  8vo,
pp.  xi.  and  108,  with  35  Figures,  cloth.     1883.     3s.  6d.

BROWNE.— A  BANoiLi  Primer,  in  Roman  Character.  By  J.  F.  Browne,  B.C.S.
Crown  8vo,  pp.  32,  cloth.     1881.     2s.

BROWNE.— A  Hindi  Primer  in  Roman  Character.  By  J.  F.  Browne,  B.C.S.
Crown  8vo,  pp.  36,  cloth.     1882.     2s.  6d.

BROWNE. — An  LTrtya  Primer  in  Roman  Character.  By  J.  F.  Browne,  B.C.S.
Crown  8vo,  pp.  32,  cloth.     1882.     2s.  6d.

BROWNING  SOCIETY'S  PAPERS.— Demy  8vo,  wrappers.  1881-84.  Part  I.,  pp.
116.  10s.  Bibliography  of  Robert  Browning  from  1833-81.  Part  II.,  pp.  142.
10s.     Part  III.,  pp.  168.     10s.     Part  IV.,  pp.  14S.     10s.     Part  V.,  pp.        .     10s.

BROWNING'S  POEMS,  Illustrations  to.    4to,  boards.    Parts  I.  and  II.    10s.  each.


10  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works,

BRUNNO W.—See  Scheffel.

BRUNTON.— Map  of  Japan.     See  under  Japan.

BUDGE.— Archaic  Classics.  Assyrian  Texts  ;  being  Extracts  from  the  Annals  of
Shalmaneserll.,  Sennacherib,  and  Assur-Bani-Pal.  With  Philological  Notes.  By
Ernest  A.  Budge,  B.A.,  M.R.A.S.,  Assyrian  Exhibitioner,  Christ's  College,
Cambridge.     Small  4to,  pp.  viii.  and  44,  cloth.     1880.     7s.  Gd.

BUDGE.— History  of  Esarhaddon.     See  Trubner's  Oriental  Series.

BUNYAN.— Scenes  from  the  Pilgrim's  Progress.  By.  R.  B.  Rutter.  4to,  pp.
142,  boards,  leather  back.     1882.     5s.

BURGESS  :--

Archjsological  Survey  of  "Western  India  : —

Report  of  the  First  Season's  Operations  in  the  Belgam  and  Kaladi
Districts.  January  to  May  1874.  By  James  Burgess,  F.R.G.S.  With  56
Photographs  and  Lithographic  Plates.  Royal  4to,  pp.  viii.  and  45 ;  half
bound.     1875.     £2,  2s.

Report  on  the  Antiquities  of  KIthiawad  and  Kachh,  being  the  result  of
the  Second  Season's  Operations  of  the  Archasological  Survey  of  Western
India,  1874-75.  By  James  Burgess,  F.R.G.S.  Royal  4to,  pp.  x.  and  242,
with  74  Plates ;  half  bound.     1876.     £3,  3s.

Report  on  the  Antiquities  in  the  Bidar  and  Aurangabad  Districts,  in
the  Territories  of  His  Highness  the  Nizam  of  Haiderabad,  being  the  result
of  the  Third  Season's  Operations  of  the  Archaeological  Survey  of  Western
India,  1875-76.  By  James  Burgess,  F.R.G.S.,  M.R.A.S.,  Archaeological  Sur-
veyor and  Reporter  to  Government,  Western  India.  Royal  4to,  pp.  viii.  and
138,  with  63  Photographic  Plates  ;  half  bound.     1S78.     £2,  2s.

Report  on  the  Buddhist  Cave  Temples  and  their  v
Inscriptions;  containing  Views,  Plans,  Sections,  and
Elevation  of  Facades  of  Cave  Temples  ;  Drawings  of
Architectural  and  Mythological  Sculptures  ;  Facsimiles
of  Inscriptions,  &c. ;  with  Descriptive  and  Explanatory
Text,  and  Translations  of  Inscriptions,  &c,  &c.  By  iov^ia  iqs^  or  «<.
James  Burgess,  LL.D.,  F.R.G.S.,  &c.  Royal  4to,  pp.
x.  and  140,  with  86  Plates  and  Woodcuts  ;  half-bound.

Report  on  Elura  Cave  Temples,  and  the  Brahmani-

CAL  AND  JAINA  CAVES  IN  WESTERN  INDIA.     By  James

Burgess,  LL.D.,  F.R.G.S.,  &c.     Royal  4to,  pp.  viii.
and  90,  with  66  Plates  and  Woodcuts  ;  half-bound.     '/

BURMA — The  British  Burma  Gazetteer.  Compiled  by  Major  H.  R.  Spearman,
under  the  direction  of  the  Government  of  India.  2  vols.  8vo,  pp.  764  and  878,
with  11  Photographs,  cloth.     1880.     £2,  10s.

BURMA. — History  of.     See  Trubner's  Oriental  Series,  page  70.

BURNE.— Shropshire  Folk-Lore.  A  Sheaf  of  Gleanings.  Edited  by  Charlotte  S.
Burne,  from  the  Collections  of  Georgina  F.  Jackson.  Demy  8vo.  Part  I.,  pp.
xvi.-176,  wrapper.     1883.     7s.  6d.      Part  II.,  pp.  192,  wrapper.     1885.     7s.  6d.

BURNELL. — Elements  of  South  Indian  Paleography,  from  the  Fourth  to  the
Seventeenth  Century  A.D.,  being  an  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  South  Indian
Inscriptions  and  MSS.  By  A.  C.  Burnell.  Second  enlarged  aud  improved
Edition.  4to,  pp.  xiv.  and  148,  Map  and  35  Plates,  cloth.     1878.     £2, 12s.  6d.

BURNELL.— A  Classified  Index  to  the  Sanskrit  MSS.  in  the  Palace  at
TANJORE.  Prepared  for  the  Madras  Government.  By  A.  C.  Burnell,  Ph.D.,  &c,
&c  4to,  stiff  wrapper.  Part  I.,  pp.  iv.-80,  Vedic  and  Technical  Literature.
Part  II.,  pp.  iv.-SO,  Philosophy  and  Law.  Part  III.,  Drama,  Epics,  Puranas,  and
Zantras ;  Indices.     1879.     10s.  each.


Published  by  Trainer  &  Co.  11

BURTON.—  II an pbook  tor  Ovkklam"  EXPEDITION  |  being  an  English  Edition  of  tlio
"  Prairie  Traveller,"  a  Handbook  for  Overland  Expedition!,     With   Illustrations

and  Itineraries  of  the  Principal  Routes  between  the  Mississippi  and  the  Pacific,
an.l  a  Map.  By  Captain  B.  l!  Marcy  (now  General  and  Chief  of  the  Staff,  Aimy
of  the  Potomac).  Edited,  with  Notes,  by  Captain  Richard  F.  Burton.  Crown
8vo,  pp.  270,  numerous.  "Woodcuts,  Itineraries,  and  Map,  cloth.     1863.     Cs.  (id.

BUTLER.  -  Ekkwiion  ;  or,  Over  the  Range.  By  Samuel  Butler.  Seventh  Edition.
Crown  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  241.  cloth.      1884.     5s.

BUTLER.— The  Faiu  Haven.  A  Work  in  Defence  of  the  Miraculous  Element  in
Our  Lord's  Ministry  upon  Earth,  both  as  against  Rationalistic  Impugners  and
certain  Orthodox  Defenders.  By  the  late  John  Pickard  Owen.  "With  a  Memoir
of  the  Author  by  William  Bickersteth  Owen.  By  Samuel  Butler.  Second  Edi-
tion.    Demy  8vo,  pp.  x.  and  248,  cloth.     1873.     7s.  6d.

BUTLER.— Life  and  Hauit.  By  Samuel  Butler.  Second  Edition.  Crown  8vo,
pp.  x.  and  308,  cloth.     1878.     7s.  6d.

BUTLER.— Gavottes,  Minuets,  Fugues,  and  other  short  pieces  for  the  Piano.
By  Samuel  Butler,  Author  of  "Erewhon,"  "Life  and  Habit,"  &c.  (Op.  I.  mus.),
and  Henry  Festing  Jones  (Op.  I.)

BUTLER.— Evolution,  Old  and  New  ;  or,  The  Theories  of  Buffon,  Dr.  Erasnvas
Darwin,  and  Lamarck,  as  compared  with  that  of  Mr.  Charles  Darwin.  By  Samuel
Butler.  Second  Edition,  with  an  Appendix  and  Index.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and
430,  cloth.     1882.     10s.  6d.

BUTLER.— Unconscious  Memory  :  A  Comparison  between  the  Theory  of  Dr.  Ewald
Hering,  Professor  of  Physiology  at  the  University  of  Prague,  and  the  "  Philosophy
of  the  Unconscious  "  of  Dr.  Edward  von  Hartmaun.  With  Translations  from  these
Authors,  and  Preliminary  Chnpters'bearing  on  "Life  and  Habit,"  "Evolution,
New  and  Old,"  and  Mr.  Charles  Darwin's  edition  of  Dr.  Krause's  "Erasmus
Darwin."    By  Samuel  Butler.    Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  288,  cloth.    1880.    7s.  6d.

BUTLER.— Alps  and  Sanctuaries  of  Piedmont  and  the  Canton  Ticino.  Pro-
fusely Illustrated  by  Charles  Gogin,  H.  F.  Jones,  and  the  Author.  By  Samuel
Butler.     Foolscap  4to,  pp.  viii.  and  37G,  cloth.     1882.     21s.

BUTLER.— Selections  from  his  Previous  Works,  with  Remarks  on  Mr.  G.  J.
Romanes'  recent  work,  "Mental  Evolution  in  Animals,"  and  "A  Psalm  of
Montreal."    By  Samuel  Butler.    Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  326,  cloth.    1884.    7s.  6d.

BUTLER. — The  Spanish  Teacher  and  Colloquial  Phrase-Book.  An  Easy  and
Agreeable  Method  of  acquiring  a  Speaking  Knowledge  of  the  Spanish  Language.
By  Francis  Butler.     Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  xviii.  and  240,  half-roan.     2s.  6d.

BUTLER.— Hungarian  Poems  and  Fables  for  English  Readers.  Selected  and
Translated  by  E.  D.  Butler,  of  the  British  Museum  ;  with  Illustrations  by  A.  G.
Butler.     Foolscap,  pp.  vi.  and  88,  limp  cloth.     1877.     2s.

BUTLER. — The  Legend  of  the  Wondrous  Hunt.  By  John  Arany.  With  a  few
Miscellaneous  Pieces  and  Folk-Songs.  Translated  from  the  Magyar  by  E.  D.
Butler,  F.R.G.S.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  70.     Limp  cloth.     2s.  6d.

CAITHNESS.— Lectures  on  Popular  and  Scientific  Subjects.  By  the  Earl  of
Caithness,  F.K.S.  Delivered  at  various  times  and  places.  Second  enlarged
Edition.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  174,  cloth.     1879.     2s.  6d.

CALCUTTA  REVIEW.— Selections  from  Nos.  I.-XXXVII.     5s.  each.

CALDER.— The  Coming  Eka.  By  A.  Calder,  Officer  of  the  Legion  of  Honour,  and
Author  of  "The  Man  of  the  Future."    8vo,  pp.  422,  cloth.     1879.     10s.  6d.

CALDWELL. — A  Comparative  Grammar  of  the  Dravidian  or  South  Indian
Family  of  Languages.  By  the  Rev.  R.  Caldwell,  LL.D.  A  second,  corrected,
and  enlarged  Edition.     Demy  8vo,  pp.  804,  cloth.     1875.     28s.

CALENDARS  OF  STATE  PAPERS.     List  on  application.


12  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works,

CALL.  — Reverberations.  Revised.  "With  a  chapter  from  My  Autobiography.
By  W.  M.  W.  Call,  M.A.,  Cambridge,  Author  of  "Lyra  Hellenica"  aud
"  Golden  Histories."     Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  200,  cloth.     1875.     4s.  6d.

CALLAWAY.  -Nursery  Tales,  Traditions,  and  Histories  of  the  Zulus.     Iu

their  own  words,  with  a  Translation  into  English,  and  Notes.    By  the  Rev.  Canon

Callaway,  M.D.     Vol.  I.,  Svo,  pp.  xiv.  and  378,  cloth.     1868.     16s.
CALLAWAY.— The  Religious  System  of  the  Amazulu.

Part  I. — Unkulunkulu  ;  or,  The  Tradition  of  Creation  as  existing  among  the
Amazulu  and  other  Tribes  of  South  Africa,  in  their  own  words,  with  a  Transla-
tion into  English,  and  Notes.  By  the  Rev.  Canon  Callaway,  M.D.  Svo,  pp.
128,  sewed.     1808.     4s.

Part  II. — Amatongo ;  or,  Ancestor-Worship  as  existing  among  the  Amazulu,  in
their  own  words,  with  a  Translation  into  English,  and  Notes.  By  the  Rev.
Canon  Callaway,  M.D.     Svo,  pp.  127,  sewed.     1869.     4s.

Part  III. — Izinyanga  Zokubula  ;  or,  Divination,  as  existing  among  the  Amazulu,
in  their  own  words,  with  a  Translation  into  English,  and  Notes.  By  the  Rev.
Canon  Callaway,  M.D.     8vo,  pp.  150,  sewed.     1870.     4s.

Part  IV. — On  Medical  Magic  and  Witchcraft.     8vo,  pp.  40,  sewed,  Is.  6d.
CAMBRIDGE  PHILOLOGICAL  SOCIETY  (Transactions).    Vol.  I.,  from  1872-1880.

Svo,  pp.  xvi.-420,  wrapper.     1881.     15s.     Vol.  II.,  for  1S81  aud  1882.     8vo,  pp.

viii -286,  wrapper.     18S3.     12s.
CAMERINI. — L'Eco  Italiano  ;  a  Practical  Guide  to  Italian  Conversation.     By  E.

Camerini.     With  a  Vocabulary.     12mo,  pp.  98,  cloth.     1860.     4s.  6d.

CAMPBELL. — The  Gospel  of  the  World's  Divine  Order.  By  Douglas  Camp-
bell.    New  Edition.    Revised.    Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  364,  cloth.    1877.    4s.  6d.

CANADA. — A  Guide  Book  to  the  Dominion  of  Canada.  Containing  Information
for  intending  Settlers,  with  many  Illustrations  and  Map.  Published  under  the
Direction  of  the  Government  of  Canada.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  xiv. -138,  thick  paper,
sewed.     1885.     6d.

CANDID  Examination  of  Theism.  By  Physicus.  Post  8vo,  pp.  xviii.  and  198,
cloth.     187S.     7s.  6d.

CANTICUM  CANTICORUM,  reproduced  in  facsimile,  from  the  Scriverius  copy  in  the
British  Museum.  With  an  Historical  and  Bibliographical  Introduction  by  I.  Ph.
Berjeau.     Folio,  pp.  36,  with  16  Tables  of  Illustrations,  vellum.     1860.     £2,  2s.

CAREY. — The  Past,  the  Present,  and  the  Future.  By  H.  C.  Carey.  Second
Edition.     8vo,  pp.  474,  cloth.     1856.     10s.  6d.

CARLETTI. — History  of  the  Conquest  of  Tunis.     Translated  by  J.  T.  Carletti.

Crown  Svo,  pp.  40,  cloth.     18S3.     2s.  6d.
CARNEGY.— Notes  on  the  Land  Tenures  and  Revenue  Assessments  of  Upper

India.    By  P.  Carnegy.    Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  136,  and  forms,  cloth.     1874.    6s.

CATHERINE  II. ,  Memoirs  of  the  Empress.  Written  by  herself.  With  a  Preface
by  A.  Herzen.  Trans,  from  the  French.  12mo,  pp.  xvi.  and  352,  bds.  1859.
7s.  6d.

CATLIN. — O-Kee-Pa.  A  Religious  Ceremony  ;  and  other  Customs  of  the  Mandans.
By  George  Catlin.  With  13  coloured  Illustrations.  Small  4to,  pp.  vi.  and  52,
cloth.     1867.     14s.

CATLIN.— The  Lifted  and  Subsided  Rocks  of  America,  with  their  Influence  on
the  Oceanic,  Atmospheric,  and  Land  Currents,  and  the  Distribution  of  Races.
By  George  Catlin.     With  2  Maps.     Cr.  Svo,  pp.  xii.  and  233,  cloth.    1870.    6s.  6d.

CATLIN.— Shut  your  Mouth  and  Save  your  Life.  By  George  Catlin,  Author  of
"  Notes  of  Travels  amongst  the  North  American  Indians,"  &c. ,  &c.  With  29  Illus-
trations from  Drawings  by  the  Author.  Eighth  Edition,  considerably  enlarged
Crown  8vo,  pp.  106,  cloth.     1882.     2s.  6d.


PuUvked  by  Trubner  it  Co.  13

CAXTON.—  The  Biography  and  Typography  op.     See  Blades.

CAXTON  CELEBRATION,  1877.  — Catalogue  of  the  LOAH  Collection  of  Anti-

QDITIS8.  OOBIOSmiS,  ami  APFLIAKOB  OOMMKUTJtD  with   the  Art  Of  I'lilN  l  im;.

Edited  by  <;.  BoIIen,  F.S.A.    Post  8vo,  pp.  xx.  and  472,  cloth,  3s.  0.1.

CAZELLES. - Outline  of  the  Evolution  Philosophy.  By  Dr.  W.  E.  Cazelles.
Translated  from  the  French  by  the  Kev.  O.  B.  Frothingham.  Crown  8vo,  pp.
156,  cloth.     1875.    3s.  6d.

CESNOLA.— Salaminia  (Cyprus).  The  History,  Treasures,  and  Antiquities  of  Sa-
lamia  in  the  Island  of  Cyprus.  By  A.  Palma  <li  CeBnola,  F.S.A.,  sc.  With  an
Introdaetion  by  S.  Birch,  Esq.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,  Keeper  of  the  Egyptian  nnd  Ori-
ental Antiquities  in  the  British  Museum.  Royal  8vo,  pp.  xlviii.  and  325,  with
upwards  of  700  Illustrations  ami  Map  of  Ancient  Cyprus,  cloth.     1882.     31s.  6d.

CHALMERS.— Structure  of  Chinksk  Characters,  under  300  Primary  Forms
after  the  Shwoh-wan,  100  A. I).,  and  the  Phonetic  Shwoh-wan,  1833.  By  J.
Chalmers,  M.A.,  LL.D.,  A.B.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  x.  and  200,  with  two  plates,  limp
cloth.     1882.     12s.  6d.

CHAMBERLAIN.— The  Classical  Poetry  of  the  Japanese.  By  Basil  Hall
Chamberlain,  Author  of  "  Yeigo  Henkaku,  Ichirafi."  Post  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  228,
cloth.     1880.     7s.  6d.

CHAPMAN.  — Chloroform  and  other  Anesthetics  :  Their  History  and  Use  dur-
ing Childbirth.     By  John  Chapman,  M.D.     8vo,  pp.  51,  sewed.     1859.     Is.

CHAPMAN.— Diarrhea  and  Cholera:  Their  Nature,  Origin,  and  Treatment
through  the  Agency  of  the  Nervous  System.  By  John  Chapman,  M.D. ,
M.R.C.P.,  M.R.C.S.     8vo,  pp.  xix.  and  248,  cloth.     7s".  6d.

CHAPMAN.— Medical  Charity  :  its  Abuses,  and  how  to  Remedy  them.  By  John
Chapman,  M.D.     8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  108,  cloth.     1874.     2s.  Od.

CHAPMAN.— Sea-Sickness,  and  how  to  Prevent  it.  An  Explanation  of  its
Nature  and  Successful  Treatment,  through  the  Agency  of  the  Nervous  System,
by  means  of  the  Spinal  Ice  Bag  ;  with  an  Introduction  on  the  General  Principles
of  Neuro-Therapeutics.  By  John  Chapman,  M.D.,  M.R.C.P.,  M.R.C.S.  Second
Edition.     8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  112,  cloth.     1868.    3s.

CHAPTERS  on  Christian  Catholicity.  By  a  Clergyman.  8vo,  pp.  2S2,  cloth.
1878.     5s.

CHARITABALI  (The),  or,  Instructive  Biography.  By  Isvarachandra  Vidyasa-
gara.  With  a  Vocabulary  of  all  the  Words-  occurring  in  the  Text.  By  J.  F.
Blumhardt,  Bengal  Lecturer  at  the  University  College,  London  ;  and  Teacher  of
Bengali  for  the  Cambridge  University.  12mo,  pp.  174,  cloth.  18S4.  5s.  The
Vocabulary  only,  2s.  6d.

CHARNOCK.— A  Glossary  of  the  Essex  Dialect.  By  Richard  Stephen  Charnock,
Ph.D.,  F.S.A.     Fcap.,  pp.  xii.  and  64,  cloth.     1880.     3s.  6d.

CHARNOCK.— Proznomina  ;  or,  The  Etymology  of  the  Principal  Christian  Names
of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland.  By  R.  S.  Charnock,  Ph.D.,  F.S.A.  Crown  8vo,
pp.  xvi.  and  128,  cloth.     1882.     6s.

CHATTERJEE.     See  Phillips.

CHATTOPADHYAYA.— The  YatrAs  ;  or,  The  Popular  Dramas  of  Bengal.  By  N.
Chattopadhyaya.     Post  8vo,  pp.  50,  wrapper.     1882.     2s.

CHAUCER  SOCIETY.  — Subscription,  two  guineas  per  annum.    List  of  Publications

on  application.
CHILDERS—  A  Pali-English  Dictionary,  with  Sanskrit  Equivalents,  and  with

numerous  Quotations,   Extracts,  and  References.      Compiled   by  Robert   Caesar

Childers,  late  of  the  Ceylon  Civil  Service.     Imperial  8vo,  double  columns,  pp.

648,  cloth.     1875.     £3, 3s.
CHILDERS. — The  Mahaparinihranasutta  of  the  Sutta  Pitaka.     The  Pali  Text.

Edited  by  the  late  Professor  R.  C.  Childers.     8vo,  pp.  72,  limp  cloth.     1878.     5s.


14  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works,

CHINTAMON.—  A  Commentary  on  the  Text  of  the  Bhagavad-Gita'  ;  or,  The

Discourse  between  Khrishna  and  Arjuna  of  Divine  Matters      A  Sanskrit  Philoso-
phical Poem.     With  a  few  Introductory  Papers.     By  Hurrychund   Chintamon,

Political  Agent  to  H.  H.  the  Guicowar  Mulhar  Rao  Maharajah  of  Baroda.     Post

8vo,  pp.  118,  cloth.     1874.     6s.
CHRONICLES  and  Memorials  op  Great  Britain  and  Ikeland  during  thb

Middle  Ages.     List  on  application.
CLARK. — Meghaduta,  the  Cloud  Messenger.     Poem  of  Kalidasa.     Translated

by  the  late  Rev.  T.  Clark,  M.A.     Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  64,  wrapper.     1882.     Is.
CLARK.— A  Forecast  of  the  Religion  of  the  Future.     Being  Short  Essays  on

some  important   Questions  in  Religious  Philosophy.     By  W.  W.    Clark.     Post

8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  238,  cloth.     1879.     3s.  6d.
CLARKE.— Ten  Great  Religions  :  An  Essay  in  Comparative  Theology.     By  James

Freeman  Clarke.     Demy  8vo,  pp.  x.  and  528,  cloth.     1871.     15s.
CLARKE. — Ten  Great  Religions.     Part  II.,  A  Comparison  of  all  Religions.     By

J.  F.  Clarke.     Demy  8vo,  pp.  xxviiL-  414,  cloth.     1883.     10s.  6d.
CLARKE.— The  Early  History  of  the  Mediterranean  Populations,  &c,  in

their  Migrations  and  Settlements.     Illustrated  from  Autonomous  Coins,  Gems,

Inscriptions,  &c.     By  Hyde  Clarke.     8vo,  pp.  80,  cloth.     1882.     5s.
CLAUSEWITZ.—  On  War.     By  General  Carl  vonClausewitz.    Translated  by  Colonel

J.  J.  Graham,  from  the  third  German  Edition.     Three  volumes  complete  in  one.

Fcap  4to,  double  columns,  pp.   xx.   and  564,  with  Portrait  of  the  author,  cloth.

1873.     10s.  6d.
CLEMENT  AND  HUTTON. — Artists  op  the  Nineteenth  Century  and  their

Works.    A  Handbook  containing  Two  Thousand  and  Fifty  Biographical  Sketches.

By  Clara  Erskine  Clement  and  Lawrence  Hutton.     Third,  Revised  Edition.     2

vols,  crown  8vo.  pp.  844,  cloth.     1885.     21s.
COKE. — Creeds  of  the  Day  :  or,  Collated  Opinions  of  Reputable  Thinkers.     By

Henry  Coke.      In  Three  Series  of  Letters.      2  vols.      Demy  Svo,  pp.  302-324,

cloth.     1883.     21s.
COLEBROOKE. — The  Life  and  Miscellaneous  Essays  of  Henry  Thomas  Cole-

brooke.     The  Biography  by  his  Son,  Sir  T.  E.  Colebrooke,  Bart.,  M.P.     3  vols.

Vol.    I.  The  Life.     Demy  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  492,  with  Portrait  and  Map,  cloth.

1873.     14s.     Vols.  II.  and  III.  The  Essays.     A  new  Edition,  with  Notes  by  E.

B.  Cowell,  Professor  of  Sauskrit  in   the  University  of  Cambridge.     Demy  8vo,

pp.  xvi.  and  544,  and  x.  and  520,  cloth.     1873.     28s.
COLENSO. — Natal  Sermons.     A  Series  of  Discourses  Preached  in  the  Cathedral

Church  of  St  Peter's,  Maritzburg.      By  the  Right  Rev.  John  William  Colenso,

D.D.,  Bishop  of  Natal.    8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  373,  cloth.    1866.    7s.  6d.     The  Second

Series.     Crown  Svo,  cloth.     1868.     5s.
COLLINS. — A  Grammar  and  Lexicon  of  the  Hebrew  Language,  Entitled  Sefer

Hassoham.     By  Rabbi  Moseh  Ben  Yitshak,  of  England.     Edited  from  a  MS.  in

the  Bodleian  Library  of  Oxford,  and  collated  with  a  MS.  in  the  Imperial  Library

of  St.  Petersburg,  with  Additions  and  Corrections,  by  G.  W.  Collins,  M.A.     Demy

4to,  pp.  112,  wrapper.     1882.     7s.  6d.
COLYMBIA.— Crown  Svo,  pp.  260,  cloth.     1873.     5s.

"  The  book  is  amusing  as  well  as  clever." — AthencEum.  "  Many  exceedingly  humorous  pas-
sages."—Public  Opinion.  "  Deserves  to  be  read." — Scotsman.  "  Neatly  done." — Gravkic.
"  Very  amusing." — Examiner.

COMTE. — The  Catechism  of  Positive  Religion  :  Translated  from  the  French  of

Auguste  Comte.    By  Richard  Congreve.    Second  Edition.    Revised  and  Corrected.

and  conformed  to  the  Second  French  Edition  of  1874.    Crown  Svo,  pp.  316,  cloth,

1883.     2s.  6d.
COMTE. — The  Eight  Circulars  of  Auguste  Comte.   Translated  from  the  Freneh,

under  the  auspices  of  R.  Congreve.    Fcap.  Svo,  pp.  iv.  and  90,  cloth.  1882.    Is.  6d.


Published  by  Tr&bner  ft  Co.  15

COMTE.  —  Pkkiiminary  DOOOUBU  on  the  Positive  Spirit.  Prefixed  to  the
"  Truito    Philosophique    d'Astronomie    Fopulaire. "      By    M.    Auguste    Comte.

Translated  by  W.  M.  W.  Call,  M.A.,  Camb.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  154,  cloth.     1883.

•_'*.  M.
COMTE.— Thk  Positive  Philosophy  of  A.UGUSX]  Comte.    Translated  and condenseil

iv  Harriet  Martineau.     2  vol*.     Second  Edition.     8vo,  cloth.      Vol.  I.,  pp.  xxiv.

and  400  :   Vol.  II..  pp.  xiv.  and  468.     1875.     25s.
CONGREVE.  —The  Roman  Empire  of  thk  Wist.     Four  Lectures  delivered  at  the

Philosophical  Institution,  Edinburgh,  February  1855,  by  Richard  Congreve,  M.  A.

8vo,  pp.  176,  cloth.    1855.     4s.
CONGREVE.— Elizabeth  OF  England.     Two  Lectures  delivered  at  the  Philosophi-
cal Institution,  Edinburgh,  January  1862.    By  Richard  Congreve.     18mo,  pp.  114,

sewed.     1862.     2s.  6d.
CONTOPOULOS.- A  Lkxk'on  of  Modern  Greek-English  and  English  Modern

Gkkek.     By  N.  Contopoulos.     Part  I.  Modern  Greek-English.     Part  II.   English

Modern  Greek.     8vo,  pp.  460  and  582,  cloth.     1877.     27s.
CONWAY. — The  Sacred  Anthology  :  A  Book  of  Ethnical  Scriptures.     Collected

and  Edited  by  Moncure  D.  Conway.    Fifth  Edition.     Demy  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  480,

cloth.     1876.    12s.

CONWAY.— Idols  and  Ideals.  With  an  Essay  on  Christianity.  By  Moncure  D.
Oonw&y,  M.A.,  Author  of  "The  Eastern  Pilgrimage,"  kc.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  352,
cloth.  *  1877.     4s.

CONWAY.— Emerson  at  Home  and  Abroad.  See  English  and  Foreign  Philoso-
phical Library.

CONWAY.— Travels  in  South  Kensington.  By  M.  D.  Conway.  Illustrated.
8vo,  pp.  234,  cloth.     1882.     12s.

Contents.  —The  South  Kensington  Museuni — Decorative  Ait  and  Architecture  in  England
—Bedford  Park.

COOMARA  SWAMY.— The  Dathavansa  ;  or,  The  History  of  the  Tooth  Relic  of
Gotama  Buddha,  in  Pali  verse.  Edited,  with  an  English  Translation,  by  Mutu
Coomara  Swamy,  F.R.A.S.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  174,  cloth.  1874.  10s.  6d.  English
Translation.     With  Notes,     pp.  100.    6s.

COOMARA  SWAMY.— Sctta  Nipata  ;  or,  Dialogues  and  Discourses  of  Gotama
Buddha  (2500  years  old).  Translated  from  the  original  Pali.  With  Notes  and
Introduction.  By  Mutu  Coomara  Swamy,  F.R.A.S.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xxxvi.  and
160,  cloth.    1874.     6s.

COPARCENERS  (The)  :  Being  the  Adventures  of  Two  Heiresses.     See  "Arthur."

CORNELIA.     A  Novel.     Post  8vo,  pp.  250,  boards.     1863.     Is.  6d.

COTT A.  — Geology  and  History.  A  Popular  Exposition  of  all  that  is  known  of  the
Earth  and  its  Inhabitants  in  Pre-historic  Times.  By  Bernhard  Von  Cotta,  Pro-
fessor of  Geology  at  the  Academy  of  Mining,  Freiberg,  in  Saxony.  12mo,  pp.
iv.  and  84,  cloth.     1865.     2s.

COUSIN. — The  Philosophy  of  Kant.  Lectures  by  Victor  Cousin.  Translated  from
the  French.  To  which  is  added  a  Biographical  and  Critical  Sketch  of  Kant's
Life  and  Writings.  By  A.  G.  Henderson.  Large  post  8vo,  pp.  xciv.  and  194,
cloth.     1864.     6s.

COUSIN.  —Elements  of  Psychology  :  included  in  a  Critical  Examination  of  Locke's
Essay  on  the  Human  Understanding,  and  in  additional  pieces.  Translated  from
the  French  of  Victor  Cousin,  with  an  Introduction  and  Notes.  By  Caleb  S.
Henry,  D.D.  Fourth  improved  Edition,  revised  according  to  the  Author's  last
corrections.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  568,  cloth.     1871.     8s.

COWELL.  — A  Short  Introduction  to  the  Ordinary  Prakrit  of  the  Sanskrit
Dramas.  With  a  List  of  Common  Irregular  Prakrit  Words.  By  E.  B.  Cowell,
Professor  of  Sanskrit  in  the  University  of  Cambridge,  and  Hon.  I.L.  D  of  the
University  of  Edinburgh.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  40,  limp  cloth.     1875.     3s.  Od.


16  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works,

COWELL.— Prakrita-Prakasa;  or,  The  Prakrit  Grammar  of  Vararuclii,  with  the
Commentary  (Manorama)  of  Bhamaha ;  the  first  complete  Edition  of  the  Original
Text,  with  various  Readings  from  a  collection  of  Six  MSS.  in  the  Bodleian  Library
at  Oxford,  and  the  Libraries  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society  and  the  East  India
House  ;  with  Copious  Notes,  an  English  Translation,  and  Index  of  Prakrit  Words,
to  which  is  prefixed  an  Easy  Introduction  to  Prakrit  Grammar.  By  Edward
Byles  Cowell,  of  Magdalen  Hall,  Oxford,  Professor  of  Sanskrit  at  Cambridge.
New  Edition,  with  New  Preface,  Additions,  and  Corrections.  Second  Issue.
8vo,  pp.  xxxi.  and  204,  cloth.     18G8.     14s.

COWELL.— The  Sarvadarsana  Samgraha.     See  Trubner's  Oriental  Series.

COWLEY.— Poems.  By  Percy  Tunnicliff  Cowley.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  104,  cloth.
1881.     5s.

CRAIG. — The  Irish  Land  Labour  Question,  Illustrated  in  the  History  of  Rala-
hine  and  Co-operative  Farming.  By  E.  T.  Craig.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  202,
cloth.     1882.     2s.  6d.     Wrappers,  2s.

CRANBROOK. — Credibilia  ;  or,  Discourses  on  Questions  of  Christian  Faith.  By
the  Rev.  James  Cranbrook,  Edinburgh.  Reissue.  Post  8vo,  pp.  iv.  and  190,
cloth.    1868.     3s.  6d.

CRANBROOK.— The  Founders  of  Christianity  ;  or,  Discourses  upon  the  Origin
of  the  Christian  Religion.  By  the  Rev.  James  Cranbrook,  Edinburgh.  Post  8vo,
pp.  xii.  and  324.    1868.     6s.

CRAVEN.— The  Popular  Dictionary  in  English  and  Hindustani,  and  Hindu-
stani and  English.  With  a  Number  of  Useful  Tables.  Compiled  by  the
Rev.  T.  Craven,  M.A.     18mo,  pp.  430,  cloth.     1881.     3s.  6d.

CRAWFORD. —Recollections  of  Travel  in  New  Zealand  and  Australia.  By
James  Coutts  Crawford,  F.G.S.,  Resident  Magistrate,  Wellington,  &c,  kc.  With
Maps  and  Illustrations.     8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  468,  cloth.     1880.     18s.

CROSLAND.— Apparitions  ;  An  Essay  explanatory  of  Old  Facts  and  a  New  Theory.
To  which  are  added  Sketches  and  Adventures.  By  Newton  Crosland.  Crown  8vo,
pp.  viii.  and  166,  cloth.     1873.     2s.  6d.

CROSLAND. — Pith  :  Essays  and  Sketches  Grave  and  Gay,  with  some  Verses
and  Illustrations.     By  Newton  Crosland.    Crown  Svo,  pp.  310,  cloth.     1881.     5s.

CROSLAND. — The  New  Principia  ;  or,  The  Astronomy  of  the  Future.  An  Essay
Explanatory  of  a  Rational  System  of  the  Universe.  By  N.  Crosland,  Author  of
"  Pith,"  &c.     Foolscap  Svo,  pp.  88,  cloth  limp  elegant,  gilt  edges.     18S4.     2s.  6d.

CROSS. — Hespehides.  The  Occupations,  Relaxations,  and  Aspirations  of  a  Life.
By  Lauucelot  Cross,  Author  of  "  Characteristics  of  Leigh  Hunt,"  "  Brandon
Tower,"  "  Business,"  &c.     Demy  8vo,  pp.  iv.-486,  cloth.     1883.     10s.  6d.

CSOMA  DE  KOROS.— Life  OF.     See  Trubner's  Oriental  Series.

CUMMINS. — A  Grammar  of  the  Old  Fkiesic  Language.  By  A.  H.  Cummins,
A.M.     Crown  Svo,  pp.  x.  and  76,  cloth.     1881.     3s.  6d.

CUNNINGHAM. — The  Ancient  Geography  of  India.  I.  The  Buddhist  Period,
including  the  Campaigns  of  Alexander  and  the  Travels  of  Hwen-Thsang.  By
Alexander  Cunningham,  Major-General,  Royal  Engineers  (Bengal  Retired).  With
13  Maps.     8vo,  pp.  xx.  and  590,  cloth.     1870.     £1,  8s.

CUNNINGHAM. — The  Stupaof  Bharhut  :  A  Buddhist  Monument  ornamented  with
numerous  Sculptures  illustrative  of  Buddhist  Legend  and  History  in  the  Third
Century  B.C.  By  Alexander  Cunningham,  C  S.I.,  CLE.,  Maj.-Gen.,  R.E.  (B.R.),
Dir.-Gen.  Archseol.  Survey  of  India.  Royal  Svo,  pp.  viii.  and  144,  with  57  Plates,
cloth.     1879.     £3,  3s.

CUNNINGHAM.— Archaeological  Survey  of  India.  Reports  from  1862-80.  By
A.  Cunningham,  C.S.L,  CLE.,  Major-General,  R.E.  (Bengal  Retired),  Director-
General,  Archaeological  Survey  of  India.  With  numerous  Plates,  cloth,  Vols.  I.-
XI.  10s.  each.  (Except  Vols.  VII.,  VIII.,  and  IX.,  and  also  Vols.  XII.  to
XVIIL,  which  are  12s.  each.)


Published  by  Trilbner  <£  Co.  17

CUSHMAN.  — Charlotte    Cushman :     Her    Letters    and    Memories   of   her   Life.
I   by  her  friend,   Emma  Stebbina.     Square  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  308,  cloth.
With  Portrait  mid  Illustrations.     1879.     12s.  tid.

CUST.— Languages  of  the  East  Indies.     See  Trubner's  Oriental  Series.

CUST.— Linguistic  and  Oriental  ESSAYS.     See  Trubner's  Oriental  Series.

CUST. —Languages  OF  Africa.     See  Trubner's  Oriental  Series.

CUST.— Pictures  of  Indian  Life,  Sketched  with  the  Pen  from  1852  to  1881.  By
R.  N.  Cust,  late  LOS.,  Hon.  Sec.  Royal  Asiatic  Society.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  x.  and
346,  cloth.     "With  Maps.     1881.     7s.  6d.

CUST—  The  Shrinks  of  Lourdes,  Zaragossa,  the  Holt  Stairs  at  Rome,
the  Holt  House  of  Loretto  and  Nazareth,  and  St.  Ann  at  Jerusalem.  By
R.  N.  Oust,  Member  of  Committees  of  the  Church  Missionary  Society,  and  British
and  Foreign  Bible  Society.  With  Four  Autotypes  from  Photographs  obtained  oa
the  spot.     Fesp,  8vo,  pp.  iv.  and  63,  stiff  wrappers.     1885.     2s.

DANA.  —A  Text-Book  of  Geology,  designed  for  Schools  and  Academies.  By  James
D.  Dana,  LLD.,  Professor  of  Geology,  kc,  at  Yale  College.  Illustrated.  Crown
8vo,  pp.  vi.  and  354,  cloth.    1876.     10s.

DANA. — Manual  of  Geology,  treating  of  th^  Principles  of  the  Science,  with  special
Reference  to  American  Geological  History  ;  for  the  use  of  Colleges,  Academies,
and  Schools  of  Science.  By  James  D.  Dana,  LL.  D.  Illustrated  by  a  Chart  of  the
World,  and  over  One  Thousand  Figures.    8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  800,  and  Chart,  cl.  21s.

DANA.— The  Geological  Story  Briefly  Told.  An  Introduction  to  Geology  for
the  .General  Reader  and  for  Beginners  in  the  Science.  By  J.  D.  Daua,  LL.D.
Hlnstrated.    12mo,  pp.  xii.  and  264,  cloth.     7s.  6d.

DANA — A  System  of  Mineralogy.  Descriptive  Mineralogy,  comprising  the  most
Recent  Discoveries.  By  J.  D.  Dana,-  aided  by  G.  J.  Brush.  Fifth  Edition,  re-
written and  enlarged,  and  illustrated  with  upwards  of  600  Woodcuts,  with  three
Appendixes  and  Corrections.     Royal  8vo,  pp.  xlviii.  and  892,  cloth.     £2,  2s.

DANA.— A  Text  Book  of  Mineralogy.  With  an  Extended  Treatise  on  Crystallo-
graphy and  Physical  Mineralogy.  By  E.  S.  Dana,  on  the  Plan  and  with  the
Co-operation  of  Professor  J.  D.  Dana.  Third  Edition,  revised.  Over  800  Wood-
cuts and  1  Coloured  Plate.     8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  486,  cloth.     1879.     18s.

DANA — Manual  of  Mineralogy  and  Lithology  ;  Containing  the  Elements  of
the  Science  of  Minerals  and  Rocks,  for  the  Use  of  the  Practical  Mineralogist  and
Geologist,  and  for  Instruction  in  Schools  and  Colleges.  By  J.  D.  Dana.  Fourth
Edition,  rearranged  and  rewritten.  Illustrated  by  numerous  Woodcuts.  Crown
8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  474,  cloth.     1882.     7s.  6d.

DARWIN.— Charles  Darwin:  A  Paper  contributed  to  the  Transactions  of  the
Shropshire  Archaeological  Society.  Bv  Edward  Woodall.  With  Portrait  and
Illustrations.     Post  8vo,  pp.  iv.-64,  cloth.     1884.     3s.  6d.

DATES  and  Data  Relating  to  Religious  Anthropology  and  Biblicai  Arche-
ology.    (Primaeval  Period. )     8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  106,  cloth.     1876.     5s.

DAVIDS.— Buddhist  Birth  Stories.     See  Trubner's  Oriental  Series.

DAVTES.— Hindu  Philosophy.     2  vols.     See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series.

DAVIS. — Narrative  of  the  North  Polar  Expedition,  U.S.  Ship  Polaris,  Cap-
tain Charles  Francis  Hall  Commanding.  Edited  under  the  direction  of  the  Hon.
G.  M.  Robeson,  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  by  Rear- Admiral  C.  H.  Davis,  U.S.N.
Third  Edition.  With  numerous  Steel  and  Wood  Engravings,  Photolithographs,
and  Maps.     4to,  pp.  696,  cloth.     1881.     £1,  8s.

DAY. — The  Prehistoric  Use  of  Iron  and  Steel;  with  Observations  on  certain
matter  ancillary  thereto.  By  St.  John  V.  Day,  C.E.,  F.R.S.E.,  &c.  8vo,  pp.
xxiv.  and  278,  cloth.     1877.     12s.

DE  FLANDRE.— Monograms  of  Three  or  More  Letters,  Designed  and  Drawn
on  Stone.  By  0.  De  Flandre,  F.S.A.  Soot.,  Edinburgh.  With  Indices,  showing
the  place  and  style  or  period  of  every  Monogram,  and  of  each  individual  Letter.
4to,  42  Plates,  cloth.     1880.     Large  paper,  £7,  7s.  ;  small  paper,  £3,  3s.

B


18  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works,

DELBRUCK.— Introduction  to  the  Study  of  Language  :  A  Critical  Survey  of  the

History  and  Methods  of  Comparative  Philology  of  the  Indo-European  Languages.

By  B.  Delbrikk.     Authorised  Translation,  with  a  Preface  by  the  Author.     8vo,

pp.  156,  cloth.     1882.     5s.     Sewed,  4s.

DELEPIERRE.— Histoire  Litteraire  DES  Fous.     Par  Octave  Delepierre.     Crown

8vo,  pp.  184,  cloth.     1800.    5s.
DELEPIERRE. — Macaroneana  Andra  ;  overum  Nouveaux  Melanges  de  Litterature
Macaronique.     Par  Octave  Delepierre.      Small  4to,  pp.  180,  printed  by  Whitting-
ham,  and  handsomely  bound  in  the  Iloxburghe  style.     1862.    10s.  6d.
DELEPIERRE.  — Analyse  des  Travaux  de  la  Societe  des  Philobiblon  de  Lon-
dres.     Par  Octave  Delepierre.     Small  4to,  pp.  viii.  and  134,  bound  in  the  Rox-
burgh* style.     1862.     10s.  6d.
DELEPIERRE.— Revue  Analytique  des  Ouvrages  £crits  en  Centons,  depuis  lea
Temps  Anciens,   jusqu'au  xixi(§me  Siecle.     Par  un  Bibliophile  Beige.     Small  4to,
pp.  508,  stiff  covers.    18G8.     £1,  10s.
DELEPIERRE.— Tableau  de  la  Litterature  du  Centon,  chez  les  Anciens  et  chez
LES  Modernes.      Par  Octave  Delepierre.      2  vols,  small  4to,  pp.  324  and  318.
Paper  cover.     1875.     £1,  Is.
DELEPIERRE.— L'Enfer  :  Essai  Philosophique  et  Historique  sur  les  Legendes  de
la  Vie  Future.     Par  Octave  Delepierre.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  160,  paper  wrapper.
1876.     6s.     Only  250  copies  printed.
DENNYS.— A  Handbook  of  the  Canton  Vernacular  of  the  Chinese  Language.
Being  a  Series  of  Introductory  Lessons  for  Domestic  and  Business  Purposes.     By
N.  B.  Dennys,  M.R.A.S.,  &c.     Royal  8vo,  pp.  iv.  and  228,  cloth.     1874.     30s.
DENNYS. — A  Handbook  of  Malay  Colloquial,  as  spoken  in  Singapore,  being  a
Series  of  Introductory  Lessons  for  Domestic  and  Business  Purposes.     By  N.  B.
Dennys,  Ph.D.,  F.R.G.S.,  M.R.A.S.    Impl.  8vo.  pp.  vi.  and  204,  cloth.    1878.    21s.
DENNYS.— The  Folk-Lore  of  China,  and  its  Affinities  with  that  of  thb
Aryan  and  Semitic  Races.     By  N.  B.   Dennys,  Ph.D.,   F.R.G.S.,  M.R.A.S.
8vo,  pp.  166,  cloth.     1876.     10s.  6d.
DE  VALDES.-See  Valdes.

DE  VINNE. — The  Invention  of  Printing:  A  Collection  of  Texts  and  Opinions.
Description  of  Early  Prints  and  Playing  Cards,  the  Block-Books  of  the  Fifteenth
Century,  the  Legend  of  Lourens  Janszoon  Coster  of  Haarlem,  and  the  Works  of
John  Gutenberg  and  his  Associates.  Illustrated  with  Fac-similes  of  Early  Types
and  Woodcuts.  By  Theo.  L.  De  Vinne.  Second  Edition.  In  royal  8vo,  elegantly
printed,  and  bound  in  cloth,  with  embossed  portraits,  and  a  multitude  of  Fac-
similes and  Illustrations.  1877.  £1  Is.
DICKSON. — Who  was  Scotland's  first  Printer?  Ane  Compendious  and  breue
Tractate,  in  Commendation  of  Androw  Myllar.  Compylit  be  Robert  Dickson,
F.S.A.  Scot.  Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  24,  parchment  wrapper.  1881.  Is.
DOBSON.— Monograph  of  the  Asiatic  Chiroptera,  and  Catalogue  of  the  Species
of  Bats  in  the  Collection  of  the  Indian  Museum,  Calcutta.  By  G.  E.  Dobson,
M.A.,  M.B.,  F.L.S.,  &c.  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  228,  cloth.  1876.  12s.
D'ORSEY. — A  Practical  Grammar  of  Portuguese  and  English,  exhibiting  in  a
Series  of  Exercises,  in  Double  Translation,  the  Idiomatic  Structure  of  both  Lan-
guages, as  now  written  and  spoken.  Adapted  to  Ollendorff's  System  by  the  Rev.
Alexander  J.  D.  D'Orsey,  of  Corpus  Christi  College,  Cambridge,  and  Lecturer  on
Public  Beading  and  Speaking  at  King's  College,  London.  Third  Edition.  12mo,
pp.  viii.  and  298,  cloth.  1868.  7s.
DOUGLAS.— Chinese-English  Dictionary  of  the  Vernacular  or  Spoken  Lan-
guage of  Amoy,  with  the  principal  variations  of  the  Chang-Chew  and  Chin-
Chew  Dialects.  By  the  Rev.  Carstairs  Douglas,  M.A. ,  LL.D.,  Glasg.,  Missionary
of  the  Presbyterian  Church  in  England.  High  quarto,  double  columns,  pp.  632,
cloth.  1873.  £3,  3s.
DOUGLAS. — Chinese  Language  and  Literature.  Two  Lectures  delivered  at  the
Royal  Institution,  by  R.  K.  Douglas,  of  the  British  Museum,  and  Professor  of
Chinese  at  King's  College.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  IIS,  cloth.     1875.     5s.


Published  by  Triibner  &  Co.  10

DOUGLAS.  -The  Life  of  Jexghiz  Khan.  Translated  from  the  Chinese.  With  an
Introduction.  By  Robert  K.  Douglas,  of  the  British  Museum,  and  Professor  of
Chinese  at  King's  College.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  xxxvi.  and  100,  cloth.     1877.     5s.

DOUGLAS.— Pom-  Lyrical  and  Dramatic.  By  Evelyn  Douglas.  Foolscap  8vo,
pp.  •_'.">(•,,  olotb,     1885.     5s.

DOUGLAS.— The  Queen  of  the  Hid  Isle:  An  Allegory  of  Life  and  Art.  And
L>\  k's  Perversity;  or,  Eros  and  Anteros.  A  Drama.  By  Evelyn  Douglas.
Feap.  Bto,  pp.  viii.-238,  cloth.     1885.     5s.

DOWSON.—  Dictionary  ok  Hindi:  Mythology,  &c.     See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series.

DOWSON.— A  Grammar  of  the  Urdu  or  Hindustan!  Language.  By  John  Dow-
son,  M.R.A.S.,  Professor  of  Hindustani,  Staff  College,  Sandhurst.  Crown  8vo,
pp.  xvi.  and  264,  with  8  Plates,  cloth.     1872.     10s.  6d.

DOWSON. —A  Hindustani  Exercise  Book;  containing  a  Series  of  Passages  and
Extracts  adapted  for  Translation  into  Hindustani.  By  John  Dowson,  M.  R.A.S.,
Professor  of  Hindustani,  Staff  College,  Sandhurst.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  100,  limp
cloth.    1872.    2s.  Od.

DUKA.— The  Life  and  Travels  of  Alexander  Csoma  de  KOros  :  A  Biography,
compiled  chiefly  from  hitherto  Unpublished  Data;  With  a  Brief  Notice  of  each
of  his  Published  Works  aud  Essays,  as  well  as  of  his  still  Extant  Manuscripts.  By
Theodore  Duka,  Doctor  of  Medicine  ;  Fellow  of  the  Royal  College  of  Surgeons  of
England  ;  Surgeon-Major,  Her  Majesty's  Bengal  Medical  Service,  Retired  ;  Knight
of  the  Order  of  the  Iron  Crown  ;  Corresponding  Member  of  the  Academy  of
Sciences  of  Hungary.     Post  8vo,  with  Portrait,  pp.  xii.-234,  cloth.     1885.     9s.

DUSAR. — A  Grammar  of  the  German  Language  ;  with  Exercises.  By  P.  Friedrich
Dusar,  First  German  Master  in  the  Military  Department  of  Cheltenham  College.
Second  Edition.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  208,  cloth.     1879.     4s.  6d.

DUSAR.— A  Grammatical  Course  of  the  German  Language.  By  P.  Friedrich
Dusar.     Third  Edition.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  x.  and  134,  cloth.     1883.     3s.  6d.

DYMOCK.— The  Vegetable  Materia"  Medica  of  Western  India.  By  W.
Dymock,  Surgeon-Major  Bombay  Army,  &c.  &c.  To  be  completed  in  four  parts.
8vo,  Part  L,  pp.  160;  Part  II. ,  pp.  168;  wrappers,  4s.  each.

EARLY  ENGLISH  TEXT  SOCIETY.— Subscription,  one  guinea  per  annum.  Extra
Series.  Subscriptions — Small  paper,  one  guinea ;  large  paper,  two  guineas,  per
annum.     List  of  publications  on  application.

EASTWICK. — Khirad  Afroz  (the  Illuminator  of  the  Understanding).  ByMaulavi
Hafizu'd-din.  A  New  Edition  of  the  Hindustani  Text,  carefully  revised,  with
Notes,  Critical  and  Explanatory.  By  Edward  B.  Eastwick,  F.R.S.,  M.R.A.S.,  &c.
Imperial  8vo,  pp.  xiv.  and  319,  cloth.     Reissue,  1867.     18s.

EASTWICK.— The  Gulistan.     See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series.

EBSRS.— The  Emperor.  A  Romance.  By  Georg  Ebers.  Translated  from  the
German  by  Clara  Bell.  In  two  volumes,  16mo,  pp.  iv.  319  and  322,  cloth.  1881.
7s.  6d.     Paper,  5s.

E3ERS. — A  Question  :  The  Idyl  of  a  Picture  by  his  friend,  Alma  Tadema.  Related
by  Georg  Ebers.  From  the  German,  by  Mary  J.  Safford.  16mo,  pp.  125,  with
Frontispiece,  cloth.     1881.     4s.     Paper,  2s.  6d.

EBERS. — Serapis.  A  Romance.  By  Georg  Ebers.  From  the  German  by  Clara
Bell.     16ino,  pp.  iv.-388,  cloth.     1885.     4s.     Paper,  2s.  6d.

ECHO  (Deutsches).  The  German  Echo.  A  Faithful  Mirror  of  German  Conver-
sation. By  Ludwig  Wolfram.  With  a  Vocabulary.  By  Henry  P.  Skelton.
Post  8vo,  pp.  130  and  70,  cloth.     1863.     3s.

ECHO  FR4.NCAIS.  A  Practical  Guide  to  Conversation.  By  Fr.  de  la  Fruston.
With  a  complete  Vocabulary.  By  Anthony  Maw  Border.  Post  8vo,  pp.  120  and
72,  cloth.     1860.     3s.

ECO  ITALIANO  (IS),  A  Practical  Guide  to  Italian  Conversation.  By  Eugene
Camerini.  With  a  complete  Vocabulary.  By  Henry  P.  Skelton.  Post  8vo,  pp.
vi.,  128,  and  (J8.  cloth.     1860.    4s.  6d.

ECO  DE  MADRID.  The  Echo  of  Madrid.  A  Practical  Guide  to  Spanish  Con-
versation. By  J.  E.  Hartzenbosch  and  Henry  Lemming.  With  a  complete
Vocabulary,  containing  copious  Explanatory  Remarks.  By  Henry  Lemming.
Post  8vo,  pp.  xii.,  144,  and  83,  cloth.    1860.    5s.


20  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works,

ECKSTEIN.— Prusias:    A  Romance  of   Ancient   Rome   under  the  Republic.     By
Ernst  Eckstein.     From  the  German  by  Clara  Bell.      Two  vols.  16mo,  pp.  356
and  336.  cloth.     1884.     7s.  6d. ;  paper,  5s.
ECKSTEIN.  —  Quintus  Claudius.      A  Romance  of  Imperial  Rome.      By  Ernst
Eckstein.       From   the  German   by  Clara  Bell,       Two  vols.  16mo,  pp.  314  and
304,  cloth.     1884.     7s.  6d. ;  paper,  5s.
EDDA  S^MUNDAR  HiNNS  Froda.     The  Edda  of  Scemund  the  Learned.     Translated
from  the  Old  Norse,  by  Benjamin  Thorpe.     Complete  in  1  vol.  fcap.  8vo,  pp.  viii.
and  152,  and  pp.  viii.  and  170,  cloth.     1866.     7s.  6d.
EDGREN.— Sanskrit  Grammar.     See  Triibner's  Collection.

EDKINS.— China's  Place  in  Philology.     An  attempt  to  show  that  the  Languages
of  Europe  and  Asia  have  a  common  origin.     By  the  Rev.  Joseph  Edkins.     Crown
8vo,  pp.  xxiii.  and  403,  cloth.     1871.     10s.  6d.
EDKINS.— Introduction  to  the  Study  of  the  Chinese  Characters.   By  J.  Edkins,

D.D.,  Peking,  China.     Royal  8vo,  pp.  340,  paper  boards.     1876.     18s.
EDKINS.— Religion  in  China.     See  English  and  Foreign  Philosophical  Library,

Vol.  VIII.,  or  Triibner's  Oriental  Series.
EDKINS.— Chinese  Buddhism.     See  Trubner'3  Oriental  Series.
EDMONDS.— Greek  Lays,  Idylls,  Legends,  &c.     A  Selection  from  Recent  and
Contemporary  Poets.     Translated  by  E.  M.  Edmonds.     With  Introduction  and
Notes.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  xiv.  and  264,  cloth.     1885.     6s.  6d.
EDMUNDSON.— Milton  and  Vondel  :  a  Curiosity  of  Literature.      By  George
Edmundson,  M.A.,  Late  Fellow  and  Tutor  of  Brasenose  College,  Oxford,  Vicar  of
Northolt,  Middlesex.     Crown  8vo,  pp.        ,  cloth.
EDWARDS.— Memoirs  of  Libraries,  together  with  a  Practical  Handbook  of  Library
Economy.    By  Edward  Edwards.    Numerous  Illustrations.    2  vols,  royal  Svo,  cloth.
Vol.  i.  pp.  xxviii.  and  841 ;  Vol.  ii.  pp.  xxxvi.  and  1104.     1859.     £2,  8s.
Ditto,  large  paper,  imperial  8vo,  cloth.     £4,  4s.
EDWARDS.— Chapters  of  the  Biographical  History  of  the  French  Academy.
1629-1863.     With  an  Appendix  relating  to  the  Unpublished  Chronicle  "  Liber  de
Hyda."     By  Edward  Edwards.     8vo,  pp.  180,  cloth.     1864.     6s.
Ditto,  large  paper,  royal  8vo.     10s.  6d.
EDWARDS.— Libraries  and  Founders  of  Libraries.    By  Edward  Edwards.    Svo,
pp.  xix.  and  506,  cloth.     1865.     18s.

Ditto,  large  paper,  imperial  Svo,  cloth.     £1,  10s.
EDWARDS.— Free  Town  Libraries,  their  Formation,  Management,  and  History  in
Britain,  France,  Germany,  and  America.     Together  with  Brief  Notices  of  Book
Collectors,  and  of  the  respective  Places  of  Deposit  of  their  Surviving  Collections.
By  Edward  Edwards.     Svo,  pp.  xvi.  and  634,  cloth.    1869.     21s.
EDWARDS. — Lives  of  the  Founders  of  the  British  Museum,  with  Notices  of  its
Chief  Augmentors  and   other   Benefactors.     1570-1870.      By  Edward  Edwards.
With  Illustrations  and  Plans.     2  vols.  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  780,  cloth.     1870.     30s.
EDWARDES.— See  English  and  Foreign  Philosophical  Library,  Vol.  XVII.
EGER.— Technological  Dictionary  in  the  English  and  German  Languages.
Edited  by  Gustav  Eger,  Professor  of  the  Polytechnic  School  of  Darmstadt,  and
Sworn   Translator  of  the  Grand  Ducal  Ministerial  Departments.     Technically
Revised  and  Enlarged  by  Otto  Brandes,  Chemist.     Two  vols.,  royal  8vo,  pp.  viii.
and  712,  and  pp.  viii.  and  970,  cloth.     1884.     £1,  7s.
EGER  AND  GRIME. — An  Early  English  Romance.     Edited  from  Bishop  Percy's
Folio  Manuscripts,  about  1650  a.d.     By  J.  W.  Hales,   M.A.,  Fellow  of  Christ's
College,  Cambridge,  and  F.  J.  Furnivall,  M.A.,  of  Trinity  Hall,  Cambridge.     4to,
large  paper,  half  bound,  Roxburghe  style,  pp.  64.     1867.     10s.  6d.
EGERTON.— Sussex  Folk  and  Sussex  Ways.     Stray  Studies  in  the  Wealden  For-
mation of  Human  Nature.    By  the  Rev.  J.  Coker  Egerton,  M.A.,  Rector  of  Bur-
wash.     Crown  Svo,  pp.  140,  cloth.     1884.     2s.


Published  by  Triibner  tfc  Co.  21


EGGELING.     &  •   Auctores  Sanskrit!,  Vols.  IV.  and  V.
EGYPT  EXPLORATION  FUND  :—

Tin.  BlOR]   <nv  Of  PlTHOK,  and  tin;  Rovteof  the  Exodus.     By  Edouard  Naville.
U  ■   pp.  riii  and  82,  iritb  Thirteeo  Plates  aad  Two  Maps,  boards.    1885.    25s.
EGYPTIAN  GENERAL  STAFF  PUBLICATIONS  :—

.•■.:.  REPOBT  Olf  TBI  PaovntOS  OF  KOBDOFAH.    Submitted  to  General  C.  P.
.  Chief  of  the  General   Staff  Egyptian  Army.     By  Major  H.  G.  Trout,
mending  Expedition  of  Reeonnaiaaaitee.     Made  at  El-Obeiyad  (Kordofan),
March  12th,  1876.     Boyal  8ro,  pp.  232,  stitched,  with  6  Maps.     1877.     10s.  Cd.
Provinces  Of  the  EQOATOB:  Summary  of  Letters  and  Reports  of  the  Governor-
General.     Part  1.     1874.     Royal  8vo,  pp.    viii.    and  90,  stitched,  with    Map.
1-77.     5s.
Report  OB  the  Seizure  by  the  Abyssinfans  of  the  Geological  and  Mineralo-
gical  Reconnaissance  Expedition  attached  to  the  General  Staff  of  the  Egyptian
Army.     By  L.  H.  Mitchell,  Chief  of  the  Expedition.     Containing  an  Account
of  the  subsequent  Treatment  of  the  Prisoners  and  Final  Release  of  the  Com-
mander.    Royal  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  120,  stitched,  with  a  Map.     1878.     7s.  6d.

EGYPTIAN  CALENDAR  for  the  year  1295  A.H.  (1878  A.n.)  :  Corresponding  with  the

years  1594,  1595  of  the  Koptic  Era.     8vo,  pp.  98,  sewed.     1878.     2s.  6d.
EHRLICH.—  French  Reader  :    With  Notes  and  Vocabulary.     By  H.  W.  Ehrlich.

12mo,  pp.  viii.  and  125,  limp  cloth.     1877.     Is.  6d.
EITEL.—  Buddhism  :  Its  Historical,  Theoretical,  and  Popular  Aspects.     In  Three

Lectures.     By  E.  J.  EiteL,  M.A.,  Ph.D.     Third  Revised  Edition.     Demy  8vo,

pp.  X.-146.     1884.     5s.
EITEL.— Feng-Sh li  ;  or,  The  Rudiments  of  Natural  Science  in  China.     By  E.  J.

Eitel,  M.A.,  Ph.D.     Royal  8vo,  pp.  yi.  and  84,  sewed.     1873.    6s.

EITEL.— Handbook  for  the  Student  of  Chinese  Buddhism.    By  the  Rev.  E.  J.

Eitel,  of  the  London  Missionary  Society.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii  and  224,  cloth.

1870.     18s.
ELLIOT.  -Memoirs  on  the  History,  Folk-Lore,  and  Distribution  of  the  Races

01  the  North- "Western  Provinces  of  India.     By  the  late  Sir  Henry  M.  Elliot,
K.C.B.    Edited,  revised,  and  rearranged  by  John  Beames,  M.R.A.S.,  &c,  &c.    In

2  vols,  demy  8vo,  pp.  xx. ,  370,  and  396,  with  3  large  coloured  folding  Maps,  cloth.
1869.     £1  16s.

ELLIOT.  — The  History  of  India,  as  told  by  its  own  Historians.  The  Muhammadan
Period.  Edited  from  the  Posthumous  Papers  of  the  late  Sir  H.  M.  Elliot,  K.C.B.,
East  India  Company's  Bengal  Civil  Service.  Revised  and  continued  by  Professor
John  Dowson,  M.R.A.S.,  Staff  College,  Sandhurst.  8vo.  Vol.  I.— Vol.  II.,
pp.  x.  and  580,  cloth.  Vol.  III.,  pp.  xii.  and  627,  cloth.  24s.— Vol.  IV.,
pp.  xii.  and  564,  cloth.  1872.  21s.— Vol.  V.,  pp.  x.  and  576,  cloth.  1873.
21s.— Vol.  VI.,  pp.  viii.  574,  cloth.  21s.— VoL  VII.,  pp.  viii. -574.  1877.  21s.
Vol.  VIII.,  pp.  xxxii.-444.  With  Biographical,  Geographical,  and  General
Index.     1877.     24s.     Complete  sets,  £8,  8s.    Vols.  I.  and  II.  not  sold  separately.

ELLIS.— Etruscan  Numerals.  By  Robert  Ellis,  B.D.,  late  Fellow  of  St.  John's
College,  Cambridge.     8vo,  pp.  52,  sewed.     1876.     2s.  6d.

ELY.— French  and  German  Socialism  in  Modern  Times.  By  R.  T.  Ely,  Ph.D.,
Associate  Professor  of  Political  Economy  in  the  Johns  Hopkins  University,  Balti-
more ;  and  Lecturer  on  Political  Economy  in  Cornell  University,  Ithaca,  N.  Y.
Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii. -274,  cloth.     1884.     3s.  6d.

EMERSON  at  Home  and  Abroad.  See  English  and  Foreign  Philosophical  Library
VoL  XIX.

EMERSON.— Indian  Myths;  or,  Legends,  Traditions,  and  Symbols  of  the  Abori-
gines of  America,  compared  with  those  of  other  Countries,  including  Hindostan,
Egvpt,  Persia,  Assyria,  nnd  China.  By  Ellen  Russell  Emerson.  Illustrated.
Post  8vo,  pp.  viii. -678,  cloth.     1884.     £1,  Is.


22  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works,

ENGLISH  DIALECT  SOCIETY.— Subscription,  10s.  6J.  per  annum.    List  of  publica-
tions on  application.
ENGLISH  AND  FOREIGN  PHILOSOPHICAL  LIBRARY  (THE).
Post  8vo,  cloth,  uniformly  bound.
I.  to  III. — A  History  of  Materialism,  and  Criticism  of  its  present  Importance.
By  Professor  F.  A.  Lange.    Authorised  Translation  from  the  German
by  Ernest  C.  Thomas.     In  three  volumes.     Vol.  I.     Second  Edition,
pp.  350.    1878.    10s.  6d.— Vol.  II.,  pp.  viii.  and  ^98.    1880.    10s.  6d.
—Vol.  IIL,  pp.  viii.  and  376.     1881.     10s.  6d.
IV. — Natural  Law  :   an  Essay  in  Ethics.     By  Edith  Simcox.     Second
Edition.     Pp.  366.     1878.     10s.  6d.
V  and  VI. — The  Creed  of  Christendom  ;  its  Foundations  contrasted  with  Super-
structure.   By  W.  Pi.  Greg.    Eighth  Edition,  with  a  New  Introduction.
In  two  volumes,  pp.  cxiv.-154  and  vi.-282      1883.     I5s.
VII.— Outlines  of  the  History  of  Religion  to  the  Spread  of  the
Universal  Religions.     By  Prof.  C.  P.   Tiele.     Translated  from
the  Dutch  by  J.  Estlin  Carpenter,  M.A.,  with  the  author's  assist-
ance.    Third  Edition.     Pp.  xx.  and  250.     1884.     7s.  6d.
VIII. — Religion  in  China;  containing  a  brief  Account  of  the  Three  Religions
of  the  Chinese ;  with   Observations  on  the  Prospects  of  Christian
Conversion  amongst  that  People.      By  Joseph  Edkins,  D.D. ,  Peking.
Third  Edition.     Pp.  xvi.  and  260.     1884.     7s.  6d.
IX. — A  Candid   Examination    of   Theism,     By  Physicus.      Pp.    216.

1878.    7s.  6d.
X. — The  Colour-Sense  ;  its  Origin  and  Development ;  an  Essay  in  Com-
parative Psychology.       By  Grant  Allen,   B.A.,    author  of    "  Phy-
siological ^Esthetics."    Pp.  xii.  and  2S2.     1879.     10s.  6d.
XI. — The  Philosophy  of  Music  ;  being  the  substance  of  a  Course  of
Lectures   delivered  at   the   Royal   Institution  of   Great   Britain  in
February  and   March   1877.     By   William  Pole,   F.R.S.,   F.R.S.E.,
Mus.  Doc.,Oxon.     Pp.336.     1879.     10s.  6d.
XII. — Contributions  to  the  History  of  the  Development  of  the  Human
Race:    Lectures  and  Dissertations,  by  Lazarus  Geiger.     Translated
from  the  German  by  D.  Asher,  Ph.D.     Pp.  x.  and  156.     1880.     6s.
XIII.— Dr.  Appleton  :  his  Life  and  Literarv  Relics.     By  J.  H.  Appleton,

M.A.,  and  A.  H.  Sayce,  M.A.     Pp.  350.     1881.     10s.  6d.
XIV. — Edgar  Quinet:  His  Early  Life  and  Writings.     By  Richard  Heath.
With  Portraits,  Illustrations,  and  an  Autograph  Letter.     Pp.  xxiii.
and  370.     1881.     12s.  6d.
XV. — The  Essence  of  Christianity.    By  Ludwig  Feuerbach.    Translated
from  the  German  by  Marian  Evans,  translator  of  Strauss's  "  Life
of  Jesus."    Second  Edition.     Pp.  xx.  and  340.     1881.     7s.  6d.
XVI. — Auguste  Comte  AND  Positivism.     By  the  late  John  Stuart  Mill,
M.P.     Third  Edition.     Pp.  200.     1882.    3s.  6d.
XVII. — Essays  and  Dialogues  of  Giacomo  Leopardi.     Translated  by
Charles  Edwardes.     With  Biographical  Sketch.     Pp.  xliv.  and  216.
1882.    7s.  6d.
XVIIL— Religion  and  Philosophy  in  Germany  :   A  Fragment.    By  Hein-
rich  Heine.     Translated  by  J.   Snodgrass.     Pp.  xii.  and  178,  cloth.
1882.     6s.
XIX.— Emerson  at  Home  and  Abroad.    By  M.  D.  Conway.    Pp.  viii.  and

310.  With  Portrait.  1883.  10s.  6d.
XX.— Enigmas  of  Life.  By  W.  R.  Greg.  Fifteenth  Edition,  with  a
Postscript.  Contents  :  Realisable  Ideals — Malthus  Notwithstand-
ing— Non-Survival  of  the  Fittest — Limits  and  Directions  of  Human
Development— The  Significance  of  Life — De  Profundis— Elsewhere —
Appendix.     Pp.  xx.  and  314,  cloth.     1883.     10s.  6d.


Published  by  Trubner  6  Co.  23

ENGLISH  AND  FOREIGN  PHILOSOPHICAL  LIBRARY- continued.

XXI.      BTHIC  DkHONSTRATID   IN   GlOMITRIOAL  OHDBB   and    DIVIDED   into

Parts  which  treal  (1)  Of  God,  (2)  Of  the  Nat  me ...  ,|  Origin  of
U  01  the  Origin  and  Nature  of  the  Affeota,  (4)  Of  Human

Bondage,  or  of  the  Strength  of  the  Affects,  (5)  of  tlie  Power  of  the
Intellect,  or  of  Human  Liberty.     By  Benedict  de  Spinoza,     Trans-
lated from  the  Latin  by  William  Hale  White.    Pp.328.   1883.   10s.  6d.
XXII.— Tin:  WORLD  as  Will  aHD  Idea.    By  Arthur  Sohopenhauer.    Trans-
lated from  the  Qerman  by  EL.  r>.  Baldane,  M.A.,  and  John  Kemp,
M.A.     3  rola.     Vol.  I.,  pp.  xxdi-532.     1883.     18s.
XXV.  to  XXVII. — Thi  PHILOSOPHY  of  the  Unconscious.      By  Eduard   Von
Qartmann.    Speculative  Results,  according  to  the  Inductive  Method
of  Physical  Science.    Authorised  Translation,  by  William  0.  Coup-
land,  M.A.    3 vols.  pp.  xxxii.-372;  vi.-3G8;  viii.-360.    188-1.    31s. 6d.
XXVIII.  to  XXX. — Thi  Guide  of  the  Perplexed  ok  Maimonideb.    Translated
from  the  Original  Text  and  Annotated  by  M.    Friedlauder,  Ph.D.
3  vols. ,  pp.

Extra  Series.
I.  and  II. — Lessing  :  His  Life   and  Writings.     By  James  Sime,  M.A.     Seccnd
Edition.     2  vols.,  pp.   xxii.   and  328,  and  xvi.  and  358,  with  por-
traits.     1879.     21s.
III.  and  VI. — Al  Account  of  the  Polynesian  Race:  its  Origin  and  Migrations,
and  the  Ancient  History  of  the   Hawaiian  People  to  the  Times  of
Kamehameha   I.     By  Abraham   Fornander,    Circuit   Judge   of   the
bland  of  Maui,  H.I.     Vol.  I.,  pp.  xvi.  and  248.     1877.    7s.  Gd.    Vol.
II.,  pp.  viii.  and  400,  cloth.     1880.     10a.  6d.
IV.  and  V.  —  Omental  Religions,  and  their  Relation   to   Universal  Religion-
India.     By  Samuel  Johnson.     In    2  vols.,    pp.   viii.   and  408;  viii.
and  402.     1879.     21s.
VI. — An  Account  of  the  Polynesian  Race.     By  A.  Fornander.     Vol.
II.,  pp.  viii.  and  400,  cloth.     1880.     10s.  6d.

ER  SIE  ES.— Facsimile  of  a  MANUSCRIPT  supposed  to  have  been  found  in  an  Egyp-
tian Tomb  by  the  English  soldiers  last  year.  Royal  Svo,  in  ragged  canvas  covers,
with  string  binding,  with  dilapidated  edges  (?  just  as  discovered).     1884.     6s.  Gil.

EYTON. — Domesday  Studies  :  An  Analysis  and  Digest  of  the  Staffordshire
Survey.  Treating  of  the  Method  of  Domesday  in  its  Relation  to  Staffordshire,
•fee.     By  the  Rev.  R.  W.  Eyton.     4 to,  pp.  vii.  and  135,  cloth.     1881.     £1,  Is.

FABER.  — The  Mind  of  Mencius.     See  Trubner's  Oriental  Series.

FALKE.-Art  IN  THE  House.  Historical,  Critical,  and  JSsthetical  Studies  on  the
Decoration  and  Furnishing  of  the  Dwelling.  By  J.  von  Falke,  Vice-Director  of
the  Austrian  Museum  of  Art  and  Industry  at  Vienna.  Translated  from  the  German.
Edited,  with  Notes,  by  C.  C.  Perkins,  M.A.  Royal  Svo,  pp.  xxr  356,  cloth.
With  Coloured  Frontispiece,  60  Plates,  and  over  150  Illustrations.     1878.     £3.

FARLEY.  — Egypt,  Cyprus,  and  Asiatic  Turkey.  By  J.  L.  Farlev,  author  of  "The
Resources  of  Turkey,"  &c.     8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  270,  cloth  gilt.     1878.     10s.  6d.

FAUSBOLL.— See  Jataka.

FEATHERMAN.— The  Social  History  of  the  Races  of  Mankind.  By  A.  Feather-
man.  Demy  8vo,  cloth.  Vol.  I.  The  Nigritians.  Pp.  xxvi.  and  800.  1885.
£1,  lis.  6d.     Vol.  V.  The  Aramaeans.     Pp.  xvii.  and  664.     1881.     £1,  Is.

FENTON.— Early  Hebrew  Life:  a  Study  in  Sociology.  By  John  Fenton.  8vo,
pp.  xxiv.  and  102,  cloth.     1880.     5s.

FERGUSSON.— Archeology  in  India.  With  especial  reference  to  the  works  of
Balm  Rajendralala  Mitra.  By  James  Fergusson,  OLE.,  F.R.S.,  D.O.L.,  LL.D.,
V.-P.R.A.S.,  &c.     Demy  8vo,  pp.  116,  with  Illustrations,  sewed.     1884.     5s.


24  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works,

FERGUSSON.— The  Temple  of  Diana  at  Ephesus.  With  Especial  Reference  to
Mr.  Wood's  Discoveries  of  its  Remains.  By  James  Fergusson,  C.I.E.,  D.C.L.,
LL.D.,  F.R.S.,  &c.  From  the  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Institute  of  British
Architects.     Demy  4to,  pp.  24,  with  Plan,  cloth.     1883.     5s.

FERGUSSON  AND  BURGESS.— The  Cave  Temples  of  India.  By  James  Fergusson,
D.C.L.,  F.R.S.,  and  James  Burgess,  F.R.G.S.  Impl.  8vo,  pp.  xx.  and  536,  with
98  Plates,  half  bound.     1880.     £2,  2s.

FERGUSSON. — Chinese  Researches.  First  Part.  Chinese  Chronology  and
Cycles.  By  Thomas  Fergusson,  Member  of  the  North  China  Branch  of  the
Royal  Asiatic  Society.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  274,  sewed.     1881.     10s.  6d.

FEUERBACH.— The  Essence  of  Christianity.  See  English  and  Foreign  Philo-
sophical Library,  vol.  XV.

FICHTE.— J.  G.  Fichte's  Popular  Works  :  The  Nature  of  the  Scholar— The  Voca-
tion of  Man — The  Doctrine  of  Religion.  With  a  Memoir  by  William  Smith,  LL.D.
Demy  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  564,  cloth.     1873.     15s.

FICHTE. — Characteristics  of  the  Present  Age.  By  J.  G.  Fichte.  Translated
from  the  German  by  W.  Smith.    Post  8vo,  pp.  xi.  and  271,  cloth.     1847.     6s.

FICHTE. — Memoir  of  Johann  Gottlieb  Fichte.  By  William  Smith.  Second
Edition.     Post  Svo,  pp.  168,  cloth.     1848.     4s.

FICHTE.  — On  the  Nature  of  the  Scholar,  and  its  Manifestations.  By  Johann
Gottlieb  Fichte.  Translated  from  the  German  by  William  Smith.  Second  Edi-
tion.    Post  8vo,  pp.  vii.  and  131.  cloth.     1848.    3s.

FICHTE.— New  Exposition  of  the  Science  of  Knowledge.  By  J.  G.  Fichte.
Translated  from  the  German  by  A.  E.  Krceger.  Svo,  pp.  vi.  and  182,  cloth.  1869.    6s.

FIELD. — Outlines  of  an  International  Code.  By  David  Dudley  Field.  Second
Edition.     Royal  8vo,  pp.  iii.  and  712,  sheep.     1876.     £2,  2s.

FIGANIERE. — Elva  :  A  Story  of  the  Dark  Ages.  By  Viscount  de  Figaniere,  G.C.
St.  Anne,  &c.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  194,  cloth.     1878.     5s.

FINN.— Persian  for  Travellers.  By  Alexander  Finn,  F.R.G.S.,  &c,  H.B.M.
Consul  at  Resht.     Oblong  32mo,  pp.  xxii.-232,  cloth.     1884.     5s.

FISKE.— The  Unseen  World,  and  other  Essays.  By  John  Fiske,  M.A.,  LL.B.
Crown  8vo,  pp.  350.     1876.     10s.

FISKE.— Myths  and  Myth-Makers;  Old  Tales  and  Superstitions,  interpreted  by
Comparative  Mythology.  By  John  Fiske,  M.A. ,  LL.B.,  Assistant  Librarian,  and
late  Lecturer  on  Philosophy  at  Harvard  University.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  260,  cloth
1873.    10s.

FITZGERALD. -Australian  Orchids.  Bv  R.  D.  Fitzgerald,  F.L.S.  Folio.— Part  I
7  Plates.— Part  II.  10  Plates.— Part  III.  10  Plates.  — Part  IV.  10  Plates.—
Part  V.  10  Plates.— Part  VI.  10  Plates.  Each  Part,  Coloured  21s.;  Tlain,  10s.  6d
—Part  VII.  10  Plates.     Vol.  II.,  Part  I.  10  Plates.     Each,  Coloured,  25s.

FITZGERALD. — An  Essay  on  the  Philosophy  of  Self-Consciousness.  Corn
prisjng  an  Analysis  of  Reason  and  the  Rationale  of  Love.  By  P.  F.  Fitzgerald
Demy  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  196,  cloth.     1882.     5s.

FOR JETT.— External  Evidences  of  Christianity.  By  E.  H.  Forjett.  8vo,  pp
114,  cloth.     1874.     2s.  6d.

FORNANDER.— The  Polynesian  Race.  See  English  and  Foreign  Philosophical
Library,  Extra  Series,  Vols.  III.  and  VI.

FORSTER. — Political  Presentments. — By  William  Forster,  Agent-General  for
New  South  Wales.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  122,  cloth.     187S.     4s.  6d.

FOULKES. — The  Daya  Bhaga,  the  Law  of  Inheritance  of  the  Sarasvati  Vilasa.
The  Original  Sanskrit  Text,  with  Translation  by  the  Rev.  Thos.  Foulkes,  F.L.S.,
M.R.A.S.,  F.R.G.S.,  Fellow  of  the  University  of  Madras,  &c.  Demy  Svo,  pp.
xxvi.  and  194-162,  cloth.     1881.     10s.  6d.

FOX. — Memorial  Edition  of  Collected  Works,  by  W.  J.  Fox.  12  vols.  8vo,
cloth.    £3.


I'ubli.shcd  by  Ti timer  &  Co.  25

FRANKLYN.-  OUTLOTBOI  Military  Law,  and  tiik  Laws  of  BviDTOI  L  Bj  II.  B.
Franklyn,  LL.B.     Crown  IGnio,  pp.  viii.  and  lo2,  cloth.     1.^74.     I'.^.  6d.

FREEMAN.  -  Lutihks  to  Amkiucan  Audiences.  By  E.  A.  Freeman.  D.C.L.,
I.I..  1»..  Honorary  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Oxford.  I.  Tlie  English  People  in
its  Three  Homes.  II.  The  Practical  Bearings  of  General  European  History.
Post  8vo.  pj>.  nil -464,  cloth.     1883.     8s.  Gd.

FRIEDRICH.  —  Progressive  German  Keai-er,  with  Copious  Notes  to  the  First  Part.
By  P.  Friedrich.    Crown  8vo,  pp.  166,  cloth.    18C8.    4s.  Gd.

FRIEDRICH — A  Grammatical  Course  of  thb  German  Language.  See  uudcr
Disar.

FRIEDRICH.— A  Grammar  of  the  German  Language,  with  Exercises.  See
under  Dusak.

FRIEDERICI.  — Bibliotheca  Orientalis,  or  a  Complete  List  of  Books,  Papers,
Serials,  and  Essays,  published  in  England  and  the  Colonies,  Germany  and
France,  on  the  History,  Geography,  Religions.  Antiquities,  Literature,  and
Languages  of  the  East.  Compiled  by  Charles  Friederici.  8vo,  boards.  1876,  2s.  6d.
1877,3s.     1878,  3s.  Gd.     1879,3s.     1880,3s.        1881,3s.     1882,3s.     1883,  3s.  6d.

FRCEMBLING. — Graduated  German  Reader.  Consisting  of  a  Selection  from  the
most  Popular  "Writers,  arranged  progressively  ;  with  a  complete  Vocabulary  for
the  first  part.  By  Friedrich  Otto  Frcembling.  Eighth  Edition.  12mo,  pp.  viii.  and
306,  cloth.     1883.     3s.  Gd.

FRCEMBLING.— Graduated  Exercises  for  Translation  into  German.  Consist-
ing of  Extracts  from  the  best  English  Authors,  arranged  progressively  ;  with  an
Appendix,  containing  Idiomatic  Notes.  By  Friedrich  Otto  Frcembling,  Ph.D.,
Principal  German  Master  at  the  City  of  London  School.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xiv.  and
322,  cloth.     With  Notes,  pp.  66.     1867.     4s.  6d.     Without  Notes,  4s.

FROUDE.— The  Book  OF  Job.  By  J.  A.  Froude,  M.A.,  late  Fellow  of  Exeter  Col-
lege, Oxford.     Reprinted  from  the  Westminster  Review.     8vo,  pp.  38,  cloth.     Is.

FRUSTON.—  Echo  Francais.  A  Practical  Guide  to  French  Conversation.  By  F.
de  la  Fruston.     With  a  Vocabulary.     12mo,  pp.  vi.  and  192,  cloth.     3s.

FRYER. —The  Khyeng  People  of  the  Sandoway  District,  Arakan.  By  G.  E.
Fryer,  Major,  M.S. C.,  Deputy  Commissioner,  Sandoway.  With  2  Plates.  8vo,
pp.  44,  cloth.     1875.     3s.  6d.

FRYER.— PXli  Studies.  No.  I.  Analysis,  and  Pali  Text  of  the  Subodhalankara,  or
Easy  Rhetoric,  by  Sangharakkhita  Tbera.     8vo,  pp.  35,  cloth.     1875.     3s.  6d.

FURNIVALL.  — Education  in  Early  England.  Some  Notes  used  as  forewords  to
a  Collection  of  Treatises  on  "Manners  and  Meals  in  Olden  Times,"  for  the  Early
English  Text  Society.  By  Frederick  J.  Furnivall,  M.A.  8vo,  pp.  4  and  Lxxiv.,
sewed.     1867.     Is.

GALDOS.— Trafalgar  :  A  Tale.  By  B.  Perez  Galdos.  From  the  Spanish  by  Clara
Bell.     16mo,  pp.  256,  cloth.     1884.     4s.     Paper,  2s.  6.1.

GALDOS.— Marianela.  Bv  B.  Perez  Galdos.  From  the  Spanish,  by  Clara  Bell.
16mo,  pp.  264,  cloth.     1883.     4s.     Paper,  2s.  6d.

GALDOS.— Gloria:  A  Novel.  By  B.  Perez  Galdos.  From  the  Spanish,  by  Clara
Bell.  Two  volumes,  16mo,  pp.  vi.  and  318,  iv.  and  362,  cloth.  1883.  7s.  6d.
Paper,  5s.

GALLOWAY.— A  Treatise  on  Fuel.  Scientific  and  Practical.  By  Robert  Gallo-
way, M.R.I. A.,  F.C.S.,  &c.  With  Illustrations.  Post  8vo,  pp.  x.  and  136,
cloth.     1880.     6s.

GALLOWAY. — Education  :  Scientific  and  Technical;  or,  How  the  Inductive
Sciences  are  Taught,  and  How  they  Ought  to  be  Taught.  By  Robert  Galloway,
M.R.I.A.,  F.C.S.     8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  462,  cloth.     1881.     10s.  6d.

GAMBLE.— A  Manual  of  Indian  Timbers  :  An  Account  of  the  Structure,  Growth,
Distribution,  and  Qualities  of  Indian  "Woods.  By  J.  C.  Gamble,  M.A.,  F.L.S.
8vo,  pp.  xxx.  and  522,  with  a  Map,  cloth.     1881.     10s.


26  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works,

GARBE.— See  Auctores  Sanskkiti,  Vol.  III.

GARFIELD.— The  Life  and  Public  Service  of  James  A.  Garfield,  Twentieth
President  of  the  United  States.  A  Biographical  Sketch.  By  Captain  F.  H.  Mason,
late  of  the  42d  Regiment,  U.S.A.  "With  a  Preface  by  Bret  Harte.  Crown  8vo,
pp.  vi.  aud  134,  cloth.     With  Portrait.     1881.     23.  6d.

GARRETT.— A  Classical  Dictionary  of  India:  Illustrative  of  the  Mythology,
Philosophy,  Literature,  Antiquities,  Arts,  Manners,  Customs,  &c,  of  the  Hindus.
By  John  Garrett,  Director  of  Public  Instruction  in  Mysore.  8vo,  pp.  x.  and  794,
cloth.     With  Supplement,  pp.  160.     1871  and  1873.     £1,  16s.

GAUTAMA. — The  Institutes  of.    See  Auctores  Sanskriti,  Vol.  II.

GAZETTEER  of  the  Central  Provinces  of  India.  Edited  by  Charles  Grant,
Secretary  to  the  Chief  Commissioner  of  the  Central  Provinces.  Second  Edition.
With  a  very  large  folding  Map  of  the  Central  Provinces  of  India.  Demy  8vo,  pp.
clvii.  and  582,  cloth.     1870.     £1,  4s.

GEIGER. — A  Peep  at  Mexico;  Narrative  of  a  Journey  across  the  Republic  from
the  Pacific  to  the  Gulf,  in  December  1873  and  January  1874.  By  J.  L.  Geiger,
F.R.G.S.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  368,  with  Maps  and  45  Original  Photographs.  Cloth,
24s.

GEIGER. — Contributions  to  the  History  of  the  Development  of  the  Human
Race  :  Lectures  and  Dissertations,  by  Lazarus  Geiger.  Translated  from  the
Second  German  Edition,  by  David  Asher,  Ph.D.  Post  8vo,  pp.  X.-156,  cloth.
1880.     6s.

GELD  ART.— Faith  and  Freedom.  Fourteen  Sermons.  By  E.  M.  Geldart,  M.A.
Crown  8vo,  pp.  vi.  and  168,  cloth.     1881.     4s.  6d.

GELDART.— A  Guide  to  Modern  Greek.  By  E.  M.  Geldart,  M.A.  Post  8vo,
pp.  xii.  and  274,  cloth.     18S3.    7s.  6d.     Key,  pp.  28,  cloth.     1883.     2s.  6d.

GELDART. — Greek  Grammar.     See  Triibner's  Collection.

GEOLOGICAL  MAGAZINE  (The)  :  or,  Monthly  Journal  of  Geology.  With
which  is  incorporated  "The  Geologist."  Edited  by  Henry  Woodward,  LL.D.,
F.R.S.,  F.G.S.,  &c,  of  the  British  Museum.  Assisted  by  Professor  John  Morris,
M.A.,  F.G.S.,  &c,  and  Robert  Etheridge,  F.R.S.,  L.  &  E.,  F.G.S.,  &c,  of  the
Museum  of  Practical  Geology.     8vo,  cloth.     1866  to  1884.     20s.  each.

GHOSE.— The  Modern  History  of  the  Indian  Chiefs,  Rajas,  Zamindars,  &c.

By  Loke  Nath  Ghose.    2  vols,  post  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  218,  and  xviii.  and  612,  cloth.

1883.     21s.
GILES. — Chinese  Sketches. — By  Herbert  A.  Giles,  of  H.B.M.'s  China  Consular

Service.     8vo,  pp.  204,  cloth.     1875.     10s.  6d.

GILES.— A  Dictionary  of  Colloquial  Idioms  in  the  Mandarin  Dialect.  By
Herbert  A.  Giles.     4to,  pp.  65,  half  bound.     1873.     28s.

GILES.— Synoptical  Studies  in  Chinese  Character.  By  Herbert  A.  Giles.  8vo,
pp.  118,  half  bound.     1874.     15s.

GILES.  — Chinese  without  a  Teacher.  Being  a  Collection  of  Easy  and  Useful
Sentences  in  the  Mandarin  Dialect.  With  a  Vocabulary.  By  Herbert  A.  Giles.
12rao,  pp.  60,  half  bound.     1872.     5s.

GILES. — The  San  Tzu  Ching  ;  or,  Three  Character  Classic  ;  and  the  Ch'Jen  Tsu
Wen  ;  or,  Thousand  Character  Essay.  Metrically  Translated  by  Herbert  A.  Giles.
12mo,  pp.  28,  half  bound.     1873.     2s.  6d.

GLASS. — Advance  Thought.  By  Charles  E.  Glass.    Crown  8vo,  pp.  xxxvi.  and  188,

cloth.     1876.     6s.
GOETHE'S  Faust.— See  Scoones  and  Wysard.
GOETHE'S  Minor  Poems.— See  Selss.


Published  l»j  Trubner  <£•  Co.  27

COLDSTUCKER.—  A  Dictionary,  Sanskrit  and  English,  cxtemlo.l  and  improved
from  the  Second  Edition  of  the  Dictionary  of  Professor  II.  H.  Wilson,  with  oil
•notion  and  concurrence.  Together  with  a  Supplement,  Grammatical  Appen-
dices, and  an  Index,  serving  as  a  Sanskrit-English  Vocabulary.  By  Theodore  Gold-
stucker.     Parts  I.  to  VI.     4to,  pp.  400.     1856-63.    6s.  each.

GOLDSTUCKER.—  See  Auctores  Sanskriti,  Vol.  I.

GOOROO  SIMPLE.  Strange  Surprising  Adventures  of  the  Venerable  G.  S.  and  his
Five  Disciples,  Noodle,  Doodle,  "Wiseacre,  Zany,  and  Foozle  ;  adorned  with  Fifty
Illustrations,  drawn  on  wood,  by  Alfred  Crowquill.  A  companion  Volume  to
"  Munchhausen  n  and  "  Owlglass,"  based  upon  the  famous  Tamul  tale  of  the  Gooroo
Paramartan,  and  exhibiting,  in  the  form  of  a  skilfully-constructed  consecutive
narrative,  some  of  the  fiuest  specimens  of  Eastern  wit  and  humour.  Elegantly
printed  on  tinted  paper,  in  crown  8vo,  pp.  223,  richly  gilt  ornamental  cover,  gilt
edges.    1861.     10s.  6d.

GORKOM— Handbook  of  Cinchona  Culture.  By  K.  W.  Van  Gorkom,  formerly
Director  of  the  Government  Cinchona  Plantations  intlava.  Translated  by  B.  D.
Jackson,  Secretary  of  the  Linnsean  Society  of  London.  With  a  Coloured  Illus-
tration.    Imperial  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  292,  cloth.     1882.     £2.

GOUGH.— The  Sarya-Darsana-Samgraha.     See  Trubner 's  Oriental  Series.
GOUGH. — Philosophy  of  the  Upanishads.     See  Trubner's  Oriental  Series.

GOVER.— The  Folk-Songs  of  Southern  India.  By  C.  E.  Gover,  Madras.  Con-
tents :  Canarese  Songs  ;  Badaga  Songs  ;  Coorg  Songs  ;  Tamil  Songs  ;  The  Cural  ;
Malayalam  Songs ;  Telugu  Songs.  8vo,  pp.  xxviii.  and  300,  cloth.  1872.
10s.  6<L

GRAY. — Darwiniana  :  Essays  and  Reviews  pertaining  'to  Darwinism.  By  Asa
Gray.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  396,  cloth.     1877.     10s.

GRAY. — Natural  Science  and  Religion:  Two  Lectures  Delivered  to  the  Theo-
logical School  of  Yale  College.  By  Asa  Gray.    Crown  8vo,  pp.  112,  cloth.  1880.  5s.

GREEN.— Shakespeare  and  the  Emblem- Writers  :  An  Exposition  of  their  Simi-
larities of  Thought  and  Expression.  Preceded  by  a  View  of  the  Emblem-Book
Literature  down  to  a.D.  1616.  By  Henry  Green,  M.A.  In  one  volume,  pp.  xvi.
572,  profusely  illustrated  with  Woodcuts  and  Photolith.  Plates,  elegantly  bound
in  cloth  gilt.   1870.  Large  medium  8vo,  £1,  lis.  6d.  ;  large  imperial  8vo.  £2, 12s.  6d.

GREEN. — Andrea  Alciati,  and  his  Books  of  Emblems  :  A  Biographical  and  Biblio-
graphical Study.  By  Henry  Green,  M.A.  With  Ornamental  Title,  Portraits,
and  other  Illustrations.  Dedicated  to  Sir  William  Stirling-Maxwell,  Bart.,  Rector
of  the  University  of  Edinburgh.  Only  250  copies  printed.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  360,
handsomely  bound.     1872.     £1,  Is.

GREENE.— A  New  Method  of  Learning  to  Read,  Write,  and  Speak  the
French  Language  ;  or,  First  Lessons  in  French  (Introductory  to  Ollendorff's
Larger  Grammar).  By  G.  W.  Greene,  Instructor  in  Modern  Languages  in  Brown
University.  Third  Edition,  enlarged  and  rewritten.  Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  248,  cloth.
1869.     3s.  6d.

GREENE— The  Hebrew  Migration  from  Egypt.  By  J.  Baker  Greene,  LL.B.,
M.B.,  Trin.  Coll.,  Dub.  Second  Edition.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  440,  cloth.
1882.     10s.  6d.

GREG.— Truth  versus  Edification.    By  W.  R.  Greg.    Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  32,  cloth.

1869.     Is.
GREG.— Why  are  Women  Redundant?    By  W.  R.  Greg.   Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  40,  cloth.

1S69.    Is.

GREG.  — Literary  and  Social  Judgments.  By  W.  R.  Greg.  Fourth  Edition,
considerably  enlarged.     2  vols,  crown  8vo,  pp.  310  and  288,  cloth.     1877.     153.


28  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works,

GREG. —Mistaken  Aims  and  Attainable  Ideals  of  the  Artisan  Class.  By  W.
R.  Greg.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  vi.  aud  332,  cloth.     1876.     10a.  6d.

GREG.— Enigmas  of  Life.  By  W.  R.  Greg.  Fifteenth  Edition,  with  a  postscript.
Contents :  Realisable  Ideals.  Malthus  Notwithstanding.  Non-Survival  of  the
Fittest.  Limits  and  Directions  of  Human  Development.  The  Significance  of  Life.
De  Profundis.  Elsewhere.  Appendix.  Post  8vo,  lip.  xxii.  and  314,  cloth.
1883.     10s.  6d.

GREG. —Political  Problems  for  our  Age  and  Country.  By  W.  R.  Greg.  Con-
tents :  I.  Constitutional  and  Autocratic  Statesmanship.  II.  England's  Future
Attitude  and  Mission.  III.  Disposal  of  the  Criminal  Classes.  IV.  Recent
Change  in  the  Character  of  English  Crime.  V.  The  Intrinsic  Vice  of  Trade-
Unions.  VI.  Industrial  and  Co-operative  Partnerships.  VII.  The  Economic
Problem.  VIII.  Political  Consistency.  IX.  The  Parliamentary  Career.  X.  The
Price  we  pay  for  Self-government.  XL  Vestryism.  XII.  Direct  v.  Indirect
Taxation.  XIII.  The  New  Regime,  and  how  to  meet  it.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  342,
cloth.     1870.     10s.  6d.

GREG.  — The  Great  Duel  :  Its  True  Meaning  and  Issues.  By  W.  R.  Greg.  Crown
8vo,  pp.  96,  cloth.     1871.     2s.  6d.

GREG.— The  Creed  of  Christendom.     See  p]nglish  and  Foreign  Philosophical

Library,  Vols.  V.  and  VI.
GREG— Rocks  Ahead  ;  or,  The  Warnings  of  Cassandra.     By  W.  R.  Greg.    Second
Edition,  with  a  Reply  to  Objectors.    Crown  8vo,  pp.  xliv.  and  236,  cloth.     1874.
9s.
GREG.— Miscellaneous  Essays.     By  W.   R.   Greg.     First  Series.     Crown  8vo,
pp.  iv.-268,  cloth.     1881.     7s.  6d.

Contents  :— Rocks  Ahead  and  Harbours  of  Refuge.     Foreign  Policy  of  Great
Britain.     The  Echo  of  the  Antipodes.     A  Grave  Perplexity  before  us.      Obli-
gations   of    the    Soil.      The  Right    Use    of    a    Surplus.      The   Great  Twin
Brothers  :  Louis  Napoleon  and  Benjamin  Disraeli.     Is  the  Popular  Judgment
in  Politics  more  Just  than  that  of  the  Higher  Orders?     Harriet  Martineau.
Verify  your  Compass.    The  Prophetic  Element  in  the  Gospels.    Mr.  Frederick
Harrison  on  the  Future  Life.      Can  Truths  be  Apprehended  which  could
not  have  been  Discovered  ?
GREG.— Miscellaneous  Essays.    By  W.  R.  Greg.    Second  Series.   Pp.  294.   1884.
7s.  6d.
Contents  : — France  since  1848.     France  in  January  1852.     England  as  it  is.
Sir  R.  Peel's  Character  and  Policy.     Employment  of  our  Asiatic  Forces  in
European  "Wars.
GRIFFIN. — The  Rajas  of  the  Punjab.     Being  the  History  of  the  Principal  States
in  the  Punjab,  and  their  Political  Relations  with  the  British -Government.     By
Lepel  H.  Griffin,  Bengal  Civil  Service,  Acting  Secretary  to  the  Government  of  the
Punjab,   Author  of   "The   Punjab  Chiefs,"  &c.      Second  Edition.      Royal  8vo,
pp.  xvi.  and  630,  cloth.     1873.    £1,  Is.
GRIFFIN.— The  World  under  Glass.     By  Frederick  Griffin,  Author  of  "The
Destiny  of  Man,"  "The  Storm  King,"  and  other  Poems.     Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  204,
cloth  gilt.    1879.     3s.  6d.
GRIFFIN.— The  Destiny  of  Man,  The  Storm  King,  and  other  Poems.    By  F.

Griffin.     Second  Edition.     Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  vii.-104,  cloth.     1S83.     2s.  6d.
GRIFFIS. — The  Mikado's  Empire.     Book  I.  History  of  Japan,  from  660  B.C.  to
1872  a.d.— Book  II.  Personal  Experiences,  Observations,  and  Studies  in  Japan,
1870-1874.    By  W.  E.  Griffis,  A.M.     Second  Edition.    8vo,  pp.  626,  cloth.     Illus-
trated.    1883.     20s.
GRIFFIS. — Japanese  Fairy  World.    Stories  from  the  Wonder-Lore  of  Japan.    By

W.  E.  Griffis.     Square  16mo,  pp.  viii.  and  304,  with  12  Plates.     1880.     7s.  6d.
GRIFFITH.— The  Birih  of  the  War  God.     See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series.


Published  by  Triilmer  d  Co.  29

GREFTITH.     Yusuf  AND  Zulaikha.     See  Trubners  Oriental  Seriea.

GREFFITH.  Scenes  ROM  the  Kamayana,  Mkuiiadita,  &«,  Translated  hy  Ralph
T.  EL  Griffith,  M.A.,  Principal  of  the  Beuares  College.  Second  Edition.  Crown
8vo,  pp.  xviii.  and  244,  cloth.     1870.     6s.

CosTtsrs.  —  Preface — Ayodhya — Ravan  Doomed— The  Birth  of  Rama — The  Heir- Apparent —
Manthara's  Guile— Dasaratha's  0:iih— The  Step-mother— Mother  and  Son — The  Triumph  of
Love— Farewell  ?— The  Hermit's  Son— The  Trial  of  Truth— The  Forest— The  Rape  of  Sita—
Rama's  Despair— The  Messenger  Cloud — Khumbakarna— The  Suppliant  Dove— True  Glory —
Feed  the  Poor— The  Wise  Scholar.

GRIFFITH. -The  Ram.Cyan  OF  Valmiki.  Translated  into  English  Verse.  By  Ralph
T.  H.  Griffith,  M.  A.,  l'riucipal  of  the  Benares  College.  Vol.  I.,  containing  Books
I.  and  II.,  demy  Sv»,  pp.  xxxii.  and  440,  cloth.  1870.  — Vol.  II.,  containing
Book  II.,  with  additional  Notes  and  Index  of  Names.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  504,  cloth.
1871.  —Vol.  III.,  demy  Svo,  pp.  390,  cloth.  1872.  —Vol.  IV,  demy
8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  4.'>2,  cloth.  1873.  — Vol.  V.,  demy  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  360,
cloth.     1875.    The  complete  work,  5  vols.  £7,  7s.

GROTE.  — Review  of  the  "Work  of  Mr.  John  Stuart  Mill  entitled  "Examination  of
Sir  William  Hamilton's  Philosophy/'  By  George  Grote,  Author  of  the  "  History
of  Ancient  Greece,"  "  Plato,  and  the  othtr  Companions  of  Socrates,"  &c.  12mo,
pp.  112,  cloth.     1868.     3s.  6d.

GROUT.  —Zulu-Land;  or,  Life  among  the  Zulu-Kafirs  of  Natal  and  Zulu-Land,
South  Africa.  By  the  Rev.  Lewis  Grout.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  352,  cloth.  With
Map  and  Illustrations.     7s.  6d.

GROWSE.  — Mathura  :  A  District  Memoir.  By  F.  S.  Growse,  B.C.S.,  M.A.,  Oxon,
CLE.,  Fellow  of  the  Calcutta  University.  Second  edition,  illustrated,  revised,
and  eularged,  4to,  pp.  xxiv.  and  520,  boards.     1880.     42s.

GUBERNATIS.— Zoological  Mythology  ;  or,  The  Legends  of  Animals.  By  Angelo
de  Gubernatis,  Professor  of  Sanskrit  and  Comparative  Literature  in  the  Instituto
di  Studii  Superorii  e  di  Perfezionamento  at  Florence,  &c.  2  vols.  8vo,  pp.  xxvi.
and  432,  and  vii.  and  442,  cloth.     1872.     £1,  8s.

This  work  is  an  important  contribution  to  the  study  of  the  comparative  mythology  of  the  Indo-
Germanic  nations.  The  author  introduces  the  denizens  of  the  air,  earth,  and  water  in  the  vari-
ous characters  assigned  to  them  in  the  myths  and  legends  of  all  civilised  nations,  and  traces  the
migration  of  the  mythological  ideas  from  the  times  of  the  early  Aryans  to  those  of  the  Greeks,
Romans,  and  Teutons.

GULSHAN  I.  RAZ  :  The  Mystic  Rose  Garden  of  Sa'd  ud  din  Mahmdd  Shabis-
TARI.  The  Persian  Text,  with  an  English  Translation  and  Notes,  chiefly  from  the
Commentary  of  Muhammed  Bin  Yahya  Lahiji.  By  E.  H.  Whinfield,  M.A.,  Bar-
rister-at-Law,  late  of  H.M  B.C.S.     4to,  pp.  xvi.,  94,  60,  cloth.     1880.     10s.  6d.

GUMPACH.— Treaty  Rights  of  the  Foreign  Merchant,  and  the  Transit  System
in  China.     By  Johannes  von  Gumpach.     8vo,  pp.  xviii.  and  421,  sewed.     10s.  6d.

HAAS.— Catalogue  of  Sanskrit  and  Pali  Books  in  the  British  Museum.  By
Dr.  Ernst  Haas.  Printed  by  permission  of  the  Trustees  of  the  British  Museum.
4to,  pp.  viii.  and  188,  paper  boards.     1876.     21s.

HAFIZ  OF  SHIRAZ.  —  Selections  from  his  Poems.  Translated  from  the  Persian
by  Hermann  Bicknell.  "With  Preface  by  A.  S.  Bicknell.  Demy  4to,  pp.  xx.  and
384,  printed  on  fine  stout  plate-paper,  with  appropriate  Oriental  Bordering  in  gold
and  colour,  and  Illustrations  by  J.  R.  Herbert,  R.A.     1S75.     Jt'2,  2s.

HAFIZ.— See  Trubner's  Oriental  Series.

HAGEN.  — Norica  ;  or,  Tales  from  the  Olden  Time.   Translated  from  the  German  of

August  Hagen.     Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  xiv.  and  374.     1850.     5s.
HAGGARD.— Cetywayo  and  his  White  Neighbours;   or,  Remarks  on  Recent

Events  in  Zululand,  Natal,  and  the  Transvaal.     By  H.  R.  Haggard.     Crown  Svo

pp.  xvi.  and  294,  cloth.     18S2.     7fc  6d.


30  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works,

HAGGARD.— See  "The  Vazir  of  Lankuran."

HAHN.— Tsuni- II  Goam,  the  Supreme  Being  of  the  Khoi-Khoi.  By  Theophilus
Hahn,  Ph.D.,  Custodian  of  the  Grey  Collection,  Cape  Town,  &c,  k<s.  Post  8vo,
pp.  xiv.  and  154.     1882.     7s.  6d.

HALDANE.  —  See  Schopenhauer,  or  English  and  Foreign  Philosophical
Library,  vol.  xxii.

HALDEMAN.  —Pennsylvania  Dotch  :  A  Dialect  of  South  Germany  with  an  Infusion
of  English.  By  S.  S.  Haldeman,  A.M.,  Professor  of  Comparative  Philology  in  the
University  of  Pennsylvania,  Philadelphia.  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  70,  cloth. "  1872.  3s.
6d.

HALL.— On  English  Adjectives  in -Able,  with  Special  Reference  to  Reliable.
By  FitzEdward  Hall,  C.E.,  MA.,  Hon.  D.C.L.  Oxon ;  formerly  Professor  of
Sanskrit  Language  and  Literature,  and  of  Indian  Jurisprudence  in  King's  College,
London.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  23*,  cloth.     1877.     7s.  6d.

HALL. — Modern  English.  By  FitzEdward  Hall,  M.A.,  Hon.  D.C.L.  Oxon.  Crown
8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  394,  cloth.     1873.     10s.  6d.

HALL. — Sun  and  Earth  as  Great  Forces  in  Chemistry.  By  T.  W.  Hall,  M.D  ,
L.R.C.S.E.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  220,  cloth.     1874.     3s.

HALL.— The  Pedigree  of  the  Devil.  By  F.  T.  Hall,  F.R.A.S.  "With  Seven
Autotype  Illustrations  from  Designs  by  the  Author.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and
256,  cloth.     1883.     7s.  6d.

HALL. — Arctic  Expedition.     See  Nourse.

HALLOCK. — The  Sportsman's  Gazetteer  and  General  Guide.  The  Game
Animals,  Birds,  and  Fishes  of  North  America  :  their  Habits  and  various  methods
of  Capture,  &c,  &c.  With  a  Directory  to  the  principal  Game  Resorts  of  the
Country.  By  Charles  Hallock.  New  Edition.  Crown  8vo,  cloth.  Maps  and
Portrait.     1883.     15s.

HAM. — The  Maid  of  Corinth.  A  Drama  in  Four  Acts.  By  J.  Panton  Ham,
Crown  8vo,  pp.  65,  sewed.     2s.  6d.

HARLEY.— The  Simplification  of  English  Spelling,  specially  adapted  to  the  Ris-
ing Generation.  An  Easy  "Way  of  Saving  Time  in  Writing,  Printing,  and  Reading.
By  Dr.  George  Harley,  F.R.S.,  F.C.S.     8vo.  pp.  128,  cloth.     1877'.     2s.  6d.

HARRISON.— Woman's  Handiwork  in  Modern  Homes.  By  Constance  Cary
Harrison.  With  numerous  Illustrations  and  Five  Coloured  Plates,  from  designs
by  Samuel  Colman,  Rosina  Emmet,  George  Gibson,  and  others.  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and
242,  cloth.     1881.     10s.

HARTMANN.— See  English  and  Foreign  Philosophical  Library,  vol.  XXV.

HARTZENBUSCH  and  LEMMING.— Eco  de  Madrid.  A  Practical  Guide  to  Spanish
Conversation.  By  J.  E.  Hartzenbusch  and  H.  Lemming.  Second  Edition.  Post
8vo,  pp.  250,  cloth.     1870.     5s.

HASE.— Miracle  Plays  and  Sacred  Dramas  :  An  Historical  Survey.  By  Dr.
Karl  Hase.  Translated  from  the  German  by  A.  W.  Jackson,  and  Edited  by  the
Rev.  W.  W.  Jackson,  Fellow  of  Exeter  College,  Oxford.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  288.
1880.     9s.

HAUG.—  Glossary  and  Index  of  the  Pahlavi  Texts  of  the  Book  of  Arda  Viraf,
the  Tale  of  Gosht — J.  Fryano,  the  Hadokht  Nask,  and  to  some  extracts  from  the
Dinkard  and  Nirangistan ;  prepared  from  Destur  Hoshangji  Jamaspji  Asa's
Glossary  to  the  Arda  Viraf  Namak,  and  from  the  Original  Texts,  with  Notes  on
Pahlavi  Grammar  by  E.  W.  West,  Ph.D.  Revised  by  M.  Haug,  Ph.D.,  &c.
Published  by  order  of  the  Bombay  Government.  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  352,  sewed.
1874.     25s.


Published  by  Trainer  A  Co.  31

HAUG.-  The  Sacred  Language,  &c.,ofthe  Paksis.    Bee  Triil.ncr's  Oriental  Si

HAUPT.— The  London  Arbitrageur ;  or,  The  English  Honey  Market,  In  con-
nection with  Foreign  Bourses.  A  Collection  of  Notes  and  Formula  for  the  Arbi-
tration of  Kills,  Stocks,  Shares,  Bullion,  and  Coins,  with  all  fchi  (mportant
Foreign  Countries.  Bv  Ottomar  Haupt.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  1%,  cloth.
1870.     7s.  Bd.

HAWKEN.  —  I "paSastka  :  Comments,  Lingoiatie,  Doctrinal,  on  Sacred  and  Mythic
Literature.    By  J.  D.  Hawken.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  288,  cloth.  1877.  7s.  Gd.

HAZEN. — Tin  School  and  the  Abut  in  Gebhakt  and  France,  with  a  Diary  of  Siege
Life  at  Versailles.  By  Brevet  Major-General  W.  B.  Hazen,  U.S.A.,  Cot  Gth  In-
fantry.    8vo,  pp.  408,  cloth.     1872.     10s.  6d.

HEATH.— Edgar  QuiNET.  See  English  and  Foreign  Philosophical  Library,  Vol.
XIV.

HEATON— Australian  Dictionary  of  Dates  and  Men  of  the  Time.     Containing
the  History  of  Australasia  from  1542  to  May  1879-    By  I.  H.  Heaton.    Royal  8vo
pp.  iv.  and  554,  cloth.     15s.
HEBREW  LITERATURE  SOCIETY.

HECHLER.— The  Jerusalem  Bishopric  Documents.  With  Translations,  chiefly
derived  from  "Das  Evangelische  Bisthum  in  Jerusalem,"  Geschichtliche  Dar-
legung  mit  Urtunden.  Berlin,  1842.  Published  by  Command  of  His  Majesty
Frederick  William  IV.,  King  of  Prussia.  Arranged  and  Supplemented  by  the
Rev.  Prof.  "William  H.  Hechler,  British  Chaplain  at  Stockholm.  8vo,  pp.  212,
with  Maps,  Portrait,  and  Illustrations,  cloth.  1883.  10s.  6d.
HECKER.— The  Epidemics  of  the  Middle  Ages.  Translated  by  G.  B.  Babington,
M.D.,  F.R.S.  Third  Edition,  completed  by  the  Author's  Treatise  on  Child-Pil-
grimages. By  J.  F.  C.  Hecker.  8vo,  pp.  384,  cloth.  1859.  9s.  6d.
Contents. — The  Black  Death — The  Danciug  Mania — The  Sweating  Sickness— Child  Pil-
grimages.

HEDLEY  —  Masterpieces  of  German  Poetry.    Translated  in  the  Measure  of  the

Originals,  by  F.  H.  Hedley.     With  Illustrations  by  Louis  Wanke.     Crown  8vo,

pp.  viii.  and  120,  cloth.     1876.     6s.
HEINE.— Religion   and  Philosophy  in  Germany.     See   English   and   Foreign

Philosophical  Library,  Vol.  XVIII.
HEINE.— Wit,  WISDOM,  and  Pathos  from  the  Prose  of  Heinrich  Heine.     With  a

few  pieces  from  the  "  Book  of  Songs."    Selected  and  Translated  by  J.  Snodgrass.

With  Portrait.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  xx.  and  340,  cloth.     1879.     7s.  6d.
HEINE.— Pictures  of  Travel.     Translated  from  the  German  of  Henry  Heine,  by

Charles  G.  Leland.      7th  Revised  Edition.      Crown  8vo,  pp.  472,  with  Portrait,

cloth.     1873.     7s.  6d.
HEINE.— Heine's  Book  of  Songs.     Translated  by  Charles  G.  Leland.     Fcap.  8vo,

pp.  xiv.  and  240,  cloth,  gilt  edges.     1874.     7s.  6d.
HEITZMANN. — Microscopical  Morphology  of  the  Animal  Body  in  Health

and  Disease.     By  C.  Heitzmann,  M.D.     Royal  8vo,  pp.  xx.-850,  cloth.     1884.

31s.  6d.
HENDRIK.— Memoirs  of  Hans  Hendrik,  the  Arctic  Traveller  ;  serving  under

Kane,  Hayes,  Hall,  and  Nares,  1853-76.     Written  by  Himself.     Translated  from

the   Eskimo   Language,  by  Dr.   Henry  Rink.     Edited  by  Prof.  Dr.  G.  Stephens,

F.S.A.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  100,  Map,  cloth.     1878.     3s.  6d.
HENNELL.— Present  Religion:    As  a  Faith   owning  Fellowship   with   Thought.

Vol.  I    Part  I.     By  Sara  S.  Hennell.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  570,  cloth.     1865.     7s.  6d.
HENNELL—  Comparativism  ;   An   Introduction   to  the  Second  Part  of   "Present

Religion,"  explaining  the  Priuciple  by  which  Religion  appears  still  to  be  set  in

Necessary  Antagonism  to  Positivism.     By  Sara  S.  Hennell.     8vo,  pp.  160,  cloth.

186ft     3s.
HENNELL.— Comparative  Ethics— T.     Section  I.      Moral  Standpoint.      Present

Religion,  Vol.  III.     By  Sara  S.  Hennell.     8vo,  pp.  66,  wrapper.     1882.     2s.


32  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works,

HENNELL.— Comparative  Ethics— I.  Sections  II.  and  III.  Moral  Principle  in
Regard  to  Sexhood.  Present  Religion,  Vol.  III.  By  S.  Hennell.  Crown  8vo,
pp.  92,  wrapper.     1884.    2s.

HENNELL.— Present  Religion  :  As  a  Faith  owning  Fellowship  with  Thought.
Part  II.  First  Division.  Intellectual  Effect :  shown  as  a  Principle  of  Metaphy-
sical Comparativism.  By  Sara  S.  Hennell.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  G18,  cloth.  1873.
7s.  6d.

HENNELL.— Present  Religion,  Vol.  III.  Part  II.  Second  Division.  The  Effect
of  Present  Religion  on  its  Practical  Side.  By  S.  S.  Hennell.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  68,
paper  covers.     1882.     2s.

HENNELL. — Comparativism  shown  as  Furnishing  a  Religious  Basis  to  Morality.
(Present  Religion.     Vol.   III.   Part  II.     Second  Division:  Practical  Effect.)     By

•  Sara  S.  Hennell.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  220,  stitched  in  wrapper.     1878.     3s.  6d.

HENNELL.— Comparative  Ethics.  II.  Sections  I.  and  II.  Moral  Principle  in
regard  to  Brotherhood.  (Present  Religion,  Vol.  III.)  By  Sara  S.  Hennell.
Crown  8vo,  pp.  52,  wrapper.     1884.     2s.

HENNELL. — Thoughts  in  Aid  of  Faith.  Gathered  chiefly  from  recent  Works  in
Theology  and  Philosophy.   By  Sara  S.  Hennell.    Post  8vo,  pp.  428,  cloth.   1860.   6s.

HENWOOD.— The  Metalliferous  Deposits  of  Cornwall  and  Devon  ;  with  Ap-
pendices on  Subterranean  Temperature  ;  the  Electricity  of  Rocks  and  Veins  :  the
Quantities  of  "Water  in  the  Cornish  Mines  ;  and  Mining  Statistics.  (Vol.  V.  of
the  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Geographical  Society  of  Cornwall.)  By  William
JoryHenwood,  F.R.S.,  F.G.S.  8vo,  pp.  x.  and  515;  with  113  Tables,  and  12
Plates,  half  bound.     £2,  2s.

HENWOOD.— Observations  on  Metalliferous  Deposits,  and  on  Subterranean
Temperature.  (Vol.  VIII.  of  the  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Geological  Society
of  Cornwall.)  By  William  Jory  Henwood,  F.R.S.,  F.G.S.,  President  of  the
Royal  Institution  of  Cornwall.  In  2  Parts.  8vo,  pp.  xxx.,  vii.  and  916  ;  with
38  Tables,  31  Engravings  on  Wood,  and  6  Plates.     £1,  16s.

HEPBURN.  — A  Japanese  and  English  Dictionary.  With  an  English  and  Japanese
Index.  By  J.  C.  Hepburn,  M.D.,  LL.D.  Second  Edition.  Imperial  8vo,  pp.
xxxii.,  632,  and  201,  cloth.    £8,  8s.

HEPBURN^-Japanese-Engltsh  and  English-Japanese  Dictionary.  By  J.  C.
Hepburn,  M.D.,  LL.D.  Abridged  by  the  Author.  Square  fcap.,  pp.  vi.  and  536,
cloth.     1873.     18s.

HERNISZ.— A  Guide  to  Conversation  in  the  English  and  Chinese  Languages,
for  the  Use  of  Americans  and  Chinese  in  California  and  elsewhere.  By  Stanislas
Hernisz.     Square  8vo,  pp.  274,  sewed.     1855.     10s.  6d.

HERSHON. — Talmudic  Miscellany.     See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series.

HERZEN.— Du  Developpement  des  Idees  Revolutionnaires  en  Russie.  Par
Alexander  Herzen.     12mo,  pp.  xxiii.  and  144,  sewed.     1853.     2s.  6d.

HERZEN. — A  separate  list  of  A.  Herzen's  works  in  Russian  may  be  had  on
application.

HILL. — The  History  of  the  Reform  Movement  in  the  Dental  Profession  in  Great
Britain  during  the  last  twenty  years.  By  Alfred  Hill,  Licentiate  in  Dental  Sur-
gery, &c.     Crown  Svo,  pp.  xvi.  and  400,  cloth.     1877.     10s.  6d.

HILLEBRAND.— France  and  the  French  in  the  Second  Half  of  the  Nine-
teenth Century.  By  Karl  Hillebrand.  Translated  from  the  Third  German
Edition.    Post  Svo,  pp.  xx.  and  262,  cloth.     1881.     10s.  6d.

HINDOO  Mythology  Popularly  Treated.  Being  »n  Epitomised  Description  of
the  various  Heathen  Deities  illustrated  on  the  Silver  Swami  Tea  Service  pre-
sented, as  a  memento  of  his  visit  to  India,  to  H.R.H.  the  Prince  of  Wales,  K.G.,
G.  CS .1.,  by  His  Highness  the  Gaekwar  of  Baroda.  Small  4to,  pp.  42,  limp  cloth.
1875.     3s.  6d.


Published  by  Triibner  &  Co.  33

HITTELL.—  The  Commerce  and  Industries  of  the  Pacific  Coast  of  North
KJA.     By  J.    S.  llittell,  Author  of  "  The  Kesources  of  California."     4tu,

pp.  820.     1882.     i'l.  H»s.
HODGSON.  — Academy  LECTURES.    By  J.  E.  Hodgson,  R.A.,  Librarian  and  Professor

of  Painting  to  the  Royal  Academy.    Cr.  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  312,  cloth.    1884.    7s.  6d.
HODGSON.     Essays  ON  the  LANGUAGES,   Literature,  and  Religion  of  Nepal

and  Tibkt.     Together  with  farther  Pipers  on  the  Geography,  Ethnology,  and

Commerce  of  those  Countries.     By  B.   H.   Hodgson,  late  British  Minister  at  the

Court  of  Nepal.     Royal  8vo,  cloth,  pp.  xii.  and  276.     1874.     14s.
HODGSON.—  ESSAYS  OH  Indian  Subjects.     See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series.
HODGSON.  —  The   Education  of   Girls  ;    and  the  EMPLOYMENT  of  Women  of

the  Upper  Classes  EDUCATIONALLY  considered.     Two   Lectures.    By  W.  B.

Hodgson,  LL.D.    Second  Edition.    Cr.  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  114,  cloth.    1869.    3s.  6d.
HODGSON.     TUBGOT:  His  Life,  Times,  and  Opinions.     Two  Lectures.     By  "W.  B.

Hodgson,  LL.D.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  vi.  and  83,  sewed.     1870.     2s.
HOERNLE. — A  Comparative  Grammar  of  the  Gaudian  Languages,  with  Special

Reference  to  the  Eastern  Hindi.     Accompanied  by  a  Language  Map,  and  a  Table

of  Alphabets.     By  A.  F.  Rudolf  Hoernle.     Demy  8vo,  pp.  474,  cloth.    1880.    18s.
HOLBEIN  SOCIETY. — Subscription,  one  guinea  per  annum.      List  of  publications

on  application.
HOLMES-FORBES.— The  Science  OF  Beaoty.      An  Analytical  Inquiry  into  the

Laws  of  -Esthetics.     By  Avary  W.  Holmes-Forbes,  of  Lincoln's  Inn,  Barrister-at-

Law.     Post  8vo,  cloth,  pp.  vi.  and  200.     1881.     6s.
HOLST.—  The  Constitutional  and  Political  Histoey  of  the  United  States.

By  Dr.  H.  von  Hoist.    Translated  by  J.  J.  Lalor  and  A.  B.  Mason.     Royal  8vo.

Vol.  I.  1750-1833.    State  Sovereignty  and  Slavery.    Pp.  xvi.  and  506.    1876.    18s.

— Vol.   II.     1828-1846.     Jackson's  Administration  — Annexation  of  Texas.     Pp.

720.     1879.     £1,  2s.— Vol.  III.     1846-1850.     Annexation  of  Texas— Compromise

of  1850.     Pp.  x.  and  598.     1881.     18s.
HOLYOAKE.—  Travels  in  Search  of  a  Settler's  Guide-Book  of  America  and

Canada.     By  George  Jacob  Holyoake,  Author  of  "The  History  of  Co-operation

in  England."    Post  8vo,  pp.  148,  wrapper.     1884.     2s.  6d.
HOLYOAKE.— The  History  of  Co-operation  in  England  :  its  Literature  and  its

Advocates.     By  G.  J.  Holyoake.     Vol.  I.  The  Pioneer  Period,  1812-44.     Crown

8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  420,  cloth.    1875.     4s.— Vol.  II.  The  Constructive  Period,  1845-

78.    Crown  8vo,  pp.  x.  and  504,  cloth.     1878.    8s.
HOLYOAKE.— The  Trial  of  Theism  accused  of  Obstructing  Secular  Life.     By

G.  J.  Holyoake.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  256,  cloth.     1877.     2s.  6d.
HOLYOAKE. — Reasoning  from  Facts  :  A  Method  of  Everyday  Logic.     By  G.  J.

Holyoake.     Fcap. ,  pp.  xii.  and  94,  wrapper.     1877.     Is.  6d.
HOLYOAKE. — Self-Help  by  the  People.     Thirty-three  Years  of  Co-operation  in

Rochdale.     In  Two  Parts.     Part  I.,  1844-1857  ;  Part  II.,  1857-1877.     By  G.  J.

Holyoake.     Ninth  Edition.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  174,  cloth.     1883.     2s.  6d.
HOPKINS.— Elementary  Grammar  of  the  Turkish  Language.    "With  a  few  Easy

Exercises.     By  F.  L.  Hopkins,  M.A.,  Fellow  and  Tutor  of  Trinity  Hall,  Cam-
bridge.    Crown  8vo,  pp.  48,  cloth.     1877.     3s.  6d.
HORDER.— A  Selection  from  "  The  Book  of  Praise  for  Children,"  as  Edited

by  \V.   Garrett  Horder.     For  the  Use  of  Jewish  Children.     Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  80,

cloth.     1883.     Is.  6d.
HOSMER. — The  People  and   Politics  ;    or,   The  Structure  of   States  and   the

Significance  and  Relation  of  Political  Forms.     By  G.  W.  Hosmer,  M.D.     Demy

8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  340,  cloth.     1883.     15s.
HOWELLS. — A  Little  Girl  among  the  Old  Masters.     "With  Introduction  and

Comment.     By  W.  D.  Howells.     Oblong  crown  8vo,  cloth,  pp.  66,  with  54  plates.

1884.     10s.


34  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works,

HOWELLS.— Dr.  Breen's  Practice:     A  Novel.     By  W.  D.   Howells.      English

Copyright  Edition.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  272,  cloth.     1882.     6s.
HOWSE.— A  Grammar  op  the  Cree  Language.      "With  which  is  combined  an
Analysis  of  the  Chippeway  Dialect.     By  Joseph  Howse,  F.R.G.S.     8vo,  pp.  xx.
and  324,  cloth.     1865.     7s.  6d.
HULME.— Mathematical  Drawing  Instruments,  and  How  to  Use  Them.    By
F.  Edward  Hulme,  F.L.S.,  F.S.A.,  Art-Masterof  Marlborough  College,  Author  of
"Principles  of  Ornamental   Art,"   &c.      With   Illustrations.      Second   Edition.
Imperial  16mo,  pp.  xvi.  and  152,  cloth.     1881.     3s.  6d.
HUMBERT.— On   "Tenant  Right."    By  C.  F.  Humbert.     8vo,   pp.  20,   sewed.

1875.     Is.
HUMBOLDT. — The  Sphere  and  Duties  of  Government.    Translated  from  the
German  of  Baron  Wilhelm  Von  Humboldt  by  Joseph  Coulthard,  jun.     Post  8vo,
pp.  xv.  and  203,  cloth.     1854.     5s.
HUMBOLDT.— Letters  of  William  Von  Humboldt  to  a  Female  Friend.  A  com-
plete Edition.     Translated  from  the  Second  German  Edition  by  Catherine  M.  A.
Couper,  with  a  Biographical  Notice  of  the  Writer.     2  vols,  crown  8vo,  pp.  xxviii.
and  592,  cloth.     1867.     10s.
HUNT. — The  Religion  of  the  Heart.    A  Manual  of  Faith  and  Duty.     By  Leigh

Hunt.     Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  xxiv.  and  259,  cloth.    2s.  6d.
HUNT. — Chemical    and    Geological  Essays.      By  Professor  T.    Sterry    Hunt.

Second  Edition.     8vo,  pp.  xxii.  and  448,  cloth.     1879.     12s.
HUNTER.— A  Comparative  Dictionary  of  the  Non-Aryan  Languages  of  India
and  High  Asia.     With  a  Dissertation,  Political  and  Linguistic,  on  the  Aboriginal
Races.     By  W.  W.  Hunter,  B.A.,  M.R.A.S.,  Hon.  Fel.  Ethnol.  Soc,  Author  of
the  "Annals  of  Rural  Bengal,"  of  H.M.'s  Civil  Service.     Being  a  Lexicon  of  144
Languages,  illustrating  Turanian  Speech.      Compiled  from  the  Hodgson  Lists,
Government  Archives,  and  Original  MSS.,  arranged  with  Prefaces  and  Indices  in
English,  French,  German,  Russian,  and  Latin.     Large  4to,  toned  paper,  pp.  230,
cloth.     1869.     42s.
HUNTER.— The  Indian  Musalmans.     By  W.  W.  Hunter,  B.A.,  LL.D.,  Director-
General  of  Statistics  to  the  Government  of  India,  &c,  Author  of  the  "  Annals  of
Rural  Bengal,"  &c.     Third  Edition.     8vo,  pp.  219,  cloth.     1876.     10s.  6d.
HUNTER. — Famine  Aspects  of  Bengal  Districts.   A  System  of  Famine  Warnings.

By  W.  W.  Hunter,  B. A.,  LL.D.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  216,  cloth.     1874.     7s.  6d.
HUNTER. — A  Statistical  Account  of  Bengal.    By  W.  W.  Hunter,  B.A.,  LL.D.,
Director-General  of  Statistics  to  the  Government  of  India,  &c.     In  20  vols.  8vo,
half  morocco.     1877.     £5.
HUNTER. — Catalogue  of  Sanskrit  Manuscripts  (Buddhist).  Collected  in  Nepal
by  B.  H.  Hodgson,  late  Resident  at  the  Court  of  Nepal.     Compiled  from  Lists  ir.
Calcutta,  France,  and  England,  by  W.  W.  Hunter,  CLE.,  LL.D.     8vo,  pp.  28,
paper.    1880.     2s.
HUNTER.— The  Imperial  Gazetteer  of  India.    By  W.  W.  Hunter,  OLE.,  LL.D.,
Director-General  of  Statistics  to  the  Government  of  India      In  Nine  Volumes,
gvo,  pp.  xxxiii.  and  544,  539,  567,  xix.  and  716,  509,  513,  555,  537,  and  xii.  and
478^  half  morocco.     With  Maps.     1881.
HUNTER. — The  Indian  Empire  :  Its  History,  People,  and  Products.     By  W.  W.

Hunter,  OLE.,  LL.D.  Post  Svo,  pp.  568,  with  Map,  cloth.  1S82.  16s.
CUNTER. — An  Account  of  the  British  Settlement  of  Aden,  in  Arabia.  Com-
piled by  Capt.  F.  M.  Hunter,  Assistant  Political  Resident,  Aden.  Svo,  pp.  xii.
and  232,  half  bound.  1877.  7s.  6d.
HUNTER.— A  Statistical  Account  of  Assam.  By  W.  W.  Hunter,  B.A.,  LL.D.
CLE.,  Director-General  of  Statistics  to  the  Government  of  India,  kc.  2  vols.
Svo,  pp.  420  and  490,  with  2  Maps,  half  morocco.     1S79.     10a.


Published  by  Triibner  db  Co.  35

HUNTER.  A  r.itiFF  SlBTOBl  01  tiik  Indian  PEOPLE.  By  W.  W.  Hunter,  CLE  ,
I.l.D.     Fourth  Edition.    Crown  8vo,  pp.  222,  cloth.    With  Map.     1884.

HURST.  History  OF  RATIONALISM:  embracing  a  Survey  of  the  Present  Btate  of
Protectant  Theology.  By  the  Rev.  John  F.  Hurst.  A.M.  With  Appendix  of
Literature.    Revised  and  enlarged  from  the  Third  American  Edition.    Crown  8vo,

pp.  xvii.  ami  ;V_'.\  cloth.      1867.     10s.  6d.

HX&fT. — Prompt  Remedies  roB  AociDBNTa  and  Poisons  :  Adapted  to  the  ose  of

the  Inexperienced  till  Medical  aid  arrives.    By  W,  II.  Hyett,  F.R.S.    A  Broad-
sheet, to  hang  no  in  Country  Schools  or  Vestries,  Workshops,  Offices  of  Factories,

Mines   and   Docks,   on    board    Yachts,   in  Railway   Stations,   remote  Shooting

Quarters,  Highland  Manses,  and  Private  Houses,  wherever  the  Doctor  lives  at  a

distance.     Sold  for  the  benefit  of  the  Gloucester  Eye  Institution.     Iu  sheets,  21.}

by  17.}  inches,  2s.  0d.  ;  mounted,  3s.  6d.
HYMANS.  — l'ui'iL   Versus  Teacher.     Letters  from  a  Teacher  to  a  Teacher.     Fcap.

pp.  '.)■-'.  cloth.     1875.    2s.
IHNE. -  A   Latin  Grammar  for  Beginners.    By  W.  H.  Ihne,  late  Principal  of

Carlton  Terrace  School,  Liverpool.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  vi.  and  LS4,  cloth.     1864.    3s.
IKHWANU-S  SafA";  or,  Brothers  of  Purity.     Translated  from  the  Hindustani  by

Professor  John  Dowson,    M.R.A.S.,  Staff  College,  Sandhurst.     Crown  8vo,   pp.

viii.  and  156,  cloth.     1869.     7s.
INDIA. — Arch.eological  Survey  of  Western  India.     See  Burgess.
INDIA.— Publications  of  the  Arch.£ological  Survey  of  India.    A  separate  list

on  application.
INDIA.— Publications  of  the  Geographical  Department  of  the  India  Office,

London.     A  separate  list,  also  list  of  all  the  Government  Maps,  on  application.
INDIA — Publications  of  the  Geological  Survey  of  India.    A  separate  list  on

application.
INDIA  OFFICE  PUBLICATIONS  :—

Aden,  Statistical  Account  of.     5s.

Assam,       do.  do.  Vols.  I.  and  II.     5s.  each.

Baden  Powell,  Land  Revenues,  &c,  in  India,     12s.

Do.  Jurisprudence  for  Forest  Officers.     12s.

Real's  Buddhist  Tripitaka.     4s.

Bengal,  Statistical  Account  of.  Vols.  I.  to  XX.     100s.  per  set.
Do.         do.  do.  Vols.  VI.  to  XX.     5s.  each.

Bombay  Code.     21s.

Bombay  Gazetteer.     Vol.  II.,  14s.     Vol.  VIII.,  9s.      Vol.  XIII.  (2   parts),   16s.
Vol.  XV.  (2  parts),  16s.
Do.  do.  Vols.  III.  to  VII.,  and  X.,  XL,  XII.,  XIV.,  XVI.  8s.  each.

Do.  do.  Vols.  XXL,  XXIL,  and  XXIII.     9s.  each.

Burgess'  Archaeological  Survey  of  Western  India.     Vols.  I.  and  III.     42s.  each.
Do.  do.  do.  Vol.  II.     63s.

Do.  do.  do.  Vols.  IV.  and  V.     126s.

Burma  (British)  Gazetteer.     2  vols.     50s.

( 'atalogue  of  Manuscripts  and  Maps  of  Surveys.     12s.

Chambers'  Meteorology  (Bombay)  and  Atlas.     30s.

Cole's  Agra  and  Muttra.     70s.

Cook's  Gums  and  Resins.     5s.

Corpus  Inscriptionem  Indicarum.     Vol.1.     32s.

Cunningham's  Archteological  Survey.     Vols.  I.  to  XVIII.     10s.  and  12s.  each.
Do.  Stupa  of  Bharut.     63s.

Egerton's  Catalogue  of  Indian  Arms.     2s.  6d.

Ferguson  and  Burgess,  Cave  Temples  of  India.     42s.

Do.  Tree  and  Serpent  Worship.     105s.

Finance  and  Revenue  Accounts  of  the  Government  of  India  for  1883-4.     2s.  6d.

Gamble,  Manual  of  Indian  Timbers.     10s.

Hunter's  Imperial  Gazetteer.     9  vols.


36  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works,

INDIA  OFFICE  PUBLICATIONS— continued.

Indian  Education  Commission,  Report  of  the.     12s.      Appendices.     10  vols.     10s.

Jaschke's  Tibetan-English  Dictionary.     30s.

King.     Chinchona-Planting.     Is.

Kurz.     Forest  Flora  of  British  Burma.     Vols.  I.  and  II.     15s.  each.

Liotard's  Materials  for  Paper.     2s.  6d.

Liotard's  Silk  in  India.     Part  I.     2s.

Loth.     Catalogue  of  Arabic  MSS.    10s.  6d.

Markham's  Tibet.     21s.

Do.         Memoir  of  Indian  Surveys.     10s.  Gd.
Do.        Abstract  of  Reports  of  Surveys.     13.  Gd.

Mitra  (Rajendralala),  Buddha  Gaya.     00s.

Moir,  Torrent  Regions  of  the  Alps.     Is.

Mueller.     Select  Plants  for  Extra-Tropical  Countries.     8s.

Mysore  and  Coorg  Gazetteer.     Vols.  I.  and  II.     10s.  each.
Do.  do.  Vol.  III.     5s.

N.  W.  P.  Gazetteer.    Vols.  I.  and  II.     10s.  each.

Do.  do.  Vols.  III.  to  XI.,  XIII.,  and  XIV.  12s.  each.

Oudh  do.  Vols.  I.  to  III.     10s.  each.

People  of  India,  The.    Vols.  I.  to  VIII.     45s.  each.

Raverty's  Notes  on  Afghanistan  and  Baluchistan.     Sections  I.  and  II.     2s.    Sec-
tion III.  5s.     Section  IV.  3s.

Rajputana  Gazetteer.     3  vols.     15s.

Saunders'  Mountains  and  River  Basins  of  India.     3s.

Sewell's  Amaravati  Tope.     3s.

Smyth's  (Brough)  Gold  Mining  in  Wynaad.     Is.

Taylor.     Indian  Marine  Surveys.     2s.  6d.

Trigonometrical  Survey,  Synopsis  of  Great.     Vols.  I.  to  VI.     10s.  6d.  each.

Trumpp's  Adi  Granth.     52s.  Gd.

Waring.     Pharmacopoeia  of  India,  The.     6s.

Watson's  Cotton  Gins.     Boards,  10s.  6d.     Paper,  10s.
Do.       Rhea  Fibre.     2s.  Gd.
Do.       Tobacco.     5s.

Wilson.     Madras  Army.     Vols.  I.  and  II.     21s.

INDIAN  GAZETTEERS.— See  Gazetteer,  and  India  Office  Publications.

INGLEBY.— See  Shakespeare.

INMAN.— Nautical  Tables.     Designed  for  the  use  of  British  Seamen.   By  the  Rev.

James  Inman,  D.D.,  late  Professor  at   the   Royal   Naval  College,  Portsmouth.

Demy  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  410,  cloth.     1877.     15s.
INMAN.— History  of  the  English  Alphabet  :  A  Paper  read  before  the  Liverpool

Literary  and  Philosophical  Society.     By  T.  Inman,  M.D.     8vo,  pp.  36,  sewed.

1872.     Is.
IN  SEARCH  OF  TRUTH.     Conversations  on  the  Bible  and  Popular  Theology,  for

Young  People.     By  A.  M.  Y.      Crown  Svo,  pp.  x.  and  138,  cloth.     1S75.     2s.  6d.

INTERNATIONAL  Numismata  Orientalia  (The).— Royal  4to,  in  paper  wrapper.
Part  I.  Ancient  Indian  Weights.  By  E.  Thomas,  F.R.S.  Pp.  84,  with  a  Plate  and
Map  of  the  India  of  Manu.  9s.  6d.— Part  II.  Coins  of  the  Urtuki  Turkumans.
By  Stanley  Lane  Poole,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford.  Pp.  44,  with  G  Plates.
9s.— Part  III.  The  Coinage  of  Lydia  and  Persia,  from  the  Earliest  Times  to  the
Fall  of  the  Dynasty  of  the  Achremenidse.  By  Barclay  V.  Head,  Assistant-Keeper
of  Coins,  British  Museum.  Pp.  viii.-56,  with  3  Autotype  Plates.  10s.  Gd. —
Part  IV.  The  Coins  of  the  Tuluni  Dynasty.  By  Edward  Thomas  Rogers.  Pp.
iv.-22,  and  1  Plate.  5s.— Part  V.  The  Parthian  Coinage.  By  Percy  Gardner,
M.A.  Pp.  iv.-G6,  and  8  Autotype  Plates.  18s.— Part  VI-  The  Ancient  Coins
and  Measures  of  Ceylon.  By  T.  W.  Rhys  Davids.  Pp.  iv.  and  60,  and  1  Plate.
10s. — Vol.  I.,  containing  the  first  six  parts,  as  specified  aLove.  Royal  4to,  half
bound.     £3,  13s.  6d,


Published  by  Trubtu  r  dt'Oo.  37

INTERNATIONAL  Nimismata- matin  net.

Vol.  If.  Com  09  tiik  JEWS.     Being  a  History  of  the  Jewish  Coinage  and  Money

in  the  ohl  ami  New  Testaments.     By  Frederick  W.  Madden,  M.K.A.s  .  M.-mber

of  the  Numismatic  Society  of  London,  Secretary  of   the  Brighton  College,  kc,

kc     With  279  woodcuts  and  a  plate  of  alphabets.     Boyal  4to,  pp.  xii.  and  330,

sewed.    1881.    £2.

Vol  III.    l'art  I.    The  Coins  of  Arakan,  of  Pegu,  and  of  Birma.     By  Lieut.-

General  Sir  Arthur  Phayre,   C.B.,  K.C.S.I.,  G.C.M.G.,  late   Commissioner  of

British   Burma.     Also  contains  the  Indian  Balhara,  and  the  Arabian  Intercourse

with  India  in  the  Ninth  and  following  Centuries.     By  Edward  Thomas,  F.R.S.

Royal  4to,  pp.  viii.  and  4S,  with  Five  Autotype  Illustrations,  wrapper.     1882.

8s.  CI.
Part  II.  The  Coins  of  Southern  India.     By  Sir  W.  Elliot.    Royal  4to.
JACKSON.—  BraHOLOGT  and  Phrenology  as  an  Aid  to  the  Historian.     By  the

late  J.   W.   Jackson.     Second  Edition.     With  a  Memoir  of  the  Author,  by  his

Wife.     Crown  Svo,  pp.  xx.  and  324,  cloth.     1875.     4s.  6d.
JACKSON. — The  Shropshire  "Word-Book.     A  Glossary  of  Archaic  and  Provincial

Words,  kc. ,  used  in  the  County.     By  Georgina  F.  Jackson.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  civ.

and  524,  cloth.     1881.     31s.  6d.
JACOB.— Hindu  Pantheism.     See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series.
JAGIELSKL— On   Marienrad  Spa,  and  the  Diseases  Curable  by  its  Waters  and

Baths.     By  A.  V.  Jagielski,  M.D.,  Berlin.    Second  Edition.     Crown  Svo,  pp.  viii.

and  186.   With  Map.     Cloth.     1874.     5s.
JAMISON— The  Life  and  Times  of  Bertrand  Dv  Gcesclin.    A  History  of  the

Fourteenth  Century.     By  D.  F.  Jamison,  of  South  Carolina.      Portrait.     2  vols.

8vo,  pp.  xvi.,  287,  and  viii.,  314,  cloth.     18G4.     £1,  Is.

JAPAN. — Map  01  Nippon  (Japan) :  Compiled  from  Native  Maps,  and  the  Notes  of
most  recent  Travellers.  By  R.  Henry  Brunton,  M.I.C.E.,  F.R.G.S.,  1S80.  Size,
5  feet  bv  4  feet.  20  miles  to  the  inch.  In  4  Sheets,  £1,  Is.;  Roller,  varnished.
£1,  lis.  6d.;  Folded,  in  Case,  £1,  5s.  6d.

JASCHKE.  — A  Tibetan-English  Dictionary.  With  special  reference  to  the  Pre-
vailing Dialects.  To  which  is  added  an  Engli.-h-Tibetan  Vocabulary.  By  H.  A.
Jiischke.  lata  Moravian  Missionary  at  Kyelang,  British  Lahoul.  Imperial  8vo,  pp.
xxiw-672,  cloth.     1881.     £1,  10s.

JASCHKE.—  Tibetan  Grammar.  By  H.  A.  Jiischke.  Crown  Svo,  pp.  viii.-10-9,
cloth.     1883.     5s.

JATAKA  (The),  together  with  its  Commentary  :  being  tales  of  the  Anterior  Birth
of  Gotama  Buddha.  Now  first  published  in  Pali,  bv  V.  Fausboll.  Text.  8vo.
Vol.  I.,  pp.  viii.  and  512,  cloth.  1877.  28s.— Vol.  II.,  pp.  452,  cloth.  1879,
28s.— Vol.  III.,  pp.  viii.  and  544,  cloth.  1883.  28s.  (For  Translation  see
Triibner's  Oriental  Series,  "Buddhist  Birth  Stories.")

JENKINS.— A  Paladin  of  Finance:  Contemporary  Manners.  Bv  E.  Jenkins,
Author  of  "GiDx's  Baby."    Crown  8vo,  pp.  iv.  and  392,  cloth.     1882.     7s.  6d.

JENKINS.  —  Vf.st-Pocket  Lexicon.  An  English  Dictionary  of  all  except  familiar
Words,  including  the  principal  Scientific  and  Technical  Terms,  and  Foreign
Moneys,  Weights  and  Measures;  omitting  what  everybody  knows,  and  contain-
ing what  evervbody  wants  to  know  and  cannot  readily  find.  By  Jabez  Jenkins.
64mo,  pp.  564",  cloth.     1879.     Is.  6d.

JOHNSON.  — Oriental  Religions.  India.  See  English  and  Foreign  Philosophical
Library,  Extra  Series,  Vols.  IV.  and  V.

JOHNSON.— Oriental  Religions  and  their  Relation  to  Universal  Religion.
Persia.  By  Samuel  Johnson.  With  an  Introduction  by  0.  B.  Frothingham.
Demy  8vo,  pp.  xliv.  and  784,  cloth.     1885.     18s.

JOLLY.— See  Naradi'ta.


38  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works,

JOMINI  —  The  Art  of  War.  By  Baron  de  Jomini,  General  and  Aide-de-Camp  to
the  Emperor  of  Russia.  A  New  Edition,  with  Appendices  and  Maps.  Translated
from  the  French.  By  Captain  G.  H.  Mendell,  and  Captain  W.  O.  Craighill.
Crown  8vo,  pp.  410,  cloth.     1879.     9a.

JOSEPH.--Religion,  Natural  and  Revealed.  A  Series  of  Progressive  Lessons
for  Jewish  Youth.  Bv  N.  S.  Joseph.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xii. -296,  cloth.  1879.
3s.

JUVENALIS  SATIR.S.  "With  a  Literal  English  Prose  Translation  and  Notes.  By
J.  D.  Lewis,  M.A.,  Trin.  Coll.  Camb.  Second  Edition.  Two  vols.  8vo,  pp.  xii.
and  230  and  400,  cloth.     1882.     12s.

KARCHER. — Questionnaire  Franc  ais.  Questions  on  French  Grammar.  Idiomatic
Difficulties,  and  Military  Expressions.  By  Theodore  Karcher,  LL.B.  Fourth
Edition,  greatly  enlarged.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  224,  cloth.  1879.  4s.  6d.  Interleaved
with  writing  paper,  5s.  6d.

KARDEC. — The  Spirit's  Book.  Containing  the  Principles  of  Spiritist  Doctrine  on
the  Immortality  of  the  Soul,  &c,  &c,  according  to  the  Teachings  of  Spirits  of
High  Degree,  transmitted  through  various  mediums,  collected  and  set  in  order  by
Allen  Kardec.  Translated  from  the  120th  thousand  by  Anna  Blackwell.  Crown
8vo,  pp.  512,  cloth.     1875.     7s.  6d.

KARDEC. — The  Medium's  Book  ;  or,  Guide  for  Mediums  and  for  Evocations.
Containing  the  Theoretic  Teachings  of  Spirits  concerning  all  kinds  of  Manifesta-
tions, the  Means  of  Communication  with  the  Invisible  World,  the  Development
of  Medianinrity,  &c,  &c.  By  Allen  Kardec.  Translated  by  Auna  Blackwell.
Crown  8vo,  pp.  456,  cloth.    1876.     7s.  6d.

KARDEC.— Heaven  and  Hell  ;  or,  the  Divine  Justice  Vindicated  in  the  Plurality
of  Existences.  By  Allen  Kardec.  Translated  by  Anna  Blackwell.  Crown  8vo,
pp.  viii.  and  448,  cloth.     1878.     7s.  6d.

KEMP.    See  Schopenhauer.

KENDRICK. — Greek  Ollendorff.     A  Progressive  Exhibition  of  the  Principles  of

the  Greek  Grammar.     By  Asahel  C.  Kendrick.     8vo,  pp.  371,  cloth.     1870.     9s.
KERMODE. — Natal  :  Its  Early  History,  Rise,  Progress,  and  Future  Prospects  as  a

Field  for  Emigration.    By  W.  Kermode,  of  Natal.    Crown  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  228,

with  Map,  cloth.     1883.     3s.  6d.
KEYS  OF  THE  CREEDS  (The).     Third  Revised  Edition.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  210,

cloth.     1876.     5s.
KINAHAN. — Valleys  and  their  Relation  to  Fissures,  Fractures,  and  Faults.

By  G.  H.  Kinahan,  M.R.I. A.,  F.R.G.S.I.,  &c.     Dedicated  by  permission  to  his

Grace  the  Duke  of  Argyll.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  256,  cloth,  illustrated.     7s.  6d.

KING'S  STRATAGEM  (The)  ;  Or,  The  Pearl  of  Poland  ;  A  Tragedy  in  Five  Acts.

By  Stella.     Second  Edition.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  94,  cloth.    1874.     2s.  6d.
KINGSTON.— The  Unity  of  Creation.     A  Contribution  to  the  Solution  of  the

Religious  Question.    By  F.  H.  Kingston.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  152,  cloth.

1874.     5s.
KISTNER.—  Buddha  and  his  Doctrines.     A  Bibliographical  Essay.     By  Otto

Kistner.  4to,  pp.  iv.  and  32,  sewed.  1869.  2s.  6d.
KNOX.— On  a  Mexican  Mustang.  See  under  Sweet.
KLEMM.— Muscle  Beating;  or,  Active  and  Passive  Home  Gymnastics,  for  Healthy

and   Unhealthy  People.      By   C.    Klemm.      With   Illustrations.      8vo,    pp.   60,

wrapper.     1878.     Is.

KOHL.— Travels  in  Canada  and  through  the  States  of  New  York  and
Pennsylvania.  By  J.  G.  Kohl.  Translated  by  Mrs.  Percy  Sinnett.  Revised  by
the  Author.     Two  vols,  post  8vo,  pp.  xiv.  and  794,  cloth.     1861.     £1,  Is.


Published  by  Triibner  &  Co.  39

KRAPF.— Dictionary  OFTH1  BUAHIM  Laxqvaqm.     Compiled  by  th«  Rer.  Dr.  L.

iv  of  the  Church  Huaionary  Society  in  Bui  Africa.     With  an
Appendix,  containing  an  outline  of  a  Suahili  Qrammar.     Medium  8vo,  pp.   xl.

and  4>4,  cloth.     1SS2.     30s.

KRAUS.  OaBLSBAD  and  its  Natural  Hevling  Agents,  from  the  Physiological
and  Therapeatical  Point  of  View.  By  J.  Crane,  M.  I>.  With  NTotea  Introductory
by  the  Rev.  J.  T.  Walton,  M.A.  Second  Edition.  Revised  and  enlarged.  Grown
Sto,  pp.  104,  cloth.     1880.     5a.

KROEGER.— The  Minnesinger  of  Germany.  By  A.  E.  Kroeger.  Fcap.  8vo,  pp.
890,  cloth.     1873.     7s.

KURZ.— Forest  Flora  of  BRITISH  Bcuma.  By  S.  Kurz,  Curator  of  the  Her-
barium, Boyal  Botanical  Gardens,  Calcutta.  2  vols,  crown  8vo,  pp.  xxx.,  530,
and  014,  cloth.     1877.    30s.

LACERDA'S  Journey  to  Cazembe  in  1798.  Translated  and  Annotated  by  Captain
R.  F.  Burton,  F.  R.G.S.  Also  Journey  of  the  Pombeiros,  &c.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  viii.
and  272.     With  Map,  cloth.    1873.     7s.  6d.

L AN ARI.— Collection  of  Italian  and  English  Dialogues.  By  A.  Lanari.
Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  200,  cloth.     1874.     3s.  6d.

LAND.— The  Principles  of  Hebrew  Grammar.  By  J.  P.  N.  Land,  Professor  of
Logic  and  Metaphysics  in  the  University  of  Leyden.  Translated  from  the  Dutch.
by  Reginald  Lane  Poole,  Balliol  College,  Oxford.  Part  I.  Sounds.  Part  II
Words.  With  Large  Additions  by  the  Author,  and  a  new  Preface.  Crown  8vo,
pp.  xx.  and  220,  cloth.     1876.     7s.  6d.

LANE.— The  Koran.     See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series.

LANGE.— A  History  of  Materialism.  See  English  and  Foreign  Philosophical
Library,  Vols.  I.  to  III.

LANGE. — Germania.  A  German  Reading-book  Arranged  Progressively.  By  F.  K.
W.  Lange,  Ph.D.  Part  I.  Anthology  of  German  Prose  and  Poetry,  with
Vocabulary  and  Biographical  Notes.  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  216,  cloth,  1881,  3s.  6d.
Part  II.  Essays  on  German  History  and  Institutions,  with  Notes.  8vo,  pp.  124,
cloth.     1881.     3s.  6d.     Parts  I.  and  II.  together.     5s.  6d.

LANGE.— German  Prose  Writing.  Comprising  English  Passages  for  Translation
into  German.  Selected  from  Examination  Papers  of  the  University  of  London,
the  College  of  Preceptors,  London,  anil  the  Royal  Military  Academy,  Woolwich,
arranged  progressively,  with  Notes  and  Theoretical  as  well  as  Practical  Treatises
on  themes  for  the  writing  of  Essays.  By  F.  K.  W.  Lange,  Ph.D.,  Assistant  Ger-
man Master,  Royal  Academy,  Woolwich  ;  Examiner,  Royal  College  of  Preceptors
London.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  176,  cloth.     1881.     4s.

LANGE.— German  Grammar  Practice.  By  F.  K.  W.  Lange,  Ph.D.  Crown  8vo,
pp.  viii.  and  64,  cloth.    1882.     Is.  Od.

LANGE.— Colloquial  German  Grammar.  With  Special  Reference  to  the  Anglo-
Saxon  Element  in  the  English  Language.  By  F.  K.  W.  Lange,  Ph.D.,  &c.
Crown  8vo,  pp.  xxxii.  and  380,  cloth.     1882.      4s.  6d.

LANMAN.— A  Sanskrit  Reader.  With  Vocabulary  and  Notes.  By  Charles
Rockwell  Lanman,  Professor  of  Sanskrit  in  Harvard  College.  Part  I.  Imperial
8vo,  pp.  xx.  and  294,  cloth.     1884.     10s.  6d.

LARSEN  —  Danish- English  Dictionary.    By  A.  Larsen.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  vii
and  646,  cloth.     1884.     7s.  6d.


40  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works,

LASCARIDES. — A  Comprehensive  Phraseological  English- Ancient  and  Modern
Greek  Lexicon.  Founded  upon  a  manuscript  of  G.  P.  Lascarides,  and  Compiled
by  L.  Myriantheus,  Ph.D.    2  vols.    18mo,  pp.  xi.  and  1338,  cloth.    1882.    £1,  10s.

LATHE  (The)  and  its  Uses;  or,  Instruction  in  the  Art  of  Turning  Wood  and  Metal,
including  a  description  of  the  most  modern  appliances  for  the  Ornamentation  of
Plain  and  Curved  Surfaces,  &c.  Sixth  Edition.  With  additional  Chapters  and
Index.     Illustrated.     8vo,  pp.  iv.  and  316,  cloth.     18S3.     10s.  Gd.

LE-BRUN. — Materials  for  Translating  from  English  into  French;  being  a
short  Essay  on  Translation,  followed  by  a  Graduated  Selection  in  Prose  and  Verse.
By  L.  Le-Brun.  Seventh  Edition.  Revised  and  corrected  by  Henri  Van  Laun.
Post  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  204,  cloth.     1882.     4s.  6d.

LEE. — Illustrations  of  the  Physiology  of  Religion.  In  Sections  adapted  for
the  use  of  Schools.  Part  I.  By  Henry  Lee,  F.R.C.S. ,  formerly  Professor  of
Surgery,  Royal  College  of  Surgeons,  &c.  Crown  Svo,  pp.  viii.  and  108,  cloth.
1880.     3s.  6d.

LEES. — A  Practical  Guide  to  Health,  and  to  the  Home  Treatment  of  the
Common  Ailments  of  Life  :  With  a  Section  on  Cases  of  Emergency,  and  Hints
to  Mothers  on  Nursing.  &c.  By  F.  Arnold  Lees,  F.L.S.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  334,
stiff  covers.     1874.     3s.

LEGGE.— The  Chinese  Classics.  With  a  Translation,  Critical  and  Exegetical,
Notes,  Prolegomena,  and  copious  Indexes.  By  James  Legge,  D.D.,  of  the  Lon-
don Missionary  Society.  In  7  vols.  Royal  8vo.  Vols.  I.-V.  in  Eight  Parts,
published,  cloth.     £2,  2s.  each  Part.

LEGGE.  —  The  Chinese  Classics,  translated  into  English.  With  Preliminary  Essays
and  Explanatory  Notes.  Popular  Edition.  Reproduced  for  General  Readers  from
the  Author's  work,  containing  the  Original  Text.  BjT  James  Legge,  D.D.  Crown
8vo.  Vol.  I.  The  Life  and  Teachinss  of  Confucius.  Third  Edition.  Pp.  vi.
and  338,  cloth.  1872.  10s.  6d.-  Vol.  II.  The  Works  of  Mencius.  Pp.  x.  and  402,
cloth,  12s.— Vol.  III.  The  She-King ;  or,  The  Book  of  Poetry.  Pp.  vi.  and  432,
cloth.     1876.     12s.

LEGGE.— Confucianism  in  Relation  to  Christianity.  A  Paper  read  before  the
Missionary  Conference  in  Shanghai,  on  May  11th,  1877.  By  Rev.  James  Legge,
D.D.,  LL.D.,  &c.     Svo,  pp.  12,  sewed.     1877.     Is.  6d.

LEGGE.— A  Letter  to  Professor  Max  Muller,  chiefly  on  the  Translat'on  into
English  of  the  Chinese  Terms  Tt  and  Shang  Tl.  By  James  Legge,  Professor  of
the  Chinese  Language  and  Literature  in  the  University  of  Oxford.  Crown  8vo,
pp.  30,  sewed.     18S0.     Is.

LEIGH.— The  Religion  of  the  World.  By  H.  Stone  Leigh.  12mo,  pp.  xii.  and
66,  cloth.     1869.     2s.  6d.

LEIGH.— The  Story  of  Philosophy.  By  Aston  Leigh.  Post  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and
210,  cloth.     1881.     6s.

LEILA-HANOUM.— A  Tragedy  in  the  Imperial  Harem  at  Constantinople.
By  Leila-Hanoum.  Translated  from  the  French,  with  Notes  by  General  R.  E.
Colston.     16mo,  pp.  viii.  and  300,  cloth.     1883.     4s.     Paper,  2s.  6d.

LELAND. — The  Breitmann  Ballads.  The  only  authorised  Edition.  Complete  in  1
vol.,  including  Nineteen  Ballads,  illustrating  his  Travels  in  Europe  (never  before
printed),  with  Comments  by  Fritz  Schwackenhammer.  By  Charles  G.  Leland.
Crown  Svo,  pp.  xxviii.  and  292,  cloth.     1872.    6s.

LELAND. — The  Music  Lesson  of  Confucius,  and  other  Poems.  By  Charles  G.
Leland.     Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  168,  cloth.     1871.     3s.  6d.

LELAND.— Gaudeamus.  Humorous  Poems  translated  from  the  German  of  Joseph
Victor  Scheffel  and  others.  By  Charles  G.  Leland.  16mo,  pp.  176,  cloth.  1872.
3s.  6d.


Published  by  Trubner  cO  Co.  41

LELAND.- Tiik  K<.irriAN  SkiK  n-l:o<  k.     By  0.  G.  Leland.     Crown  8vo.  i'i».  viii.

and  Mi\,  clt>th.     187&     7*.  M.
LELAND.      I'iif   KM.M--H   Qmm   anp  thfik  Lanc.iai.f.     By  Charles  O.  Leland.
n.l  Edition.    Crown  Bto,  pp.  xvi.  mill  260,  cloth.     1874.    7».  6cL

LELAND.     Ki-Sani;  ;  OB,  THl  DlBOOYl  i;v  oi  Am  Kit  ha  by  Chinese  Buddhist  Pi
in  the  Fifth  Century.     By  Charles  G.  Leland.     Crown  8ro,  pp.  232, cloth.     1875.
Sd.

LELAND.  — rir><iiy-ENGi.isii  Sisg-Song  :  or.  Songs  and  Stories  in  the  Chins-English
Dialect.  With  ■  Vocabulary,  By  Charles  G.  Leland.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and
140,  cloth.     1876.     5s.

LELAND. -The  Gyfsxeb.  By  C.  G.  Leland.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  372,  cloth.  1882.
10s.  H.

LEOPARDI.— See  English  and  Foreign  Philosophical  Library,  Vol.  XVII.

LEO. — Foir  Chapters  01  North's  Plutarch,  Containing  the  Lives  of  Cains  Mar-
cius.  Coriolanus.  Julius  Caesar,  Marcus  Antonius,  and  Marcos  Biutus,  as  Sources
to  Shakespeare*s  Tragedies  ;  Coriolanns,  Julius  Csasar,  and  Antony  and  Cleo-
]>atra  ;  and  partly  to  Hamlet  and  Timon  of  Athens.  Photolithographed  in  the
size  of  the  Edition  of  1595.  With  Preface,  Notes  comparing  the  Text  of  the
Editions  of  1579,  1595,  1C03,  and  1C12  ;  and  Eeference  Notes  to  the  Text  of  the
Tragedies  of  Shakespeare.  Edited  by  Professor  F.  A.  Leo,  Ph.D.,  Vice-Presi-
dent of  the  New  Shakespeare  Society  ;  Member  of  the  Directory  of  the  German
Shakespeare  Society  ;  and  Lecturer  at  the  Academy  of  Modem  Philology  at  Berlin.
Folio,  pp.  22,  130  of  facsimiles,  half-morocco.  Library  Edition  (limited  to  250
copies),  £1,  lis.  6d.  ;  Amateur  Edition  (50  copies  on  a  superior  large  hand-made
paper),  £3,  3s.

LEO— Shakespeare-Notes.  By  F.  A.Leo.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  120,  cloth.
1885.     6s.

LEONOWENS. — Life  and  Travel  in  India  :  Being  Recollections  of  a  Journey  before
the  Days  of  Railroads.  By  Anna  Harriette  Leonower.s,  Author  of  "The  English
veriies8  at  the  Siamese  Court,"  and  "The  Romance  of  the  Harem."  8vo,  pp.
326,  cloth,  Illustrated.     1885.     10s.  6d.

LERMONTOFF.  —  The  Demon.  By  Michael  Lennontoff.  Translated  from  the
Russian  by  A.  Condie  Stephen.     Crown  Svo,  pp.  88,  cloth.     1881.     2s.  6d.

LESLEY.—  Man's  Origin  and  Destiny.  Sketched  from  the  Platform  of  the  Physical
Sciences.  By.  J.  P.  Lesley,  Member  of  the  National  Academy  of  the  United
States,  Professor  of  Geology,  University  of  Pennsylvania.  Second  (Revised  and
considerably  Enlarged)  Edition,  crown  Svo,  pp.  viii.  and  142,  cloth.    1881.    7s.  6d.

LESSING.—  Letters  on  Bibliolatrt.  By  Gotthold  Ephraim  Lessing.  Translated
from  the  German  by  the  late  H.  H.  Bernard,  Ph.D.    8vo,  pp.  184,  cloth.    1862.    5s.

LESSING.— See  English  and  Foreign  Philosophical  Library,  Extra  Series,  Vols.  I.

and  II.
LETTERS  on  the  "War  between  Germany  and  France.     ByMommsen,  Strauss,

M;ix  Miiller,  and  Carlvle.  Second  Edition.   Crown  Svo,  pp.  120,  cloth.  1871.  2s.  6d.
LEWES.— Problems  of  Life  and  Mind.     By  George  Henry  Lewes.     First  Series:

The  Foundations  of  a  Creed.     Vol.  L,  demy  8vo.    Fourth  edition,  pp.  488,  cloth.

1884.     12s.— Vol.  II.,  demy  8vo,  pp.  552,  cloth.     1875.     16s.
LEWES. — Problems  of  Life  and  Mind.     By  George  Henry  Lewes.    Second  Series.

The  Physical  Basis  of  Man).     8vo,  with  Illustrations,  pp.  508,  cloth.     1877.

16s.     Contents. — The  Nature  of  Life;  The  Nervous  Mechanism;  Animal  Auto-
matism ;  The  Reflex  Theory.
LEWES.— Problems  of  Life  and  Mind.     By  George  Henry  Lewes.     Third  Series.

Problem  the  First— The  Study  of  Psychology  :  Its  Object,  Scope,  and  Method.

Demy  Svo,  pp.  200,  cloth.     1S79.     7s.  Gd.


42  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works,

LEWES.— Problems  of  Life  and  Mind.  By  George  Henry  Lewes.  Third  Series.
Problem  the  Second — Mind  as  a  Function  of  the  Organism.  Problem  the  Third —
The  Sphere  of  Sense  and  Logic  of  Feeling.  Problem  the  Fourth— The  Sphere  of
Intellect  and  Logic  of  Signs.     Demy  8vo,  pp.  x.  and  500,  cloth.     1879.     15s.

LEWIS.— See  Juvenal  and  Pliny.

LIBRARIANS,  TRANSACTIONS  AND  PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE  CONFERENCE  OF,  held  in
London,  October  1877.  Edited  by  Edward  B.  Nicholson  and  Henry  R.  Tedder.
Imperial  Svo,  pp.  276,  cloth.     1878.     £1.  8s.

LIBRARY  ASSOCIATION  OF  THE  UNITED  KINGDOM,  Transactions  and  Proceed-
ings of  the  Annual  Meetings  of  the.  Imperial  Svo,  cloth.  First,  held  at
Oxford,  October  1,  2,  3,  1878.  Edited  by  the  Secretaries,  Henry  R.  Tedder,
Librarian  of  the  Athenaeum  Club,  and  Ernest  C.  Thomas,  late  Librarian  of  the
Oxford  Union  Society.  Pp.  viii.  and  192.  1879.  £1,  8s.— Second,  held  at  Man-
chester, September  23,  24,  and  25,  1879.  Edited  by  H.  R.  Tedder  and  E.  C.
Thomas.  Pp.  x.  and  184.  1880.  £1,  Is.— Third,  held  at  Edinburgh,  October
5,  6,  and  7,  1880.  Edited  by  E.  C.  Thomas  and  C.  Welsh.  Pp.  x.  and  202.
1881.  £1,  Is. — Fourth  and  Fifth,  held  in  London,  September  1881,  and  at
Cambridge,  September  18S2.     Edited  by  E.  C.  Thomas.     Pp.  x.- 258.     1885.     28s.

LIEBER.— The  Life  and  Letters  of  Francis  Lieber.  Edited  by  T.  S.  Perry.
Svo,  pp.  iv.  and  440,  cloth,  with  Portrait.     1882.     14s.

LITTLE  FRENCH  READER  (The).  Extracted  from  "  The  Modern  French  Pveader."
Third  Edition.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  112,  cloth.     1884.     2s.

LLOYD  and  Newton. — Prussia's  Representative  Man.  By  F.  Lloyd  of  the
Universities  of  Halle  and  Athens,  and  W.  Newton,  F.B.G.S.  Crown  8vo,  pp.
648,  cloth.    1S75.     10s.  6d.

LOBSCHEID.— Chinese  and  English  Dictionary,  arranged  according  to  the  Radi-
cals.    By  W.  Lobscheid.     1  vol.  imperial  Svo,  pp.  600,  cloth.     £2,  8s.

LOBSCHEID.— English  and  Chinese  Dictionary,  with  the  Punti  and  Mandarin
Pronunciation.  By  W.  Lobscheid.  Four  Parts.  Folio,  pp.  viii.  and  2016,  boards.
£8,  8s.

LONG.  — Eastern  Proverbs.     See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series.

LOVETT.  —The  Life  and  Struggles  of  William  Lovett  in  his  pursuit  of  Bread,
Knowledge,  and  Freedom  ;  with  some  short  account  of  the  different  Associations
he  belonged  to,  and  of  the  Opinions  he  entertained.  8vo,  pp.  vi.  and  474,  cloth.
1876.     5s.

LOVELY.— Where  to  go  for  Help:  Being  a  Companion  for  Quick  and  Easy
Reference  of  Police  Stations,  Fire-Engine  Stations,  Fire-Escape  Stations,  &c. ,
&c,  of  London  and  the  Suburbs.  Compiled  by  W.  Lovely,  R.N.  Third  Edi-
tion.    ISmo,  pp.  16,  sewed.     1882.     3d.

LOWELL. — The  Biglow  Papers.  By  James  Russell  Lowell.  Edited  by  Thomas
Hughes,  Q.C.  A  Reprint  of  the  Authorised  Edition  of  1859,  together  with  the
Second  Series  of  1862.  First  and  Second  Sei-ies  in  1  vol.  Fcap.,  pp.  lxviii.-140
and  lxiv.-190,  cloth.     1880.     2s.  6d.

LUCAS. — The  Children's  Pentateuch  :  With  the  Haphtarahs  or  Portions  from
the  Prophets.  Arranged  for  Jewish  Children.  By  Mrs.  Henry  Lucas.  Crown
Svo,  pp.  viii.  and  570,  cloth.     1878.     5s.

LUDEWIG.—  The  Literature  of  American  Aboriginal  Languages.  By  Hermann
E.  Ludewig.  With  Additions  and  Corrections  by  Professor  Wm.  W.  Turner.
Edited  by  Nicolas  Trnbner.      8vo,  pp.  xxiv.  and  258,  cloth.    1858.     10s.  6d.

LUKIN. — The  Boy  Engineers  :  What  they  did,  and  how  they  did  it.  By  the  Rev.
L.  J.  Lukin,  Author  of  "The  Young  Mechanic,"  &c.  A  Book  for  Boys  ;  30  En-
gravings.    Imperial  16mo,  pp.  viii.  and  344,  cloth.    1877.     7s.  6d.

LUX  E  TENEBRIS;  or,  The  Testimony  of  Consciousness.  A  Theoretic  Essay.
Crown  8vo,  pp.  376,  with  Diagram,  cloth.     1874.     10s.  6d.


Published  by  Tritburr  £  Co.  43

MACCORMAC  — Tiik  Conversation  of  a  Soul  with  Gon  :  A  Theodicy.  Bv  Henry
MaeOonnwi,  M.I>.     l6mo,  pp.  xvi.  ami  144,  cloth.     1877.    3s.  6d.

MACHIAVELLI.-Tiif.  Historical,  Political,  and  Diplomatic  Whitings  or
NiOOOLO  Machiavki.i.i.  Translated  from  the  Italian  by  C.  E.  Detnn.ld.  With
Portraits.     4  tola.  Svo,  cloth,  pp.  xli.,  420,  464,  488,  and  472.    1882.    £3,  3s.

MACKENZIE.— History  of  tiif.  Relations  ok  the  Government  with  the  Hill
Tkibk.s  of  the  north-fast  frontier  of  Bengal.  By  Alexander  Mackenzie,  of
the  Bengal  Civil  Service  ;  Secretary  to  the  Government  of  India  in  the  Home
Department,  and  formerly  Secretary  to  the  Government  of  Bengal.  Royal  8vo,
pp.  xviii.  and  580,  cloth,  with  Map.     1884.     16s.

MADDEN.  Coins  of  the  Jews.  Beinga  History  of  the  Jewish  Coinage  and  Money
iu  the  Old  and  New  Testaments.  By  Frederick  W.  Madden,  M.R.A.S.  Member
of  the  Numismatic  Society  of  London,  Secretary  of  the  Brighton  College,  &c,  4c,
"With  279  Woodcuts  and  a  Plate  of  Alphabets.  Royal  4to,  pp.  xii.  and  330,  cloth.
1881.     r_\  2b.

MADELUNO.— The  Causes  and  Operative  Treatment  of  Duputtren's  Finger
Contraction.  By  Dr.  Otto  W.  Madelung,  Lecturer  of  Surgery  at  the  Univer-
sity, and  Assistant  Surgeon  at  the  University  Hospital,  Bonn.  8vo,  pp.  24,  sewed.
1876.     Is.

MAHAPARTNIBBANASUTTA.—  See  Childers.

MAHA-VIRA-CHARITA ;  or,  The  Adventures  of  the  Great  Hero  Rama.  An  Indian
Drama  m  Seven  Acts.  Translated  into  English  Prose  from  the  Sanskrit  of
Bhavabhuti.     By  John  Pickford,  M.A.     Crown  8vo,  cloth.     5s.

MAIMONIDES.— The  Guide  of  the  Perplexed  of  Maimonides.  Fee  English  and
Foreign  Philosophical  Library.

MALLESON.— Essays  and  Lectures  on  Indian  Historical  Subjects.  By  Colonel
G.  B.  Malleson,  C.S.I.     Second  Issne.     Crown  Svo,  pp.  348,  cloth.     1876.     5s.

MAN. — On  the  Aboriginal  Inhabitants  of  the  Andaman  Islands.  By  Edward
Horace  Man,  Assistant  Superintendent,  Andaman  and  Nicobar  Islands,  F.R.G.S.,
M.R.A.S.,  M.A.I.  With  Report  of  Researches  into  the  Language  of  the  South
Andaman  Islands.  By  A.  J.  Ellis,  F.R.S.,  F.S.A.  Reprinted  from '"The  Journal
of  the  Anthropological  Institute  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland."  Demy  Svo,  pp.
xxviii.-298,  with  Map  and  8  Plates,  cloth.     18S5.     10s.  Gd.

MANDLEY. — Woman  Outside  Christendom.  An  Exposition  of  the  Influence
exerted  by  Christianity  on  the  Social  Position  and  Happiness  of  Women.  By
J.  G.  Mandley.     Crown  Svo,  pp.  viii.  and  160,  cloth.     1880.     5s.

MANIPULUS  Vocabulorum.  A  Rhyming  Dictionary  of  the  English  Language.  By
Peter  Levins  (1570).  Edited,  with  an  Alphabetical  Index,  by  Henry  B.  Wheatley.
Svo,  pp.  xvi.  and  370,  cloth.     1867.     14s.

MANCEUVRES.— A  Retrospect  of  the  Autumn  Manoeuvres,  1871.  With  5  Plans.
By  a  Recluse.     8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  133,  cloth.     1872.     5s.

MARIETTE-BEY.— The  Monuments  of  Upper  Egypt  :  a  translation  of  the
"  Itineraire  de  la  Haute  Egypte"  of  Auguste  Mariette-Bey.  Translated  by
Alphonse  Mariette.     Crown  Svo,  pp.  xvi.  and  202,  cloth.     1877.     7s.  6d.

MARKHAM.— Quichua  Grammar  and  Dictionary.  Contributions  towards  a
Grammar  and  Dictionary  of  Quichua,  the  Language  of  the  Yncas  of  Peru.  Col-
lected by  Clements R.  Markham,  F.S.A.     Crown  Svo,  pp.  223,  cloth.     £1,  lis.  6d.

MARKHAM. — Ollanta  :  A  Drama  in  the  Quichua  Language.  Text,  Translation,
and  Introduction.  By  Clements  R.  Markham,  C.B.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  128,  cloth.
1871.     7s.  6d.

MARKHAM.— A  Memoir  of  the  Lady  Ana  de  Osonio,  Countess  of  Chincon,  and
Vice-Queen  of  Peru,  A.D.  1629-39.  With  a  Plea  for  the  correct  spelling  of  the
Chinchona  Genus.  By  Clements  R.  Markham,  C.B.,  Member  of  the  Imperial  Aca-
demy Naturae  Curiosorum,  with  the  Cognomen  ofChinchon.  Small  4to,  pp.  xii.  and
100.  With  2  Coloured  Plates,  Map,  and  Illustrations.  Handsomely  bound.
1874.     28s.


44  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works,

MARKHAM.— A  Memoir  on  the  Indian  Surveys.  By  Clements  R.  Markham,
C.B.,  F.R.S.,  &c,  &c.  Published  by  Order  of  II.  M.  Secretary  of  State  for  India
in  Council.  Illustrated  with  Maps.  Second  Edition.  Imperial  8vo,  pp.  xxx.
and  481,  boards.     1878.     10s.  6d.

MARKHAM.— Narratives  of  the  Mission  of  George  Bogle  to  Tibet,  and  of  the
Journey  of  Thomas  Manning  to  Lhasa.  Edited  with  Notes,  an  Introduction,  and
Lives  of  Mr.  Bogle  and  Mr.  Manning.  By  Clements  K.  Markham,  C.B.,  F.R.S.
Second  Edition.  8vo,  pp.  clxv.  and  362,  cloth.  With  Maps  and  Illustrations.
1879.     21s.

MARKS. — Sermons.  Preached  on  various  occasions  at  the  West  London  Synagogue
of  British  Jews.  By  the  Rev.  Professor  Marks,  Minister  of  the  Congregation.
Published  at  the  request  of  the  Council.  Second  Series,  demy  8vo,  pp.  viii.-310,
cloth.     1885.     7s.  6d.     Third  Series,  demy  8vo,  pp.  iv.-284,  cloth.     1885.    7s.  Gd.

MARMONTEL. — Belisaire.  Par  Marmontel.  Nouvelle  Edition.  12mo,  pp.  xii.
and  123,  cloth.     1867.     2s.  6d.

MARSDEN. — Numismata  Orientalia  Tllustrata.  The  Plates  of  the  Oriental
Coins,  Ancient  and  Modern,  of  the  Collection  of  the  late  William  Marsden,
F.R.S.,  &c.  &c.  Engraved  from  Drawings  made  under  his  Directions.  4to,  57
Plates,  cloth.     31s.  6d.

MARTIN  and  Trubner.— The  Current  Gold  and  Silver  Coins  of  all  Countries,
their  Weight  and  Fineness,  and  their  Intrinsic  Value  in  English  Money,  with
Facsimiles  of  the  Coins.  By  Leopold  C.  Martin,  of  Her  Majesty's  Stationery
Office,  and  Charles  Trubner.  In  1  vol.  medium  8vo,  141  Plates,  printed  in  Gold
and  Silver,  and  representing  about  1000  Coins,  with  100  pages  of  Text,  hand-
somely bound  in  embossed  cloth,  richly  gilt,  with  Emblematical  Designs  on  the
Cover,  and  gilt  edges.     1863.     £2.  2s.

MARTIN. — The  Chinese:  their  Education,  Philosophy,  and  Letters.  By  W.
A.  P.  Martin,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  President  of  the  Tungwen  College,  Pekin.  8vo,  pp.
320,  cloth.     1881.     7s.  6d.

MARTINEAU. — Essays,  Philosophical  and  Theological.  By  James  Martineau.
2  vols,  crown  Svo,  pp.  iv.  and  414 — x.  and  430,  cloth.     1875.     £1,  4s.

MARTINEAU. — Letters  from  Ireland.  By  Harriet  Martineau.  Reprinted  from
the  Daily  News.     Post  Svo,  pp.  viii.  and  220,  cloth.     1852.     6s.  6d.

MASON.— Burma:  Its  People  and  Productions;  or,  Notes  on  the  Fauna,  Flora,
and  Minerals  of  Tenasserim,  Pegu  and  Burma.  By  the  Rev.  F.  Mason,  D.D.,
M.R.  A.S.,  Corresponding  Member  of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  of  the  Boston
Society  of  Natural  History,  and  of  the  Lyceum  of  Natural  History,  New  York.
Vol.  I.  Geology,  Mineralogy  and  Zoology.  Vol.  II.  Botany.  Rewritten  and
Enlarged  by  W.  Theobald,  late  Deputy-Superintendeut  Geological  Survey  of
India.  Two  Vols.,  royal  Svo,  pp.  xxvi.  and  560;  xvi.  and  788  and  xxxvi.,  cloth.
1884.     £3.

MATHEWS.— Abraham  Ibn  Ezra's  Commentary  on  the  Canticles  after  the
First  Recension.  Edited  from  the  MSS.,  with  a  translation,  by  H.  J.  Mathews,
B.A.,  Exeter  College,  Oxford.  Crown  Svo,  pp.  x.,  34,  and  24,  limp  cloth.  1874.
2s.  6d.

MATERIA  MEDICA,  Physiological  and  Applied.  Vol.  I.  Contents  : — Aconitum,
by  R  E.  Dudgeon,  M.D.;  Crotalus,  by  J.  W.  Hayward,  M.D.;  Digitalis,  by  F.
Black,  M.D. ;  Kali  Bichromicum,  by  J.  J.  Drysdale,  M.D. ;  Nux  Vomica,  by  F.
Black,  M.D.;  Plumbum,  by  F.  Black,  M.D.  Demy  Svo,  pp.  xxiv.-726,  cloth.
1884.     15s.

MAXWELL.— A  Manual  of  the  Malay  Language.  By  W.  E.  Maxwell,  of  the
Inner  Temple,  Barrister-at-Law  ;  Assistant  Resident,  Perak,  Malay  Peninsula.
With  an  Introductory  Sketch  of  the  Sanskrit  Element  in  Malay.  Crown  8vo,
pp.  viii.  and  182,  cloth.     1882.     7s.  6d.

MAY.— A  Bibliography  of  Electricity  and  Magnetism.  1860  to  1883.  With
Special  Reference  to  Electro-Technics.  Compiled  by  G.  May.  With  an  Index
by  O.  Salle,  Ph.D.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii. -204,  cloth.     1884.     5s. :


Published  by  Trainer  &•  Co.  45

MAYER.— On  the  Art  of  Pottery:  with  a  History  of  its  Rise  and  Progress  in
Liverpool.    By  Joseph  Mayer,  F.S.A.,  F.R.S.N.A.,  &c.     Svo,  pp.  100,  boards.

1-7.:.'  5a,

MAYERS. — Tki:atii:s   Bbtwjiih   tiii:    Empire  of  China   and  Foreign  Powers,
■  r  with  Regulations  for  the  conduct  of  Foreign  Trade,  *vc.     Edited  by  W.
1'.   Mayers,   Chinese  Seoretary  to  ll.B.M.'s  Legation  at  Peking.     8vo,  pp.  246,
•  ..  '  1877,    25s.

MAYERS— The  CuiMWH  Government  :  a  Manual  of  Chinese  Titles,  categorically
arranged  and  explained,  with  an  Appendix.  By  Win.  Fred.  Mayers,  Chinese
Secretary  to  H.B.M.'s  Legation  at  Poking,  kc.,kc.  Royal  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  1G0,
cloth.     iS7S.     30s.

M'CRINDLE.— Ancient  India,  as  Described  by  Megasthenes  and  Arrian;
beiug  a  translation  of  the  fragments  of  the  indika  of  Megasthenes  collect<-<l  hy
Dr.  Schwanbeck,  and  of  the  first  part  of  the  Indika  of  Arrian.  Py  J.  W.
M'Crindle,  M.A.,  Principal  of  the  Government  College,  Patna,  &c.  With
Introduction,  Notes,  and  Map  of  Ancient  India.  Post  8vo,  pp.  xi.  and  224,
cloth.    1877.    7s.  6d.

M'CRINDLE.— The  Commerce  and  Navigation  of  the  Erythr.ean  Sea.  Being
a  Translation  of  the  Periplus  Maris  Erythrad,  by  an  Anonymous  Writer,  and  of
Arrian's  Account  of  the  Voyage  of  Nearkhos,  from  the  Mouth  of  the  Indus  to  the
Head  of  the  Persian  Gulf.  With  Introduction,  Commentary,  Notes,  and  Index.
Bv  J.  W.  M'Crindle,  M.A.,  Edinburgh,  &c.  Post  8vo,  pp.  iv.  and  238,  cloth.
1879.    7s.  6d.

M'CRINDLE. — Ancient  India  as  Described  byKtesias  the  Knidian;  being  a  Transla-
tion of  the  Abridgment  of  his  '"Indika  "  by  Photios,  and  of  the  Fragments  of  that
"Work  preserved  in  other  Writers.  With  Introduction.  Notes,  and  Index.  By
J.  W.  M'Crindle,  M.A.,  M.R.S.A.     8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  104,  cloth.    1882.     6s.

MECHANIC  (The  Young).  A  Book  for  Boys,  containing  Directions  for  the  use  of
all  kinds  of  Tools,  and  for  the  construction  of  Steam  Engines  and  Mechanical
Models,  including  the  Art  of  Turning  in  Wood  and  Metal.  Fifth  Edition.
Imperial  lGmo,  pp.  iv.  and  346,  and  70  Engravings,  cloth.     1878.     6s.

MECHANIC'S  Workshop  (Amateur*.  A  Treatise  containing  Plain  and  Concise
Directions  for  the  Manipulation  of  Wood  and  Metals,  including  Casting,  Forging,
Brazing,  Soldering,  and  Carpentry.  By  the  Author  of  "The  Lathe  and  its  Uses."
Sixth  Edition.     Demy  Svo,  pp.  iv.  and  148.     Illustrated,  cloth.     1880.     6s.

MEDITATIONS  on  Death  and  Eternity.    Translated  from  the  German  byFrederica
Rowan.     Published  by  Her  Majesty's  gracious  permission.     8vo,  pp.  386,  cloth.
1862.    10s.  6d.
Ditto.     Smaller  Edition,  crown  Svo,  printed  on  toned  paper,  pp.  352,  cloth.
1884.    6s.

MEDITATIONS  on  Life  and  its  Religious  Duties.  Translated  from  the  German
by  Frederica  Rowan.  Dedicated  to  II.R.H.  Princess  Louis  of  Hesse.  Published
by  Her  Majesty's  gracious  permission.  Being  the  Companion  Volume  to  "Medi-
tations on  Death  and  Eternity."    Svo,  pp.  vL  and  370,  cloth.     1863.     10s.  6d.

Ditto.     Smaller  Edition,  crown  Svo,  printed  on  toned  paper,  pp.  338.    1S63.
6s.

MEDLICOTT.—  A  Manual  of  the  Geology  of  India,  chiefly  compded  from  the
observations  of  the  Geological  Survey.  By  11.  B.  Medlicott,  M.A..  .Superintendent,
Geological  Survey  of  India,  and  W.  T.  Blanford,  A.R.S.M.,  F.R.S.,  Deputy  Super-
intendent. Published  by  order  of  the  Government  of  India.  2  vols.  8vo,  pp.
xviii.-lxxx.-818.  with  21  Plates  and  large  coloured  Map  mounted  in  case,  uniform,
cloth.     1879.     16s.     (For  Part  III.  see  Ball.)


46  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works,

MEGHA-DUTA  (The).  (Cloud-Messenger.)  By  Kalidasa.  Translated  from  the
Sanskrit  into  English  Verse  by  the  late  H.  H.  Wilson,  M.A.,  F.R.S.  The  Vocabu-
lary by  Francis  Johnson.     New  Edition.     4to,  pp.  xi.  and  180,  cloth.     10s.  6d.

MEREDYTH. — Auca,  a  Repertoire  of  Original  Poems,  Sacred  and  Secular.  By
F.  Meredyth,  M.A.,  Canon  of  Limerick  Cathedral.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  124,  cloth.
1875.     os.

METCALFE. —Th  e  Englishman  and  the  Scandinavian.  By  Frederick  Met-
calfe, M.A.,  Fellow  of  Lincoln  College,  Oxford;  Translator  of  "  Gallus "  and
"Charicles;"  and  Author  of  "The  Oxonian  in  Iceland."  Post  8vo,  pp.  512,
cloth.     1880.     18s.

MICHEL.— Les  Ecossais  en  France,  Les  Franjais  en  Ecosse.  Par  Francisque
Michel,  Correspondant  de  l'lnstitut  de  France,  &c.  In  2  vols.  8vo,  pp.  vii.,  547,
and  551,  rich  blue  cloth,  with  emblematical  designs.  With  upwards  of  100  Coats
of  Arms,  and  other  Illustrations.  Price,  £1,  12s. — Also  a  Large-Paper  Edition
(limited  to  100  Copies),  printed  on  Thick  Paper.  2  vols.  4to,  half  morocco,  with  3
additional  Steel  Engravings.     1862.     £3,  3s.

MICKIEWICZ.  — Konrad  Wallenrod.  An  Historical  Poem.  By  A.  Mickiejvicz.
Translated  from  the  Polish  into  English  Verse  by  Miss  M.  Biggs.  18mo,  pp.
xvi.  and  100,  cloth.     1882.     2s.  6d.

MILL. — Auguste  Comte  and  Positivism.  By  the  late  John  Stuart  Mill.  M.P.
Third  Edition.     8vo,  pp.  200,  cloth.     1882.     3s.  6d.

MILLHOUSE. — Manual  of  Italian  Conversation.  For  the  Use  of  Schools.  By
John  Millhouse.     18mo,  pp.  126,  cloth.     1866.     2s.

MILLHOUSE.— New  English  and  Italian  Pronouncing  and  Explanatory  Dic-
tionary. By  John  Millhouse.  Vol.  I.  English-Italian.  Vol.  II.  Italian-English.
Fourth  Edition.     2  vols,  square  8vo,  pp.  654  and  740,  cloth.     1867-     12s.

MILNE.— Notes  on  Crystallography  and  Crystallo-physics.  Being  the  Sub-
stance of  Lectures  delivered  at  Yedo  during  the  years  1876-1877.  By  John
Milne,  F.G.S.     8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  70,  cloth.     1879.     3s.

MILTON  AND  VONDEL.— See  Edmundson.

MINOCHCHERJI.— Pahlavi,  GujArati,  and  English  Dictionary.  By  Jamashji
Dastur  Minochcherji.  Vol.  I.,  with  Photograph  of  Author.  8vo,  pp.  clxxii.  and
168,  cloth.     1877.     14s.

MITRA — Buddha  Gay  a  :  The  Hermitage  of  Sakya  Muni.  By  Rajendralala  Mitra,
LL.D.,  CLE.,  &c.     4to,  pp.  xvi.  and  258,  with  51  Plates,  cloth.     1879.     £3.

MOCATTA. — Moral  Biblical  Gleanings  and  Practical  Teachings,  Illustrated
by  Biographical  Sketches  Drawn  from  the  Sacred  Volume.  By  J.  L.  Mocatta.
8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  446,  cloth.     1872.     7s.

MODERN  FRENCH  READER  (The).  Prose.  Junior  Course.  Tenth  Edition.  Edited
by  Ch.  Cassal,  LL.D.,  and  Theodore  Karcher,  LL.B.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xiv.  and  224,
cloth.     1884.     2s.  6d.

Senior  Course.    Third  Edition.    Crown  8vo,  pp.  xiv.  and  418,  cloth.    1880.    4s.

MODERN  FRENCH  READER— A  Glossary  of  Idioms,  Gallicisms,  and  other  Diffi-
culties contained  in  the  Senior  Course  of  the  Modern  French  Reader ;  with  Short
Notices  of  the  most  important  French  Writers  and  Historical  or  Literary  Charac-
ters, and  hints  as  to  the  works  to  be  read  or  studied.  By  Charles  Cassal,  LL.D.,
&c.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  104,  cloth.     1881.     2s.  6d.

MODERN  FRENCH  READER.  —Senior  Course  and  Glossary  combined.    6s.  '

MORELET.— Travels  in  Central  America,  including  Accounts  of  some  Regions
unexplored  since  the  Conquest.  From  the  French  of  A.  Morelet,  by  Mrs.  M.  F
Squier.     Edited  by  E.  G.  Squier.     8vo,  pp.  430,  cloth.     1871.     8s.  6d.

MORFILL.— Simplified  Polish  Grammar.     See  Triibner's  Collection.


Published  by  Trubncr  d'  Co.  47

MORFTT.  — A  Practical  Treatise  on  thk  Mahufaotubk  OF  So.\rs.    By  Campbell
Morfit,  M.l»..  P.O.S.,  formerly  Professor  of  Applied  Chemistry  in  the  Dni
ef  Maryland.     With  Illustrations.    Demy  ^\o,  pp.  xii.  and  -70,  cloth.    1871.
r_\  12s.  6d

MORFIT.— A  Practical  Treatise  ON  PuBI  Fertilizers,  and  the  Chemical  Con-
version of  Rock  Guanos,  Marlstones,  Coprolites,  and  the  Crude  Phosphates  of
Lime  and  Alumina  generally  into  various  valuable  Products.  By  Campbell  Morfit,
M.D.,  F.(  I.S.,  formerly  Professor  of  Applied  Chemistry  in  the  University  of  Man-
land.     With  28  Plates.     8to,  pp.  xvi.  and  547,  cloth.     1873.     £4,  4s.

MORRIS.— A  Pi  scr.nTivF.  and  Historical  Account  op  the  Godavery  District,
a  THE  Pbbstdenct  OF  Mahkas.     By  Henry  Morris,  formerly  of  the  Madras  Civil

vice,  author  of  "A  History  of  India,  for  use  in  Schools,"  and  other  works.
With  a  Map.     8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  390,  cloth.     1878.     12s.

MOSENTHAL.  —  Ostriches  and  Ostrich  Farming.  By  J.  de  Mosenthal,  late
Member  of  the  Legistive  Council  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  &c,  and  James  E.
Harting.  P.L.S.,  F./.S..  Member  of  the  British  Ornithologist's  Union,  &c.  Second
Edition.  With  8  full-page  illustrations  and  20  woodcuts.  Royal  8vo,  pp.  xxiv.
and  240,  cloth.     1879.     10s.  Gd.

MOTLEY.— John  Lothrop  Motley:  a  Memoir.  By  Oliver  "Wendell  Holmes.
English  Copyright  Edition.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  275,  cloth.     1878.     6s.

MUELLER.— The  Organic  Constituents  of  Plants  and  VkgetableSubstances,
and  their  Chemical  Analysis.  By  Dr.  G.  C.  Wittstein.  Authorised  Translation
from  the  German  Original,  enlarged  with  numerous  Additions,  by  Baron  Ferd.
von  Mueller.  K.C.M.G.,  M.  &  Ph.  D.,  F.R.S.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xviii.  and  332,
wrapper.     1880.     14s.

MUELLER.— Select  Extra-Tropical  Plants  readily  eligible  for  Industrial
Culture  OR  Naturalisation.  With  Indications  of  their  Native  Countries  and
some  of  their  Uses.  Bv  F.  Von  Mueller,  K.C.M.G.,  M.D.,  Ph.D.,  F.R.S.  8vo,
pp.  x.,  394,  cloth.     1880.     8s.

MUHAMMED.-  The  Life  of  Muhammed.  Based  on  Mubammed  Ibn  Ishak.  By
Abd  El  Malik  Ibn  Hisham.  Edited  by  Dr.  Ferdinand  Wiistenfeld.  One  volume
containing  the  Arabic  Text.  8vo,  pp.  1026,  sewed.  £1,  Is.  Another  volume,  con-
taining Introduction,  Notes,  and  Index  in  German.  8vo,  pp.  lxxii.  and  266,  sewed.
7s.  6d.     Each  part  sold  separately.

MUIR. — Extracts  from  the  Coran.  In  the  Original,  with  English  rendering.
Compiled  by  Sir  William  Muir,  K.C.S.I.,  LL.D.,  Author  of  "The  Life  of
Mahomet."     Second  Edition.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  64,  cloth.     1885.     2s.  Gd.

MUIR.  — Original  Sanskrit  Texts,  on  the  Origin  and  History  of  the  People  of
India,  their  Religion  and  Institutions.  Collected,  Translated,  and  Illustrated  by
John  Muir,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,  Ph  D.,  &c.  &c.

Vol.  I.  Mythical  and  Legendary  Accounts  of  the  Origin  of  Caste,  with  an  Inquiry
into  its  existence  in  the  Vedic  Age.     Second  Edition,  rewritten  and
greatly  enlarged.     8vo,  pp.  xx.  and  532,  cloth.     1868.     £1,  Is.
Vol.  II.  The  Trans- Himalayan  Origin  of  the  Hindus,  and  their  Affinity  with  the
Western  Branches  of  the  Aryan  Race.     Second  Edition,  revised,  with
Additions.     8vo,  pp.  xxxii.  and  512,  cloth.     1871.     £1,  is.
Vol.  III.  The  Vedas  :  Opinions  of  their  Authors,  and  of  later  Indian  AVriters,  on
their  Origin,  Inspiration,  and  Authority.     Second  Edition,  revised  and
enlarged.     8vo,  pp.  xxxii.  and  312,  cloth.     1868.     16s.
Vol.  IV.  Comparison  of  the  Vedic  with  the  later  representation  of  the  principal
Indian  Deities.    Second  Edition,  revised.    8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  524,  cloth.
1873.     £1,  Is.


48  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works,

MUIR. — Original  Sanskrit  Texts— continued.
Vol.  V.  Contributions  to  a  Knowledge  of  the  Cosmogony,  Mythology,  Religious
Ideas,  Life  and   Manners  of  the   Indians   in   the  Vedic  Age.     Third
Edition.     8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  492,  cloth.     1884.    £1,  Is.
MUIR. — Translations  from  the  Sanskrit.     See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series.
MULHALL. — Handbook  of  the  River  Plate,  Comprising  the  Argentine  Republic,
Uruguay,  and  Paraguay.     With  Six  Maps.     By  M.  G.  and  E.  T.  Mulhall,  Pro-
prietors and   Editors   of  the   Buenos   Ayres   Standard.      Fifth  Edition   (Ninth
Thousand),  crown  8vo,  pp.  x.  and  732,  cloth.    1885.     7s.  6d.

MULLER.— Outline  Dictionary,  for  the  Use  of  Missionaries,  Explorers,  and
Students  of  Language.  With  an  Introduction  on  the  proper  Use  of  the  Ordinary
English  Alphabet  in  transcribing  Foreign  Languages.  By  F.  Max  Muller,  M.  A.  The
Vocabulary  compiled  by  John  Bellows.     12mo,  pp.  368,  morocco.     1867.    7s.  6d.

MULLER.— Lecture  on  Buddhist  Nihilism.  By  F.  Max  Muller,  M.A.  Fcap.
8vo,  sewed.     1869.     Is.

MULLER. — The  Sacred  Hymns  of  the  Brahmins,  as  preserved  to  us  in  the  oldest
collection  of  religious  poetry,  the  Rig-Veda-Sanhita.  Translated  and  explained,  by
F.  Max  Muller,  M.  A . ,  Fellow  of  All  Souls'  College,  Professor  of  Comparative  Philo-
logy at  Oxford,  Foreign  Member  of  the  Institute  of  France,  &c,  &c.  Vol.  I.  Hymns
to  the  Maruts  or  the  Storm-Gods.     8vo,  pp.  clii.  and  264,  cloth.     1869.     12s.  6d.

MULLER.  —The  Hymns  of  the  Rig-Veda,  in  the  Samhita  and  Pada  Texts.  Reprinted
from  the  Editio  Princeps.  By  F.  Max  Muller,  M.A.,  &c.  Second  Edition,  with
the  two  Texts  on  Parallel  Pages.      In  two  vols.  8vo,  pp.  1704,  sewed.     £1,  12s.

MULLER.  — A  Short  History  of  the  Bourbons.  From  the  Earliest  Period  down
to  the  Present  Time.  By  R.  M.  Muller,  Ph.D.,  Modern  Master  at  Forest  School,
Walthamstow,  and  Author  of  "  Parallele  entre  '  Jules  Cesar,'  par  Shakespeare,  et
'  Le  Mort  de  Cesar,'  par  Voltaire,"  &c.     Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  30,  wrapper.     1882.     Is.

MULLER. — Ancient  Inscriptions  in  Ceylon.  By  Dr.  Edward  Muller.  2  Vols.
Text,  crown  8vo,  pp.  220,  cloth,  and  Plates,  oblong  folio,  cloth.     1883.     21s.

MULLER. — Pali  Grammar.     See  Triibner's  Collection.

MULLEY. — German  Gems  in  an  English  Setting.  Translated  by  Jane  Mulley.
Fcap.,  pp.  xii.  and  180,  cloth.     1877.     3s.  6d.

NAGANANDA ;  or,  The  Joy  of  the  Snake  Would.  A  Buddhist  Drama  in  Five
Acts.  Translated  into  English  Prose,  witli  Explanatory  Notes,  from  the  Sanskrit
of  Sri-Harsha-Deva,  by  Palmer  Boyd,  B.  A.  With  an  Introduction  by  Prof essor
Cowell.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  100,  cloth.     1872.     4s.  6d.

NAPIER. — Folk  Lore  ;  or,  Superstitious  Beliefs  in  the  West  of  Scotland  within
this  Century.  With  an  Appendix,  showing  the  probable  relation  of  the  modern
Festivals  of  Christmas,  May  Day,  St.  John's  Day,  and  Hallowe'en,  to  ancient  Sun
and  Fire  Worship.  By  James  Napier,  F.R.S.E.,  &c.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  vii.  and
190,  cloth.     1878.     4s.

NARADIYA  DHARMA-SASTRA  ;  or,  The  Institutes  of  Narada.  Translated,  for
the  first  time,  from  the  unpublished  Sanskrit  original.  By  Dr.  Julius  Jolly,
University,  Wurzburg.  With  a  Preface,  Notes,  chiefly  critical,  an  Index  of
Quotations  from  Narada  in  the  principal  Indian  Digests,  and  a  general  Index.
Crown  Svo,  pp.  xxxv.  and  144,  cloth.     1876.     10s.  6d.

NAVILLE.— Pithom.     See  Egypt  Exploration  Fund.

NEVILL.— Hand  List  of  Mollusca  in  the  Indian  Museum,  Calcutta.  By
Geoffrey  Nevill,  C.M.Z.  S.,  &c,  First  Assistant  to  the  Superintendent  of  the
Indian  Museum.  Part  I.  Gastropoda,  Pulmonata,  and  Prosobranchia-Neuro-
branchia.     Svo,  pp.  xvi.  and  338,  cloth.     1878.     15s.

NEWMAN.— The  Odes  of  Horace.  Translated  into  Unrhymed  Metres,  with  Intro-
duction and  Notes.  By  F.  W.  Newman.  Second  Edition.  Post  Svo,  pp.  xxi.
and  247,  cloth.     1876.    4s.


Published  by  Tr'dbner  &  Co.  49

NEWMAN.  -TunsM,  Doctrinal  AVDpBAi  TZOAIij  or,  Di.l.u  tic  Religious  Utterances.

By  V.  W.  Newman.    4to,  pp.  184,  doth.     1868.    4s.  6d.
NEWMAN.      Homeric  Translation  in  Til  lory  and  Practice.    A  Reply  to  Matthew

Arnold.     By  F.  W.  Newman.     Grown  8vo,  pp.  104,  stiff  covers.     186L    2s.  (id.

NEWMAN.     Hiawatha:    Rendered    into   Latin.     With    Abridgment.     By   P.    W.

N.  wman.     12mo,  pp.  vii.  mid  110,  sewed.     18C2.     2s.  Cd.
NEWMAN.— A  History  Of  THE  II I t.rkw  MoNABOHT f rom  the  Administration  of

Samuel  to  the  Babylonish  Captivity.    By  F.  W.  Newman.    Third  Edition.    Crown

Mo.  pp.  x.  and  364,  cloth.     1865.     8s.  (5d.
NEWMAN.— rn asks  Of  Faith  :  or,  Passages  from  the  History  of  my  Creed.     By

P.  W.   Newman.     New  Edition  ;  with  Reply  to  Professor  H en ry  Rogers,  Author

of  the  "  Eclipse  of  Faith."     Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  212,  cloth.     1881.     3s.  Od.
NEWMAN.  — A  EANDBOOR  OB  MODBBH  Arabic,  consisting  of  a  Practical  Grammar,

with  numerous  Examples,   Dialogues,   and  Newspaper  Extracts,   in  European

Type.     By  F.  W.  Newman.     Post  8vo,  pp.  xx.  and  192,  cloth.     1866.     6s.

NEWMAN.  —  Translations  of  ENGLISH   PoBTBT  DTK)  Latin  Verse.     Designed  as

Part  of  a  New  Method  of  Instructing  in  Latin.    By  F.  W.  Newman.    Crown  8vo,

pp.  xiv.  and  202,  cloth.     1868.     6s.
NEWMAN.— The  Soul  :  Her  Sorrows  and  her  Aspirations.     An  Essay  towards  the

Natural  History  of  the  Soul,  as  the  True  Basis  of  Theology.      By  F.  W.  Newman.

Tenth  Edition.     Post  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  162,  cloth.     1882.     3s.  6d.
NEWMAN. — The  Text  of  the  Iguvine  Inscriptions.      With  Interlinear  Latin

Translation  and  Notes.     By  F.  W.  Newman.     8vo,  pp.  56,  sewed.     1808.     2s.

NEWMAN. — Miscellanies  ;  chiefly  Addresses,  Academical  and  Historical.     By  F.

W.  Newman.     8vo,  pp.  iv.  and  '656,  cloth.     1869.     7s.  6d.
NEWMAN. — The  Iliad  of  Homer,  faithfully  translated  into  TJnrhymed  English

Metre,  by  F.  W.  Newman.     Royal  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  384,  cloth.     1871.     10s.  6d.

NEWMAN.— A  Dictionary  of  Modern  Arabic.     1.  Anglo-Arabic  Dictionary.     2.

Anglo-Arabic  Vocabulary.     3.  Arabo-English  Dictionary.     By  F.  W.  Newman.

In  2  vols,  crown  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  376-464,  cloth.     1871.     £1,  Is.
NEWMAN.— Hebrew  Theism.     By  F.  W.  Newman.     Royal  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  172

Stiff  wrappers.     1874.     4s.  6d.
NEWMAN. — The  Moral  Influknce  of  Law.     A  Lecture  by  F.  W.  Newman,  May

20,  1860.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  16,  sewed.     3d.
NEWMAN. — Religion  not  History.     By  F.  W.  Newman.     Foolscap,  pp.  58,  paper

wrapper.     1877.     Is.
NEWMAN. — Morning  Prayers  in  the  Household  of  a  Believer  in  God.    By  F.

W.  Newman.     Second  Edition.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  80,  limp  cloth.     1882.     Is.  6d.

NEWMAN. —Reorganization  of  English  Institutions.    A  Lecture  by  Emeritus

Professor  F.  W.  Newman.     Delivered  in  the  Manchester  Athenaeum,  October  15,

1875.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  28,  sewed.     1880.     Gd.
NEWMAN.— What  is  Christianity  without  Christ?      By  F.    W.   Newman,

Emeritus  Professor  of   University  College,   London.     8vo,   pp.    28,   stitched  in

wrapper.     1831.     Is.
NEWMAN.  — Libyan  Vocabulary.     An  Essay  towards  Reproducing  the   Ancient

Numidian  Language  out  of  Four  Modern  Languages.     By  F.  W.Newman.     Crown

8vo,  pp.  vi.  and  204,  cloth.     1882.     10s.  6d.

NEWMAN. —  A  Christian  Commonwealth.     By  F.  W.  Newman.     Crown  8vo,  pp.

(iO,  cloth.     1883.     Is.
NEWMAN.— Christianity  in  its  Cradle.    By  F.  W.  Newman,  once  Fellow  of

Balliol  College,  Oxford,  now  Emeritus  Professor  of  University  College,  London.

Crown  8vo,  pp.  iv.  and  132,  cloth.     1884.     2s.

D


50  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works,

NEWMAN.— Comments  on  the  Text  of  .ZEschylus.  ByF.  W.  Newman,  Honorary
Fellow  of  Worcester  College,  Oxford,  and  formerly  Fellow  of  Balliol  College.
Demy  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  144,  cloth.     1884.     5s.

NEWMAN. — Rebilius  Cruso  :  Robinson  Crusoe  in  Latin.  A  Book  to  Lighten
Tedium  to  a  Learner.  By  F.  \V.  Newman,  Emeritus  Professor  of  Latin  in  Univer-
sity College,  London  ;  Honorary  Fellow  of  Worcester  College,  Oxford.  Post
8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  110,  cloth.     1884.     5s.

NEW  SOUTH  WALES,  Publications  of  the  Government  of.     List  on  application.

NEW  SOUTH  WALES.— Journal  and  Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Society  of

Published  annually.     Price  10s.  6d.     List  of  Contents  on  application.
NEWTON. — Patent  Law  and  Practice:    showing  the  mode  of    obtaining  and
opposing  Grants,  Disclaimers,  Confirmations,  and  Extensions  of  Patents.     With  a
Chapter  on  Patent  Agents.       By  A.  V.  Newton.     Enlarged  Edition.     Crown  8vo,
pp.  xii.  and  104,  cloth.     1879.     2s.  6d.
NEWTON.— An  Analysis  of  the  Patent  and  Copyright  Laws:  Including  the
various  Acts  relating  to  the  Protection  of  Inventions,  Designs,  Trade  Marks  ;
Literary  and  Musical  Compositions,  Dramatic  Performances  ;  Engravings,  Sculp-
ture, Paintings,  Drawings,  and  Photographs.     By  A.  Newton,  author  of  "Patent
Law  and  Practice."     Demy  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  70,  cloth.     1884.     3s.  6d.
NEW  ZEALAND  INSTITUTE  PUBLICATIONS  :-
I.  Transactions  and  Proceedings  of  the  New  Zealand  Institute.    Demy  8vo,
stitched.    Vols.  I.  to  XVI.,  1868  to  1883.     £1,  Is.  each.
II.  An  Index  to  the  Transactions  and  Proceedings  of  the  New  Zealand  In-
stitute.    Vols.  I.  to  VIII.     Edited  and  Published  under  the  Authority  of  the
Board  of  Governors  of  the  Institute.     By  James  Hector,  C.M.G.,  M.D. ,  F.R.S.
Demy,  8vo,  44  pp.,  stitched.     1877.     2s.  6d.

NEW  ZEALAND.  —Geological  Survey.     List  of  Publications  on  application.

NOIRIT.— A  French  Course  in  Ten  Lessons.  By  Jules  Noirit,  B.A.  Lessons
I.-IV.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  xiv.  and  80,  sewed.     1870.     Is.  6d.

NOIRIT.— French  Grammatical  Questions  for  the  use  of  Gentlemen  preparing
for  the  Army,  Civil  Service,  Oxford  Examinations,  &c,  &c.  By  Jules  Noirit.
Crown  8vo,  pp.  62,  cloth.     1870.     Is.     Interleaved,  Is.  6d.

NOURSE. — Narrative  of  the  Second  Arctic  Expedition  made  by  Charles  F.
Hall.  His  Voyage  to  Repulse  Bay  ;  Sledge  Journeys  to  the  Straits  of  Fury  and
Hecla,  and  to  King  William's  Land,  and  Residence  among  the  Eskimos  during
the  years  1864-69.  Edited  under  the  orders  of  the  Hon.  Secretary  of  the  Navy,
by  Prof.  J.  E.  Nourse,  U.S.N.  4to,  pp.  1.  and  644,  cloth.  With  maps,  heliotypes,
steel  and  wood  engravings.     1880.     £1,  8s,

NUGENT' S  Improved  French  and  English  and  English  and  French  Pocket
Dictionary.     Par  Smith.     24mo,  pp.  489  and  320,  cloth.     1873.     3s.

NUTT.— Two  Treatises  on  Verbs  containing  Feeble  and  Double  Letters.  By
R.  Jehuda  Hayug  of  Fez.  Translated  into  Hebrew  from  the  original  Arabic  by
R.  Moses  Gikatilia  of  Cordova,  with  the  Treatise  on  Punctuation  by  the  same
author,  translated  by  Aben  Ezra.  Edited  from  Bodleian  MSS.,  with  an  English
translation,  by  J.  W.  Nutt,  M.A.     Demy  8vo,  pp.  312,  sewed.     1870.     5s.

NUMISMATA  ORIENTALIA  ILLUSTRATA.     See  Marsden,  and  International.

NUTT. — A  Sketch  of  Samaritan  History,  Dogma,  and  Literature.  An  Intro-
troduction  to  "Fragments  of  a  Samaritan  Targum."  By  J.  W.  Nutt,  M.A.,  &c,
&c.     Demy  8vo,  pp.  180,  cloth.     1874.     5s.

OEHLENSCHLAGER.— Axel  and  Valborg  :  a  Tragedy,  in  Five  Acts,  and  other
Poems.  Translated  from  the  Danish  of  Adam  Oehlenschlager  by  Pierce  Butler,
M.A.,  late  Rector  of  Ulcombe,  Keut.  Edited  by  Professor  Palmer,  M.A.,  of  St.
John's  Coll.,  Camb.  With  a  Memoir  of  the  Translator.  Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and
164,  cloth.     1874.     5s.


Publislifl  by  Triibner  &-  Co.  51

OERA  LINDA  BOOK  (Tiik).— From  a  Manuscript  of  the  13th  Century,  with  the  per-
mission of  the  proprietor,  0.  Over  de  Linden  of  the  Helder.  The  Original  Frisian
Text  as  verified  by  Dr.  J.  O.  Ottema,  accompanied  by  an  Bnglwh  Venion  of  Dr.
Ottema's  Dutch  Translation.  By  W.  It.  Sandbach.  8vo,  pp.  xxv.  and  '-'54,  cloth.
IA76

OGAREFF.  Bb8AI  BUB  LA  SITUATION  BUBSX.  Lettres  a  un  Anglais.  Par  N.  OgarefT.
L2mo,  pp.  150,  sewed.     1862.     3s.

0LC0TT.  — A  BUDDHIST  Catechism,  according  to  the  Canon  of  the  Southern  Church.
By  Colonel  H.  S.  Olcott,  President  of  the  Theosophical  Society.    24mo,  pp.  32.    Is.

OLCOTT.—  The  Yoga  Philosophy:  Being  the  Text  of  Patanjali,  with  Bhojarajah's
Commentary.  A  Reprint  of  the  Englisli  Translation  of  the  above,  by  the  late  Dr.
Ballantyne  and  Govind  Shastri  Deva  ;  to  which  are  added  Extracts  from  Various
Authors.  With  an  Introduction  by  Colonel  H.  S.  Olcott,  President  of  the  Theo-
sophieal  Society.  The  whole  Edited  by  Tukaram  Tatia,  F.T.S.  Crown  8vo,  pp.
xvi.-"_".i4,  wrapper.     1882.     7s.  6d.

OLLENDORFF.— Metodo  para  apkender  a  Leer,  escribir  y  hablar  el  Ingles  segun
el  sistema  de  Ollendorff.  Por  Ramon  Palenzuela  y  Juan  de  la  Carreflo.  8vo,  pp.
xlvi.  an.l  460,  cloth.     1873.     7s.  6d.

Key  to  Ditto.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  112,  cloth.     1873.     4s.

OLLENDORFF.  — Metodo  para  aprender  a  Leer,  escribir  y  hablar  el  Frances,
segun  el  verdadero  sistema  de  Ollendorff ;  ordenado  en  lecciones  progresivas,  con-
sistiendo  de  ejercicios  orales  y  escritos  ;  enriquecido  de  la  pronunciacion  figurada
como  se  estila  en  la  conversacion  ;  y  de  un  Apendice  abrazando  las  reglas  de  la
sintaxis,  la  formacion  de  los  verbos  regulares,  y  la  conjugacion  de  los  irregulares.
Por  Teodoro  Simonne",  Professor  de  Lenguas.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  342,  cloth.  1873.  6s.
Key  to  Ditto.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  80,  cloth.     1873.     3s.  6d.

OPPERT.  —Ox  the  Classification  OP  LANGUAGES  :  A  Contribution  to  Comparative
Philology.  By  Dr.  Gustav  Oppert,  Ph.D.,  Professor  of  Sanskrit,  Presidency
College,  Madras.     8vo,  paper,  pp.  viii.  and  146.     1883.     7s.  6d.

OPPERT. — Lists  of  Sanskrit  Manuscripts  in  Private  Libraries  of  Southern
India,  Compiled,  Arranged,  and  Indexed  by  Gustav  Oppert,  Ph.D.,  Professor  of
Sanskrit,  Presidency  College,  Madras.  Vol.  I.  8vo,  pp.  vii.  and  620,  cloth.  1883.
£1.  Is.

OPPERT.— On  the  "Weapons,  Army  Organisation,  and  Political  Maxims  of
the  Ancient  Hindus  ;  with  special  reference  to  Gunpowder  and  Firearms.  By
Dr.  Gustav  Oppert,  Ph.D.,  Professor  of  Sanskrit,  Presidency  College,  Madras.
8vo,  paper,  pp.  vi.  and  162.     1883.     7s.  6d.

ORIENTAL  SERIES.— See  Trubner's  Oriental  Series.

ORIENTAL  Text  Society's  Publications.     A  list  may  be  had  on  application.

ORIENTAL  CONGRESS.  — Report  of  the  Proceedings  of  the  Second  Interna-
tional Congress  of  Orientalists  held  in  London,  1874.  Royal  8vo,  pp.
viii.  and  68,  sewed.     1874.     5s.

ORIENTALISTS.— Transactions  of  the  Second  Session  of  the  International
Congress  of  Orientalists.  Held  in  London  in  September  1874.  Edited  by
Robert  K.  Douglas,  Hon.  Sec.     8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  456,  cloth.     1876.     21s.

OTTE — How  to  Learn  Danish  (Dano-Norwegian) :  a  Manual  for  Students    of
Danish  based  on  the  Ollendorffian  system  of  teaching  languages,  and  adapted^ for
self-instruction.     By  E.  C.  Otte.     Second  Edition.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  xx.  and  338,
cloth.     1884.     7s.  6d.
Key  to  above.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  84,  cloth.     3s.

OTTE.— Simplified  Danish  and  Swedish  Grammars.    See  Trubner's  Collection.

OVERBECK.— Catholic  Orthodoxy  and  Anglo-Catholicism.  A  AVord  about  the
Intercommunion  between  the  English  and  Orthodox  Churches.  By  J.  J.  Overbeck,
D.D.     8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  200,  cloth.     1866.     5s.

OVERBECK.  — Bonn  Conference.  By  J.  J.  Overbeck,  D.D.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  48,
sewed.     1876.     Is


52  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works,

OVERBECK.— A  Plain  View  of  the  Claims  of  the  Orthodox  Catholic  Church
as  Opposed  to  all  other  Christian  Denominations.  By  J.  J.  Overbeck,
D.D.     Crown  Svo,  pp.  iv,  and  138,  wrapper.     1881.     2s.  6d.

OWEN.— Footfalls -on  the  Boundary  of  Another  Wobld.  Wi£b  Narrative
Illustrations.  By  R.  D.  Owen.  An  enlarged  English  Copyright  Edition.  Post
8vo,  pp.  xx.  and  392,  cloth.     1875.     7s.  6d.

OWEN. — The  Debatable  Land  between  this  "World  and  thb  Next.  With
Illustrative  Narrations.  By  Robert  Dale  Owen.  Second  Edition.  Crown  8vo,
pp.  456,  cloth.     1874.    7s.  6d.

OWEN.—  THREADING  my  Way  :  Twenty-Seven  Years  of  Autobiography.  By  R.  D.
Owen.     Crown  Svo,  pp.  344,  cloth.     1874.     7s.  Gd.

OXLEY. — Egypt  :  And  the  Wonders  of  the  Land  of  the  rharaohs.  By  William
Oxley,  author  of  "The  Philosophy  of  Spirit."  Illustrated  by  a  New  Version  of
the  Bhagavat-Gita,  an  Episode  of  the  Mahabharat,  one  of  the  Epic  Poems  of
Ancient  India.     Crown  Svo,  pp.  viii.-328,  cloth.     1884.     7s.  Gd.

OYSTER  (The)  :  Where,  How,  and  When  to  Find,  Breed,  Cook,  and  Eat  It.
Second  Edition,  with  a  New  Chapter,  "The  Oyster-Seeker  in  London."  12mo,
pp.  viii.  and  10(5,  boards.     1863.     Is.

PALESTINE.— Memoirs  of  the  Survey  of  Western  Palestine.  Edited  by  W.
Besant,  M.A.,  and  E.  H.  Palmer,  M.A.,  under  the  Direction  of  the  Committee
of  the  Palestine  Exploration  Fund.  Complete  in  seven  volumes.  Demy  4to,
cloth,  with  a  Portfolio  of  Plans,  and  large  scale  Map.  Second  Issue.  Price
Twenty  Guineas.

PALMER.— A  Concise  English-Persian  Dictionary  ;  together  with  a  simplified
Grammar  of  the  Persian  Language.  By  the  late  E.  H.  Palmer,  M.A.,  Lord
Almoner's  Reader,  and  Professor  of  Arabic,  Cambridge,  &c.  Completed  and
Edited,  from  the  MS.  left  imperfect  at  his  death,  by  G.  Le  Strange.  Royal
16mo,  pp.  COG,  cloth.     1883.     10s.  Gd.

PALMER.  — A  Concise  Persian-English  Dictionary.  By  E.  H.  Palmer,  M.A.,  of
the  Middle  Temple,  Barrister-at-Law,  Lord  Almoner's  Reader,  and  Professor  of
Arabic,  and  Fellow  of  St.  John's  College  in  the  University  of  Cambridge.  Second
Edition.     Royal  lGmo,  pp.  726,  cloth.    1884.     10s.  6d.

PALMER.— The  Song  of  the  Reed,  and  other  Pieces.  By  E.  H.  Palmer,  M.A.,
Cambridge.     Crown  Svo,  pp.  208,  cloth.     1876.     5s.

PALMER. — Hindustani,  Arabic,  and  Persian  Grammar.  See  Triibner's  Col-
lection.

PALMER.  — The  Patriarch  and  the  Tsar.  Translated  from  the  Russ  by  William
Palmer,  M.A.  Demy  8vo,  cloth.  Vol.  I.  The  Replies  of  the  Humble  Nicon.
Pp.  xl.  and  674.  1871.  12s.— Vol.  II.  Testimonies  concerning  the  Patriarch
Nicon,  the  Tsar,  and  the  Boyars.  Pp.  lxxviii.  and  554.  1873.  12s. — Vol.  III.
History  of  the  Condemnation  of  the  Patriarch  Nicon.  Pp.  lxvi.  and  558.
1873.  12s.— Vols.  IV.,  V.,  and  VI.  Services  of  the  Patriarch  Nicon  to  the
Church  and  State  of  his  Country*,  &c.  Pp.  lxxviii.  and  1  to  660;  xiv.-661-
1028,  and  1  to  254  ;  xxvi.-1029-1656,  and  1-72.     1876.     36s.

PARKER. — Theodore  Parker's  Celebrated  Discourse  on  Matters  Pertaining  to
Religion.    People's  Edition.    Cr.  8vo,  pp.  351.     1872.     Stitched,  Is.  Gd. ;  cl.,  2s.

PARKER.— Theodore  Parker.  A  Biography.  By  O.  B.  Frothingham.  Crown
8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  5SS,  cloth,  with  Portrait.     1876.     12s.

PARKER. — The  Collected  Works  of  Theodore  Parker,  Minister  of  the  Twenty-
eighth  Congregational  Society  at  Boston,  U.S.  Containing  his  Theological,
Polemical,  and  Critical  Writings ;  Sermons,  Speeches,  and  Addresses  ;  and
Literary  Miscellanies.     In  14  vols.  Svo,  cloth.     6s.  each.

Vol.  I.  Discourse  on  Matters  Pertaiuing  to  Religion.     Preface  by  the  Editor,

and  Portrait  of  Parker  from  a  medallion  by  Saulini.     Pp.  3S0.
Vol.  II.  Ten  Sermons  and  Prayers.     Pp.  360.
Vol.  III.  Discourses  ot  Theology.     Pp.  318.
Vol.  IV.  Discourses  on  Politics.     Pp.  312.


Published  by  Trainer  (fr  Co.  53

Parker.  Womb   eentim

V.    I  »:scourses  of  Slavery.     I.      Pp.338.
Vol.   VI.    D  Of  Slavery.       II.       l'j>.  323.

VoL  VIL  ial  Sck-nci'.     Pp.  21)6.

VoL  VIIL   Miscellaneous  Discourses.     Pp.230.

VoL  IX.   Critical  Writings.      I.      Pp.  292.
VoL  X.  Critical  Writings.     II.     Pp.308.

VoL  XI.  Sermons  of  Theism,  Atheism,  and  Popular  Theology.     Pp.  287.
Vol.  XII.  Autobiographical  and  Miscellaneous  Pieces.     Pp.356.
Vol.  XIII.  Historic  Americans.     Pp.236.

Vol.  XIV.  Lessons  from  the  World  of   Matter  and   the  World  of  Mau.      Pp.
362.

PARKER.  —  Malagasy  Grammar.     See  Triibner's  Collection.

PARRY. —  A  Shout  Chapter  on  Letter-Change,  with  Examples.  Being  chiefly
aa  attempt  to  reduce  in  a  simple  manner  the  principal  classical  and  cognate  words
t'>  their  primitive  meanings.  By  J.  Parry,  B.A.,  formerly  Scholar  of  Corpus
Christi  College,  Cambridge.     Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  16,  wrapper.     1884.     Is.

PATERSON. — Notes  on  Military  Surveying  and  Reconnaissance.  By  Lieut.-
Colonel  William  Paterson.  Sixth  Edition.  With  10  Plates.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  xii.
and  146,  cloth.     1882.     7s.  6d.

PATERSON.  —TOPOGRAPHICAL  Examination  Papers.  By  Lieut.-Col.  W.  Paterson.
8vo,  pp.  32,  with  4  Plates.     Boards.     1882.     2s.

PATERSON.—  Treatise  on  Military  Drawing.  With  a  Course  of  Progressive
Plates.  By  Captain  W.  Paterson,  Professor  of  Military  Drawing  at  che  Royal
Military  College,  Sandhurst.     Oblong  4to,  pp.  xii.  and  31,  cloth.     1862.     £1,  Is.

PATERSON. — The  Orometer  for  Hill  Measuring,  combining  Scales  of  Distances,
Protractor.  Clinometer,  Scale  of  Horizontal  Equivalents,  Scale  of  Shade,  and
Table  of  Gradients.     By  Captain  William  Paterson.     On  cardboard.     Is.

PATERSON.— Central  America.  By  W.  Paterson,  the  Merchant  Statesman.
From  a  MS.  in  the  British  Museum,  1701.  With  a  Map.  Edited  by  S.  Bannis-
ter, M.A.     8vo,  pp.  70,  sewed.    1857.     2s.  6d.

PATON. — A  History  OP  the  Egyptian  Revolution,  from  the  Period  of  the  Mame-
lukes to  the  Death  of  Mohammed  Ali ;  from  Arab  and  European  Memoirs,  Oral
Tradition,  and  Local  Research.  By  A.  A.  Baton.  Second  Edition.  2  vols,  demy
8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  395,  viii.  and  446,  cloth.     1870.     7s.  Gd.

PATON.  -Henry  Beyle  (otherwise  De  Stendahl).  A  Critical  and  Biographical
Study,  aided  by  Original  Documents  and  Unpublished  Letters  from  the  Private
Papers  of  the  Family  of  Beyle.  By  A.  A.  Eaton.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  340,  cloth.
1874.     7s.  6d.

PATTON.— The  Death  of  Death;  or,  A  Study  of  God's  Holiness  in  Connection
with  the  Existence  of  Evil,  in  so  far  as  Intelligent  and  Responsible  Beings  are
Concerned.  By  an  Orthodox  Layman  (John  M.  Patton).  Revised  Edition,  crown
8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  252,  cloth.     1881.     6s.

PAULI.— Simon  de  Montfort,  Earl  of  Leicester,  the  Creator  of  the  House  of
Commons.  By  Reinhold  Pauli.  Translated  by  Una  M.  Goodwin.  AVith  Intro-
duction by  Harriet  Martineau.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  340,  cloth.     1876.     6s.

PETTENKOFER.— The  I! elation  of  the  Air  to  the  Clothes  we  wear,  the  House
we  live  in,  and  the  Soil  we  dwell  ON.  Three  Popular  Lectures  delivered  before
the  Albert  Society  at  Dresden.  By  Dr.  Max  Von  Pettenkofer,  Professor  of  Hygiene
at  the  University  of  Munich,  kc.  Abridged  and  Translated  by  Augustus  Hess,
M.D.,  M.R.C.P.,  London,  &c.     Cr.  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  96,  limp  cl.    1873.     2s.  6d.

PETRUCCELLI.— Prei.iminaires  de  la  Question  Romaine  de  M.  Ed.  About.  Par
F.  Petruccelli  de  la  Gattina.     8vo,  pp.  xv.  and  364,  cloth.     1860.     7s.  6d.

PEZZI. — Aryan  Philology,  according  to  the  most  recent  researches  (Glottologia
Aria  Recentissima).  Remarks  Historical  and  Critical.  By  Domeuico  Pezzi.
Translated  by  E.  S.  Roberts,  M.A.    Crown  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  200,  cloth.  1879.  6s.


54  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works,

PHAYRE.— A  History  of  Burma.     See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series.

PHAYRE.— The  Coins  of  Arakan,  of  Pegu,  and  of  Burma.  By  Sir  Arthur
Phayre,  C.B.,  K.C.S.I.,  G.C.M.G.,  late  Commissioner  of  British  Burma.  Royal
4to,  pp.  viii.-48,  with  Autotype  Illustrative  Plates.     "Wrapper.      1882.     8s.  6d.

PHILLIPS.— The  Doctrine  of  Addai,  the  Apostle,  now  first  edited  in  a  com-
plete form  in  the  Original  Syriac,  with  English  Translation  and  Notes.  By
George  Phillips,  D.D.,  President  of  Queen's  College,  Cambridge.  8vo,  pp.  xv.
and  52  and  53,  cloth.     1876.     7s.  6d.

PHILLIPS. — Kopal-Kundala  :  A  Tale  of  Bengali  Life.  Translated  from  the  Ben-
gali of  Bunkim  Chandra  Chatterjee.  By  H.  A.  D.  Phillips,  Bengal  Civil  Service.
Crown  8vo,  pp.  xxx.-208,  cloth.     1885.     6s.

PHILOLOGICAL  SOCIETY,  Transactions  of,  published  irregularly.  List  of  publi-
cations on  application.

PHILOSOPHY  (The)  of  Inspiration  and  Revelation.  By  a  Layman.  With  a
preliminary  notice  of  an  Essay  by  the  present  Lord  Bishop  of  Winchester,  con-
tained in  a  volume  entitled  "Aids  to  Faith."    8vo,  pp.  20,  sewed.     1875.     6d.

PICCIOTTO. — Sketches  of  Anglo- Jewish  History.  By  James  Picciotto.  Demy
8vo,  pp.  xi.  and  420,  cloth.     1875.     12s.

PIESSE.— Chemistry  in  the  Brewing-Room:  being  the  substance  of  a  Course  of
Lessons  to  Practical  Brewers.  With  Tables  of  Alcohol,  Extract,  and  Original
Gravity.  By  Charles  H.  Piesse,  F.C.S.,  Public  Analyst.  Fcap.,  pp.  viii.  and  62,
cloth.     1877.    5s.

PIRY. — Le  Saint  Edit,  Etude  de  Litterature  Chinoise.  Preparee  par  A.
Th^ophile  Piry,  du  Service  des  Douanes  Maritimes  de  Chine.  4to,  pp.  xx.  and
320,  cloth.    1879.    21s.

PLAYFAIR. — The  Cities  and  Towns  of  China.  A  Geographical  Dictionary.
By  G.  M.  H.  Playfair,  of  Her  Majesty's  Consular  Service  in  China.  8vo,  pp.
506,  cloth.     1879.     £1,  5s.

PLINY. — The  Letters  of  Pliny  the  Younger.  Translated  by  J.  D.  Lewis,  M.A.,
Trinity  College,  Cambridge.     Post  8vo,  pp.  vii.  and  390,  cloth.     1879.     5s.

PLUMPTRE. — King's  College  Lectures  on  Elocution  ;  on  the  Physiology  and
Culture  of  Voice  and  Speech  and  the  Expression  of  the  Emotions  by  Language,
Countenance,  and  Gesture.  To  which  is  added  a  Special  Lecture  on  the  Causes
and  Cure  of  the  Impediments  of  Speech.  Being  the  substance  of  the  Introduc-
tory Course  of  Lectures  annually  delivered  by  Charles  John  Plumptre,  Lecturer
on  Public  Reading  and  Speaking  at  King's  College,  London,  in  the  Evening
Classes  Department.  Dedicated  by  permission  to  H.R.H.  the  Prince  of  Wales.
Fourth,  greatly  Enlarged  Illustrated,  Edition.  Post  8vo,  pp.  xviii.  and  494,  cloth.
1883.     15s.

PLUMPTRE.— General  Sketch  of  the  History  of  Pantheism.  By  C.  E.
Plumptre.  Vol.  I.,  from  the  Earliest  Times  to  the  Age  of  Spinoza;  Vol.  II.,
from  the  Age  of  Spinoza  to  the  Commencement  of  the  19th  Century.  2  vols,
demy  Svo,  pp.  viii.  and  395  ;  iv.  and  348,  cloth.     1881.     18s.

POLE. — The  Philosophy  of  Music.  See  English  and  Foreign  Philosophical  Library.
Vol.  XI.

PONSARD.— Charlotte  Corday.  A  Tragedy.  By  F.  Ponsard.  Edited,  with  Eng-
lish Notes  and  Notice  on  Ponsard,  by  Professor  C.  Cassal,  LL.D.  12mo,  pp.  xi.
and  133,  cloth.     1867.     2s.  6d.

PONSARD. — L'Honneur  ET  L'Argent.  A  Comedy.  By  Francois  Ponsard.  Edited,
with  English  Notes  and  Memoir  of  Ponsard,  by  Professor  C.  Cassal,  LL.D.  Fcap.
8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  172,  cloth.    1869.     3s.  6d.

POOLE. — An  Index  to  Periodical  Literature.  By  W.  F.  Poole,  LL.D.,  Librarian
of  the  Chicago  Public  Library.  Third  Edition,  brought  down  to  January
1882.  Royal  8vo,  pp.  xxviii.  and  1442,  cloth.  1883.  £3,  13s.  6d.  Wrappers,
£3, 10s.


Published  by  Trii.bner  d'  Co.  55

PRACTICAL  GUIDES:  —

Fka.V  1.   Bl  !  Ml  If,    II- 1  I  AND,  AND  THE  KlUNP.      Is.-  ITALIAN  I.AKIS.      It. — WlN-

tei.in.;  PlacbOI  mi   BOOTH.     2s.—  Switzerland,  BAYOT,  and  North  Italy.
!.  Continental  Glide,     5s.— Geneva.     Is.—  Paris.     Is.  — Bek-
nesi i On  ki.and.     Is. — Italy.    4s.

PRATT.- A  Grammar  and   Dictionary   ok  the  Samoan  Language.     By  Rev.

George  Pratt,  Forty  Years  a  Missionary  of   the   London   Missionary  Society  in

Samoa.     Second  Edition.      Edited  by  Rev.   S.  J.  Whitmee,  F.R.G.S.      Crown
.  pp.  viii.  and  380,  cloth.     1878.     18s.
PRINSEP.— Record  Of  Services  op  the  Honourable  East  India  Company's

ClTO  Servants  in  the  Madras  Presidency,  from  1741  to  1858.     Compiled  and
1  from  Records  in  the  possession  of  the  Secretary  of  State  for  India.     By

• '.  0.  Prinsep.  late  Superintendent  of  Records,  India  Office.    Post  8vo,  pp.  xxxvi.-

164,  doth.    1885.     10s.  6d.
PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH,  Proceedings  of  the  Society  for.    Published  irregularly.

Post  Svo,  cloth.     Vol.  I.,  pp.  338.     1884.     10s.     Vol.  II.,  pp.  356.     1884.     10s.
PURLTZ.— Code-Book  of  Gymnastic  Exercises.     By  Ludwig  Puritz.     Translated

by  O.  Knofe  and  J.  W.   Macqueen.     Illustrated.     32mo,  pp.  xxiv.-292,  boards.

1883.     Is.  6d.
QUTNET.— Edgar  Quinet.  See  English  and  Foreign  Philosophical  Library,  Vol.  XIV.
RAM  RAZ. — Essay  OB  the  Architecture  of  the  Hindus.     By  Ram  Raz,  Native

Judge  and  Magistrate  of  Bangalore,  Corr.  Mem.  R.A.S.      With  48  Plates.     4to,

pp.  xiv.  and  64,  sewed.     1834.     £2,  2s.

RAMSAY.— Tabular  List  of  all  the  Australian  Bibds  at  present  known  to
the  Author,  showing  the  distribution  of  the  species.  By  E.  P.  Ramsay,  F.L.  s. ,
\c,  Curator  of  the  Australian  Museum,  Sydney.  8vo,  pp.  36.  and  Map  ;  boards
1878.     5s.

RASK— Grammar  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  Tongue,  from  the  Danish  of  Erasmus
Eask.  Bv  Benjamin  Thorpe.  Third  Edition,  corrected  and  improved,  with
Plate.     Post  Svo,  pp.  vi.  and  192,  cloth.     1879.    5s.  6d.

RASK. — A  Short  Tractate  on  the  Longevity  ascribed  to  the  Patriarchs  in  the
Book  of  Genesis,  and  its  relation  to  the  Hebrew  Chronology ;  the  Flood,  the
Exodus  of  the  Israelites,  the  Site  of  Eden,  kc.  From  the  Danish  of  the  late
Professor  Rask,  with  his  manuscript  corrections,  and  large  additions  from  his
autograph,  now  for  the  first  time  printed.  With  a  Map  of  Paradise  and  the
circumjacent  Lands.     Crown  Svo,  pp.  134,  cloth.     1S63.     2s.  6d.

RAVENSTEIN.  —The  Russians  on  the  Amur  ;  its  Discovery,  Conquest,  and  Colo-
nization,  with  a  Description  of  the  Country,  its  Inhabitants,  Productions,  and
Commercial  Capabilities,  and  Personal  Accounts  of  Russian  Travellers.  By  E.  G.
Ravenstein,  F.R.G.S.  With  4  tinted  Lithographs  and  3  Maps.  Svo,  pp.  500,
cloth.     1861.     15s.

RAVENSTEIN  AND  HTJLLEY.— The  Gymnasium  and  its  Fittings.  By  E.  G.
Ravenstein  and  John  Hulley.  With  14  Plates  of  Illustrations.  8vo,  pp.  32,
sewed.     1867.     2s.  6d.

RAVERTY.— Notes  on  Afghanistan  and  Part  of  Baluchistan,  Geographical,
Ethnographical,  and  Historical,  extracted  from  the  Writiugs  of  little  known
Afghan,  and  Tajyik  Historians,  &c,  &c. ,  and  from  Personal  Observation.  By
Major  H.  G.  Raverty,  Bombay  Native  Infantry  (Retired).  Foolscap  folio.  Sec-
tions I.  and  II.,  pp.  98,  wrapper.  1880.  2s.  Section  III.,  pp.  vi.  and  218.
1881.     5s.     Section  IV.     1S84.     3s.

READE.— The  Martyrdom  of  Man.      By  Winwood  Reade.      Eighth  Edition.

Crown  8vo,  pp.  viiL  and  544,  cloth.     1884.     7s.  6d.
RECORD  OFFICE.  — A  Separate  Catalogue  of  the  Official  Publications  of

the  Public  Record  Office,  on  sale  by  Triibner  &  Co.,  may  be  had  on  application.


56  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works,

RECORDS  OF  THE  HEART.  By  Stella,  Author  of  "Sappho,'  "The  King's
Stratagem,"  &c.  Second  English  Edition.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  188,  with
six  steel-plate  engravings,  cloth.     1881.'    3s.  6d.

REDHOUSE.— The  MesnevI.     See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series.

REDHOUSE.  —  Simplified  Ottoman-Turkish  Grammar.    See  Triibner's  Collection.

REDHOUSE. — The  Turkish  Vade-Mecum  of  Ottoman  Colloquial  Language:
Containing  a  Concise  Ottoman  Grammar ;  a  Carefully  Selected  Vocabulary
Alphabetically  Arranged,  in  two  Parts,  English  and  Turkish,  and  Turkish  and
English  ;  Also  a  few  Familiar  Dialogues  and  Naval  and  Military  Terms.  The
whole  in  English  Characters,  the  Pronunciation  being  fully  indicated.  By  J.
W.  Kedhouse,  M.R.A.S.  Third  Edition.  32mo,  pp.  viii.  and  372,  cloth.
1882.     6s.

REDHOUSE.— On  the  History,  System,  and  Varieties  of  Turkish  Poetry.
Illustrated  by  Selections  in  the  Original  and  in  English  Paraphi'ase,  with  a  Notice
of  the  Islamic  Doctrine  of  the  Immortality  of  "Woman's  Soul  in  the  Future  State.
Bv  J.  W.  Redhouse,  Esq.,  M.R.A.S.  8vo,  pp.  62,  cloth,  2s.  6d.;  wrapper,  Is.  6d.
1879.

REEMELIN.— A  Critical  Review  of  American  Politics.  By  C.  Reemelin,  of
Cincinnati,  Ohio.     Demy  8vo,  pp.  xxiv.  and  630,  cloth.     1881.     14s.

RELIGION  in  Europe  Historically  Considered  :  An  Essay  in  Verse.  By  the
Author  of  "The  Thames."     Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  iv.  and  152,  cloth.     1883.     2s.  6d.

RENAN. — Philosophical  Dialogues  and  Fragments.  From  the  French  of
Ernest  Kenan.  Translated,  with  the  sanction  of  the  Author,  by  Ras  Bihari
Mukharji.     Post  8vo,  pp.  xxxii.  and  182,  cloth.     1883.     7s.  6d.

RENAN. — An  Essay  on  the  Age  and  Antiquity  of  the  Book  of  Nabath^ean
Agriculture.  To  which  is  added  an  Inaugural  Lecture  on  the  Position  of  the
Shemitic  Nations  in  the  History  of  Civilisation.  By  Ernest  Renan.  Crown  8vo,
pp.  xvi.  and  148,  cloth.     1862.     3s.  6d.

RENAN.— The  Life  of  Jesus.  By  Ernest  Renan.  Authorised  English  Translation.
Crown  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  312,  cloth.     2s.  6d.  ;  sewed.  Is.  6d.

REPORT  of  a  General  Conference  of  Liberal  Thinkers,  for  the  discussion
of  matters  pertaining  to  the  religious  needs  of  our  time,  and  the  methods  of
meeting  them.  Held  June  13th  and  14th,  1878,  at  South  Place  Chapel,  Finsbury,
London.    8vo,  pp.  77,  sewed.     1878.     Is.

RHODES.— Universal  Curve  Tables  for  Facilitating  the  Laying  out  of
Circular  Arcs  on  the  Ground  for  Railways,  Canals,  &c.  Together  with
Table  of  Tangential  Angles  and  Multiples.  By  Alexander  Rhodes,  C.E.  Oblong
18mo,  band,  pp.  ix.  and  104,  roan.     1881.     5s.

RHYS.— Lectures  on  Welsh  Philology.  By  John  Rhys,  M.A.,  Professor  of
Celtic  at  Oxford,  Honorary  Fellow  of  Jesus  College,  kc. ,  &c.  Second  Edition,
Revised  and  Enlarged.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  xiv.  and  467,  cloth.     1879.     15s.

RICE. — Mysore  and  Coorg.  A  Gazetteer  compiled  for  the  Government  of  India,
By  Lewis  Rice,  Director  of  Public  Instruction,  Mysore  and  Coorg.  Vol.  I.
Mysore  in  General.  "With  2  Coloured  Maps.  Vol.  II.  Mysore,  by  Districts.
With  10  Coloured  Maps.  Vol.  III.  Coorg:.  With  a  Map.  3  vols,  royal  8vo,
pp.  xii.  670  and  xvi.  ;  544  and  xxii.  ;  and  427  and  xxvii.,  cloth.     1878.     25s.

RICE. — Mysore  Inscriptions.  Translated  for  the  Government  by  Lewis  Rice.
8vo,  pp.  xcii.  and  336-xxx.,  with  a  Frontispiece  and  Map,  boards.     1879.     30s.

RIDLEY. — KXmilaroi,  and  other  Australian  Languages.  By  the  Rev.  William
Ridley,  B.A.  Second  Edition,  revised  and  enlarged  by  the  author;  with  com-
parative Tables  of  Words  from  twenty  Australian  Languages,  and  Songs,  Tradi-
tions, Laws,  and  Customs  of  the  Australian  Race.  Small  4to,  pp.  vL  and  172,  cloth.
1877.     10s.  6d.


Published  by  Trubncr  A  Co.  57

RIG-VEDA  SANHITA.    A  Collection  of  Ancient  Elindn  Hymns.    Constituting  Um  1st
to  Um  x 1 1 1  Aehtaktt,  "i  Bookl  of  the  Big-Veda  ;  the  oldest  authority  for  the  Reli-
gious anil  Social  Institutions  of  the  Hindus.     Translated  from  the  Original  San-
skrit.    By  the  late  II.  11.  Wilson,  M.A.,  F.U.s..  &c,  &c.
\  oL  I.     Bvo,  pp.  lii.  and  34S,  cloth.     21s.
Vol.  II.     Svo.  pp.  xxx.  and  846,  cloth.     1864.     21s.
Vol.  III.     8to,  pp.  xxiv.  and  525,  cloth.      1857.     21s.

Vol.  IV.     Edited  by  B.  B.  Cowell,  M.A.     Svo,  pp.  214,  cloth.     1866.     14s.
Vols.  V.  and  VI.  in  the  l'ress.

RILEY.  -  Mm  i.i. yal  Chronicles  of  thk  City  of  London.  Chronicles  of  the  Mayors
and  Sheriffs  of  London,  and  the  Events  which  happened  in  their  Days,  from  the
Year  a.  i  >.  1188  to  a.  n.  1274.  Translated  from  the  original  Latin  of  the  "Liber
de  Antiquis  Legibus"  (published  by  the  Camden  Society),  in  the  possession  of  the
Corporation  of  the  City  of  London  ;  attributed  to  Arnold  Fitz-Thedinar,  Alder-
man of  London  in  the  Reign  of  Henry  III.— Chronicles  of  London,  and  of  the
Marvels  therein,  between  the  Years  44  Henry  III.,  A.D.  1260,  and  17  Edward  I1T.,
A.D.  1343.  Translated  from  the  original  Anglo-Norman  of  the  "  Croniques  de
London,"  preserved  in  the  Cottonian  Collection  (Cleopatra  A.  iv.)  in  the  British
Museum.  Translated,  with  copious  Notes  and  Appendices,  by  Henry  Thomas
Riley,  M.A.,  Clare  Hall,  Cambridge,  Barrister-at-Law.  4to,  pp.  xii.  and  319,  cloth.
1863.     12s.

RIOLA. —  HOW  TO  Lkarn  Russian:  a  Manual  for  Students  of  Russian,  based  upon
the  Ollendorftian  System  of  Teaching  Languages,  and  adapted  for  Self-Instruc-
tion.     Bv  Henry  Riola,  Teacher  of  the  Russian  Language.     "With  a  Preface  by
W.K.S.  Ralston",  M.A.    Second  Edition.    Crown  Svo,  pp.  576,  cloth.     1883.     12s.
Key  to  the  above.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  126,  cloth.     1878.     5s.

RIOLA. — A  Graduated  Russian  Reahkr,  with  a  Vocabulary  of  all  the  Russian
"Words  contained  in  it.  By  Henry  Riola,  Author  of  "  How  to  Learn  Russian."
Crown  Svo,  pp.  viii.  and  314,  cloth.     1879.     10s.  6d.

RIPLEY.— Sacked  Rhetoric;  or,  Composition  and  Delivery  of  Sermons.  By
Henry  I.  Ripley.     12mo,  pp.  234,  cloth.     1858.     2s.  6d.

ROCHE.— A  French  Grammar,  for  the  use  of  English  Students,  adopted  for  the
Public  Schools  by  the  Imperial  Council  of  Public  Instruction.  By  A.  Roche.
Crown  Svo,  pp.  xii.  and  176,  cloth.     1869.     3s.

ROCHE.-  Phi >se  and  Poetry.  Select  Pieces  from  the  best  English  Authors,  for
Reading,  Composition,  and  Translation.  By  A.  Roche.  Second  Edition.  Fcap.
Svo,  pp.  viii.  and  226,  cloth.     1872.     2s.  6d.

ROCKHILL.  —  Uhanavarga.     See  Trubner's  Oriental  Series.

ROCKHILL. — The  Life  of  the  Buddha.     See  Trubner's  Oriental  Series.

RODD.— The  Birds  of  Cornwall  and  the  Scilly  Islands.  By  the  late  Edward
Hearle  Rodd.  Edited,  with  an  Introduction,  Appendix,  and  Memoir,  by  J.  E.
Harting.     8vo,  pp.  lvi.  and  320,  with  Portrait  and  Map,  cloth.     1880.     14s.

ROGERS.— The  "Wayeri.ey  Dictionary  :  An  Alphabetical  Arrangement  of  all  the
Characters  in  Sir  Walter  Scott's  "Waverley  Novels,  with  a  Descriptive  Analysis
of  each  Character,  and  Illustrative  Selections  from  the  Text.  By  May  Rogers.
12mo,  pp.  358,  cloth.      1879.     10s.

ROSING.— English-Danish  Dictionary.  By  S.  Rosing.  Crown  Svo,  pp.  x.  and
722,  cloth.     8s.  fid.

ROSS.  — Alphabetical  Manual  of  Blowpipe  Analysis;  showing  all  known
Methods,  Old  and  New.  By  Lieut. -Colonel  W.  A.  Ross,  late  R.A.,  Member  of
the  German  Chemical  Society  (Author  of  "  Pyrology,  or  Fire  Chemistry").
Crown  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  148,  cloth.     1880.     5s.

ROSS. — Pyrology,  or  Fire  Chemistry  ;  a  Science  interesting  to  the  General  Philo-
sopher, and  an  Art  of  infinite  importance  to  the  Chemist,  Metallurgist,  Engineer,
&c,  &c.  By  "W.  A.  Ross,  lately  a  Major  in  the  Royal  Artillery.  Small  4to,  pp.
xxviii.  and  346,  cloth.     1875.     36s.

ROSS.— Celebrities  of  the  Yorkshire  Wolds.  By  Frederick  Ross,  Fellow  of  the
Royal  Historical  Society.     12mo,  pp.  202,  cloth.     1878.    4s.


58  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works,

ROSS.  —The  Early  History  of  Land  Holding  among  the  Germans.  By  Denman
W.  Ross,  Ph.D.     8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  274,  cloth.     1883.     12s.

ROSS.  — Corean  Primer  :  being  Lessons  in  Corean  on  all  Ordinary  Subjects.  Trans-
literated on  the  principles  of  the  "  Mandarin  Primer,"  by  the  same  author.  By
Rev.  John  Ross,  Newchwang.     8vo,  pp.  90,  wrapper.     1877.     10s.

ROSS.— Honour  or  Shame?  By  R.  S.  Ross.  8vo,  pp.  183.  1878.  Cloth.  3s.  6d.  ;
paper,  2s.  6d.

ROSS.- -Removal  of  the  Indian  Troops  to  Malta.  By  R.  S.  Ross.  8vo,  pp.  77,
paper.     1878.     Is.  6d.

ROSS. — The  Monk  of  St.  Gall.  A  Dramatic  Adaptation  of  Scheffel's  "  Ekke-
hard."    By  R.  S.  Ross.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  218.     1879.     5s.

ROSS.— Ariadne  in  Naxos.    By  R.  S.  Ross.    Square  16mo,  pp.  200,  cloth.    1882.  5s.

ROTH. — The  Animal  Parasites  of  the  Sugar  Cane.  By  H.  Ling  Roth,  late  Hon.
Sec.  to  the  Mackay  Planters'  Association.    Demy  8vo,  pp.  16,  wrapper.    1885.    Is.

ROTH. — Notes  on  Continental  Irrigation.  By  H.  L.  R.oth.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  40,
with  8  Plates,  cloth.    1882.     5s.

ROUGH  Notes  of  Journeys  made  in  the  years  1868-1873  in  Syria,  down  the  Tigris,
India,  Kashmir,  Ceylon,  Japan,  Mongolia,  Siberia,  the  United  States,  the  Sand-
wich Islands,  and  Australasia.     Demy  8vo,  pp.  624,  cloth.     1875.     14s.

ROUSTAING.  —  The  Four  Gospels  Explained  by  their  Writers.  "With  an
Appendix  on  the  Ten  Commandments.  Edited  by  J.  B.  Roustaing.  Translated
by  W.  E.  Kirby.     3  vols,  crown  8vo,  pp.  440-456-304,  cloth.     1881.     15s.

ROUTLEDGE.— English  Rule  and  Native  Opinion  in  India.  From  Notes  taken
in  1870-74.     By  James  Routledge.     8vo,  pp.  x.  and  338,  cloth.     1878.     10s.  6d.

ROWE.— An  Englishman's  Views  on  Questions  of  the  Day  in  Victoria.  By
C.  J.  Rowe,  M.A.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  122,  cloth.     1882.     4s.

ROWLEY.— Ornithological  Miscellany.  By  George  Dawson  Rowley,  M.  A.,  F.Z.S.
Vol.  I.  Part  1,  15s.— Part  2,  20s.— Part  3,  15s.— Part  4,  20s.
VoL  II.  Part  5,  20s.— Part  6,  20s.— Part  7,  10s.  6d.— Part  8,  10s.  6d.— Part  9,
10s.  6d.— Part  10,  10s.  6d.
Vol.  III.  Part  11,  10s.  6<L— Part  12,  10s.  6d.— Part  13,  10s.  6d.-Part  14,  20s.

ROYAL  SOCIETY  OF  LONDON  (The).— Catalogue  of  Scientific  Papers  (1800-
1863),  Compiled  and  Published  by  the  Royal  Society  of  London.  Demy  4to,
cloth,  per  vol.  £1 ;  in  half-morocco,  £1,  8s.  Vol.  I.  (1867),  A  to  Cluzel.  pp.
lxxix.  and  960;  Vol.  II.  (1863),  Coaklay— Graydon.  pp.  iv.  and  1012;  Vol.
III.  (1869),  Greatheed— Leze.  pp.  v.  and  1002  ;  Vol.  IV.  (1870),  L'Heritier  de
Brutille — Pozzetti.  pp.  iv.  and  1006  ;  Vol.  V.  (1871),  Praag — Tizzani.  pp.  iv.
and  1000;  Vol.  VI.  (1872),  Tkalec — Zylius,  Anonymous  and  Additions,  pp.  xi.
and  763.  Continuation  of  above  (1864-1873)  ;  Vol.  VII.  (1877),  A  to  Hyrtl.  pp.
xxxi.  and  1047  ;  Vol.  VIII.  (1879),  Ibaiiez— Zwicky.  pp.  1310.  A  List  of  the
Publications  of  the  Royal  Society  (Separate  Papers  from  the  Philosophical
Transactions),  on  application.

RUNDALL. — A  Short  and  Easy  Way  to  Write  English  as  Spoken.  Methode
Rapide  et  Facile  d'Ecrire  le  Francais  comme  on  le  Parle.  Kurze  und  Leichte
Weise  Deutsch  zu  Schreiben  wie  man  es  Spricht.  By  J.  B.  Rundall,  Certificated
Member  of  the  London  Shorthand  Writers'  Association.     6d.  each.

RUSSELL. — The  Wave  of  Translation  in  the  Oceans  of  Water,  Air,  and
Ether.  By  John  Scott  Russell,  M.  A.,  F.R.S.S.  L.  and  E.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  31S,
with  10  Diagrams,  cloth.     1885.     12s.  6d.

RUTHERFORD.— The  Autobiography  of  Mark  Rutherford,  Dissenting  Minister.
Edited  by  his  friend,  Reuben  Shapcott.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  180,  boards.
1881.     5s.

RUTHERFORD. — Mark  Rutherford's  Deliverance  :  Being  the  Second  Part  of  his
Autobiography.  Edited  by  his  friend,  Reuben  Shapcott.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.
and  210,  boards.     1885.     5s.

RUTTER.— See  Bunyan.


Published  by  TiUbner  dk  Co.  59

SAMAVIDHANABRAHMANA  (Tiik)  (being  the  Third  Brahmana)  of  the  Sima  Veda,
Edited,  together  with  the  Commentary  of  EULyana,  an  English  Tranalation,  Intro-
duction, und  Index  of  Words,  by  A.  C.  Burnoll.  Vol.  I.  'IYm  and  Commentary,
with  Introduction.     Demy  8vo,  pp.  xx.wiii.  and  104,  cloth.     Is7;j.      r_'s.  6d.

SAMUELSON.  BISTORT  0»  J  >kink.  A  Review,  Social,  Scientific,  and  Political  By
Janies  Sanmelson,  of  the  Middle  Temple,  Barristcr-at-Law.  Second  Edition.
Nvo,  pp.  xxviii.  and  '288,  cloth.     1880.     6s.

SAND.  Moi.ikke.  A  Drama  in  Prose.  By  George  Sand.  Edited,  with  Notes,  by
Th.  Kaicher,  LL.B.     12mo,  pp.  xx.  and  170,  cloth.     1868.    3s.  6d.

SARTORIUS.— Mexico.  Landscapes  and  Popular  Sketches.  By  C.  Sartorine.
Edited  by  Dr.  Gaspcy.  With  Engravings,  from  Sketches  by  M.  Kugendas.  4to,
PP.  \i.  and  202,  cloth  gilt.    1859.    18s.

SATOW.  An  English  Japanese  Dictionary  of  the  Spoken  Language.  By
Ernest  Mason  Satow,  Japanese  Secretary  to  H.M.  Legation  at  Yedo,  and  Ishibashi
Masakata  of  the  Imperial  Japanese  Foreign  Office.  Second  Edition.  Imperial
32mo,  pp.  xv.  and  416,  cloth.     1879.     12s.  6d.

SAVAGE.— Tiik  Morals  of  Evolution.  By  M.  J.  Savage,  Author  of  "The  Reli-
gion of  Evolution,"  &c.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  192,  cloth.     1880.     5s.

SAVAGE.— Belief  IN  God;  an  Examination  of  some  Fundamental  Theistic  Pro-
blems. By  M.  J.  Savage.  To  which  is  added  an  Address  on  the  Intellectual  Basis
of  Faith.     By  W.  H.  Savage.     8vo,  pp.  176,  cloth.     1881.     5s.

SAVAGE.— Beliefs  about  Man.  By  M.  J.  Savage.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  130,  cloth.
1882.    5s.

SAYCE. — An  Assyrian  Grammar  for  Comparative  Purposes.  By  A.  H.  Sayce,
M.A.,  Fellow  and  Tutor  of  Queen's  College,  Oxford.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and
188,  cloth.     1885.

SAYCE.— The  Principles  of  Comparative  Philology.  By  A.  H.  Sayce,  M.A.
Third,  Revised,  and  Enlarged  Edition.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xlviii.-422,  cloth.  1885.
10s.  Cd.

SCHAIBLE.— An  Essay  on  the  Systematic  Training  of  the  Body.  By  C.  H.
Schaible,  M.D.,  &c,  &c.  A  Memorial  Essay,  Published  on  the  occasion  of  the
first  Centenary  Festival  of  Frederick  L.  Jahn,  with  an  Etching  by  H.  Herkomer.
Crown  8vo,  pp.  xviii.  and  124,  cloth.     1878.     5s.

SCHEFTEL.— Mountain  Psalms.  By  J.  V.  von  Scheffel.  Translated  by  Mrs.  F.
Brunnow.  Fcap.,  pp.  62,  with  6  Plates  after  designs  by  A.  Von  "Werner.  Parch-
ment.    1882.     3s.  6d.

SCHILLER.— The  Bride  of  Messina.  Translated  from  the  German  of  Schiller  in
English  Verse.    By  Emily  Allfrey.    Crown  Svo,  pp.  viii.  and  110,  cloth.    1876.  2s.

SCHLAGINTWEIT.  —  Buddhism  in  Tibet:  Illustrated  by  Literary  Documents  and
Objects  of  Religious  Worship.  By  Emil  Schlagintweit,  LL.D.  With  a  folio  Atlas
of  20  Plates,  and  20  Tables  of  Native  Print  in  the  Text.  Roy.  8vo,  pp.  xxiv.  and
404.    1863.    £2,  2s.

SCHLAU,  SCHLAUER,  AM  SCHLAUESTEN.— Facsimile  of  a  Manuscript  supposed
to  have  been  found  in  an  Egyptian  Tomb  by  the  English  Soldiers.  Royal  8vo,  in
ragged  canvas  covers,  with  string  binding,  aud  dilapidated  edges  (?  just  as  dis-
covered).    1884.     6s.

SCHLEICHER.— A  Compendium  of  the  Comparative  Grammar  of  the  Indo-
European,  Sanskrit,  Greek,  and  Latin  Languages.  By  August  Schleicher.
Translated  from  the  Third  German  Edition,  by  Herbert  Beudall,  B.A. ,  Chr.
Coll.,  Camb.  8vo.  Part  I.,  Phonology.  Pp.  184,  cloth.  1874.  7s.  6d.  Part  II.,
Morphology.     Pp.  viii.  and  104,  cloth.     1877.     6s.

SCHOPENHAUER.— The  World  as  Will  and  Idea.  By  Arthur  Schopenhauer.
Translated  from  the  German  by  R.  B.  Haldane,  M.A.,  and  J.  Kemp,  M.A.
Vol.  I.,  containing  Four  Books.     Post  8vo,  pp.  xxxii.  532,  cloth.     1883.     18s.

SCHULTZ.— Universal  Dollar  Tables  (Complete  United  States).  Covering  all
Exchanges  between  the  United  States  and  Great  Britain,  Fiance,  Belgium,
Switzerland,  Italy,  Spain,  and  Germany.  By  C.  W.  H.  Schultz.  8vo,  cloth.
1874.     15s.


60  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works,

SCHULTZ.—  Universal  Interest  and  General  Percentage  Tables.      On  the

Decimal  System.     With  a  Treatise  on  the  Currency  of  the  World,  and  numerous

examples  for  Self-Instruction.    By  0.  W.  H.  Schultz.    8vo,  cloth.    1874.    10s.  6d.
SCHULTZ.— English  German  Exchange  Tables.     By  C.  W.  II.  Schultz.    With  a

Treatise  on  the  Currency  of  the  World.     8vo.  boards.     1874.     5s.
SCHWENDLER. — Instructions  for  Testing  Telegraph  Lines,  and  the  Technical

Arrangements  in  Offices.     Written  on  behalf  of  the  Government  of  India,  under

the  Orders  of  the  Director-General  of  Telegraphs  in  India.     By  Louis  Schwen-

dler.     Vol.  I.,  demvSvo,  pp.  248,  cloth.     1878.     12s.     Vol.  II.,  demy  8 vo,  pp.  xi.

and  268,  cloth.     1880.     9s.
SCOONES.— Faust.     A  Tragedy.     By  Goethe.     Translated  into  English  Verse,  by

William  Dalton  Scoones.     Fcap.,  pp.  vi.  and  230,  cloth.     1879.     5s.
SCOTT. — The  English  Life  of  Jesus.     By  Thomas  Scott.    Crown  8vo,  pp.  xxviii.

and  350,  cloth.     1879.     2s.  6d.
SCOTUS.— A  Note  ox  Mr.  Gladstone's  "The  Peace  to  Come."    By  Scotus.     8vo,

pp.  106.     1878.    Cloth,  2s.  6d. ;  paper  wrapper,  Is.  6d.
SELL. — The  Faith  of  Islam.     By  the  Rev.  E.  Sell,  Fellow  of  the  University  of

Madras.     Demy  8vo,  pp.  xiv.  and  270,  cloth.     1881.     6s.  6d.
SELL. — Ihn-i-Tajwid  ;  or,  Art  of  Reading  the  Quran.     By  the  Rev.  E.  Sell,

B.D.     8vo,  pp.  48,  wrappers.     1882.     2s.  6d.
SELSS. — Goethe's  Minor  Poems.  Selected,  Annotated,  and  Rearranged.    By  Albert

M.  Selss,  Ph.D.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  xxxi.  and  152,  cloth.     1875.     3s.  6d.
SERMONS  NEVER  PREACHED.     By  Philip  Phosphor.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  vi.  and  124,

cloth.     1878.    2s.  6d.
SEWELL. — Report  on  the  Amaravati  Tope,  and  Excavations  on  its  Site  in  1877.

By  Robert  Sewell,  of  the  Madras  C.S.,  &c.     With  four  plates.     Royal  4to,  pp.

70,  boards.     1880.    3s.
SEYPPEL.— Sharp,  Sharper,  Sharpest  :  A  Humorous  Tale  of  Old  Egypt.    Penned

down  and  Depicted  in  the  Year  1315  A.C.     By  C.  M.  Seyppel,   Court  Painter  and

Poet  Laureate  of  His  Majesty  King  Rhampsinit  III.,  and  done  into  the  English

tongue  by  Two  Mummies  of  the  Old  Dynasty.     Memphis,  35,  Mummies  Arcade.

(Ring  three  times).     Imperial  8vo,  pp.  42,  in  ragged  canvas  cover,  with  dilapidated

edges,  and  string  binding  (?  just  as  discovered),  price  6s.
SHAD  WELL.—  Political  Economy  for  the  People.     By  J.  L.  Shadwell,  Author  of

"A  System  of  Political  Economy."  Fcap.,  pp.  vi.  and  154,  limp  cloth.  1880.   Is.  6d.
SHAKESPEARE. — A  New  Study  of  Shakespeare  :  An  Inquiry  into  the  connection

of  the  Plays  and  Poems,  with  the  origins  of  the  Classical  Drama,  and  with  the

Platonic  Philosophv,  through  the  Mvsteries.     Demy  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  372,  with

Photograph  of  the  Stratford  Bust,  cloth.     1884.     10s.  6d.
SHAKESPEARE'S  Centjrie  of  Prayse  ;  being  Materials  for  a  History  of  Opinion

on  Shakespeare  and  his  Works,  culled  from  Writers  of  the  First  Century  after

his  Rise.     By  C.  M.  Ingleby.     Medium  8vo,  pp.  xx.  and  384.     Stiff  cover.     1874.

£1,  Is.     Large  paper,  fcap.  4to,  boards.     £2,  2s.
SHAKESPEARE.— Hermeneutics;  or,  The  Still  Lion.     Being  an  Essay  towards

the  Restoration  of  Shakespeare's  Text.     By  C.   M.   Ingleby,   M.A.,  LL.D.,  of

Trinity  College,  Cambridge.     Small  4to,  pp.  168,  boards.     1875.     6s.
SHAKESPEARE. -The  Man  and  the  Book.     By  C.  M.  Ingleby,  M.A.,  LL.D.

Small  4to.     Part  I.,  pp.  172,  boards.     1877.     6s.
SHAKESPEARE. — Occasional  Papers  on  Shakespeare  ;  being  the  Second  Part

of  "Shakespeare:  the  Man  and  the  Book."     By  C.  M.  Ingleby,  M.A.,  LL.D.,

V.P.R.S.L.     Small  4to,  pp.  x.  and  194,  paper  boards.     1881.     6s.
SHAKESPEARE'S  BONES.— The  Proposal  to  Disinter  them,  considered  in  relation

to  their  possible  bearing  on  his  Portraiture  :  Illustrated  by  instances  of  Visits  of

the  Living  to  the  Dead.     By  C.  M.  Ingleby,  LL.D.,  V.P.R.S.L.     Fcap.  4to,  pp.

viii.  and  48,  boards.     1883.     Is.  6d.


PtMuhedby  Trubnerd  Co.  CI

SHAKESPEARE  A  New  Variorum  Kdition 0»  Shakespeare.  Edited  by  Horace
Howard  Furneaa,  Royal  8to.  Vol.  I.  Bobmo  and  Juliet.  Pp.  rxiii.  ami  480,
cloth.  187L  18s.— VoL  II.  Macbeth.  Pp.  xix.  and  492.  1873.  18s.— Vols.
III.  and  IV.  Hamlet.  2  vols.  pp.  xx.  and  171  and  430.  1877.  38b.— VoL  V.
King  Lear.     Pp.  viand  504.     1880.     is..

SHAKESPEARE.  -  Concorhame  TO    Shakespeare's  Poems.     By  Mis.  H.  II.  Fur-
Royal  Bvo,  cloth.     18s.

SHAKESPEARE  N. its.    ByP.  A.  Lea    Demy 8vo, pp.  viii.  and  120, cloth.  1886.  6s.

SHAKSPERE  SOCIETY  (Tin:  New).—  Subscription,  One  Guinea  per  annum.  List  of
Publications  on  application.

SHERRING.  The  Sacked  City  of  the  Hindi's.  An  Account  of  Benares  in
Ancient  and  Modern  Times.  By  the  Kev.  M.  A.  Sherring,  M  A.,  I.L.I).  ;  and
Prefaced  with  an  Introduction  by  FitzEdward  Hall,  D.C.L.  "With  Illustrations.
8vo,  pp.  xxxvi.  and  388,  cloth.     -Is.

SHERRING.  -Hindu  TbIBBB  and  Castes;  together  with  an  Account  of  the
Mohamedan  Tribes  of  the  North-West  Frontier  and  of  the  Aboriginal  Tribes  of
the  Central  Provinces.  P>y  the  Kev.  M.  A.  Sheiring,  M.A.,  LL.B.,  Lond.,  &c.
4to.  VoL  II.  Pp.  lxviii.  and  376,  cloth.  1879.  £2,  8s.— Vol.  III.,  with  Index  of
3  vols.     Pp.  xii.  ami  336,  cloth.     1881.     32s.

SHERRING.  -The  Hindoo  Pilgrims.  By  Rev.  M.  A.  Sherring,  M.A.,  LL.D.
Crown  8vo.  pp.   120,  cloth.    187S.     5s.

SHIELDSj  —  The  Final  Philosophy  ;  or,  System  of  Perfectible  Knowledge  issuing
from  the  Harmony  of  Science  and  Religion.  By  Charles  W.  Shields,  D.D.,  Pro-
fessor in  Princeton  College.      Royal  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  G10,  cloth.     1878.     18s.

SIBREE.  — The  Cheat  African  Island.  Chapters  on  Madagascar.  A  Popular
Account  of  Recent  Researches  in  the  Physical  Geography,  Geology,  and  Explora-
tion of  the  Country,  and  its  Natural  History  and  Botany  ;  and  in  the  Origin  and
Divisions,  Customs  and  Language,  Superstitions,  Folk-lore,  and  Religious  Beliefs
and  Practices  of  the  Different  Tribes.  Together  with  Illustrations  of  Scripture
and  Early  Church  History  from  Native  Habits  and  Missionary  Experience.  By
the  Rev.  James  Sibree,  jun.,  F.R.G.S.,  Author  of  "Madagascar  and  its  People,'
&c.  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  272,  with  Physical  and  Ethnological  Maps  and  Four  Illus
tratious,  cloth.     1879.     12s.

SIBREE.—  Poems:  iucludiug  "Fancy,"  "A  Resting  Place,"  ice.  By  John  Sibree
M.A.,  London.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  iv.  and  134,  cloth.     1884.     4s.

SIMCOX.  — Episodes  in  the  Lives  oe  .Men,  Women,  and  Lovers.  By  Edith  Sim
cox.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  312,  cloth.     1S82.     7s.  6d.

SIMCOX.— Natural  Law.    See  English  and  Foreign  Philosophical  Library,  Vol.  IV

SIME.  — Lessing.  See  English  and  Foreign  Philosophical  Library,  Extra  Series
Vols.  I.  and  II.

SIMPSON-BAIKIE.— The  Dramatic  Unities  in  the  Fkesent  Day.  By  E.  Simpson
Baikie.     Third  Edition.     Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  iv.  and  108,  cloth.     1878.     2s.  64

SIMPSON-BAIKIE. — The  International  Dictionary  for  Naturalists  and  Sportsmen
in  English,  French,  and  German.  By  Edwin  Simpson-Baikie.  Svo,  pp.  iv.  and
284,  cloth.     1880.     15s.

SINCLAIR.— The  Messenger  :  A  Poem.  By  Thomas  Sinclair,  M.A.  Foolscap
Svo.  pp.  174,  cloth.     1875.     5s.

SINCLAIR.  — Loves's  Trilogy  :  A  Poem.  By  Thomas  Sin  lair.  M.A.  Crown  Svo,
np    150,  cloth.     l>7fi.    5s.

SINCLAIR.— The  Mount  :  Speech  from  its  Esglish  Heights.  By  Thomas  Sinclair,
M.A.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  302,  cloth.     1877.     10s.

SINCLAIR.  — Godde-s  Fortune  :  A  Novel.  Bv  Thomas  Sinclair,  M.A.  Three  vols.,
post  8vo,  pp.  viii.-302.  302,  274,  cloth.     1884.     31s.  Od.

SINCLAIR —Quest:  A  Collection  of  Essays.  By  Thomas  Sinclair,  M.A.  Crown
8vo,  pp.  184,  cloth.     1885.     2s.  Gd.

SINGER.  — Hungarian  Grammar.     See  Trubner's  Collection.

SINNETT.— The  Occult  World.  By  A.  P.  Sinnett.  Fourth  Edition.  With  nn
Appendix  of  20  pages,  on  the  subject  of  Mr.  Kiddle's  Charge  of  Plagiarism.  Svo,
pp.  xx.  and  20G,  cloth.    18S4.    3s.  6d.  ,


62  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Woi'ks,

SMITH.— The  Divine  Government.  By  S.  Smith,  M.D.  Fifth  Edition.  Crown
8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  276,  cloth.     1866.     6s.

SMITH.— The  Recent  Depression  of  Trade.  Its  Nature,  its  Causes,  and  the
Remedies  which  have  been  suggested  for  it.  By  Walter  E.  Smith,  B.A  ,  New-
College.  Being  the  Oxford  Cobden  Prize  Essay  for  1879.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  vi.  and
108,  cloth.     1880.     3s.

SMYTH. — The  Aborigines  of  Victoria.  "With  Notes  relating  to  the  Habits  of
the  Natives  of  other  Parts  of  Australia  and  Tasmania.  Compiled  from  various
sources  for  the  Government  of  Victoria.  By  R.  Brough  Smyth,  F.L.S.,  F.G.S.,
&c,  &c.  2  vols,  royal  8vo,  pp.  lxxii.-484  and  vi.-456,  Maps,  Plates,  and  Wood-
cuts, cloth.    1878.    £3,  3s.

SNOW— A  Theologico-Political  Treatise.  By  G.  D.  Snow.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  180,
cloth.     1874.     4s.  6d.

SOLLING.— Diutiska:  An  Historical  and  Critical  Survey  of  the  Literature  of  Ger-
many, from  the  Earliest  Period  to  the  Death  of  Goethe.  By  Gustav  Soiling.  8vo,
pp.  xviii.  and  368.     1863.     10s.  6d.

SOLLING.— Select  Passages  from  the  Works  of  Shakespeare.  Translated  and
Collected.  German  and  English.  By  G.  Soiling.  12mo,  pp.  155,  cloth.  1866.
3s.  6d.

SOLLING.— Macbeth.  Rendered  into  Metrical  German  (with  English  Text  ad-
joined).    By  Gustav  Soiling.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  160,  wrapper.     1878.     3s.  6d.

SONGS  of  the  Semitic  in  English  Verse.  By  G.  E.  W.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  iv.  and
134,  cloth.     1877.     5s.

SOUTHALL.— The  Epoch  of  the  Mammoth  and  the  Apparition  of  Man  upon
Earth.  By  James  C.  Southall,  A.M.,  LL.D.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  430,  cloth.
Illustrated.     1878.     10s.  6d.

SPANISH  REFORMERS  of  Two  Centuries  from  1520 ;  Their  Lives  and  Writing,
.according  to  the  late  Benjamin  B.  Wiffen's  Plan,  and  with  the  Use  of  His  Mate-
rials. Described  by  E.  Boehmer,  D.D.,  Ph.D.  Vol.  I.  With  B.  B.  Wiffen's
Narrative  of  the  Incidents  attendant  upon  the  Republication  of  Reformistas
Antiguos  Espanoles,  and  with  a  Memoir  of  B.  B.  Wiffen.  By  Isaline  Wiffen.
Royal  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  216,  cloth.  1874.  12s.  6d.  Roxburghe,  15s.— Vol.  II.
Royal  8vo,  pp.  xii. -374,  cloth.     1883.     18s.

SPEDDING.— The  Life  and  Times  of  Francis  Bacon.  Extracted  from  the  Edition
of  his  Occasional  Writings,  by  James  Spedding.  2  vols,  post  8vo,  pp.  XX.-710  and
xiv.-708,  cloth.   1878.     21s.

SPIERS. — The  School  System  of  the  Talmud.  By  the  Rev.  B.  Spiers.  8vo,  pp.
48,  cloth.     1882.     2s.  6d.

SPINOZA. — Benedict  de  Spinoza:  his  Life,  Correspondence,  and  Ethics.  By  R.
Willis,  M.D.     8vo,  pp.  xliv.  and  648,  cloth.     1870.     21s.

SPINOZA.— Ethic  Demonstrated  in  Geometrical  Order  and  Divided  into  Five
Parts,  which  treat — I.  Of  God  ;  II.  Of  the  Nature  and  Origin  of  the  Mind  ;
III.  Of  the  Origin  and  Nature  of  the  Affects  ;  IV.  Of  Human  Bondage,  or  of  the
Strength  of  the  Affects  ;  V.  Of  the  Power  of  the  Intellect,  or  of  Human  Liberty
By  Benedict  de  Spinoza.  Translated  from  the  Latin  by  W.  Hale  White.  Post
8vo,  pp.  328,  cloth.     1883.     10s.  6d.

SPIRITUAL  EVOLUTION,  An  Essay  on,  considered  in  its  bearing  upon  Modern
Spiritualism,  Science,  and  Religion.  By  J.  P.  B.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  156,  cloth.
1879.     3s.

SPRUNER. — Dr.  Karl  Von  Spruner's  Historico-Geographical  Hand-Atlas,
containing  26  Coloured  Maps.     Obi.  cloth.     1861.     15s.

SQUIER. — Honduras  ;  Descriptive,  Historical,  and  Statistical.  By  E.  G.  Squier,
M.A.,  F.S.A.     Cr.  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  278,  cloth.     1870.     3s.  6d.

STATIONERY  OFFICE.— Publications  of  Her  Majesty's  Stationery  Office.
List  on  application.


Published  by  Triibner  &  Co.  G">

STEDMAN.  — Oxford  :  Its  Social  and  Intellectual  Life.     With  Remarks  and  Hint*

OB   Bxpenaet,  the  Examinations,  &c.     By  Algernon  M.  M.  Stcdman,  R.A.,  Wad-

ham  College.  Oxford.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  309,  cloth.     1878,     7s.  6d.
STEELE.     An    Kastern  Lovk  BTOBT.      Kusa  Jatakaya  :  A   Buddhistic    I.oL-ndarv

Poj  in,  with  other  Stories.    By  Th.  Steele.    Cr.  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  200,  cl.    1871.    6s.
STENT.— The  Jade  Chaplet.      In  Twenty-four  Beads.     A  Collection  of  Songs,

Ballads,  kc.  (from  the  Chinese).     By  G.  C.  Stent,  M.N.C.B.R.A.S.     Post  8vo,  pp.

viii.  and  1G8,  cloth.     1874.     5s.
STENZLER.— See  AoCTORBS  Sanskrit:,  Vol.  II.
ROOK. — Attempts  at  Truth.     By  St.  George  Stock.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  vi.  and

MS,  oloth.     1882.    5s.
STOKES.     QOIDI  i  KJA— Old  and   Early-Middle   Irish    Glosses:     Prose   and   Verse.

Edited  by  Whitley  Stokes.     2d  Edition.     Med.  8vo,  pp.  192,  cloth.     1872.     18s.
STOKES.  — BkuvaHB  Mekiasek.     The  Life  of  Saint  Meriasek,  Bishop  and  Confessor.

A  Cornish  Drama.     Edited,  with  a  Translation  and  Notes,  by  Whitley  Stokes.

Med.  8vo.  pp.  xvi.  and  280,  and  Facsimile,  cloth.     1872.     15s.
STOKES.— Tog  ah.  Troy,  the  Destruction  of  Troy.     Transcribed  from  the  Fac

simile  of  the  Book  of  Leinster,  and  Translated,  with  a  Glossarial  Index  of  the

Rarer  Words,  by  Whitley  Stokes.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  188,  paper  boards.

1882.     18s.
STOKES.— Three  Middle-Irish  Homilies  on  the  Lives  of  Saints— Patrick,

Brigit,  and  Columba.     Edited  by  Whitley  Stokes.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and

140.  paper  boards.     1882.     10s.  6d.
STONE  —  Christianity  before  Christ;  or,  Prototypes  of  our  Faith  and  Culture.

By  Charles  J.  Stone,  F.R.S.L.,  F.R.Hist.S.,  Author  of  "Cradle-Land  of  Arts  and

Creeds."    Crown  8vo,  pp.      ,  cloth.
STRANGE— The  Bible;  is  it  "  The  Word  of  God  "  ?    By  Thomas  Lumisden  Strange.

Demy  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  384,  cloth.     1871.     7s.
STRANGE.— The  Speaker's  Commentary.     Reviewed  by  T.  L.  Strange.      Cr.  8vo

pp.  viii.  and  159,  cloth.      1871.     2s.  6d.
STRANGE.— The  Development  of  Creation  on  the  Earth.     By  T.  L.  Strange.

Demy  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  110,  cloth.     1874.     2s.  6d.
STRANGE.— The  Legends  of  the  Old  Testament.    By  T.  L.  Strange.    Demy  8vo,

pp.  xii.  and  244,  cloth.     1874.     5s.
STRANGE.  — The  Sources    and    Development   of   Christianity.    By  Thomas

Lumisden  Strange.     Demy  8vo,  pp.  xx.  and  256,  cloth.     1875.     53.
STRANGE. —What  is  Christianity?     An  Historical  Sketch.     Illustrated  with  a

Chart.    By  T.  L.  Strange.     Foolscap  8vo,  pp.  72,  cloth.     1880.     2s.  6d.
STRANGE.— Contributions  to  a  Series  of  Controversial  Writings,  issued  by

the  late  Mr.  Thomas  Scott,  of  Upper  Norwood.     By  Thomas  Lumisden  Strange.

Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  312,  cloth.     1881.     2s.  6d.
STRANGFORD. — Original  Letters  andPapers  of  the  Late  Viscount  Strangford

upon  Philological  and  Kindred  Subjects.     Edited  by  Viscountess  Strangford.

Post  8vo,  pp.  xxii.  and  284,  cloth.     1878.     12s.  6d.
STRATMANN.     The  Tragicall  Historie  of  Hamlet,  Prince  of  Denmarke.     By

William  Shakespeare.   Edited  according  to  the  first  printed  Copies,  with  the  various

Readings    and   Critical  Notes.      By  F.  H.  Stratmann.      8vo,  pp.    vi.  and  120,

sewed.     3s.  6<1.
STRATMANN.  —A  Dictionary  of  the  Old  English  Language.    Compiled  from

Writings  of  the  Twelfth,  Thirteenth,  Fourteenth,  and  Fifteenth  Centuries.     By

F.  H.  Stratmann.    Third  Edition.     4to,  pp.  x.  and  002,  sewed.     1878.     30s.
STUDIES  ok  Man.     By  a  Japanese.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  124,  cloth.     1874.     2s.  6d.
SUMNER.  —What  Social  Classes  Owe  to  Each  Other.     By  W.  G.  Sumner,  Pro-
fessor of  Political  and  Social  Science  in  Yale  College.    18mo,  pp.  170,  cloth.     1884.

3s.  6d.
SUYEMATZ.— Genji  Monog atari.      The  Most  Celebrated  of  the  Classical  Japanese

Romances.     Translated  by  K.    Suyematz.     Crown  8vo,  pp.   xvi.  and  254,  cloth.

1882.     7s.  6d.


64  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works,

SWEET.— Spelling  Reform  and  English  Ljteiuture.  By  Henry  Sweet,  M.A.
8vo,  pp.  8,  wrapper.     1884.     2d.

SWEET. — History  of  English  Sounds,  from  the  Earliest  Period,  including  an  In-
vestigation of  the  General  Laws  of  Sound  Change,  and  full  Word  Lists.  By
Henry  Sweet.     Demy  8vo,  pp.  iv.-164,  cloth.     1874.     4s.  6d.

SWEET. — On  a  Mexican  Mustang  through  Texas  from  the  Gulf  to  the  Rio
GltANDE.  By  Alex.  E.  Sweet  and  J.  Annoy  Knox,  Editors  of  "  Texas  Siftings."
English  Copyright  Edition.     Demy  8vo,  pp.  672.    Illustrated,  cloth.     1883.     10s.

SYED  AHMAD. — A  Seiues  of  Essays  on  the  Life  of  Mohammed,  and  Subjects
subsidiary  thereto.  By  Syed  Ahmad  Khan  Bahadur,  C.S.I.  Svo,  pp.  532,
with  4  Tables,  2  Maps,  and  Plate,  cloth.     1870.     30s.

TALBOT.— Analysis  of  the  Organisation  of  the  Prussian  Army.  By  Lieuten-
ant Gerald  F.  Talbot,  2d  Prussian  Dragoon  Guards.  Royal  8vo,  pp.  78,  cloth.
1871.     3s.

TAYLER.— A  Retrospect  of  the  Religious  Life  of  England  ;  or,  Church,
Puritanism,  and  Free  Inquiry.  By  J.  J.  Tayler,  B.A.  Second  Edition.  Re-
issued, with  an  Introductory  Chapter  on  Recent  Development,  by  James  Martineau,
LL.D.,  D.D.     Post  Svo,  pp.  380,  cloth.     187G.     7s.  6d.

TAYLOR. — Prince  Deukalion  :  A  Lyrical  Drama.  By  Bayard  Taylor.  Small  4to,
pp.  172.     Handsomely  bound  in  -white  vellum.     1878.     12s.

TECHNOLOGICAL  Dictionary  of  the  Terms  employed  in  the  Arts  and  Sciences  ;
Architecture  ;  Civil  Engineering  ;  Mechanics  ;  Machine-Making  ;  Shipbuilding  and
Navigation ;  Metallurgy ;  Artillery;  Mathematics;  Physics;  Chemistry;  Minera-
logy, &c.     With  a  Preface  by  Dr.  K.  Karmarsch.     Second  Edition.     3  vols.
Vol.  1.  German-English-French.     8vo,  pp.  646.     12s.
Vol.  II.  Euglish-German-French.     8vo,  pp.  666.     12s.
Vol.  III.  French-German-English.     Svo,  pp.  618.     12s.

TECHNOLOGICAL  DICTIONARY.— A  Pocket  Dictionary  of  Technical  Terms
used  in  Arts  and  Manufactures.  English-German-French,  Deutsch-Englisch-
Franzosisch,  Frangais-Allemaud-Anglais.  Abridged  from  the  above  Techno-
logical Dictionary  by  Rumpf,  Mothes,  and  Unverzagt.  With  the  addition  of
Commercial  Terms.     3  vols.  sq.  12mo,  cloth,  12s.

TEMPLE.— The  Legends  of  the  Punjab.  Bv  Captain  R.  C.  Temple,  Bengal  Staff
Corps,  F.G.S.,  &c.     Vol.  I.,  8vo,  pp.  xviii.-546,  cloth.     18S4.     £1,  6s.

THEATRE  FranCais  Moderne.— A  Selection  of  Modern  French  Plays.  Edited  by
the  Rev.  P.  H.  E.  Brette,  B.D.,  C.  Cassal,  LL.D.,  and  Th.  Karcher,  LL.B.

First  Series,  in  1  vol.  crown  8vo,  cloth,  6s.,  containing —

Charlotte  Corday.  A  Tragedy.  By  F.  Ponsard.  Edited,  with  English  Notes
and  Notice  on  Ponsard,  by  Professor  C.  Cassal,  LL.D.  Pp.  xii.  and  134.  Sepa-
rately, 2s.  6d.

Diane.  A  Drama  in  Verse.  By  Emile  Augier.  Edited,  with  English  Notes  and
Notice  on  Augier,  by  Th.  Karcher,  LL.B.  Pp.  xiv.  and  145.  Separately,
2s.  6d.

Le  Voyage  A  Dieppe,  A  Comedy  in  Prose.  By  Wafflard  and  Fulgence.  Edited,
with  English  Notes,  by  the  Rev.  P.  H.  E.  Brette,  B.D.  Pp.  104.  Separately,
2s.  6d.

Second  Scries,  crown  8vo,  cloth,  6s.,  containing —

Moliere.  A  Drama  in  Prose.  By  George  Sand.  Edited,  with  English  Notes
and  Notice  of  George  Sand,  by  Th.  Karcher,  LL.B.  Fcap.  Svo,  pp.  xx.  and
170,  cloth.     Separately,  3s.  6d.

Les  Aristocraties.  A  Comedy  in  Verse.  By  Etienne  Arago.  Edited,  with  Eng-
lish Notes  and  Notice  of  Etienne  Arago,  by  the  Rev.  P.  H.  E.  Brette,  B.D.  2d
Edition.     Fcap.  Svo,  pp.  xiv.  and  236,  cloth.     Sep. irately,  4s.


Published  by  2'riibner  &  Co.  C5

THEATRE  Franc  ais  Moderns— continued.

Third  Series,  crown  8vo,  clotli,  6s.,  containii.
Les  Fai  \  BoHBHOmoB.      A  Oomedy.      By  Theodore  Barrier*  and   Ernest  On-

peiulu.      Edited,  with  English  Notes  HM  Notice  on  Barriere,  by  Prsfenor  C.
Cassal,  LL.D.     Fcap.  Svo,  pp.  xvi.  and  304.     1808.     Separately,  4s.
I/Hn.sNiiH    11    L'AbGKHT.       A  Comedy.      By  Francois  Fonsard.     Edited,  with
English   Notes  and   Memoir  of   Fonsard,    by  Professor  C.  Cassal,  LL.D.      2d
Edition.     Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  171,  cloth.     18(19.     Separately,  3s.  0d.

THEISM  —A  Candid  Examination  ok  Theism.  By  Physicus.  Post  8vo,  pp.  xviii.
and  198,  cloth.     1878.     7s.  6d.

THEOBALD. — Selections  from  tiik  POSTS  ;  or,  Passages  Illustrating  Peculiarities
of  their  Style,  Pathos,  or  Wit.  By  \V.  Theobald,  M.R.A.S.,  late  Deputy-Snperiii-
tendent  Geological  Survey  of  India.  With  Notes,  Historical,  Explanatory,  and
Glossarial,  for  the  Use  of  Young  Readers.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  208,  cloth.
1885.     5s.

THE0SOPHY  and  THE  Higher  Life;  or,  Spiritual  Dynamics  and  the  Divine  and
Miraculous  Man.  By  G.  W.,  M.D.,  Edinburgh.  President  of  the  British  Theoso-
phical  Society.     12mo,  pp.  iv.  and  138,  cloth.     1880.     3s.

THOM.  — St.  Paul's  Epistles  to  the  Corinthians.  An  Attempt  to  convey  their
Spirit  and  Significance.  By  the  Rev.  J.  H.  Thorn.  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  408,  cloth.
1851.     5s.

THOMAS.  —Early  Sassanian  Inscriptions,  Seals,  and  Coins,  illustrating  the
Early  History  of  the  Sassanian  Dynasty,  containing  Proclamations  of  Ardeshir
Babek,  Sapor  I.,  and  his  Successors.  "With  a  Critical  Examination  and  Explana-
tion of  the  celebrated  Inscription  in  the  Hajh'ibad  Cave,  demonstrating  that  Sapor,
the  Conqueror  of  Valerian,  was  a  professing  Christian.  By  Edward  Thomas.
Illustrated.     8vo,  pp.  148,  cloth.     7s.  6d.

THOMAS.— The  Chronicles  of  the  Pathan  Kings  of  Dehli.  Illustrated  by
Coins,  Inscriptions,  and  other  Antiquarian  Remains.  By  E.  Thomas,  F.R.A.S.
With  Plates  and  Cuts.     Demy  8vo,  pp.  xxiv.  and  467,  cloth.     1871.     28s.

THOMAS.  The  Revenue  Resources  of  the  Mughal  Empire  in  India,  front
A.D.  1593  to  A.D.  1707.  A  Supplement  to  "The  Chronicles  of  the  Pathan  Kings
of  Delhi."    By  E.  Thomas,  F.RS.     8vo,  pp.  60,  cloth.     3s.  6d.

THOMAS.— Sassanian  Coins.  Communicated  to  the  Numismatic  Society  of
London.  By  E.  Thomas,  F.R.S.  Two  Parts,  12mo,  pp.  43.  3  Plates  and  a  Cut,
sewed.     5s.

THOMAS. — Jainism  ;  or,  The  Early  Faith  of  Asoka.  With  Illustrations  of  the
Ancient  Religions  of  the  East,  from  the  Pantheon  of  the  Indo-Scythians.  To
which  is  added  a  Notice  on  Bactrian  Coins  and  Indian  Dates.  By  Edward
Thomas,  F.R.S.  8vo,  pp.  viii.-2-t  and  82.  With  two  Autotype  Plates  and
Woodcuts.     1877.    7s.  6d.

THOMAS.— The  Theory  and  Practice  of  Creole  Grammar.  By  J.  J.  Thomas.
8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  135,  boards.     12s.

THOMAS.  —  Records  of  the  Gupta  Dynasty.  Illustrated  by  Inscriptions,  Written
History,  Local  Tradition,  and  Coins.  To  which  is  added  a  Chapter  on  the  Arabs
in  Siud.  By  Edward  Thomas,  F.R.S.  Folio,  with  a  Plate,  pp.  iv.  and  64,  cloth.
14s.

THOMAS.— Tin:  Inman  Balhara,  and  the  Arabian  Intercourse  with  India  in  the
Ninth  and  following  Centuries.  By  Edward  Thomas,  F.R.S.  (Coutained  in
International  Numismata  Orientalia.  Vol.  II  I.,  Fait  I.  Coins  of  Arakan
Royal  4to,  pp.  viii. -48,  wrappers.     1882.     8s.  6d.

THOMAS.  — Boyhood  Lavs.  By  William  Henry  Thomas.  18mo,  pp.  iv.  and  74,
cloth.     1877.     2s.  6d.

THOMPSON.— Dialogues,  Russian  and  English.  Compiled  by  A.  R.  Thompson,
sometime  Lecturer  of  the  English  Language  in  the  University  of  St.  Vladimir.
Kieff.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  iv.  and  132,  cloth.     1882.     5s.

E


66  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works,

THOMSON. — Evolution  and  Involution.  By  George  Thomson, Author  of  "The
World  of  Being,"  &c.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  20(3,  cloth.     1880.     5s.

THORBURN.— BannC  ;  on,  Our  Afghan  Frontier.  By  S.  S.  Thorburn,  F.C.S.,
Settlement  Officer  of  the  Bannu  District.    8vo,  pp.  x.  and  480,  cloth.    1876.    18s.

THORPE.— Diplomatarium  Anglicum  iEvi  Saxonici.  A  Collection  of  English
Charters,  from  the  reign  of  King  iEthelberht  of  Kent,  A.n.  DCV.,  to  that  of  Wil-
liam the  Conqueror.  Containing  :  I.  Miscellaneous  Charters.  II.  Wills.  III.
Guilds.  IV.  Manumissions  and  Acquittances.  With  a  Translation  of  the  Anglo-
Saxon.  By  the  late  Benjamin  Thorpe,  Member  of  the  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences
at  Munich,  and  of  the  Society  of  Netherlandish  Literature  at  Leyden.  8vo,  pp.
xlii.  and  682,  cloth.     1865.     £1,  Is.

THOUGHTS  ON  LOGIC ;  or,  the  S.N.I.X.  Propositional  Theory.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  iv.
and  76,  cloth.    1877.    2s.  6d.

THOUGHTS  ON  THEISM,  with  Suggestions  towards  a  Public  Religious  Service  in
Harmony  with  Modern  Science  aud  Philosophy.  Ninth  Thousand.  Revised  and
Enlarged.     8vo,  pp.  74,  sewed.     1882.     Is.

THURSTON. —Friction  and  Lubrication.  Determinations  of  the  Laws  and  Co-
efficients of  Friction  by  new  Methods  and  with  new  Apparatus.  By  Robert  H.
Thurston,  A.M.,  C.E.,  &c.     Crown  Svo,  pp.  xvi.  and  212,  cloth.     1879.     6s.  6d.

TIELE. — See  English  and  Foreign  Philosophical  Library,  Vol.  VII.  and  Triibner's

Oriental  Series.
TOLHAUSEN.— A  Synopsis  of  the  Patent  Laws  of  Various  Countries.      By  A.

Tolhausen,  Ph.D.     Third  Edition.    12mo,  pp.  62,  sewed.     1870.     Is.  6d.

TONSBERG. —Norway.  Illustrated  Handbook  for  Travellers.  Edited  by  Charles
Tousberg.  AVith  134  Engravings  on  Wood,  17  Maps,  and  Supplement.  Crown
Svo,  pp.  lxx.,  482,  and  32,  cloth.     1875.     18s.

TOPOGRAPHICAL  WORKS.— A  List  of  the  various  Works  prepared  at  the
Tofographical  and  Statistical  Department  of  the  War  Office  may  be
had  on  application.

TORCEANU.— Roumanian  Grammar.     See  Triibner's  Collection.

TORRENS. — Empire  in  Asia:  How  we  came  by  it.  A  Book  of  Confessions.  By
W.  M.  Torrens,  M.P.     Med.  Svo,  pp.  426.  cloth.     1872.     14s.

TOSCANI. — Italian  Conversational  Course.  A  New  Method  of  Teaching  the
Italian  Language,  both  Theoretically  and  Practically.  By  Giovanni  Toscani,  Pro-
fessor of  the  Italian  Language  and  Literature  in  Queen's  Coll.,  London,  &c.
Fourth  Edition.    12mo,  pp.  xiv.  aud  300,  cloth.     1872.     5s.

TOSCANI. — Italian  Reading  Course.  By  G.  Toscani.  Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and
160.     With  table.     Cloth.    1875.     4s.  Cd.

TOULON. — Its  Advantages  as  a  Winter  Residence  for  Invalids  and  Others.
By  an  English  Resident.  The  jn'oceeds  of  this  pamphlet  to  be  devoted  to  the
English  Church  at  Toulon.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  S,  sewed.     1873.     6d.

TRADLEG.— A  Son  of  Belial.  Autobiographical  Sketches.  By  Nitram  Tradleg,
University  of  Bosphorus.     Crown  8 vo,  pp.  viii. -260,  cloth.     1882.     5s.

TRIMEN. — South-African  Butterflies  ;  a  Monograph  of  the  Extra-Tropical
Species.  By  Roland  Trimen,  F.L.S.,  F.Z.S.,  M.E.S.,  Curator  of  the  Sooth
African  Museum,  Cape  Town.     Royal  8vo.  [In  preparation.

TRUBNER'S  American,  European,  and  Oriental  Literary  Record.  A  Register
of  the  most  Important  Works  published  in  America,  India,  China,  and  the  British
Colonies.  With  Occasional  Notes  on  German,  Dutch,  Danish,  French,  Italian,
Spanish,  Portuguese,  aud  Russian  Literature.  The  object  of  the  Publishers  in
issuing  this  publication  is  to  give  a  full  and  particular  account  of  every  publica-
tion of  importance  issued  in  America  and  the  East.  Small  4to,  6d.  per  number.
Subscription,  5s.  per  volume.


Published  by  TnSmer  <fc  Co.  G7

TRUBNER.— Truhner's    Bibliographical    Guide    to    American    Literature:
A  fin  rood  Lirt  of  Booki  published  in  the  United  States  of  America,  from  1817
■7.     With    Bibliographical   Introduction.  Notes,  and  Alphabetical  Index.
Compiled  ami  Edited  by  Nicolas  Triibner.       In  1  vol.  8vo,  half  bound,  pp.  750.
L859.     is,.
TRUBNER S   Catalogue  of  Dictionaries  and  Grammars  of  tke  Principal
Languages  and  Dialects  of  THl  WOULD.    Considerably  Enlarged  and  Itevised,
with  an  Alphabetical  Index.     A  Guide  for  Students  and  Booksellers.     Second
Kdition,  8vo.  pp.  viii.  and  170,  cloth.     1882.     5s.
TRUBNERS  Collection  of  Simplified  Grammars  ok  the  Principal  Asiatic
and  European-  Languages.     Edited  by  Reinhold  Host,  LL.  D.,  Ph.D.     Crown
8vo,  cloth,  uniformly  bound.

L— Hindustani,    Persian,    and   Arabic.     By  E.   H.   Palmer,  M.A.
Second  Edition.     Pp.  112.     1885.     5s.
II.— Hungarian.     By  I.  Singer.     Pp.  vi.  and  88.     1882.     4s.  6d.
ELL— Baso.uk.     By  W.  Van  Eys.     Pp.  xii.  and  52.     1883.     3s.  Od.
IV.  -MALAGASY.     By  G.  W.  Parker.     Pp.  66,  with  Plate.     L883.     5s.
V.— Modern  Greek.    By  E.  M.  Geldart,  M.A.    Pp.68.    1883.    2s.  6d.
VL— ROUMANIAN.     By  R.  Torcer.nu.     Pp.  viii.  and  72.     1883.     5s.
"VII.— Tibetan  Grammar.     By  H.  A.  Jaschke.     Pp.  viii. -104.     1883.     5s.
VIII.— Danish.     By  E.  O.  Otte.     Pp.  viii.  and  00.     1884.     2s.  lid.
IX.— Turkish.  ByJ.  W.Redhouse.M.R.A.S.  Pp.  xii.  and  201.  1884.  10s.6d.
X.— Swedish.     By  E.  C.  Otte.     Pp.  xii.-70.     1884.     2s.  6d.
XI.— Polish.     By  W.  R.  Morfill,  M.A.     Pp.  viii. -64.     1884.     3s.  6d.
XII.— Pali.     By  E.  Miiller.     Pp.  xvi.-144.     1884.     7s.  6d.
XIII.— Sanskrit.     By  H.  Edgren.     Pp.  xii.-178.     1885.     10s.  6d.
TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES  :—

Post  8vo,  cloth,  uniformly  bound.
Essays   on    the    Sacred   Language,    Writings,    and   Religion  of
the  Parsis.      By  Martin  Haug,  Ph.D.,  late  Professor  of  Sanskrit  and
Comparative  Philology  at  the  University  of  Munich.     Third  Edition.
Edited  and  Enlarged  by  E.  W.  West,  Ph.D.     To  which  is  also  added,  A
Biographical  Memoir  of  the  late  Dr.  Haug.     By  Professor  E.  P.  Evans.
Pp.  xlviii.  and  428.     1884.     16s.
Texts    from    the   Buddhist  Canon,   commonly  known    as  Dhamma-
pada.     With  Accompanying  Narratives.     Translated  from  the  Chinese
by  S.  Beal,  B.A.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  Professor  of  Chinese,  Uni-
versity College,  London.     Pp.  viii.  and  176.     1878.     7s.  0,1.
The  History  of  Indian  Literature.      By  Albrecht  Weber.      Trans-
lated from  the  German  by  J.  Mann,  M.A.,  and  Dr.  T.  Zachariae,  with
the  Author's  sanction  and  assistance.  2d  Edition.  Pp.368.  1882.    10s.  6d.
["A  Sketch  of  the  Modern  Languages  of  the  East  Indies.     Accom-
panied  by  Two   Language   Maps,    Classified    List    of    Languages    and
Dialects,  and  a  List  of  Authorities  for  each  Language.     By  Robert  Cust,
late  of  H.M.I.C.S.,  and  Hon.  Librarian  of  R.A.S.      Pp.  xii.  and  193.
1878.    12s.
The  Birth  of  the  War-God:  A    Poem.      By    Kalidasa.     Translated
from  the  Sanskrit  into  English  Verse,  by  Ralph  T.  H.  Griffiths,  M.A.,
Principal  of  Benares  College.  Second  Edition.   Pp.  xii.  and  116.  1879.  5s.
A  Classical  Dictionary  of  Hindu   Mythology  and  History,  Geo-
graphy and  Literature.     By  John  Dowson,  M.R.A.S.,  late  Professor
in  the  Staff  College.     Pp.  432.     1879.     16s.
Metrical  Translations  from  Sanskrit  Writers  ;  with  an  Introduc-
tion,   many    Prose    Versions,  and    Parallel    Passages    from    Classical
Authors.     By  J.  Muir,  CLE.,  D.C.L.,  &c.     Pp.  xliv.-370.     1879.^  14s.
Modern  India  and  the  Indians:  being  a  Series  of  Impressions,  Notes,
and  Essays.     By Monier Williams,  D.C.L.,  Hon.  LL.D.  ofthe  University
of  Calcutta,  Boden  Professor  of  Sanskrit  in  the  University  of  Oxford.
Third  Edition,  revised  and  augmented  by  considerable  additions.     With
Illustrations  and  Map,  pp.  vii.  and  368.     1879.     14s.


68  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works,

TEUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES—  continued.

The  Life  or  Legend  of  Gaudama,  the  Bnddha  of  the  Burmese.  With
Annotations,  the  Ways  to  Neibban,  and  Notice  on  the  Phongyies,  or
Burmese  Monks.  By  the  Right  Rev.  P.  Bigandet,  Bishop  of  Ramatha.
Vicar  Apostolic  of  Ava  and  Pegu.  Third  Edition.  2  vols.  Pp.  xx.-368
and  viii.-326.     1880.     21s.

Miscellaneous  Essays,  relating  to  Indian  Subjects.  By  B.  H-  Hodg-
son, late  British  Minister  at  Nepal.  2  vols.,  pp.  viii.-408,  and  viii.-348.
1880.     28s.

Selections  from  the  Koran.  By  Edward  William  Lane,  Author  of  an
"Arabic-English  Lexicon,"  &c.  A  New  Edition,  Revised,  with  an
Introduction.     By  Stauley  Lane  Poole.     Pp.  cxii.  and  174.     1879.     9e.

Chinese  Buddhism.  A  Volume  of  Sketches,  Historical  and  Critical.
By  J.  Edkins,  D.D.,  Author  of  "  China's  Place  in  Philology,"  "Religion
in  China,"  &c,  &c.     Pp.  lvi.  and  454.     1880.     18s.

The  Gulistan  ;  or,  Rose  Garden  of  Shekh  Mushliu'd-Din  Sadi  of
Shiraz.  Translated  for  the  first  time  into  Prose  and  Verse,  with
Preface  and  a  Life  of  the  Author,  from  the  Atish  Kadah,  by  E.  B.
Eastwick,  F.R.S.,M.R.A.S.  2d  Edition.  Pp.  xxvi.  and  244.  1880.  10s.  6d.

A  Talmudic  Miscellany  ;  or,  One  Thousand  and  One  Extracts  from  the
Talmud,  the  Midrashim,  and  the  Kabbalah.  Compiled  and  Translated
by  P  J.  Hershon.  With  a  Preface  by  Rev.  F.  W.  Farrar,  D.D.,  F.R.S .
Chaplain  in  Ordinary  to  Her  Majesty,  and  Canon  of  Westminster.
With  Notes  and  Copious  Indexes.     Pp.  xxviii.  and  362.    1880.     14s.

The  History  of  Esarhaddon  (Son  of  Sennacherib),  King  of  Assyria,
B.C.  681-668.  Translated  from  the  Cuneiform  Inscriptions  upon
Cylinders  and  Tablets  in  the  British  Museum  Collection.  Together
with  Original  Texts,  a  Grammatical  Analysis  of  each  word,  Explana-
tions of  the  Ideographs  by  Extracts  from  the  Bi-Lingual  Syllabaries,
and  List  of  Eponyms,  &c.  By  E.  A.  Budge,  B.A.,  M.R.A.S.,  Assyrian
Exhibitioner,  Christ's  College,  Cambridge.  Post  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and
164,  cloth.    1880.     10s.  6d.

Buddhist  Birth  Stories  ;  or,  Jataka  Tales.  The  oldest  Collection  of
Folk-Lore  extant  :  being  the  JiLtakatthavannana,  for  the  first  time
edited  in  the  original  Pali,  bv  V.  Fausboll,  and  translated  by  T.  W.
Rhys  Davids.     Translation.     Vol.  I.     Pp.  cxvL  and  348.     1880.     18s.

The  Classical  Poetry  of  the  Japanese.  By  Basil  Ch  amberlain ,  Author
of  "Yeigio  Heukaku,  Ichiran."  Pp.  xii.  and  228.     1880.     7s.  6d.

Linguistic  and  Oriental  Essays.  Written  from  the  year  1846-1878.
By  R.  Cust,  Author  of  "The  Modern  Languages  of  the  East  Indies."
Pp.  xii.  and  484.     18S0.     18s.

Indian  Poetry.  Containing  a  New  Edition  of  "The  Indian  Song  of
Songs,"  from  the  Sanskrit  of  the  Gita  Govinda  of  Jayadeva  ;  Two  Books
from  "  The  Iliad  of  India"  (Mahabharata) ;  "  Proverbial  Wisdom  "  from
the  Shlokas  of  the  Hitopadesa,  and  other  Oriental  Poems.  Bv  Edwin
Arnold,  C.S.I.,  &c.     Third  Edition.     Pp.  viii.  and  270.     1884.   *  7s.  6d.

TnE  Religions  of  India.  By  A.  Barth.  Authorised  Translation  by
Rev.  J.  Wood.     Pp.  xx.  and  310.     1881.     16s.

Hindu  Philosophy.  The  Siinkhya  Kiirika  of  Iswara  Krishna.  An
Exposition  of  the  System  of  Kapila.  With  an  Appendix  on  the  Nyaya
and  Vaiseshika  Systems.  By  John  Davies,  If.  A.,  M.R.A.S.  Pp.  vi.
and  151.     1881.     6s.


Published  by  Triibncr  &  Co.  G9

TRUBNERS  ORIENTAL  SERIES  -continue d.

A  Manual  ok  Hindu  Pantheism.     The  VedantaMi*.     Translated  with

Copious  Annotations.  By  Major  G.  A.  Jacob,  Bombay  .St;ilf  Corps,
Inspector  of  Army  Schools.  With  a  PrefaM  by  B.  1!.  Cow  ell,  M.A.,
Professor  of  Sauskrit  iu  the  University  of  Cambridge.  Pp.  x.  and  130
1881.     6s.

The  KJUNBVI  (usually  known  as  the  Mesuevlyi  Sherlf,  or  Holy  MesnevI)
of  Mevlfina  (Oar  Lord)  Jel&lu-'d-Din  Mohammed,  Er-RiunT.  Book  the
First.  Together  with  some  Account  of  the  Life  and  Acts  of  the  Author,
of  his  Ancestors,  and  of  his  Descendants.  Illustrated  by  a  selection
of  Characteristic  Anecdotes  as  collected  by  their  Historian  Mevl&na
Shemsu-'d-Dln  Ahmed,  KI  Kfifikl  El  Arifi.  Translated,  and  the  Poetry
Versified  by  James  W.  Redhouse,  M.R.A.S.,  &c.  Pp.  xvi.  and  13o\
vi.  and  290.     1881.     £1,  Is.

Eastkrn  Proverbs  and  Emblems  Illustrating  Old  Truths.  By  the
Rev.  J.  Long,  Member  of  the  Bengal  Asiatic  Society,  F.R.G.S.  Pp.
xv.  and  280.     1881.     6s.

The  Quatrains  ok  Omar  Khayyam.  A  New  Translation.  Bv  E.  EL
Whiufield,  late  of  H.M.  Bengal  Civil  Service.    Pp.  90.    1881.     5s.

The  Quatrains  ok  Omar  Khayyam.  The  Persian  Text,  with  an  English
Verse  Translation.   By  E.  H.  Whinfield.    Pp.  xxxii.-335.    1883.    10s.  (id.

The  Mind  ok  Mencius  ;  or,  Political  Economy  Founded  upon  Moral  Philo-
sophy. A  Systematic  Digest  of  the  Doctrines  of  the  Chinese  Philosopher
Mencius.  The  Original  Text  Classified  and  Translated,  with  Com-
ments, by  the  Rev.  E.  Faber,  Rhenish  Mission  Society.  Translated
from  the  German,  with  Additional  Notes,  by  the  Rev.  A.  B.  Hutchin-
son, Church  Mission,  Hong  Kong.  Author  in  Chinese  of  "  Primer  Old
Testament  History,"  &c,  &c.     Pp.  xvi.  and  "294.     1882.     10s.  Gd.

Y63UK  and  Zulaikha.  A  Poem  by  Jami.  Translated  from  the  Persian
into  English  Verse.  By  R.  T.  H.  Griffith.  Pp.  xiv.  and  304.  1882.  8s.  6d.

Tsuni-  II  Go  am  :  The  Supreme  Being  of  the  Khoi-Khoi.  By  Theophilus
Hahn,  Ph.D.,  Custodian  of  the  Grey  Collection,  Cape  Town,  Corres-
ponding Member  of  the  Geographical  Society,  Dresden  ;  Corresponding
Member  of  the  Anthropological  Society,  Vienna,  &c,  &c.  Pp.  xii.  aud
154.    1882.    7s.  6d.

A  Comprehensive  Commentary  to  the  Quran.  To  which  is  prefixed
Sale's  Preliminary  Discourse,  with  Additional  Notes  and  Emendations.
Together  with  a  Complete  Index  to  the  Text,  Preliminary  Discourse,
and  Notes.  By  Rev.  E.  M.  Wherry,  M.A. ,  Lodiana.  Vol.  I.  Pp.  xii.
and  392.     1882.     12s.  6d.     Vol.  II.     Pp.  xi.  and  408.     1884.     12s.  6d.

Hindu  Philosophy.  The  Bhagavad  GIta  ;  or,  The  Sacred  Lay.  A
Sanskrit  Philosophical  Lay.  Translated,  with  Notes,  by  John  Davies,
M.A.     Pp.  vi.  and  208.     1882.     8s.  6d.

The  Sarva-Darsana-Samgraha  ;  or,  Review  of  the  Different  Systems
of  Hindu  Philosophy.  By  Madhava  Acharya.  Translated  by  K  B.
Cowell,  M.A.,  Cambridge,  and  A.  E.  Gough,  M.A.,  Calcutta.  Pp.  xii.
and  282.     1882.     10s.  6d.

Tibetan  Tales.  Derived  from  Indian  Sources.  Translated  from  the
Tibetan  of  the  Kay-Gyur.  By  F.  Anton  von  Schiefner.  Done  iuto
English  from  the  German,  with  an  Introduction.  By  W.  R.  S.  Ralston,
M.A.     Pp.  lxvi.  aud  368.     1882.     14s.

Linguistic  Essays.     By  Carl  Abel,  Ph.D.     Pp.  viii.  and  265.     1882.     9a.

The  Indian  Empire  :  Its  History,  People,  and  Products.  By  W.  W.
Hunter,  CLE.,  LL.D.     Pp.  568.     1882.     16s.

History  ok  the  Egyptian  Religion.  By  Dr.  O.  P.  Tiele,  Leiden.  Trans-
lated by  J.  Balliugal.     Pp.  xxiv.  and  230.     1882.    7s.  6d.


70  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works,

TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES-  con  tinued.

The  Philosophy  of  the  Upanishads.    By  A.  E.  Gough,  M.A.,  Calcutta.

Pp.  xxiv.-2G8.     1882.     9s.
Udanavarga.     A  Collection  of  Verses  from  the  Buddhist  Canon.     Com-
piled  by   Dharmatrata.      Being  the   Northern    Buddhist   Version    of
Dhammapatla.      Translated  from   the   Tibetan   of    Bkah-hgyur,    with
Notes,  and  Extracts  from  the  Commentary  of  Pradjnavarman,  by  W.
Woodville  Rockhill.     Pp.  240.     1883.     9s.
A  History  of  Burma,  including  Burma  Proper,  Pegu,  Taungu,  Tenas-
serim,  and  Arakan.     From  the  Earliest  Time  to  the  End  of  the  First
War  with  British  India.     By  Lieut. -General  Sir  Arthur  P.   Phayre,
G.C.M.G.,  K.C.S.I.,  andC.B.     Pp.  xii.-312.     1883.     14s.
A  Sketch  of  the  Modern  Languages  of  Africa.     Accompanied  by  a
Language-Map.     By  R.  N.  Cust,  Author  of  "  Modern  Languages  of  the
East  Iudies,"  &c.     2  vols.,  pp.  xvi.  and  5G6,  with  Thirty-one  Autotype
Portraits.     1883.     25s.
Religion  in  China  ;  containing  a  brief  Account  of  the  Three  Religions  of
the  Chinese ;  with  Observations  on  the  Prospects  of  Christian  Conver-
sion amongst  that  People.     By  Joseph  Edkins,  D.D.,  Peking.     Third
Edition.     Pp.  xvi.  and  260.     1884.     7s.  6d.
Outlines  of  the  History  of  Religion  to  the  Spread  of  the  Universal
Religions.     By  Prof.  C.  P.  Tiele.     Translated  from  the  Dutch  by  J.
Estlin  Carpenter,  M.A.,  with  the  Author's  assistance.     Third  Edition.
Pp.  xx.  and  250.     1884.     7s.  6d.
Si-Yu-Ki.    Buddhist  Records  of  the  Western  World.    Translated
from  the  Chinese  of  Hiuen  Tsaing  (a.d.  629).    By  Samuel  Beal,  Professor
of  Chinese,  University  College,  London.      2  vols.,  with  a  specially  pre-
pared Map.    Pp.  cviii.-242  and  viii.-370.    1884.    24s.    Dedicated  by  per-
mission to  H.  R.  H.  the  Prince  of  Wales.
The  Life  of  the  Buddha,  and  the  Early  History  of  his  Order.
Derived  from  Tibetan  Works  in  the  Bkah-Hgyur  and  the  Bstan-Hgyur,
followed  by  Notices  on  the  Early  History  of  Tibet  and  Khoten.     By  W.
W.  Rockhill.     Pp.  xii.  and  274.      1884.     10s.  Gd.
The  Sankhya  Aphorisms  of  Kapila.    With  Illustrative  Extracts  from
the  Commentaries.    Translated  and  Edited  by  J.  R.  Ballantyne,  LL.D.,
late  Principal  of   Benares    College.     Third   Edition,  now  entirely  Re-
Edited  by  Fitzedward  Hall.     Pp.  viii.  and  464.     1885.     16s.
The  Ordinances  of  Manu.     Translated  from   the  Sanskrit.     With  an
Introduction  by  the  late  A.  C.  Burnell,  Ph.D.,  CLE.    Completed  and
Edited   by   Edward  AV.    Hopkins,  Ph.D.,    of   Columbia  College,  New
York.     Pp.  xliv.  and  400.     1884.    12s.
The  Life  and  Works  of  Alexander  Csoma  De  Koros  between  1819
and  1842.     With  a  Short  Notice  of  all  his  Published  and  Unpublished
Works  and  Essays.     From  Original  and  for  the  most  part  Unpublished
Documents.    By  T.  Duka,  M.D.,  F.R.C.S.  (Eng.),  Surgeon-Major  H.M.'s
Bengal  Medical  Service,  Retired,  &c.     Pp.  xii. -234,  cloth.     1885.     9s.
TURNER.— The  English  Language.     A  Concise  History  of  the  English  Language,
with  a  Glossary  showing  the  Derivation  and  Pronunciation  of  the  English  Words.
By  Roger  Turner.    In  German  and  English  on  opposite  pages.    18mo,  pp.  viii.-80,
sewed.     1884.     Is.  6d.
UNGER.— A  Short  Cut  to  Reading  :  The  Child's  First  Book  of  Lessons.     Part  I.
By  W.  H.  Unger.      Fourth  Edition.     Cr.  8vo,  pp.  32,  cloth.     1873.     5d.

Sequel  to  Part  I.  and  Part  II.    Fourth  Edition.    Cr.  Svo,  pp.  64,  cloth.    1873.

6d.     Parts  I.  and  II.     Third  Edition.     Demy  8vo,  pp.  76,  cloth.    1873.    Is.  6d.

In  folio  sheets.    Pp.  44.    Sets  A  to  D,  lOd.  each  ;  set  E,  8d.    1873.    Complete,  4s.

UNGER.— W.  H.  Unger's  Continuous  Supplementary  Writing  Models,  designed

to  impart  not  only  a  good  business  haDd,  but  correctness  in  transcribing.     Oblong

8vo,  pp.  40,  stiff  covers.     1874.     6d.


Published  by  Trubner  <('•  Co.  71

UNGER.     The  sn  i  ■! -.        ;  BOOK:     Being    Beleotiom   from    Official    c.

lenee.   Reports,  fco.  :    for   I  ding  and  Copying   Manuscripts,

writing.  Orthography,  Punctuation,  Dictation,  Pncia,  Indexing,  and  D
and  Tabulating  Accounts  and  Returns,    Compiled  by  W",   II.  Unger.    Folio,  pp.
LOO,  paper.     L87&    2a.

UNGER.     TWO  Hi  Niud.ii  Tisrs  in  ENGLISH  Obthogbaphy,  or  Word  Dictations.
apQedbyW.  H.  Unger.    Foolaoap,  pp.  viii.  and  200,  cloth.   1877.  La.  6<L  plain,
"-.  6a.  interleaved.

UNGER. — THB  Si'iiin  Primer:  By  which  one  of  the  remaining  difficulties  of
Children  is  entirely  removed  in  the  firsl  stages,  and,  :is  a  consequence,  a  consider-
able saving  of  time  will  he  effected.  In  Two  Parte.  Ly  W.  H.  Unger.  Parti,
ll'mo,  pp.  xvi.  and  44,  cloth.     5d.     Part  II.,  pp.  5'J,  cloth.     5d.

UNGER.  —  PRELIMINARY    WOBD  DICTATIONS  OB   THE  RULES    FOB    SPELLING.      By  W.

II.  dnger.     L8mo,  pp.  44,  cloth.    4d.
URICOECHEA.     BiAPOTBOA   COLOMBIANS  :    Catalogo  de  Todos  los   Mapas,   Pianos,

\"ist;is,  fee.,  relativos  a  la  America-Espaiiola,   Brasil,  e  Islas  adyaceutes.     Arre-

glada  cronologicamente  i  precedida  de  una  introduccion  sobre  la  historia  i  artogra-

lica  de  America.     Por  el  Doctor  Ezequiel  Uricoechea,  de  Bogota,  Nueva  Granada.

8vo,  pp.  232,  cloth.     I860.     6s.
URQUHART.—  Ei.ectro-Motors.     A  Treatise  on  the  Means  and  Apparatus   era-

ployed  in  the  Transmission  of  Electrical  Energy  and  its  Conversion  into  Motive-
power.     For  the  Use  of  Engineers  and  Others.     By  J.  W.  Urquhart,  Electrician.

Crown  Svo,  cloth,  pp.  xii.  and  178,  illustrated.     1882.     7s.  (id.
VAITANA   SUTRA.— See  Auctores  Sanskriti,  Vol.  III.
VALDES.— Lives  of  the  Twin  BROTHERS,  Julu  and  Alfonso  de  Valdes.     By  E.

Bnehruer,    D.D.     Translated  by   J.    T.    Betts.     Crown   8vo,    pp.  32,   wrappers.

1882.     Is.
VALDES. — Seventeen   Opuscules.     By  Juan   de   Valdes.     Translated  from  the

Spanish  and  Italian,  and  edited  by  John  T.   Betts.      Crown  8vo,  pp.   xii.  and

1S8.  cloth.     1882.    6s.
VALDES.-  J  tan  dk  Valdes'  Commentary  upon  the  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.

"With   Professor  Boehmer's  "Lives  of  Juan  and  Alfonso  de  Valdes."     Now  for

the  first  time  translated  from  the  Spanish,  and  never  before  published  in  English.

By  John  T.  Betts.     Post  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  512-30,  cloth.     1882.     7s.  6d.
VALDES. —  Spiritual  Milk;  or,  Christian  Instruction  for  Children.     By  Ju&n  de

Valdes.     Translated  from  the   Italian,  edited  and  published  by  John  T.  Letts.

With  Lives  of  the  twin  brothers,  Juan  and  Alfonso  de  Valdes.     By  E.  Boehmer,

D.D.     Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  60,  wrappers.     1882.     2s.
VALDES. — Spiritual    Milk.     Octaglot.      The   Italian   original,  with  translations

into  Spanish,  Latin,  Polish,  German,  English,   French,  and  Engadin.     With   a

Critical  and  Historical  Introduction  by  Edward  Boehmer,  the  Editor  of  "Spanish

Reformers."    4 to,  pp.  88,  wrappers.     1884.     6s.
VALDES. — Three  Opuscules  :  an  Extract  from  Valdes'  Seventeen  Opuscules.     By

Juan  de  Valdes.    Translated,  edited,  and  published  by  John  T.  Betts.   Fcap.  8vo,

pp.  58,  wrappers.     1881.     Is.  6d.
VALDES.— JuAn  de  Values'  Commentary  upon  Our  Lord's  Sermon  on  the

Mount.      Translated  and   edited   by  J.    T.    Betts.     With   Lives   of  Juan   and

Alfonso   de   Valdes.      By   E.    Boehmer,    D.D.      Crown    8vo,    pp.    112,    boards,

1882.  2s.  6d.

VALDES.— JuAn  de  Valdes'  Commentary  upon  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans.
Edited  by  J.  T.  Betts.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  .xxxii.  and  296,  cloth.     1883.     6s.

VALDES.  — JuXn  de  Valdes'  Commentary  upon  St.  Paul's  First  Epistle  to
the  (.'HURCH  AT  Corinth.  Translated  and  edited  by  J.  T.  Betts.  With  Lives
of  Juan  and  Alphouso  de  Valdes.     By  E.  Boehmer.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  390,  cloth.

1883.  6s.


72  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works,

VAN  CAMPEN.— The  Dutch  in  the  Arctic  Seas.  By  Samuel  Richard  Van
Canipen,  author  of  "Holland's  Sdver  feast."  8vo.  Vol.  I.  A  Dutch  Arctic
Expedition  and  Route.  Third  Edition,  Pp.  xxxvii.  and2(>3,  cloth.  J877.  10s.  6d.
Vol.  II.  in  preparation.

VAN  DE  WEYER.— Choix  d'Ofuscules  Philosophiques,  Historiques,  Politiques
et  Litteraires  de  Sylvain  Van  de  "Weyer,  Precedes  d'Avant  propos  de  1'Editeur.
Roxburghe  style.  Crown  8vo.  Premiere  Serie.  Pp.  374.  1863.  10s.  6d.—
Deuxieme  Serie.  Pp.  502.  1869.  12s.— Troisieme  S£rie.  Pp.  391.  1875.
10s.  6d.— Quatiueme  S£rie.     Pp.  366.     1876.     10s.  6d.

VAN  EYS. — Basque  Grammar.     See  Trubner's  Collection.

VAN  LAUN.  — Grammar  of  the  French  Language.  By  H.  Van  Laun.  Parts
I.  and  II.  Accidence  and  Syntax.  13th  Edition.  Cr.  8vo,  pp.  151  and  120,  cloth.
1874.  4s.  Part  III.  Exercises.  11th  Edition.  Cr.  Svo,  pp.  xii.  and  285,  cloth.
1873.     3s.  6d.

VAN  LAUN.— Lecons  Graduees  de  Traduction  et  de  Lecture  ;  or,  Graduated
Lessons  in  Translation  and  Reading,  with  Biographical  Sketches,  Annotations
on  History,  Geography,  Synonyms  and  Style,  and  a  Dictionary  of  "Words  and
Idioms.  By  Henri  Van  Laun.  4th  Edition.  12mo,  pp.  viii.  and  400.  cloth.
1868.     5s.

VAN  PRAAGH.— Lessons  for  the  Instruction  of  Deaf  and  Dumb  Children,
in  Speaking,  Lip-reading,  Reading,  and  Writing.  By  W.  Van  Praagh,  Director
of  the  School  and  Training  College  for  Teachers  of  the  Association  for  the  Oral
Instruction  of  the  Deaf  and  Dumb,  Ofneier  d'Academie,  France.  Fcap.  8vo,
Part  I.,  pp.  52,  cloth.     1884.     2s.  6d.     Part  II.,  pp.  62,  cloth.     Is.  6d.

VARDHAMANA'S  GANARATNAMAHODADHI.     See  Auctoues  Sanskriti,  Vol.  IV.

VAZIR  OF  LANKURAN :  A  Persian  Play.  A  Text-Book  of  Modem  Colloquial
Persian.  Edited,  with  Grammatical  Introduction,  Translation,  Notes,  and  Voca-
bulary, by  W.  H.  Haggard,  late  of  H.M.  Legation  in  Teheran,  and  G.  le  Strange.
Crown  8vo,  pp.  230,  cloth.     1882.     10s.  6d.

VELASQUEZ  and  Simonne's  New   Method  to   Read,  Write,  and  Speak  the
Spanish  Language.     Adapted  to  Ollendorff's  System.     Post  8vo,  pp.  558,  cloth.
1882.     6s.
Key.     Post  8vo,  pp.  174,  cloth.     4s.

VELASQUEZ.— A  Dictionary  of  the  Spanish  and  English  Languages.  For
the  Use  of  Young  Learners  and  Travellers.  By  M.  Velasquez  de  la  Cadena.
In  Two  Parts.  I.  Spanish-English.  II.  English-Spanish.  Crown  Svo,  pp.  viii.
and  846,  cloth.     1883.     7s.  6d.

VELASQUEZ.— A  Pronouncing  Dictionary  of  the  Spanish  and  English  Lan-
guages. Composed  from  the  Dictionaries  of  the  Spanish  Academy,  Terreos,  and
Salva,  and  Webster,  Worcester,  and  Walker.  Two  Parts  in  one  thick  volume.
By  M.  Velasquez  de  la  Cadena.     Roy.  8vo,  pp.  1280,  cloth.     1873.     £1,  4s.

VELASQUEZ. — New  Spanish  Reader  :  Passages  from  the  most  approved  authors,
in  Prose  and  Verse.  Arranged  in  progressive  order.  With  Vocabulary.  By  M.
Velasquez  de  la  Cadena.     Post  8vo,  pp.  352,  cloth.     1866.     6s.

VELASQUEZ. — An  Easy  Introduction  to  Spanish  Conversation,  containing  all
that  is  necessary  to  make  a  rapid  progress  in  it.  Particularly  designed  for
persons  who  have  little  time  to  study,  or  are  their  own  instructors.  By  M.
Velasquez  de  la  Cadena.     12mo,  pp.  150,  cloth.     1863.     2s.  6d.

VERSES  and  Verselets.  By  a  Lover  of  Nature.  Foolscap  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and
88,  cloth.     1876.     2s.  6d.

VICTORIA  GOVERNMENT.— Publications  of  the  Government  of  Victoria.
lAst  in  preparation.

VOGEL.— On  Beer.  A  Statistical  Sketch.  By  M.  Vogel.  Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and
76,  cloth  limp.     1874.    2s.

WAFFLARD  and  FULGENCE.— Le  Voyage  A  Dieppe.  A  Comedy  in  Prose.  By
Wafflard  and  Fulgence.  Edited,  with  Notes,  by  the  Rev.  P.  H.  E.  Brette,  B.D.
Cr.  8vo,  pp.  104,  cloth.     1867.     2s.  6d.


Published  l>y  Triibner  d'  Co.  73

WAKE.  Tiik  Evolution  or  MoKALrTY.  Being  a  History  of  the  Development  of
Moral  Culture.  By  0.  StanilauJ  Wake.  2  vols,  crown  8vo,  p,>.  xvi.-506  and
xii.-474,  cloth.     1878.     21s.

WALLACE.  — On  Mik.ui.ks  and  Modern  Spiritualism  ;  Three  Essays.  P.y  Alfred
Russel  Wallace,  Author  of  "The  Malay  Archipelago,"  "The  Geographical  Dis-
tribution of  Animals,"  kc,  kc.  Second  Edition,  crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  230,
cloth.     1881.     5s

WANKLYN  and  CHAPMAN.  — Water  Analysis.  A  Practical  Treatise  on  the
Examination  of  Potable  Water.  By  J.  A.  Wanklyn,  and  E.  T.  Chapman.  Sixth
Edition.  Entirely  rewritten.  By  J.  A.  Wauklyn,  M.R.C.S.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  11>2,
cloth.     1884.     5s.

WANKLYN.— Milk  Analysis  ;  a  Practical  Treatise  on  the  Examination  of  Milk  and
its  Derivatives,  Cream,  Butter,  and  Cheese.  By  J.  A.  Wanklyn,  M.R.C.S.,  kc.
Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  72,  cloth.     1874.     5s.

WANKLYN. — Tea,  Coffee,  and  Cocoa.  A  Practical  Treatise  on  the  Analysis  of
Tea,  Coffee,  Cocoa,  Chocolate,  Mate"  (Paraguay  Tea),  &c.  By  J.  A.  Wauklyn,
M.R.C.S.,  kc.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  GO,  cloth.     1874.     5s.

WAR  OFFICE.  — A  List  of  the  various  Military  Manuals  and  other  Works

PUBLISHED   UNDER  THE   SUPERINTENDENCE   OF   THE  WAR   OFFICE  may  be   had  on

application.

WARD. — Ice  :  A  Lecture  delivered  before  the  Keswick  Literary  Society,  and  pub-
lished bv  request.  To  which  is  appended  a  Geological  Dream  on  Skiddaw.  By
J.  Clifton  Ward,  F.G.S.     8vo,  pp.  28,  sewed.     1870.     Is.

WARD. — Elementary  Natural  Philosophy  ;  being  a  Course  of  Nine  Lectures,  speci-
ally adapted  for  the  use  of  Schools  and  Junior  Students.  By  J.  Clifton  Ward,
F.G.S.     Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  21G,  with  154  Illustrations,  cloth.     1871.     3s.  6d.

WARD. — Elementary  Geology  :  A  Course  of  Nine  Lectures,  for  the  use  of  Schools
and  Junior  Students.  By  J.  Clifton  Ward,  F.G.S.  Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  2'J2,  with  120
Illustrations,  cloth.     1872.     4s.  6d.

WATSON.— Index  to  the  Native  and  Scientific  Names  of  Indian  and  other
Eastern  Economic  Plants  and  Products,  originally  prepared  under  the  autho-
rity of  the  Secretary  of  State  for  India  in  Council.  By  John  Forbes  Watson,
M.D.     Imp.  8vo,  pp.  650,  cloth.     18G8.     £1,  lis.  Gd.

WATSON.— Spanish  and  Portuguese  South  America  during  the  Colonial
Period.  By  It.  G.  Watson.  2  vols,  post  8vo,  pp.  x.vi.-308,  viii. -320,  cloth.
1884.     21s.

WEBER.— The  History  of  Indian  Literature.  By  Albrecht  Weber.  Translated
from  the  Second  German  Edition,  by  J.  Mann,  M.A,  and  T.  Zacharaiae,  Ph.D.,
with  the  sanction  of  the  Author.  Second  Edition,  post  Svo,  pp.  xxiv.  and  3G0,
cloth.     1882.     10s.  6d.

WEDGWOOD. —The  Principles  of  Geometrical  Demonstration,  reduced  from  the
Original  Conception  of  Space  and  Form.  By  H.  Wedgwood,  M.A.  12mo,  pp.  48,
cloth.     1844.     2s.

WEDGWOOD.— On  the  Development  of  the  Understanding.  By  H.  Wedgwood,
A.M.     12mo,  pp.  133,  cloth.     1848.     3s.

WEDGWOOD.— The  Geometry  of  the  Three  First  Books  of  Euclid.  By  Direct
Proof  from  Definitions  Alone.  By  H.  Wedgwood,  M.A.  12mo,  pp.  104,  cloth.
1856.     3s.

WEDGWOOD. --On  the  Origin  of  Language.  By  H.  Wedgwood,  M.A.  12mo,
pp.  165,  cloth.     1866.     3s.  6d.

WEDGWOOD.— A  Dictionary  of  English  Etymology.  By  H.  Wedgwood.
Third  Edition,  revised  and  enlarged.  With  Introduction  on  the  Origin  of
Language.     8vo,  pp.  lxxii.  and  746,  cloth.     1878.     £1.  Is.

WEDGWOOD.— Contested  Etymologies  in  the  Dictionary  ok  the  Rev.  W.  W.
Skeat.     By  H.  Wedgwood.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  1U4,  cloth.     1882.     5s.


74  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works,

WEISBACH.— Theoretical  Mechanics  :  A  Manual  of  the  Mechanics  of  Engineer-
ing and  of  the  Construction  of  Machines  ;  with  an  Introduction  to  the  Calculus.
Designed  as  a  Text-book  for  Technical  Schools  and  Colleges,  and  for  the  use  of
Engineers,  Architects,  &c.  By  Julius  Weisbach,  Ph.D.,  Oberbergrath,  and  Pro-
fessor at  the  Royal  Mining  Academy  at  Freiberg,  &c.  Translated  from  the  Ger-
man bv  Eckley  B.  Coxe,  A.M.,  Mining  Engineer.  Demy  8vo,  with  902  woodcuts,
pp.  Ili2,  cloth.     1877.     31s.  Gd.

WELLER.— An  Improved  Dictionary  ;  English  and  French,  and  French  and  Eng-
lish.    By  E.  Weller.     Royal  8vo,  pp.  384  and  340,  cloth.     18G4.     7s.  Gd.

WEST  and  BUflLER.—  A  Digest  of  the  Hindu  Law  of  Inheritance,  Partition,
and  Adoption  ;  embodying  the  Replies  of  the  Sastris  in  the  Courts  of  the
Bombay  Presidency,  with  Introductions  and  Notes.  By  Raymond  West  and
J.  G.  Buhler.    Third  Edition.     Demy  8vo,  pp.  1450,  sewed.    1884.    SI,  16s.

WETHERELL. — The  Manufacture  of  Vinegar,  its  Theory  and  Practice;  with
especial  reference  to  the  Quick  Process.  By  C.  M.  Wetherell,  Ph.D.,  M.D.  8vo,
pp.  30,  cloth.     7s.  Gd.

WHEELDON.— Angling  Resorts  near  London  :  The  Thames  and  the  Lea.  By  J.
P.  Wheeldon,  Piscatorial  Correspondent  to  "Bell's  Life."  Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.
and  218.     1878.     Paper,  Is.  6d.

WHEELER. — The  History  of  India  from  the  Earliest  Ages.  By  J.  Talboys
Wheeler.  Demy  Svo,  cloth.  Vol.  I.  containing  the  Vedic  Period  and  the  Maha
Bharata.  With  Map.  Pp.  lxxv.  and  576,  cl.  1867,  o.  p.  Vol.  II.  The  Ramayana,
and  the  Brahmanic  Period.     Pp.  lxxxviii.  and  680,  with  2  Maps,  cl.  21s.     Vol.

III.  Hindu,  Buddhist,  Brahmanical  Revival.  Pp.  xxiv.-500.  With  2  Maps,
Svo,  cl.  1874.  18s.  This  volume  may  be  had  as  a  complete  work  with  the  fol-
lowing title,    "  History   of  India  ;    Hindu,  Buddhist,  and  Brahmanical."    Vol

IV.  Part  I.  Mussulman  Rule.  Pp.  xxxii.-320.  1876.  14s.  Vol.  IV.  Part  II.
completing  the  History  of  India  down  to  the  time  of  the  Moghul  Empire.
Pp.  xxviii.  and  280.     1881.     12s.

WHEELER.— Early  Records  of  British  India  :  A  History  of  the  English  Settle-
ments in  India,  as  told  in  the  Government  Records,  the  works  of  old  Travellers,
and  other  Contemporary  Documents,  from  the  earliest  period  down  to  the  rise  of
British  Power  in  India.  By  J.  Talboys  Wheeler,  late  Assistant  Secretary  to  the
Government  of  India  in  the  Foreign  Department.  Royal  8vo,  pp.  xxxii.  and  392,
cloth.     1878.     15s.

WHEELER.— The  Foreigner  in  China.  By  L.  N.  Wheeler,  D.D.  With  Intro-
duction by  Professor  W.  C.  Sawyer,  Ph.D.     8vo,  pp.  2G8,  cloth.    1881.     Gs.  6d.

WHERRY.— A  Comprehensive  Commentary  to  the  Quran.  To  which  is  prefixed
Sale's  Preliminary  Discourse,  with  additional  Notes  and  Emendations.  Together
with  a  complete  Index  to  the  Text,  Preliminary  Discourse,  and  Notes.  By  Rev.
E.  M.  Wherry  M.A.,  Lodiana.  3  vols,  post  Svo,  cloth.  Vol.  I.  Pp.  xii.  and  392.
1882.     12s.  6d.    Vol.  II.     Pp.  vi.  and  408.     1884.     12s.  6d.

WHINFIELD.— Quatrains  of  Omar  Khayyam.     See  Trubner's  Oriental  Series.

WHINFIELD.— See  Gulshan  I.  Raz.

WHIST. — Short  Rules  for  Modern  Whist,  Extracted  from  the  "  Quarterly
Review  "  of  January  1871.    Printed  on  a  Card,  folded  to  fit  the  Pocket.    1878.    6d.

WHITE.— Spinoza.     See  English  and  Foreign  Philosophical  Library.

WHITNEY. — Language  and  the  Study  of  Language  :  Twelve  Lectures  on  the
Principles  of  Linguistic  Science.  By  W.  D.  Whitney.  Fourth  Edition,  aug-
mented by  an  Analysis.     Crown  Svo,  pp.  xii.  and  504,  cloth.     1884.     10s.  6d.

WHITNEY. — Language  and  ITS  Study,  with  especial  reference  to  the  Indo-
European  Family  of  Languages.  Seven  Lectures  by  W.  D.  Whitney,  Instructor
in  Modern  Languages  in  Yale  College.  Edited  with  Introduction,  Notes,  Tables,
&c,  and  an  Index,  by  the  Rev.  R.  Morris,  M.A.,  LL.D.  Second  Edition.
Crown  Svo,  pp.  xxii.  and  318,  cloth.     1880.     5s.


Published  hij  Triibner  <f-  Co.  75

VUinUf  .^-Oriental  and  Linguistic  studies.     ByW.  D.  Whitney.     Krai  Series.
Bto,  pp.  x.  and  420,  cloth.    1874.    12  s.    Beeond  Series.    Crown  8vo,  pp.  xii.

and  -iM.     Willi  chart,  cloth.     1874.     12s.

WHITNEY.     A  s.\n-kkit  Gbajocab,  inolnding  both  the  Classical  Language  and  the
older  Dialects  of  Veda  and  Brahmana.     By  William  DwightWhitn
<'f  Sanskrit  and  Comparative  Philology  in   Tale  College,   Newhaven,   &
pp.  \\iv.  and  486\    1879.    Stitched  in  wrapper,  10s.  Gd;  cloth,  12s.

WHITWELL.  Iboh  Smii. Tin's  Pocket  Analysis  Book.  By  Thomas  Whitwell,
Herabet  of  the  Institution  of  Mechanical  Engineers,  &c.  Oblong  12mo,  pp.  152,
roan.     Is77.    5s.

WILKINSON.— The  Saint's  Travel  to  the  Land  of  Canaan.  Wherein  are  dis-
covered Seventeen  False  Rests  short  of  the  Spiritual  Coming  of  Christ  in  the
Saints,  with  a  Brief  Discovery  of  what  the  Coming  "f  <  'lirist  in  the  Spirit  is.  By
R.  Wilkinson.    Printed  1648;  reprinted  1874.    Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  208,  cloth.    Is.  6d.

WILLIAMS. —A  Syllabic  Dictionary  of  the  Chinese  Language;  arranged  ac-
cording to  the  Wu-Fang  Yuen  Yin,  with  the  pronunciation  of  the  Characters  as
heard  in  Pekin,  Canton,  Amoy,  and  Shanghai.  By  S.  Wells  Williams,  LL.D.
4to,  pp.  133C.     1874.    £5,  5s.

WILLIAMS.  —  M<  i 1  >ekn  India  and  the  Indians.     See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series.

WILSON.— Works  of  the  late  Horace  Hayman  Wilson,  M.A.,  F.B.S.,  &c.

Vols.  I.  and  II.  Essays  and  Lectures  chiefly  on  the  Religion  of  the  Hindus,  by
the  late  H.  H.  Wilson,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  &c.  Collected  and  Edited  by  Dr.  Rein-
hold  Rost.     2  vols,  demy  8vo,  pp.  xiii.  and  399,  vi.  and  410,  cloth.     21s.

Vols.  III.,  IV.,  and  V.  Essays  Analytical,  Critical,  and  Philological,  on  Subjects
connected  with  Sanskrit  Literature.  Collected  and  Edited  by  Dr.  Reinhold
Rost.     3  vols,  demy  8vo,  pp.  408,  4l>6,  and  390,  cloth.     36s.

Vols.  VI.,  VII.,  VIII.,  IX.,  and  X.  (2  parts).  Vishnu  Parana,  a  System  of  nindu
Mythology  and  Tradition.  Translated  from  the  original  Sanskrit,  and  Illus-
trated by  Notes  derived  chiefly  from  other  Puranas.  By  the  late  H.  H.  Wilson.
Edited  by  FitzEdward  Hall,  M. A.,  D.C.L.,  Oxon.  Vols.  I.  to  V.  (2  parts).
Demy  8vo,  pp.  cxl.  and  200,  344,  346,  362,  and  268,  cloth.    £3,  4s.  6d.

Vols.  XI.  and  XII.  Select  Specimens  of  the  Theatre  of  the  Hindus.  Translated
from  the  original  Sanskrit.  By  the  late  H.  H.  Wilson,  M.A.,  F.R.S.  Third
corrected  Edition.     2  vols,  demy  8vo,  pp.  Ixxi.  and  384,  iv.  and  418,  cloth.     21s.

WILSON.—  Thoughts  on  Science,  Theology,  and  Ethics.  By  John  Wilson,  M.A.,
Trinity  College,  Dublin.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  280,  cloth.     1885.     3s.  6d.

WISE.— Commentary  on  the  Hindu  System  of  Medicine.  By  T.  A.  Wise,
M.D.     8vo,  pp.  xx.  and  432,  cloth.     1845.     7s.  6d.

WISE.— Review  of  the  History  of  Medicine.  By  Thomas  A.  Wise.  2  vols,
demy  8vo,  cloth.     Vol.  I.,  pp.  xcviii.  and  397.     Vol.  II.,  pp.  574.     10s.

WISE.  — Histoid  of  Paganism  in  Caledonia.  By  T.  A.  Wise,  M.D.,  &c.  Demy
4to,  pp.  xxviii.-272,  cloth,  with  numerous  Illustrations.     1884.     15s.

WITHERS.— The  English  Language  as  Pronounced.  By  G.  Withers,  Royal
8vo,  pp.  84,  sewed.     1874.     Is.

WOOD.  —  Chronos.  Mother  Earth's  Biography.  A  Romance  of  the  New  School.
By  Wallace  Wood,  M.D.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  334,  with  Illustration,  cloth.
1873.    6s.

WOMEN.— The  Rights  of  Women.  A  Comparison  of  the  Relative  Legal  Status  of
the  Sexes  in  the  Chief  Couutries  of  Western  Civilisation.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  104,
cloth.     1875.     2s.  Od.


76  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works.

WRIGHT. — Feudal  Manuals  of  English  Histouy,  a  series  of  Popular  Sketches  of
our  National  History  compiled  at  different  periods,  from  the  Thirteenth  Century
to  the  Fifteenth,  for  the  use  of  the  Feudal  Gentry  and  Nobility.  Now  first  edited
from  the  Original  Manuscripts.  By  Thomas  Wright,  M.A.,  F.S.A.,  &c.  Small
4to,  pp.  xxix.  and  184,  cloth.     1872.     15s.

WRIGHT. — The  Homes  of  other  Days.  A  History  of  Domestic  Manners  and
Sentiments  during  the  Middle  Ages.  By  Thomas  Wright,  M. A.,  F.S.A.  With
Illustrations  from  the  Illuminations  in  Contemporary  Manuscripts  and  other
Sources.  Drawn  and  Engraved  by  F.  W.  Fairholt,  F.S.A.  Medium  8vo,  350
Woodcuts,  pp.  xv.  and  512,  cloth.     1871.     21s.

WRIGHT. — Anglo-Saxon  and  Old  English  Vocabularies.  By  Thomas  Wright,
M.A.,  F.S.A.,  Hou.  M.R.S.L.  Second  Edition,  Edited  and  Collated  by  Richard
Paul  Wulcker.  2  vols,  demy  8vo,  pp.  xx.-408,  and  iv.-486,  cloth.  1884.  28s.
Illustrating  the  Condition  and  Manners  of  our  Forefathers,  as  well  as  the  History
of  the  forms  of  Elementary  Education,  and  of  the  Languages  Spoken  in  this  Island
from  the  Tenth  Century  to  the  Fifteenth.

WRIGHT.— The  Celt,  the  Roman,  and  the  Saxon;  a  History  of  the  Early
Inhabitants  of  Britain  down  to  the  Conversion  of  the  Anglo-Saxons  to  Christianity.
Illustrated  by  the  Ancient  Remains  brought  to  light  by  Recent  Research.
By  Thomas  Wright,  M.A.,  F.S.A.,  &c,  &c.  Third  Corrected  and  Enlarged
Edition.  Cr.  8vo,  pp.  xiv.  and5G2.   With  nearly  300  Engravings.   Cloth.   1875.   14s.

WRIGHT.— The  Book  OF  Kalilah  and  Dimnah.     Translated  from  Arabic  into

Syriac.     Edited  by  W.  Wright,  LL.D.,  Professor  of  Arabic  in  the  University  of

Cambridge.     Demy  8vo,  pp.  lxxxii.-408,  cloth.     1884.     21s.
WRIGHT.— Mental  Travels  in  Imagined  Lands.      By  H.  Wright.     Crown  8vo,

pp.  184,  cloth.     1878.     5s.
WYLD. — Clairvoyance;  or,  the  Auto-Noetic  Action  of  the  Miud.     By  George

Wyld,  M.D.  Ediu.     3vo,  pp.  32,  wrapper.     1883.     Is.

WYSARD.— The  Intellectual  and  Moral  Problem  of  Goethe's  Faust.    By  A.

Wysard.     Parts  I.  and  II.     Fcap.  Svo,  pp.  80,  limp  parchment  wrapper.     1883.

2s.  6d.
YOUNG  MECHANIC  (The).— See  Mechanic.

ZELLER. — Strauss  and  Renan.  An  Essay  by  E.  Zeller.  Translated  from  the
German.     Post  Svo,  pp.  110,  cloth.     1866.     2s.  6d.


PERIODICALS

PUBLISHED  AND  SOLD  BY  TRUBNER  &  CO.


AMATEUR  MECHANICAL  SOCIETY'S  JOURNAL. —Irregular.

ANTANANARIVO  ANNUAL  and  Madagascar  Magazine.— Irregular.

ANTHROPOLOGICAL  Institute  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland  (Journal  of).—
Quarterly,  5s.

ARCHITECT  (American)  and  Building  News. — Contains  General  Architectural
News,  Articles  on  Interior  Decoration,  Sanitary  Engineering,  Construction,
Building  Materials,  &c,  &c.  Four  full-page  Illustrations  accompany  each
Number.     Weekly.     Annual  Subscription,  £1,  lis.  6d.     Post  free.

ASIATIC  SOCIETY  (Royal)  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland  (Journal  of).—
Irregular.


Periodicals.


t  (


BIBLICAL  ARCETJEOLCGICAL  SOCIETY  (Transactions  ok).  — Irregular.

BIBLIOTHECA  SACRA.     Quarterly,  3s.  0.1.     Annual  Subscription,  14s.     Post  free.

BRITISH  ARCH-KOLOGICAL  ASSOCIATION  (Journal  of). —Quarterly,  8s.

BRITISH  CHESS  MAGAZINE.- Monthly,  8d.

BRITISH  HOMEOPATHIC  SOCIETY  (Annai.s  of).— Half-yearly,  2s.  Cd.

BROWNING  SOCIETY'S  PAPERS.- Irregular.

CALCUTTA  REVIEW.— -Quarterly,  8s.  6d.     Annual  Subscription,  34s.     Post  free.

CAMBRIDGE  PHILOLOGICAL  SOCIETY  (Proceedings  or).— Irregular.

ENGLISHWOMAN'S  REVIEW. -Social  and  Industrial  Questions.     Monthly,  6d.

GEOLOGICAL  MAGAZINE,  or  Monthly  Journal  of  Geology,  Is.  6d.  Annual  Sub-
scription, 18s.     Post  free.

GLASGOW,  GEOLOGICAL  SOCIETY  OF  (Transactions  of).— Irregular.

INDEX  MEDICDS.— A  Monthly  Classified  Record  of  the  Current  Medical  Literature
of  the  "World.     Annual  Subscription,  50s.     Post  free.

INDIAN  ANTIQUARY.— A  Journal  of  Oriental  Research  in  Archaeology,  History,
Literature,  Languages,  Philosophy,  Religion,  Folklore,  &c.  Annual  Subscrip-
tion, £2.     Post  free.

INDIAN  EVANGELICAL  REVIEW.— Annual  Subscription,  10s.

LIBRARY  JOURNAL.  — Official  Organ  of  the  Library  Associations  of  America  and  of
the  United  Kingdom.     Monthly,  2a.     Anuual  Subscription,  20s.     Post  free.

MANCHESTER  QUARTERLY.— Is.  6d.

MATHEMATICS  (American  Journal  of).— Quarterly,  7s.  6d.  Annual  Subscrip-
tion, 24s.     Post  free.

ORIENTALIST  (The).— Monthly.     Annual  Subscription,  12s.

ORTHODOX  CATHOLIC  REVIEW.— Irregular.

PHILOLOGICAL  SOCIETY  (Transactions  and  Proceedings  of).— Irregular.

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH  (SOCIETY  OF).— Proceedings.

PUBLISHERS*  WEEKLY.— The  American  Book-Trade  Journal.  Annual  Sub-
scription, 18s.     Post  free.

PUNJAB  NOTES  AND  QUERIES.  — Monthly.     Annual  Subscription,  10s.

REVUE  COLONIALE  INTERNATIONALE.— Monthly.  Annual  Subscription,  25a.
Post  free.

SCIENTIFIC  AMERICAN.— Weekly.    Annual  subscription,  18s.    Post  free.

SUPPLEMENT  to  ditto.  — Weekly.     Annual  subscription,  24s.     Post  free.

SCIENCE  AND  ARTS  (American  Journal  of).— Monthly,  2s.  6d.  Annual  Subscrip-
tion, 30s.

SPECULATIVE  PHILOSOPHY  (Journal  of).— Quarterly,  4s.  Annual  Subscription,
16s.     Post  free,  17s.

SUNDAY  REVIEW.  — Organ  of  the  Sunday  Society  for  Opening  Museums  and  Art
Galleries  on  Sunday.— Quarterly,  Is.    Annual  Subscription,  4s.  Cd.     Post  free.

TRUENER'S  American,  European,  and  Omental  Literary  Record.— A  Register
of  the  most  Important  Works  Published  in  America,  India,  China,  and  the  British
Colonies.  With  occasional  Notes  on  German,  Dutch,  Danish,  French,  Italian,
Spanish,  Portuguese,  and  Russian  Literature.  Subscription  for  12  Numbers,  5s.
Post  free.

TRUBNER  &  CO.'S  Monthly  List  of  New  and  Forthcoming  Works,  Official  and

other  Authorised  Publications,  and  New  American  Books.     Post  free.
WESTMINSTER  REVIEW.— Quarterly,  6s.     Annual  Subscription,  22s.     Post  free.
WOMAN'S  Suffrage  Journal.— Monthly,  Id.


TROBNER  &  CO.'S  CATALOGUES.


Any  of  the  following  Catalogues  sent  per  Post  on  receipt  of  Stamps.


Africa,  "Works  Relating  to  the  Modern  Languages  of.     Id.

Agricultural  "Works.     2d.

Arabic,  Persian,  and  Turkish  Books,  printed  in  the  East.     Is.

Assyria  and  Assyriology.     Is.

Bibliotheca  Hispano- Americana.    Is.  6d.

Brazil,  Ancient  and  Modern  Books  relating  to.    2s.  6d.

British  Museum,  Publications  of  Trustees  of  the.     Id.

Dictionaries  and  Grammars  of  Principal  Languages  and  Dialects

of  the  "World.    5s.
Educational  "Works.     Id.
Egypt  and  Egyptology.    Is.
Guide  Books.     Id.

Important  "Works,  published  by  Triibner  &  Co.     2d.
Linguistic  and  Oriental  Publications.    2d.
Medical,  Surgical,  Chemical,  and  Dental  Publications.    2d.
Modern  German  Books.    2d.
Monthly  List  of  New  Publications.    Id.
Pali,  Prakrit,  and  Buddhist  Literature.    Is.
Portuguese  Language,  Ancient  and  Modern  Books  in  the.    6d.
Sanskrit  Books.    2s.  6d.
Scientific  Works.    2d.
Semitic,  Iranian,  and  Tatar  Races.  Is.


TRUBNER'S
COLLECTION  OF  SIMPLIFIED  GRAMMARS

OF   THE

PRINCIPAL  ASIATIC  AND  EUROPEAN   LANGUAGES,

Edited  by  REIXHOLD  ROST,  LL.D.,  Ph.D.


The  object  of  this  Series  is  to  provide  the  learner  with  a  concise  but
practical  Introduction  to  the  various  Languages,  and  at  the  same  time  to
furnish  Students  of  Comparative  Philology  with  a  clear  and  comprehensive
vk-w  of  their  structure.  The  attempt  to  adapt  the  somewhat  cumbrous
grammatical  system  of  the  Greek  and  Latin  to  every  other  tongue  has  intro-
duced a  great  deal  of  unnecessary  difficulty  into  the  study  of  Languages.
Instead  of  analysing  existing  locutions  and  endeavouring  to  discover  the
principles  which  regulate  them,  writers  of  grammars  have  for  the  most  part
constructed  a  framework  of  rules  on  the  old  lines,  and  tried  to  make  the
language  of  which  they  were  treating  fit  into  it.  "Where  this  proves  im-
possible, the  difficulty  is  met  by  lists  of  exceptions  and  irregular  forms,  thus
burdening  the  pupil's  mind  with  a  mass  of  details  of  which  he  can  make
no  practical  use.

In  these  Grammars  the  subject  is  viewed  from  a  different  standpoint  ;
the  structure  of  each  language  is  carefully  examined,  and  the  principles
which  underlie  it  are  carefully  explained  ;  while  apparent  discrepancies
and  so-called  irregularities  are  shown  to  be  only  natural  euphonic  and
other  changes.  All  technical  terms  are  excluded  unless  their  meaning
and  application  is  self-evident ;  no  arbitrary  rules  are  admitted  ;  the  old
classification  into  declensions,  conjugations,  &c,  and  even  the  usual  -para-
digms and  tables,  are  omitted.  Thus  reduced  to  the  simplest  principles,
the  Accidence  and  Syntax  can  be  thoroughly  comprehended  by  the  student
on  one  perusal,  and  a  few  hours'  diligent  study  will  enable  him  to  analyse
any  sentence  in  the  language.


Now  Ready.  ",
Crown  8vo,  cloth,  uniformly  bound.

I. — Hindustani,  Persian,  and.  Arabic.    By  the  late  E.  H.  Palmer,
M.A.     Second  Edition.     Pp.  112.     5s.
II.— Hungarian.      By   I.    Singer,    of    Buda-Pesth.      Pp.   vi.    and    SS.
4s.  Gd.

For  continuation  see  next  fage.


80  Triibners  Simplified  Grammars— continued.

III.— Basque.     By  W.  Van  Eys.     Pp.  xii.  and  52.     3s.  Gel.
IV.— Malagasy.    By  G.  W.  Parker.    Pp.  66.    5s.
V.— Modern  Greek.     By  E.  M.  Geldart,  M.A.     Pp.  68.     2s.  6d.
VI.— Roumanian.     By  M.  TORCEANU.    Pp.  viii.  and  72.     5s.
VII.— Tibetan.    By  H.  A.  Jaschke.     Pp.  viii.  and  104.    5s.
VIII.— Danish.     By  E.  C.  Otte.     Pp.  viii.  and  66.     2s.  6d.

IX.— Turkish.     By  J.   W.   Kedhouse,   M.R.A.S.      Pp.   xii.  and  204.
10s.  6d.
X.— Swedish.     By  Miss  E  C.  OTTE.     Pp.  xii.  and  70.     2s.  6d.
XI— Polish.     By  \V.  R.  Morfill,  M.A.     Pp.  viii.  and  64.     3a.  6<L
XII— Pali.     By  E.  Muller,  Ph.D.     Pp.  xvi.-144.     7s.  6d.
XIII— Sanskrit.    By  H.  Edgren.     Pp.  xii.-178.     10s.  6d.

The  following  are  in  preparation  : —

SIMPLIFIED   GEAMMAES   OF

Albanian,  by  Wassa  Pasha,  Prince  of  the  Lebanon.

Assyrian,  by  Prof.  Sayce.

Bengali,  by  J.  F.  Blumhardt,  of  the  British  Museum.

Burmese,  by  Dr.  E.  Forchammer

Cymric  and  Gaelic,  by  H.  Jenner,  of  the  British  Museum.

Egyptian,  by  Dr.  Birch,

Finnic,  by  Prof.  Otto  Donner,  of  Helsingfors.

Hebrew,  by  Dr.  GlNSBURG.

Icelandic,  by  Dr.  Wimmer,  Copenhagen.

Lettish,  by  Dr.  M.  I.  A.  Volkel.

Lithuanian,  by  Dr.  M.  I.  A.  Volkel.

Malay,  by  W.  E.  Maxwell,  of  the  Inner  Temple,  Barrister-at-Law.

Portuguese,  by  Walter  de  Gray  Birch.

Prakrit,  by  Hjalmar  Edgren,  Lund,  Sweden.

Russian,  Bohemian,  Bulgarian  and  Serbian,  by  W.  R.  Morfill,  of

Oxford.
Sinhalese,  by'Dr.  Edward  Muller.


Arrangements  are  being  made  with  competent  Scholars  for  the  early
preparation  of  Grammars  of  German,  Dutch,  Italian,  Chinese
Japanese,  and  Siamese.


LONDON  :  TRUBNER  &  CO.,  LUDGATE  HILL.


PKINTED  DV  BAI.LANTYNE,   HANSON  AND  CO.
BDINBUKGH  AND  LONDON.

jooo.  —  5/3/S7— !•


CL.


M


t5


'


H  i


a     o?


UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO
LIBRARY


Acme    Library   Card    Pocket

Under  Pat.  "  Ref.  Index  File."
Made  by  LIBRARY  BUREAU
