Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam
Edward FitzGerald — First Edition (Bernard Quaritch, London, 1859)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): The complete text of the 1859 FIRST EDITION of FitzGerald's Rubaiyat — 75 quatrains ending 'TAMAM SHUD,' textually distinct from the expanded later editions (110 quatrains); the rare pamphlet that launched the Omar Khayyam cult. Facsimile reprint OCR via Internet Archive (khayyamfitzgeraldrubaiyat); library stamps removed. Public Domain.

========================================================================

RUBAIYAT


OF


OMAR KHAYYAM,


THE ASTRONOMER-POET OF PERSIA.


Translated into English Gerse.


LONDON:
BERNARD QUARITCH,
CASTLE STREET, LEICESTER SQUARE.
1859,


G. NORMAN, PRINTER, MAIDEN LANE, COVENT canves, ‘LONDON.
; 5


*y


ee


OMAR KHAYYAM, (A


THE


ASTRONOMER-POET OF PERSIA.


Omar Kuayram was born at Naishdptr in Khorassin
in the latter half of our Eleventh, and died within the First
Quarter of our Twelfth, Century. The slender Story of his
Life is curiously twined about that of two others very consi-
derable Figures in their Time and Country: one of thém,
Hasan al Sabbah, whose very Name has lengthen’d down to
us as a terrible Synonym for Murder: and the other (who
also tells the Story of all Three) Nizam al Mulk, Vizyr to
Alp the Lion and Malik Shah, Son and Grandson of Tog-
brul Beg the Tartar, who had wrested Persia from the fee-
ble Successor of Mahmiud the Great, and founded that Sel-
jukian Dynasty which finally roused Europe into the Cru-
sades. This Nizdm al Mulk, in his Wasyat—or Testament
—which he wrote and left as a Memorial for future States-
men—relates the following, as quoted in the Calcutta Review,
No. 59, from Mirkhond’s History of the Assassins.

A 2


301377


eeae


iv OMAR KHAYYAM,


‘* «One of the greatest of the wise men of Khorassan was
‘the Imain Mowatlak of Naishapur, a mao highly honoured
‘and reverenced,—may God rejoice bis soul; his Ulustrious
* years exceeded eighty-five, and it was the universal beliet
‘that every boy who read the Koran or studied the tradi-
‘tions in lis presence, would assuredly attain to honour and
‘happiness. For this cause did my father send me from
‘Tis to Naishipur with Abd-u-samad, the doctor of law,
‘that Tinight employ myself in study and learning under
‘the guidance of that illustrious teacher. Towards me he
‘ever turned an eye of favour and kindness, and as his pupil
‘T felt for him extreme affection and devotion, so that I
‘ passed four years in his service. When I first came there,
‘I found two other pupils of mine own age newly arrived,
‘Hakim Omar Khayyam, and the ill-fated Ben Sabbah.
* Both were endowed with sharpness of wit and the highest
natural powers; and we three formed a close friendship
together. When the Imam rose froin his lectures, they
used to join me, and we repeated to each other the lessons
‘we had heard. Now Omar was a native of Naishdpur,
while Hasan Ben Sabbah’s father was one Ali, a man of
austere life and practice, but heretical in his creed and
‘doctrine. One day Hasan said to me and to Khayyam, ‘It
‘is a universal belief that the pupils of the Imam Mowatlak
‘will attain to fortune. Now, even if we all do not attain
‘ thereto, without doubt one of us will; what then shall be
‘our mutual pledge and bond?’ We answered ‘ Be it
‘what you please.’ ‘Well,’ be said, ‘let us make a vow,
‘that to whomsoever this fortune falls, he shall share it
‘equally with the rest, anu reserve no pre-eminence for him-


THE ASTRONOMER-POET OF PERSIA. Vv


‘self.’ ‘Be it so,’ we both replied, and on these terms we
‘ mutually pledged our words. Years rolled on, and I went
‘from Khorassan to Transoxiana, and wandered to Ghazni
‘and Cabul; and when I returned, I was invested with
‘ office, and rose to be administrator of affairs during the
‘ Sultanate of Sultan Alp Arslan.’ ”’

** Hle goes on to state, that years passed by, and both his
old school-friends found him out, and came and claimed a
share in his good fortune, according to the school-day vow.
The Vizier was generous and kept his word. Hasan de-
manded a place in the government, which the Sultan granted
at the Vizier’s request; but discontented with a gradual
rise, he plunged into the maze of intrigue of an oriental
court, and, failing in a base attempt to supplant his bene-
factor, he was disgraced and fell. After many mishaps and
wanderings, Hasan became the head of the Persian sect of
the Jsmailians,—a party of fanatics who had long murmured
in obscurity, but rose to an evil eminence under the guidance
of his strong and evil will. In A. B. 1090, he seized the
castle of Alamut, in the province of Ridbar, which lies in
the mountainous tract, south of the Caspian sea; and it was
from this mountain home he obtained that evil celebrity
among the Crusaders as the OLD MAN OF THE MOUN.
TAINS, and spread terror through the Mohammedan world;
and it is yet disputed whether the word Assassin, which
they have left in the language of modern Europe as their
dark memorial, is derived from the hashish, or opiate of
hemp-leaves (the Indian bkang,) with which they maddened
themselves to the sullen pitch of oriental desperation, or from
the name of the founder of the dynasty, whom we have sccn


v1 OMAR KHAYYAM,


in his quiet eollegiate days, at Naishapur. One of the count-
less victims of the Assassin’s dagger was Nizam-ul-Mulk
himself, the old school-boy friend.”

“Omar Khayyam also came tothe Vizier to claim his
share; but not to ask for title or office. ‘The greatest boon
“you can confer on me,’ he said, ‘i3 to let me live in a
‘corner under the shadow of your fortune, to spread wide
‘the advantages of Science, and pray for your long life and
‘prosperity.’ The Vizier tells us, that, when he found
Omar was really sincere in his refusal, he pressed him no
further, but granted him a yearly pension of 1,200 mithkals
of gold, from the treasury of Natshapur.”’

“At Naishipur thus lived and died Omar Khayyam,
‘ busied,’ adds the Vizier, ‘in winning knowledge of every
‘ kind, and especially in Astronomy, wherein he attained toa
‘very high pre-eminence. Under the Sultanate of Malik
‘Shah, he came to Merv, and obtained great praise for his
‘ proficiency in scienec, and the Sultan showered favours
“upon him,’ ”

“When Malik Shah determined to reform the calendar,
Omar was one of the eight learned men employed to do it ;
the result was the Jalélt era, (so called from Jalal-ul-din,
one of the king’s names,)—‘a computation of time,’ says
Gibbon, ‘ which surpasses the Julian, and approaches the
‘accuracy of the Gregorian style.” He is also the author
of some astronomical tables, entitled Ziji-Mahkshahi,” and
the French have lately republished and translated an Arabic
Treatise of his on Algebra.

These severer Studies, and his Verses, which, though hap-
pily fewer than any Persian Poct’s, and, though perhaps


THE ASTRONOMER-POET OF PERSIA. Vil
fugitively composed, the Result of no fugitive Emotion or
Thought, are probably the Work and Event of his Life,
leaving little else torecord. Perhaps he liked a little Farm-
ing too, so often as he speaks of the “Edge of the Tilth”
on which he loved to rest with his Diwdn of Verse, his Loaf
—and his Wine.

“ His Takhallus or poetical name (Khayyam) signifies a
Tent-maker, and he is said to have at one time exercised
that trade, perhaps before Nizam-nl-Mulk’s generosity raised
him to independence. Many Persian poets similarly derive
their names from their occupations ; thus we have Attar, “a
druggist,” Assar, “an oil presser,” &c. (Though all these,
like our Smiths, Archers, Millers, Fletchers, &c. may simply
retain the Sirname of an hereditary calling.) ‘ Omar him-
self alludes to his name in the following whimsical lines :—


‘ Khayy4m, who stitched the tents of science,
Has fallen in grief’s furnace and been suddenly burned ;
The shears of Fate have cut the tent ropes of his life,
And the broker of Hope has sold him for nothing


‘We have only one more anecdote to give of his Life, and
that relates to the close ; related in the anonymous preface
which is sometimes prefixed to his poems ; it has been printed
in the Persian in the appendix to Hyde’s Veterum Persarum
Religio, p. 499 ; and D’Herbelot alludes to it in his Biblio-
théque, under Khiam :—*


* Though he attributes the story toa Khiam, “ Philosophe Musulman
qui a vécu en Odeur de Sainteté dans la Fin du premier et le Commence-
ment du second Siéele,” no part of which, except the “ Philosophe,” can
apply to our Khayyam, who, however, may claim the Story as Ais, on the


Vill OMAR KHAYYAM,


_'Itas written in the chronicles of the ancients that this
‘ King of the Wise, Omar Khayyam, died at Naishapur in
‘ the year of the Iegira, 517 (A.D. 1123); in science be was
‘ unrivalled, —the very paragon of his age. Khwajah Nizami
‘ of Samarcand, who was one of his pupils, relates the follow-
‘ing story: ‘1 often used to hold conversations with my
‘teacher, Omar Khayyam, ina garden ; and one day he said
‘tome, ‘my tomb shall be in a spot, where the north wind
‘may scatter roses over it.’ I wondered at the words he
‘spake, but I knew that his were no idle words. Years after,
‘when I chanced to revisit Naishipur, ] went to his final
‘ resting place, and lo! it was just outside a garden, and trees
‘Jaden with fruit stretched their boughs over the garden
‘ wall, and dropped their flowers upon his tomb, so as the
‘ stone was hidden under them.’”’

Thus far—without fear of Trespass—from the Calcutta
Review.

Though the Sultan “ shower’d Favours upon him,” Omar's
Epicurean Audacity of Thought and Speech caused him to
be regarded askance in his own Time and Country. He is
said to have been especially hated and dreaded by the Safis,
whose Practice he ridiculed, and whose Faith amounts to
httle more than his own when stript of the Mystieism aud
formal Compliment to Islamsm which Omar would not
hide under. Their Poets, including Hafiz, who are (with


Score of Rubiiyat, 77 and 78 of the present Version. The Rashness
of the Words, according to D*Herbelot, consisted in being 390 op-
posed to those in the Koran: “No Man knows where be shail
dic.’


THE ASTRONOMER-POET OF PERSIA. ix


the exception of Firdisi) the most considerable in Persia,
borrowed largely, indeed, of Omar’s material, but turning
it to a mystical Use more convenient to Themselves
and the People they address’d; a People quite as quick
of Doubt as of Behef; quite as keen of the Bodily Senses as
of the Intellectual; and delighting ina cloudy Element com-
pounded of all, in which they could float luxuriously between
Heaven and Earth, and this World and the Nest, on the wings
of a poetical expression, that could be recited indifferently
whether at the Mosque or the Tavern. Omar was too
honest of Heart as well as of Head for this. Having failed
(however mistakeuly) of finding any Providence but Destiny,
and any World but This, he set about making the most of it ;
preferring rather to soothe the Soul through the Senses into
Acquiescence with Things as they were, than to perplex it
with vain mortifications after what they mighé be. It has
been seen that his Worldly Desires, however, were not exor-
bitant; and he very likely takes a humourous pleasure in
exaggerating them above that Intellect in whose exercise he
must have found great pleasure, though not in a Theological
direction. However this may be, his Worldly Pleasures are
what they profess to be without auy Pretence at divine Alle.
gory: his Wine is the veritable Juice of the Grape: his
Tavern, where it was to be had: his Saki, the Flesh and
Blood that poured it out for him: all which, and where the
Roses were in Bloom, was all he profess'd to want of this
World or to expect of Paradise.

The Mathematic Faculty, too, which regulated his Fansy,
and condensed his Verse to a Quality and Quantity un-
known in Persian. perhaps in Oriental, Poetry, belp'd


x OMAR KHAYTAM,


by its very virtue perhaps to render him less popular with
his countrymen. If the Greeks were Children in Gossip,
what does Persian Literature imply but a Second Childishness
of Garrulity 2? And certainly if no ungeometric Greek was
to enter Plato's School of Philosophy, no so unchastised a
Persian should enter on the Raee of Persian Verse, with its
“ fatal Facility ” of running on long after Thought is winded!
But Omar was not only the single Mathematician of his
Country's Poets; be was also of that older Time and stouter
Temper, before the native Soul of Persia was quite broke by
a foreign Creed as well as foreign Conquest. Like his great
Predecessor Firdtisi, who was as little of a Mystic; who
scorned to use even a Jord of the very language in which the
New Faith came clothed; and who was suspected, not of
Omar's Irreligion indeed, but of seeretly clinging to tho


ancient Fire-Religion of Zerdusht, of which so many of the.


Kings he sang were Worshippers.

For whatever Reason, however, Omar, as before said, has
never been popular in his own Country, and therefore has
been but eharily transmitted abroad. The MSS. of his
Poems, mutilated beyond the average Casualties of Oriental
Transcription, are so rare in the East as searce to have
reach:t Westward at all, in spite of all that Arms and Science
have brought us. There is none at the India House, none
at the Bibhothéque Imperiale of Paris. We know but of ono
in England; No. 140 of the Oustley MSS. at the Bodleian,
written at Shiraz, a.p. 1460. This contains but 158 Ra-
baiyat. One in the Asiatic Society’s Library of Calcutta,
(of which we havea Copy) contains (and yet incomplete)
o16, though swelled to that by all kinds of Repetition and


THE ASTRONOMER-POET OF PERSIA. xi


Corruptiou. So Von Hammer speaks of és Copy as contain-
ing about 200, while Dr. Sprenger catalogues the Lucknow
MS. at double that Number. The Scribes, too, of the Oxford
and Caleutta MSS. seem to do their Work-under a sort of
Protest ; each beginning with a Tetrastich (whether genuine
or not) taken out of its alphabetic order; the Oxford with
one of Apology; the Calcutta with one of Execration too
stupid for Omar’s, even had Omar been stupid enough to
execrate himself.*


The Reviewer, who translates the foregoing Particulars of
Omar’s Life, and some of his Verse into Prose, concludes
bycomparing him with Lucretius, both in natural Temper and
Genius, and as acted upon by the Circumstances in which he
lived. Both indeed men ofsubtle Intellect and high Imagi-
nation, instructed in Learning beyond their day, and of Hearts
passionate for Truth and Justice; who justly revolted from
their Country’s false Religion, and false, or foolish, Devotion
toit; but who yet fellshort of replacing what they subverted
byany such better Hope as others,upon whom no better Faith
had dawned, had yet made a Law to themselves. Lucretius,
indeed, with such material as Epicurus furnished, consoled
himself with the construction of a Machine that needed no
Constructor, and acting by a Law that implied no Lawgiver ;
and so composing himself into a Stoical rather than Epicu-
rean severity of Attitude, sat down to contemplate the me-
chanical Drama of the Universe of which he was part Actor ;


* « Since this Paper was written” (adds the Reviewer in a note) ‘we
have met with a Copy of a very rare Edition, printed at Calcutta in 1836.
This contains 438 Tetrastichs, with au Appendix containing 54 others
uot found in some MSS.”


xii OMAR KHAYYAM,


himself and all about him, (as in his own sublime Description
of the Roman Theatre,) coloured with the lurid reflex of the
Curtain that was suspended between them and the outer
Sun. Omar, more desperate, or more careless, of any such
laborious System as resulted in nothing wure than hopeless
Necessity, flung his own Genius and Learning with a bitter
jest into the general Ruin which their insufficient glimpses
only served to reveal; and, yielding his Seuses to the actual
Rose and Vine, only diverted his thoughts by balancing idcal
possibilities of Fate, Freewill, Existence and Annihilation ;
with an oscillation that so generally inclined to the negative
and lower side, as to make such Stanzas as the following ex-


ceptions to his general Philosophy—


Oh, if my Sou) can fling his Dust aside,
Aud naked on the Air of Heaven nde,
Is’t not a Shame, is’t not a Shame for Him
So long in this Clay Suburb to abide!
Or is that but a Tent, where rests anon
A Sultan to his Kingdom passing on,
«And which the swarthy Chamberlain shall strike
Then when the Sultan rises to be gone?


With regard to the present Translation. The original
Rubaiyat (as, missing an Arabic Guttural, these Tetrastichs
are more musically called), are independent Stanzas, con-
sisting each of four Lines of equal, though varied, Prosody,
kometimes all rhyming, but oftener (as here attempted)
the third line suspending the Cadence by which the last
atones with the former Two. Something as in the Greek
Aleaic, where the third line seems to lift and suspend the


THE ASTRONOMER-POET OF PERSIA. xXli


arava that falls over in the last. As usual with such kind of
Oriental Verse, the Rubaiyat follow one another according
to Alphabetic Rhyme—a strange Farrago of Grave and Gay.
Those here selected are strung into something of an Eclogue,
with perhaps a less than equal proportion of the “ Drink and
'make-merry,”’ which (genuine or not) recurs over-frequently
in the Original. For Lucretian as Omar’s Genius might be,
he cross’d that darker Mood with much of Oliver de Basselin
Humour. Any way, the Result is sad enough : saddest per-
haps when most osténtatiously merry: any way, fitter to
move Sorrow than Anger toward the old Tentmaker, who,
after vainly endeavouring to unshackle his Steps from Des-
tiny, and to catch some authentic Glimpse of Tomorrow,
fell back upon Topay (which has out-lasted so many To-
morrows !) as the only Ground he got to stand upon, how-
ever momentarily slipping from under his Feet.


Digitized by Google


RUBAIYAT
OF


OMAR KHAYYAM OF NAISHAPUR.


I.


Awake! for Morning in the Bowl of Night

Has flung the Stone that puts the Stars to Flight :'
And Lo! the Hunter of the East has caught

The Sultan’s Turret in a Noose of Light,


II.


Dreaming when Dawn’s Left Hand was in the Sky 2
I heard a Voice within the Tavern cry,

“ Awake, my Little ones, and fill the Cup
“‘ Before Life’s Liquor in its Cup be dry.”


ITl.


And, as the Cock crew, those who stood before
The Tavern shouted—‘“ Open then the Door !

‘You know how little while we have to stay,
« And, once departed, may return no more.”


ra) Baad
= RNUBAIYAT OF
Iv.
Now the New Year reviving old Desires,
The thoughtful Soul to Solitude retires,


Where the Waite Hann or Moses on the Bough
Puts out,! and Jesus from the Ground suspires.


¥.
Iram indced is gone with all its Rose,°
And Jamshyd’s Sewn-ring’d Cup where no one knows ;


But still the Vine her,ancient Ruby yields,
And still a Garden hy the Water blows.


VI.

And David’s Lips are lock’t ; butin divine

High piping Péhlevi,é with “Wine! Wine! Wine!
€ Red Wine !’—the Nightingale cries to the Rose

That yellow Cheek ‘ of her’s to’incarnadine.


VIT.
* Come, fill the Cup, and in the Fire of Spring
The Winter Garment of Repentauce fling :
The Bird of Time has but a little way
To fly—and Lo! the Bird is on the Wing.


VIII.


And look—a thousand Blossoms with the Day
Woke—and a thousand scatter’d into Clay :

And this first Summer Month that brings the Rose
Shall take Jamshyd and Kaikobad away.


OMAR KHAYYAM OF NAISHAPUR.
TX:
But come with old Khayyam, and leave the Lot
Of Kaikobad and Kaikhosrt forgot :
Let Rustum lay about him as he will,8
Or Hatim Tai cry Supper—hced them not.


x.
With me along some Strip of Herbage strown
That just divides the desert from the sown,


Where name of Slave and Sultan scarce is known,
And pity Sultan Mahmud on his Throne.
xO
Here with a Loaf of Bread beneath the Bough,
A Flask of Wine, a Book of Verse—and Thou
Beside me singing in the Wilderness—
And Wilderness is Paradise enow.
XII.
“ How sweet is mortal Sovranty !”—think some:
Others—“ How blest the Paradise to come !”’
Ah, take the Cash in hand and wave the Rest ;
Oh, the brave Music of a distant Drum !®


XIII.


Look to the Rose that blows about us—“ Lo,
“ Laughing,” she says, “into the World I blow:
“¢ At once the silken Tassel of my Purse


“Tear, and its Treasure © on the Garden throw.”
B


4 RUBAIYAT OF

OA
The Worldly Ifope men set their Ifearts upon
Turns Ashes—or it prospers ; and anon,


Like Snow upon the Desert’s dusty Face
Lightning a little Hour or two—is gone.


S's
And those who husbanded the Golden Grain,
And those who flung it to the Winds like Rain,


Alike to no such aureate Earth are turn’d
As, buried once, Men want dug up again.


XVI.
Think, in this batter’d Caravanserai
Whose Doorways are alternate Night and Day,


How Sultan after Sultan with his Pomp
Abode his Hour or two, and went his way.


OT.
They say the Lion and the Lizard keep
The Courts where Jamshyd gloried and drank deep:


And Bahram, that great Hunter—the Wild Ass
Stamps o’er his Head, and he lies fast asleep.


NU. |
I sometimes think that never blows so red
The Rose as where some buried Cwsar bled ; |


That every Hyacinth the Garden wears ©
Drept in its Lap from some once lovely Ilead.


OMAR KHAYYAM OF NAISHAPUR.


XIX.


And this delightful Herb whose tender Green

Fledges the River’s Lip on which we lean—
Ah, lean upon it lightly ! for who knows

From what once lovely Lip it springs unseen !


XX.


Ah, my Belovéd, fill the Cup that clears

To-pay of past Regrets and future Fears—
To-morrow ?—Why, To-morrow I may be

Myself with Yesterday’s Sev’n Thousand Years.!2


XXI.


Lo! some we loved, the loveliest and best

That Time and Fate of all their Vintage prest,
Have drunk their Cup a Round or two before,

And one by one crept silently to Rest.


XXIT.


And we, that now make merry in the Room

They left, and Summer dresses in new Bloom,
Ourselves must we beneath the Couch of Earth

Descend, ourselves to make a Couch—for whom ?


XXII. »
Ah, make the most of what we yet may spend,
_ Before we too into the Dust descend ;
Dust into Dust, and under Dust, to lie,
* Sans Wine, sans Song, sans Singer, and—sans End !


6 RUBALYAT OF

XXIV.
Alike for those who for To-pay prepare,
And those that after a To-morrow stare,


A Muezzin from the Tower of Darkness cries
“ Fools! your Reward is neither Here nor There |”


NXY.
Why, all the Saints and Sages who discuss’d
Of the Two Worlds so learnedly, are thrust


Like foolish Prophets forth ; their Words to Scorn
Are scatter’d, and their Mouths are stopt with Dust.


ea

Oh, come with old Khayyam, and Icave the Wise

To talk ; one thing is certain, that Life thes;
Once thing is ecrtain, and the Rest is Lies ;

The lower that once has blown for ever dies.


NNVIL
Myself when young did eagerly frequent
Doctor and Saint, and heard great Argument


About it and about: but evermore
Came out by the same Door as in I went.


NAVI.

With them the Secd of Wisdom did I sow,

And with my own hand labeur’d it to grow :
And this was all the Harvest that 1 reap’d—

* J eame like Water, and hke Wind T go.”


*%


OMAR KIIAYYAM OF NAISHAPUR.


XXIX.


Into this Universe, and why not knowing,
Nor whence, like Water willy-nilly flowing:

And out of it,as Wind along the Waste,
I know not whither, willy-nilly blowing.


XXX.


What, without asking, hither hurried whence ?

And, without asking, whither hurried hence!
Another and another Cup to drown

The Memory of this Impertinence !


XXXI.
Up from Earth’s Centre through the Seventh Gate
I rose, and on the Throne of Saturn sate,’
And many Knots unravel’d by the Road ;
But not the Knot of Human Death and Fate.


XXXII.


There was a Door to which I found no Key :
There was a Veil past which I could not see:
Some little Talk awhile of Me and Ture


There seemed—and then no more of THEE and Me."


XXXIIT.


Then to the rolling Heav’n itself I cried,
Asking, “‘ What Lamp had Destiny to guide

“ Her little Children stumbling in the Dark ?”
And—‘“ A blind Understanding !” Heav’n rephed.


~ J


8 RUBALYAT OF
XXXIV.
% Then to this earthen Bowl did I adjourn
My Lip the seeret Well of Life to learn :


And Lip to Lip it murmur’d—*“ While you live
“ Drink !—for once dead you never shall return.”


NXXV.
T think the Vessel, that with fugitive |
Articulation answer’d, onee did live,
And merry-make; and the cold Lip I kiss’d
How many Kisses might it take—and give!
XNXVI.
For in the Market-place, one Dusk of Day,
I watch’d the Potter thumping his wet Clay :


And with its all obliterated Tongue
It murmur’d—“ Gently, Brother, gently, pray !”’


ae.
A Ah, fill the Cup :—what boots it to repeat
How Time is slipping underneath our Feet :


Unborn To-morrow, and dead Yesterpay,
Why fret about them if To-pay be sweet!


XNXVIIT.
One Moment in Annihilation’s Waste,
One Moment, of the Well of Life to taste—


The Stars are setting and the Caravan
Starts for the Dawn of Nothing'*—Oh, make haste !


4 ¢ 4
OMAR KHAYYAM OF NAISHAPUR. 9
XXXIX.
How long, how long, in infinite Pursuit
Of This and That endeavour and dispute ?


Better be merry with the fruitful Grape
Than sadden after none, or bitter, Fruit.


XL
You know, my Friends, how long since in my House
For a new Marriage I did make Carouse :


Divorced old barreu Reason from my Bed,
And took the Daughter of the Vine to Spouse.


XLI.


For “ Is” and “Is-nor’ though with Rule and Line,
And “ Up-anp-pown” without, I could define,!*

I yet in all I only cared to know,
Was never deep in anything but—Wine.


XLII.


And lately, by the Tavern Door agape,

Came stealing through the Dusk an Angel Shape
Bearing a Vessel on his Shoulder ; and

He bid me taste of it; and ‘twas—the Grape!


XLII.


The Grape that can with Logic absolute

The Two-and-Seventy jarring Sects” confute :
The subtle Alchemist that in a Trice

Life’s leaden Metal into Gold transmute.


10 RUBALYAT OF

XLIV.
The mighty Mahmid, the victorious Lord,
That all the misbelieving and black Horde '8


Of Fears and Sorrows that infest the Soul
Scatters and slays with his enchanted Sword.


SLY.
But leave the Wise to wrangle, and with mc
The Quarrel of the Universe let be:


And, in some corner of the Hubbub couelit,
Make Game of that which makes as much of Thee.


ALYVI.


For in and out, above, about, below,
*Tis nothing but a Magic Shadow-show,

Play'd in a Box whose Candle is the Sun,
Round which we Phantom Figures come and go.'®


XLVI.

And if the Wine you drink, the Lip you press,

End in the Nothing all Things end n—Yes—
Then faney while Thou art, Thou art but what

Thou shalt be—Nothing—Thou shalt not be less.


XLVI.

While the Rose blows along the River Brink,

With old Khayyam the Ruby Vintage drink :
And when the Angel with his darker Dranght

Draws up to Thee—take that, and do not shrink.


OMAR KHAYYAM OF NAISHAPCR. 11


XLIX.


’Tis all a Chequer-board of Nights and Days
Where Destiny with Men for Pieces plays:

Hither and thither moves, and mates, and slays,
And one by one back in the Closet lays.


J bags


The Ball no Question makes of Ayes and Noes,
But Right or Left as strikes the Player goes;

And He that toss’d Thee dowu into the Field,
ffe knows about it all—Hr knows—HE knows ! *°


LI.
The Moving Finger writes ; and, having writ,
Moves on: nor all thy Piety nor Wit
Shall lure it back to cancel half a Line,
Nor all thy Tears wash out a Word of it.


TELE

A And that inverted Bowl we call The Sky,

Whereurider crawling coop’t we live and die,
Lift not thy hands to J¢ for help—for It

Rolls impotently on as Thou or I.


LIL.
With Earth’s first Clay They did the Last Man’s knead,
And then of the Last Harvest sow’d the Seed :
Yea, the first Morning of Creation wrote
What the Last Dawn of Reckoning shall read.


12 RUBALYAT OF

LIV.
T tell Thee this—When, starting from the Goal,
Over the shoulders of the flaming Foal


Of I[eav’n Parwin and Mushtara they flung, *!
In my predestin’d Plot of Dust and Soul


LY.
The Vine had struck a Fibre; which about
If clings my Being —let the Sufi flout ;

Of my Base Metal may be filed a Key,
That shall unlock the Door he howls without.


wv.
And this I know: whether the one True Light,
Kindle to Love, or Wrathconsume me quite,


Onc Glimpse of It within the Tavern caught
Bettcr than in the Temple lost outright.


LVIT.


Oh Thou, who didst with Pitfall and with Gin
Besct the Road I was to wander in,

Thou wilt not with Predestination round
Enmesh me, and impute my Fall to Sin?


LVI.


Oh, Thou, who Man of baser Earth didst make,
And who with Eden didst devise the Snake;
For all the Sin wherewith the Face of Man
Is blacken’d, Man’s Forgiveness give—and take |
* * * * * * * *


OMAR KHAYYAM OF NAISHAPUR. 13


KUZA-NAMA.


LIX.
Listen again. One Evening at the Close
Of Ramazan, ere the better Moon arose,
In that old Potter’s Shop I stood alone
With the clay Population round in Rows.


LX.


And, strange to tell, among that Earthen Lot
Some could articulate, while others not:
And suddenly one more impatient cried—


‘‘ Who zs the Potter, pray, and who the Pot?”
LXI.


Then said another—“ Surely not in vain

“‘ My Substance from the common Earth was ta’en,
“That He who subtly wrought me into Shape

“ Should stamp me back to common Earth again.”


LXII.


Another said—‘‘ Why, ne’er a peevish Boy,

* Would break the Bowl from which he drank in Joy ;
“Shall He that made the Vessel in pure Love .

“ Aud Fansy, in an after Rage destroy !”


lf RUBALYAT OF
LAITITI.


None answer’d this ; but after Silence spake
A Vessel of a more ungainly Make :
“They sneer at me for leaning all awry ;
“ What! did the Hand then of the Potter shake?”


Iai.
Said one—“ Folks of a surly Tapster tell,
“ And daub his Visage with the Smoke of Hell;
“ They talk of some sirict Testing of us—Pish !
* He’s a Good Fellow, and ’twill all be well.”


LAY.


Then said another with a long-drawn Sigh,
“ My Clay with long oblivion is gone dry :
“ But, fill me with the old familiar Juice,
“Methinks I might recover by-and-bye !”’
LXVI.
So while the Vessels one by one were speaking,
One spied the little Crescent all were secking :


And then they jogg’d cach other, ** Brother! Brother!
© Hark to the Porter’s Shoulder-knot a-creahing


4 é 4
OMAR KHAYYAM OF NAISHAPUR. 105)


LXVII.


Ah, with the Grape my fading Life provide,
And wash my Body whence the Life has died,
And ina Windingsheet of Vine-leaf wrapt,

So bury me by some sweet Garden-side.


LXVIII.


That ev’n my buried Ashes such a Snare
Of Perfume shall fling up into the Air,

As not a True Believer passing by
But shall be overtaken unaware.


LXIX.


Indeed the Idols I have loved so long

Have done my Credit in Men’s Eye much wrong:
Have drown’d my Honour in a shallow Cup,

And sold my Reputation for a Song.


aXe
Indeed, indeed, Repentance oft before
I swore —but was I sober when I swore?


And then and then came Spring, and Rose-in-hand
My thread-bare Penitence apieces tore.


LXXI.


And much as Wine has play’d the Infidel,

And robb’d me of my Robe of Honour—well,
I often wonder what the Vintners buy

One half so precious as the Goods they sell.


16 RUBAILYAT.
LKXXII.


Alas, that Spring should vanish with the Rosc!


That Youth’s sweet-scented Manuscript should close!


The Nightingale that in the Branches sang,
Ah, whence, and whither flown again, who knows!


LXXIII.


Ah Love! could thou and I with Fate conspire

To grasp this sorry Scheme of Things entire,
Would not we shatter it to bits—and then

Re-mould it nearer to the Heart’s Desire !


LXXIV.
Ah, Moon of my Delight who know’st no wane,
The Moon of Heav’n is rising once again :


How oft hereafter rising shall she look
Through this same Garden after me—in vain !


LXXV.
And when Thyself with shining Foot shall pass
Among the Guests Star-seatter’d on the Grass,


And in thy joyous Errand reach the Spot
Where I made one—turn down an empty Glass !


TAMAM SHUD.


NOTES.


! Flinging a Stone into the Cup was the Signal for “To
Horse!’ in the Desert.

2 The “ False Dawn; Subhi Khédzib, a transient Light
on the Horizon about an hour before the Subhi sédhik, or
True Dawn; a well known Phenomenon in the East. The
Persians call the Morning Gray, or Dusk, “ Wolf-and-Sheep-
While.’ “ Almost at odds with, which is which.”

3 New Year. Beginning with the Vernal Equinox, it
must be remembered; and (howsoever the old Solar Year is
practically superseded by the clumsy Lunar Year that dates
from the Mohammedan Hijra) still commemorated by a
Festival that is said to have been appointed by the very
Jamshyd whom Omar so often talks of, and whose yearly
Calendar he helped to rectify.

‘The sudden approach and rapid advance of the Spring,”
(says a late Traveller in Persia) “are very striking. Before
the Snow is well off the Ground, the Trees burst into Blos-
som, and the Flowers start from the Soil. At Now Rooz
(their New Year's Day) the Snow was lying in patches on
the Hills and in the shaded Vallies, while the Fruit-trees in
the Garden were budding beautifully, and green Plants and
Flowers springing upon the Plains on every side—

‘ And on old Hyem’s Chin and icy Crown


‘ An odorous Chaplet of sweet Summer buds
‘Is, as in mockery, set-—’—


a


18 NOTES.


Among the Plants newly appear’d I recognized some old
Acquaintances I had not seen for many a Year : among these,
two varieties of the Thistle; a coarse species of the Daisy,
hke the Horse-gowan; red and white Clover; the Dock ; the
blue Corn-flower; and that vulgar ferb the Dandelion rear-
ing its yellow crest on the Banks of the Watercourses.”’ The
Nightingale was not yet heard, for the Rose was not
yet blown: but an almost identical Blackbird and Wood-
pecker helped to make up something of a North-country
Spring.

4 Exodus iv. 6; where Moses draws forth his Hand—not,
according to the Persians, ‘‘leprous as Snow,"’— but white as
our May-Blossom in Spring perhaps! According to them
also the Healing Power of Jesus resided in his Breath.

* Trim, planted by King Schedad, and now sunk some-
where in the Sands of Arabia. Jamshyd’s Seven-ring’d Cup
was typical of the Seven Ifeavens, 7 Plancts, 7 Seas, &c.
and was a Divining Cup.

6 Pchlevi, the old Heroic Senshit of Persia. Hafiz also
speaks of the Nightingale’s Pehlevi, which did uot change
with the People’s.

7 Tam not sure if this refers to the Red Rose looking
sickly, or the Yellow Rose that ought to be Red; Red,
White, and Yellow Roses all common in Persia.

8 Rustum, the ‘“ Hercules” of Persia, whose exploits are
among the most celebrated in the Shab-naima, Hatim Tai,
a well-known Type of Oriental Generosity.

9 A Drum—beaten outside a Palace.

10 That is, the Rose’s Golden Centre.


NOTES. Ws


11 Persepolis: call’d also Takht’i Jamshyd—Tue Tarone
or JaMSHYD, “ King-Splendid,” of the mythical Peeshdédian
Dynasty, and supposed (with Shah-nima Authority) to
have been founded and built by him, though others refer it
to the Work of the Genie King, Jan Ibn Jann, who also
built the Pyramids before the time of Adam. It is also
called Chehl-minar—Forty-colwmn ; which is Persian, pro-
bably, for Column-countless; the Hall they adorned or
supported with their Lotus Base and taurine Capital
indicating double that Number, though now counted down
to less than half by Earthquake and other Inroad. By
whomsoever built, unquestionably the Monument of a long
extinguished Dynasty and Mythology; its Halls, Chambers
and Galleries, inscribed with Arrow-head Characters, and
sculptured with colossal, wing’d, half human Figures like
those of Nimroud; Processions of Priests and Warriors
—(doubtful if any where 2 Woman)—and Kings sitting on
Thrones or in Chariots, Staff or Lotus-flower in hand, and the
Ferooher—Symbol of Existence—with his wing’d Globe,
common also to Assyria and Agypt—over their heads. All
this, together with Aqueduct and Cistern, and other Appur-
tenance of a Royal Palace, upon a Terrace-platform, ascended
by a double Flight of Stairs that may be gallop’d up, and
cut out of and into the Rock-side of the Koh’: Réahmet,
Mountain of Mercy, where the old Fire-worshiping Sove-
reigns are buried, and overlooking the Plain of Merdasht.

Persians, like some other People, it seems, love to
write their own Names, with sometimes a Verse or two, on
their Country’s Monuments. Mr. Binning (from whose
sensible Travels the foregoing Account is mainly condens’t)

G


20 NOTES.


found several such in Persepolis; in one Place a fine Line
of Hafiz: in another ‘an original, no doubt,” he says, “ by
no great Poet,”’ however ‘right in his Sentiment.” The
Words somehow looked to us, and the “halting metre”
sounded, familiar; and ou looking back at last among the
500 Rubayiat of the Calcutta Omar MS.—there it is: old
Omar quoted by one of his Countrymen, and here turned
into hasty Rhyme, at any rate—
‘This Palace that its Top to Heaven threw,
And Kings their Forehead on its Threshold drew—
I saw a Ring-dove sitting there alone,
And * Coo, Coo, Coo,’ she cried, and * Coo, Coo, Coo.’”


So as it seems the Persian speaks the English Ring-dove's
Pehlevi, which is also articulate Persian for ‘‘ Where ?”

Baukam Gour—Bahkrdm of the Wild Ass, from his Fame
in hunting it—a Sassanian Sovereign, bad also his Seven
Castles (like the King of Bohemia!) each of a different Colour;
each with a Royal Mistress within side; each of whom
recounts to Babram a Romance, according to one of the
most famous Poems of Persia, written by Amir Khusraw :
these Sevens also figuring (according to Eastern Mysticism)
the Seven Heavens, and perbaps the Book itself that
Eighth, into which the mystical Seven transceud, and
within which they revolve. The Ruius of Three of these
Towers are yet shown by the Peasantry ; as also the Swamp
in which Babram sunk, hike the Master of Ravenswood,
while pursuing his Ga.

12 A Thousand Years to each Plauet.

13 Saturn, Lord of the Seventh Heaven.

1 A Laugh at his Mathematics perbaps.
