THE JOURNEY OF WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK TO THE EASTERN PARTS, 1253-55
William of Rubruck (c. 1220-c. 1293), translated by W. W. Rockhill
Hakluyt Society, London, 1900
========================================================================
PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): English translation after W. W.
Rockhill's 1900 Hakluyt Society edition (public domain scan, Internet
Archive). The volume is complete, ending with the index: Rubruck's own
narrative of his 1253-55 journey to the Mongols, with two accounts of the
earlier journey of John of Pian de Carpine. The great Franciscan travel
narrative with its marvels of the East (Prester John, the dog-headed peoples).
========================================================================

WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK

TO

THE EASTERN PARTS,

1253-55

AS NARRATED BY HIMSELF,  WITH TWO ACCOUNTS OF THE EARLIER JOURNEY OF

JOHN OF PIAN DE CARPINE.

Translated, and Edited, with an Introductory Notice

BY

W. W. ROCKHILL

^ S # W I? K


*«R^«t&7^^^PD

^t ¥

m ^ m

University of Toronto


WORKS ISSUED BY

TLbc IddMn^t Society.

-o-

THE JOURNEY

Of

WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK

TO THE

EASTERN PARTS OF THE WORLD,

1253-55-

SECOND SERIES,  No. IV.

TH E JOURNEY

OF

WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK

TO

THE EASTERN PARTS

OF

THE WORLD,

1253-55»

AS NARRATED BY HIMSELF,  WITH TWO ACCOUNTS OF THE EARLIER JOURMEY OF

JOHN OF PIAN DE CARPINE.

^ranslaielr from ti)F Hattn, anlt (ZHliitel), tottf) an intfolnictorp ^ottre,

BY

WILLIAM WOODVILLE ROCKHILL,

HONORARY CORRESPONDING MFMBER OF THE  KOVAL GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY,

LONDON:  PRINTED FOR THE HAKLUYT SOCIETY.

LOMDO>r  PRINTED AT THE BEDFORD PRESS 20 AND 21, PEDPORDBURY, W.C.

COUNCIL

THE HAKLUYT SOCIETY.

Sir Clements Mar^lham, K.C.B., F.R.S. , Pns. R.G.S., President.

The Right Hon. The Lokd Stanley of Alderley, Vtce-Presilen*]

Rear-Admiral Sir William Whakton,. K.C. B. , Vice-Pkesideni.

C. Raymond Beazlby, M.A.

Colonel G. Earl Church.

Sir Martin Conway.

Albert Gray.

F. H. H. Guillemard, M.A.. M.D.

Edward Heawood, M.A.

Dudley F. A. Hervey, C.M.G.

AdxMiral Sir Anthony H. Hoskins, G.C.B.

J. Scott Keltje. LL.D.

F. W, Lucas.

A. P. Maudslay.

Majok M. Nathan, C.M.G.. R.E.

E. J. Payne, M.A.

E. G. Ravenstein.

Howard Saunderis.

H. W. Trinder.

Charles Welch, F.S.A.

William Foster, B.A., H<morary Secretary.

CONTENTS.

tAGE

Preface . . . . . . ix

Introductory Notice . . . . xiii

Itinera.';y of Friak William of Rubkuck . . xlv

Bibliography ...... xlvii

The Journey of Friar John of Pian de Carvine, as

narrated 15Y HIMSELF . . . .1

The same Journey descrihed by Friar Benedict the  Pole . . . . .33

The Journey of Friar William of Rubruck . . 40

Index ...... 283

Map to Illustrate the Two Journeys In pocket

PREFACE.

N publishing the narrative of Friar  William of Rubruck, a work which  should rank as high in the literature  of travel as that of Marco Polo, his  better-known successor in the field  of Asiatic exploration, the Hakluyt  Society, I think, not only renders  a service to students, but performs an act of justice long  due to a great, though much neglected, traveller, who  for six hundred and fifty years has remained imperfectly  known and appreciated.

It must be a source of lasting regret to all members  of the Society that our great geographer and lamented  President, Sir Henry Yule, was not able to undertake  the preparation of an edition of . William of Rubruck's  Ithierariuniy as he had long contemplated doing ; but his  high opinion of^the narrative, expressed in several of bis  works, has already greatly contributed towards establisliuig  the traveller's unquestionable right to pre-eminence among  the earliest European explorers of Asia. It is sincerely  hoped that the present volume will further aid in showing  the equity of Friar William's claim to the highest  recognition.

It is an interesting fact that to England, and England  alone, the great French traveller owes the chief contribu-

X rkEEACE

tions to the cstabiishment of his Fbirne Frorn England  came the first notice cf his w/oiK in the Oj^id.f Mcyu^ of  Roger Bacon ; by Richard Hakluvt the tt\zv\o\\ of his  journey was first made known to the world ; to Samuel  Purchas he owes the first publication of the complete text  of his narrative. 1 trust that it will now be found that  from an r'nglish Society he receives full recognition of his  great and lasting worth.

\\\ the Introductory Notice no attempt has been matle  to give in detail the history of the early relations between  Western Europe and the Mongol Empire ; this subject has  been elaborately and lucidly treated by such high authori-  ties as Abel Remusat, Baron d'Ohsson, Sir Henry Howorth,  Cahun, arid others. The object of the editor has simply  been to give an idea of the knowledge possessed by Western  Europe concerning the Mongols down to the time of Friar  William's journey ; and to show the sources of information  of which that traveller could, and very probably did, avail  himself as a preparation for his journey.

Among the most valuable sources of information to  which Friar William had access, v/as the narrative by  Benedict of Poland of his journey to the Court of Kuyuk  Khan, in 1246, in company with John of Pian de Carpine.  It is highly probable that Friar William met Friar John  before leaving France in 1248, and receis^ed advice from  him, and possibly communication oi his report to the Pope,  if it was written at that time. At all events, as the route  followed by the latter was for much of the way through  the same countries trave;rsed by Friar William and as  the two narratives complete and corroborate each other,  ft has been deemed advisable to give in full the relations  of Friars John and Benedict.

As to the first part of the Hisioria MougaloruJn of Friar  John, relating to the customs and history of the Mongols,  I have introduced in foot-notes to the text all such

PREPACB. xi

portions of it as bear directly on the narrative of Friar  William ; and similar use has been made of the account  of the mission of Friar Ascelin in 1247, which has reached  us in the extracts preserved by Vincent of Beauvais of the  report made by Simon of St. Quentin, a member of the  mission.

I have iarg^ely availed myself of mediaeval Chinese  works for elucidating or corroborating Friar William's  statements, and have had frequent recourse to Oriental  writers, Mohammedan or Armenian, for the same purpose.  Greek and Latin authors and European travellers, ancient"  and modern, have been consulted with profit ; though,  unfortunately, I have not had access to ^ number of works  or the latter class which may contain valuable corrobora-  tive evidence of the thorough reliability of our traveller.

It would seem that the MS. of Lord Lumley, published  by Kakluyt, divided Rubruck's narrative into a number of  chapters, to each of which .1 title was given, presumably  by the copyisi : for the other MSS., from which the text  of Michel and Wright, the one translated here, was pre-  pared, do not give these head-lines. 1 have deemed it  more convenient to divide the text arbitrarily into sections  where the narrative permitted it, and have not given titles  to any.

Concerning the spellin;^ of proper names, I have chosen  in each case vvhat appeared to me the best reading to be  found in any of the MSS., and have retained it uniformly  throughout the work. The punctuation in the MSS. is  very faulty ; I have occasionally altered it, but only where  to do so seemed absolutely necessary for a proper com-  prehension of the narrative.

The above are the only liberties that L have taken with  the text o^ Rubruck : I trust they will be deemed justifi-  able.

it affords me much pleasure to express here my sincere

XU PREFACE.

appreciation of the services rendered tnc b\' Mr. William  Foster» Honorary Secretary of the Hakluyt Society, who  has, by his kind suggestions, corrections, and general  revision of my work while gonii^ through the Press, greatly  added to its value. I have also to acknowledge with  gratitude the assistance given me by many friends in  elucidating the text of the Itinerariuni. To Thomas  Watters, formerly of H. B. M. Consular Service in China ;  to H. Leon Feer, my first guide in Oriental studies, of the  National Library in Paris ; to Father AHshan, of the  Armenian Convent of St. Lazarus at Venice ; to F.  Grcnard, the Central Asian traveller and companion of  the unfortunate Dutreuil de Rhins ; to Father F'. Ehrle,  the learned Prefect of the Vatican Library; and last, but  i*iot least, to Panagiotes Calogeropoulos, the genial and  scholarly librarian of the Greek Boule at Athens; I tender  my heartfelt thanks.

W. WOODVILLE ROCKHILL.

Washifigtcn^ D. C.  March \ith, 1900.

INTRODUCTORY NOTICE.

|N 1222 the Mongols, already masters  of all northern Asia from the Chinese  Sea to Lake Balkash, having de-  stroyed the Khorazmian empire and  ravaged Transcaucasia, broke through  the Caucasus and spread ruin and  terror over southern Russia, then  known as the Kipchak, and the valley of the Volga as  far north as the modern city of Kazan. But barely a  rumour of this invasion reached western Europe, and con-  temporary writers have left us but a few brief referenfces  to it and " the Tartars," as the Mongols and their allies  were to be called for ages to come.^ It was really not till

^ Alb^^icus Trium Fontium, in his Chnmicoju ^'^nd under date of  1222 (p.*T5©), records that the people called Tartars by the Hungarians  and the Comans, and their leader. King Uavid, or Prester John, on  learning of the fall of Damietta (in 1219), retreated as best they could  to their own country, and the little that was known of them was soon  forgotten. Under date of 1239 (p. 571), the same annalist describes  the Tartars from information given him ''by one who had seen them"  in the following terms : " They have a big head, short neck, very big  chest, big arms, little legs, and their strength is wonderfully great.  They have no religion, fear nothing, believe nothing, worship nothing  but their king, who calls himself King of Kings and Lord of Lords; '  For further information he refers his readers to the narrative of John  of Palatio {sic) Carpini. On the confusion existing between Ching-is  Khan and a Christian king, called David, see Yule {Cathay^ i75)i who  refers to a Reiatio dv Davide Rege Tariaroriim Christiana in Eccard's  Corpus Historic, ii.

xiv INTRODUCTORY NOTICE.

1238, when a second and greater Mongol expedition  against Christendom had carried devastation over nearly  half of eastern Europe, that the princes and rulers of  western and southern Europe began to awaken to sonne  slight comprehension of the immensity of the danger  which threatened them ; and that a few of them realised  that unless they could unite Christendom against the  Mongols they, their crusades, petty wars, and interminable  wrangling and fighting between Popes and Emperors  would be for ever put an end to, swept away in the rapidly  rising flood of Mongol conquest.^

Though a mission sent by the Ismaelians to the Kings of  France and of England in 1233, asking for aid against the  Tartars, may have imparted the first reliable information  to western Europe about the Mongols,^ the following  extract from Matthew Paris, under date of 1240, gives  such a full description of this new people, embodying prac-  tically all the earliest information possessed in western  Europe, not excepting that brought by the Ismaelians, of  them and their country down to the time of the journey of  Friar John of Pian de Carpine to the Mongol court in 1246,  that I will translate it in full.

" That the joys of mortal men be not enduring, nor  worldly happiness long lasting without lamentations, in

' Matthew Paris {Chrojiica Majora, iii, 488) says that in 1238 the  fear of the Mongols was so great in western Europe that people of  Gothland and Friesland did not dare come to Yarmouth for the  herring fishery, and that herrings were therefore so cheap that forty  or fifty sold for a piece of silver, even at places far away from the  coast (see also Cahun, Introduction^ 356).

^ From f^ ranee the Ismaelian envoy despatched one of his suite  to plead for assistance with Henry III of England. When he had  delivered his message, the Bishop of Winchester, who had taken the  cross at that time and was present at the audience, exclaimed : '" Let  those dogs devour each other -and be utterly wiped out, and then we  shall see, founded op their ruins, the universal Catholic Church, and  there shall truly be one shepherd and one flock'' (Matth. Paris, iii.

INTRODUCTORY NOTICE. ^^

this same year {i.e., 1240) a detestable nation of Satan, to  wit, the countless army of the Tartars, broke loose from its  mountain-environed home, and piercing the solid rocks (of  the Caucasus), poured forth like devils from the Tartarus, so  that they are rightly called Tartari or Tartarians. Swarming  like locusts over the face of the earth, they have brought  terrible devastation to the eastern parts (of Europe), laying  it waste with fire and carnage. After having passed through  the land of the Saracens, Ihey have razed cities,, cut down  forests, overthrown fortresses, pulled up vines, destroyed  gardens, killed townspeople and peasants. If perchance  they have spared any suppliants, they have forced them,  reduced to the lowest condition of slavery, to fight in the  foremost ranks against their own neighbours. Those who  have feigned to fight, or have hidden in the hope of escap-  ing, have been followed up by the Tartars and butchered.  If any have fought bravely (for them) and conquered, they  have got no thanks for reward ; and so they have misused  their captives as they have their mares. For they are in-  human and beastly, rather monsters than men, thirsting for  and drinking blood, tearing and devouring the flesh of dogs  and men, dressed in ox-hides, armed with plates of iron,  short and stout, thickset, strong, invincible, indefatigable,  their backs unprotected,^ their breasts covered with armour ;  drinking with delight the pure blood of their flocks, with  big, strong horses, which eat branches and even trees, and  which they have to mount by the help of three steps on  account of the shortness of their thighs. They are without  human laws, know no comforts, are more ferocious than lions  or bears, have boats made of ox-hides, which ten or twelve  of them own in common ; they arc able to swim or to manage  a boat, so that they can cross the largest and swiftest rivers

* The Ismaelian envoy 9«lid they did this so that they could not flee  (MfiUh. Paris, iii, 488).

XVl INTRODUCTORY NOTICE.

without let or hindrance,^ drinking turbid or muddy water  when blood fails them (as beverage). They have one-  edged swords and daggers, are wonderful archers, spare  neither age, nor sex, nor condition. They know nc other  language than their own, which no else knows ; for until now  there has been no access to them, nor did they go forth (from  their own country) ; so there could be no knowledge of  their customs or persons through the common intercourse  of men. They wander about with their flocks and their  wives, who are taught to fight like men. And so they  came with the swiftness of lightning to the confines of  Christendom, ravaging and slaughtering, striking every  one with terror and incomparable horror. It was for  this that the Saracens sought to ally themselves with the  Christians," hoping to be able to resist these monsters  with their combined forces. It is believed that these  Tartars, of cursed memory, are of the ten tribes^ who,

•^ Plan de Carpine (690) says : " When they come to a river, they  cross it in the following way, even if it is a large one : the chiefs have  a round, light skin, around the top of which they have loopholes verv^  close together through which they pass a cord, and they stretch it so  that it bellies out, and this they fill" with clothes and other things, and  then they bind it down very tightly. After that they put their saddle?  and other hard things on it, and the men likewise sit on it. Then  they lie the boat thus made to the tail of a horse, and a man swims  along ahead leading it ; or they sometimes have two oars, and with

them they row across the water, thus crossing the river Some of

the poorer people have a leather pouch, well sewn, each man having  one ; and in this pouch or sack they put their clothing and all their  things, and they tie the mouth of the bag tightly, and tie it to the tail  of a horse, then they cross as stated above {i.e.. swimming, holding  on to the horse's head ?).

Pei shih (bk. 94, 16) says the Kitan crossed rivers in the same way ;  and the Chinese traveller, Wang Yen-te, who went 10 Karakhodjo in  A.D. 981, says the Ta-ta (or Tartars) used to cross the Yellow River  on inflated sheepskins or rafts dragged by camels (Ma Tuan-lin,  bk. 336, \2). In 1474 the Venetian Conlarini was taken across the  Don on a raft tied to a horse led by a Tartar {Tmvels^ 'S3 •

- Referring to the Ismaelian mission of 1238, previously mentioned.  The Assassins hiid every reason to fear the >longols ; a few years  later, they were exterminated by Hulagu and his troops.

•' Roger Bacon {0/)us .\fnji/s, i, 268' thought it probable that the  Mongols who had broken through the Caspian gates were the soldieis

INTRODUCTORY NOTICE. XVii

having forsaken the Mosaic law, followed after the golden  calves, and whom Alexander the Macedonian endeavoured  at first to shut up in the rugged mountains of the Caspians  with bitumen-covered rocks.^ When he saw that the  undertaking exceeded the power of man, he invoked the  might of the God of Israel, and the tops of the mountains  came together, and an inaccessible and impassable place  was made. Josephus says of this place : " will God do as  much for the believer as he has done for the unbeliever ?"  So it seemed that God drd not wish them to come out ;  nevertheless, it is written in sacred history that they shall  come out toward the end of the world, and shall make a  jgreat slaughter of men. There arises, however, a doubt  whether the Tartars now coming from there be really they,  for they do not use the Hebrew tongue, neither do they  know the laws of Moses, nor have they laws, nor are they  governed by them. To which it may be answered that,  notwithstanding this, it is credible that they may belong  to those who were shut up, and to whom reference has been  made. . . . It is stated, however, that the Tartars take  their name from a certain river which flows from the  mountains which they had at an earlier date penetrated,  and which is called Tartar ;'- in like manner the river of  Damascus is called Farfar."^

of Antichrist. The Armenian historians of the period were of the same  opinion (Dalaurier, 198, 248). The Ismaelian envoy of 1238 thought  they had started either from the Arctic sh6res, or from the Caspian  mountains, or their vicinity (Matthew Paris, iii, 488).

^ Conf. Roger Bacon, i,' 364, and infra^ p. xxxi.

2 The Ismaelian' envoy said they took their name from the river  Tar. Pian de Carpine (645) says a branch of the ?\TongoIs called  Su-Mongal took their name from the river Tartar^ which flowed  through their country (conf Vincent of Beauvais, bk. xxix, ch. Ixxxix,  422/), and infra^ p. 114, note. Maundevile (127) speaks of " the river of  Fassar (or Farfar), which flows by the cyties of Marryoche and  Arteyse ;" and he adds, " bessyde the Cytie of Damas ys a Ryvere  that Cometh from the Mounteyne of Lybane, that men hyt callen

Matthew Paris, op. cit.^ iv, 76-78. ^

xvn) INTRODUCTORY NOTICE,

On April 9th, 1 241, the battle of Li^nitz was fought and  lost by Henry, Duke of Silesia, and the Mongols swept  over his dukedom and Moravia, at the same time as  another of their armies under the great Batu entered  Hungary. The last barrier against an invasion of central  and western Europe was swept away, and the Pope, the  Church, and the Princes of Europe attempted but feebly  and too late to organise resistance. On March loth, 1241,  Henry, Count of Lorraine, wrote to Henry, Duke of  Brabant, imploring his immediate assistance.-^ The latter  sent a copy of this letter to the Bishop of Paris.- The  clergy of German)^ ordered solemn fasts, and preached a  crusade.

But the most important letter written at this critical  period was that of Frederic H to Henry HI  England.^ The Emperor, from his long and intimate  relations with the Arabs, possessed more correct and  wider knowledge concerning the Mongols and their wars  than probably any man of his period. In this letter he  refers with some detail to the first Mongol invasion in

Albane." Vincent of Beauvais (bk. xxix, ch. Ixxi, 429a) says :  " Tartari modo intenogativo clamoroso loquuntiir, gutture rabido  el horribile. Cantantes mugiunt ut Thauri, vel ululani ut Lupt,  voces inartrculates in canlando pioferunt, et banc cantilenam  A/a alali {La Allah il Allah I 1 suppose) comniuniter ac  frequentissime canunt." The Armenian chronicles speak of the  sharp, piercing voices of the Tartars (Dulaurier, 248). Long before  this the Wei shu^ bk. 103, 15, had, in speaking of the origin of the  Oguz Turks {Kao-cKi) who descended from a wolf, noted that to this  first father they owed their whining, drawling" speech, and that their  songs resembled the howling of wolves.

* See Matthew Paris, ap.cit.^ iv, 109-m.

-' See Raynaldus, Annates^ ii, 258.

'-' U is really an appeal to Christendom: " to Germany, ardent in  battle : to France, who nurses in her bosom an intrepid soldiery; to  warlike Spain ; to England, powerful by its warriors and its ships ; to  Crete, to Sicily, to savage Hibernia, 10 frozen Norway." In this letter  the Emperor frankly admits that all suppositions as to the origin of the  Tartixri, or Tartatci, are baseless, \\\\<\ that no one knows whence they  had come.

INTRODUCTORY NOTICE. xix

Europe, the subjugation of the Comans and of southern  Russia. Then he passes to the second invasion, to the  conquest of Hungary, the defeat of King Bela IV at Pesth,  and to the still more overwhelming one of Lignitz. He  tells King Henry of the devastation of Poland, of Bohemia,  of the marches of Austria ; and dwells pathetically on the  urgent need for unity of astion of all Christian Princes for  the common defence, mad© so difficult by tne cruel attacks  on him by the Pope. He fin.shes his letter by saying  that he puts his trust in God, and hopes that by the com-  bined efforts of Christendom the Tartars will be driven  finally down into their Tartarus.^

So intense, however, was the feeling of a large part of  Europe against the Emperor, that we are assured that this  letter was not generally accepted as a disinterested call for  the defence of Cnristian Europe, and that to serve his own  ends against the Pope he had invented this '* plague of  Tartars."^ And so this letter was used by the Church only  as further evidence of its great enemy's wickedness and no  effort was made by any of the powers of western Europe  to assist Frederic with men or money. The Pope's quarrels,  Jerusalem and Constantinople, were their only cares.

On the receipt of the news of the Mongol invasion of  Hungary, Pope Gregory IX wrote to King Beia,^ as he had  written the year before to sympathize with the Queen of  Georgia, condoling with him, encouraging him to further  resistance, and promising all those who should take the

^ Ad sua Tartara Tartari detrudentur. In a letter of Innocent JV  to the Archbishop of Aquiisea, in 1243. we find this pun ^gain.  Joinville credits St. Louis with having also got it ofif somewhere about  this time, and we have it practically in the quotation from Matthew  Paris given. above. I cannot decide to whom the credit of the  discovery belongs, though f am inclined to think that it was Frederic ;  but then, would Pope Innocent have plagiarized his arch-enemy?  (conf. R^musat, Mem.^ 15).

'^ Matthew Paris, op. cit.^ iv, 119.

^ Raynaldus, Aiaiaies, ii, 246-24£, 259.

XX INTRODUCTORY NOTICE.

cross against the Mongols the same indulgences as if they  had gone to the Holy Land. He wrote in the same strain  to Coloman. brother of Bela, and issued an encyclical  ordering a crusade to be preached.

The defeat of Bcla at Pesth, and the loss of his kingdom to  the Mongols swiftly followed, and filled the old Pope with  alarm and distress. He wrote to Bela on July 1st, condoling  again with him, and promising him, if Frederic would but  show his contrition by returning to the Church, and thus  restore peace to Christendom, to bring all the forces of the  Church to the help of Hungary.^ And so, while the Emperor  and the Pope worked to destroy each other, the Pope ful-  minating against Frederic, and Frederic continuing to  wage war against the Pope in Italy, the Mongol inva-  sion was left to run its course. On August 21st, 1241,  Pope Gregory IX died, and in December of the same year  the Mongol Emperor, Ogodai, followed him to the grave.

Among the Mongols, the emperor was elected by the  various members of Chingis Khan's family, and by the  great generals and officers of state sitting as a parliament ;  so the news of the death of Ogodai put an end to the  invasion of Europe ; the presence of Batu, the General-  issimo, and of all the military chiefs was needed at the  great meeting {kuriltai), which would soon have to be  held near Karakorum, in Mongolia, to choose his successor.  Thus it vvas that, though the Mongols remained in Hungary  till 1243, and even detached divisions of their army into  Austria and Dalmatia, their great westward movement  was stopped, and weak and divided Europe was saved,  though it knew it not, but stood helplessly expecting the  fatal blow ; for the Mongols' claim to universal dominion  was now well known over Europe, and no one could  entertain any doubt of their ability to enforce it.

Kf\.\x\?i[d\is, Annaies, ii, 261

INTRODUCTORY NOTICE. XXl

In 1243 Innocent IV was elected Pope; and with his  characteristic energy he lost no time in putting to use  such spiritual means as he could command to encourage  the organization of arnred resistance against the supposed  impending Mongol invasion. On July 22nd he wrote to  the Archbishop of Aquilaea to proclaim a crusade, exhort  the Germans to take the cross to go to the help of the  Hungarians " against the envoys of Satan, the ministers of  the Tartarus," and promising the. same indulgences as for  a crusade to the Holy Land.^

But besides these measures the Pope promptly adopted  others more in conformity with his holy calling, his  well-known proselytizing zeal, and the deep interest he  took in the extension of the labours of the powerful  Mendicant Orders of St. Dominic and St. Francis. He  organized missions, not only among the various heretical  sects of Europe and Asia, and the pagan tribes of north-  east Europe, but also to the Mongols ; in the hope, as he  says in a letter to " the King and the Tartar people," of  " averting their onslaughts on Christendom through fear of  Divine wrath," and to preach to them Christianity ; as well  as with the ulterior purpose of finding out through the  missionaries exactly the plans of the Mongols as regarded  Europe. The Pope must have been encouraged to believe that  his representations might have some effect on the Mongol  Sovereign by the prevailing belief in the existence, some-  where in the far East, of the Nestorian Christian realm of  Prester John ; and probably by the more recent information  given him by a Russian bishop named Peter, who had fled  before the invaders to Lyons, that " the Mongols wor-  shipped one God, and vvere not vvithout some religious  beliefs."'^

^ Raynaldus, Annates^ ii, 29$.

■^ Matth. Paris, op. cit., iv, 388 ; see also Remusat, op. cit.^ 25, and  infra, p. 236, note i. The Bishop, by the way, adds still a little more

xyii IMTRODUCTOKV NOTICF.

The Pope organized two missions to the Mongols, and  to the leaders of each of them he ga\e letters to be  delivered, it is presumable, to the first important Chief  they should meet, the one in Russia, the other in Armenia  or the adjacent countries. He confided both these missions to  Franciscans. The ambassador sent to the Mongols in Russia  was Friar John of Pian de Carpine^ near Perugia, who was  at that time provincial of his order at Cologne ; the other  was Friar Lawrence of Portug^al, of whose previous life we  know nothing These missions appear to have been  organized by the personal initiative of the Pope, and the  envoys were ready to leave Lyons before the first sitting  of the General Council, for the letters to the Mongol  Emperor given to them bear date the 9th March, 1245,  and the Council, which was opened on the 26th June, only  approved the Pope's action.

The Council of Lyons had been convened more especially  for the purpose of *' finding a remedy for the Tartars and  other spurners of the faith and persecutors of the people  of Christ;"^ but so far as the Tartars were concerned, its  action was characteristic of the times, and affords further

confusion to the story of Prester John, by apparently confounding him  with John the Baptist. He says that the Mongols "say they have  saint John the Baptist for chief" {diciini se habere sanctum Johafinem  Daptistavi pro dure). The earliest knowledge gainetl by Kuropt of  Prester John dates from 1145 (Albericus, Chrotncon, 307). Ii is also  recorded under the sflme date by Otto, Bishop of Freisingen (D'Avezac,  ofi. cit.y 547. Cunf supra^ p# xiii, note 1).

' The editors of the Analecta Frdnciscnnd (iii, 266) remark that it  would be more correct to write his Latin names PLnw Ciuptnis or de  Carpine^ Planum Carpinis <Sx Planum Carpi being the halin form oi  the Italian Pian di Carpina, the modern Pian la Magione or Vlagione,  about fourteen miles from Perugia (see also Liverani, I2\ Wo have  become so accustomed to speak of Friar John as Pian de Caipine,  and of Friar William of Rubruck as Rubruck, that I have retained  these na»nes ; though we might just as well speak of Thomas oi Canter-  bury as Canterbury, or Robert of Lincoln as Lincoln. Strangely  enough Remusat {Relations Poiitiques^ 27, 34) makes out that Law-  rence and John were sent together to Baui on the \'olga . and  Vivien de St. Martin {Hist, de la dlo^., 260) repeats this blunder.

'^ Matth» Paris, op. cit.y iv, 411.

INTRODUCTORY NOTICE. xxiil

proof, if such were necessary, of the utter demoralization of  Europe It decided that, "whereas the Tartars are the most  bitter enemies of the Christian name, and the Christians are  still exposed to their attacks — for not having conquered  them all yet, as they in their desire to extinguish the  religion of Christ wish to do, they will surely come  back, and the horrors seen in Poland, Russia, Hungary,  and other countries will be renewed;" therefore it advised,  besought, and entreated all Christian people to block every  road or passage by which the enemy could pass, either by  means of ditches, walls, buildings, or sUch other contrivances  as they might deem best, and to give immediate notice to  the Pope of the appearance of the enemy, to the end that  he might take additional measures for their protection.  The Council further promised that the Church would itself  contribute, and cause all Christian localities directly inter-  ested in the matter to contribute, towards the expense  these defences would occasion.^

Friar John of Pian de Carpine set out from Lyons on  the i6th of April, 1245 ; ^"^ after various incidents which  will be found related in his narrative of his journey given on  subsequent pages, delivered the letter of the Pope, not to  any Mongol Prince in Russia, but to Kuyuk Khan himself  in northern Mongolia, not far from the city of Kara-  korum. On the 9th of June, 1247, Friar John and his  companion. Friar Benedict of Poland, were back in Kiew  in Russia ; and in the autumn of the same year they again  reached Lyons, where they presented to the Pope the reply  of Kuyuk to his letter, and related the incidents of their  adventurous journey.''^

^ Raynaldiis, op. cit . ii, 332.

- The text of Friar John's Historia Mofigaloruni, and of his account  of his journey, together with the short narrative of his companion  Friar Benedict, have been admirably edited and annotated by D'Avezac  in 1839 ; this work has been of inestimable service to me.

xxlv INTKODUCTORV NOTICK

As to the mission of Fiiar Lawrence of Portugal» we

know practically, nothing concerning it ; no mention is  made of it in any work which has come down to us. h'rom  a statement in the Ealesiasticai Annals^ that in 1^:47 the  Pope sent this same Friar as his Legate to Asia Minor, we  may infer that he mav ac«-ually have started on the mission  assigned hun in 1245, and nK-\y have \isited parts oi  western Asia, thus acquiring .-.uch knowledge of thnt region  as justified the Pope's selection of him for this new orf>':<,' ;  but the new mission which the Pope sent* in Ihe same year,  1247, to the Mongol Commander-in-Chief. Baidju, in  Armenia, tends to prove th.at Lawrence had not been able  to deliver the letter entrusted to him in 1245.^

However this may be, in 142.'' the Pope determined on  sending another mission to the Mongols of Asia Minor,  with a letter of similar tenour to those given in 1245 to  P>iar John and Friar Lawrence ; and he chose this time  as leader a Dominican triar, Ascelin or Anseim, this Order  having already at the time established itself in western  Asia. • A short narrative of the journey has been preserved  to us in Vincent of Beauvais's t^^real encvclopcedia, entitled  speculum MajoruDi : 1k« clciiving his information from a  report which was written by i~^'riar Simon of St Qnentin, a  member of the mission, but \\ Inch ha^ not reached us. ft is  not without interest, though it adds hardly anythiiig ti; our  general knowledge of the Mongols ; nor does \^ s:;ive any  details whatever about the route followed by the ixiission.  Friar Simon's narrative, like that of Friar John of l*ian de

* Raynaldus, op. cit., ii, 378.

- Additional proof of this i.s foumi ii: the Siaiemtnt 111. ide in i2^7 by  Friar Ascelin, the head of the mission of that year to Daidjii, that the-  Pope did not know who the dreai Khan was, noi l^ari he ever hcarci  of I3aidju, nor liatu, nor anyone else among them. Kcmusat, <?/>. r//.,  27, states wrongly that Ascelin's mission was sent l>\ the Pope in  1245, at the same lime as that of Pian de Carp.ne. \ i\ ien de St.  Martin, op. sup. cit.^ 270, follo\ss R(?miisat, and says lint !"iiar John  wrote the relation of Lawrence of Porltij^aiS mis-^ion

INTRODUCTORY NOTICE. XXV

Carpine, consisted presumably of two parts — the journey  proper, and notices on the ethnology and history of the  Mongols and the nations contiguous to them ; for we find  scattered about in Bks. XXIX and XXX of the Speculum  Historiale, among much information on the Mongols tjiken  verbatun from John of Pian dc Carpines work, other  additional details, which can only have been derived from  Friar Simon. ^

Friar Ascelin and his companions were made to suffer  all the humiliations and discomforts his predeces^rs and  successors on similar missions were subjected to by Mongol  arrogance and natural boorishness. Lodgings far remote  from the Court, poor and '^Puntv food, insults, delays  innumerable ; nothing was omitted to make the ambassa-  dor feel how insignificant he was, and in what low estima-  tion the i^ope was held. The envoy's conduct did not  improve matters, though we must admit that he was sorely  provoked ; he showed himself unbending, and ^adly lacking  in suavity of matiner, or in any desire to ingratiate himself  with tile Mongols. The result was what was to be  expected — a rude reply to the Pope's missive and the  utter failure of the mission. It was 1250 before Ascelin  ventured back to the Pope and made his report.

When John of Pian de Carpine reached Lyons in the  latter part of T247, a crusade against the Saracens was  about to be undertaken, and King Louis IX of P>ance,  who had taken the cross on its first preaching in 1245, '«^'^^  on the point of leaving for Aigues-Mortes, there to take  ship for Cyprus. But the Pope feared that the departure  o{ the King would leave him exposed to the attacks of  that arch-iiend, the Emperor P'rederic ; and so, in the hope

^ I have embodied or referred to tiearly all these additional details  in subsequent notes to Kubruck's rjarrati\e. Vincent of Beauvais had  no knowledge of Rubruck or his wprk. See Speculum Histoin'nJc^  l))c. \\.\i, chs. XR to LII, 453^-454^.

XX vi INTRODUCTORY NOTICE.

of inducing the King to defer his departure till his personal  safety was amply provided for, he sent, in the early part of  1248, three months after his arrival, Friar John of Pian de  Carpine and his companion Benedict the Pole, to Paris,  to represent his ur<i;ent needs to the King and seek to  delay his setting out for the Holy Land.^

There was then at the Court of King Louis, among the  numerous members of the mendicant Orders of which he  was so fond, a Franciscan called William, a native of the  vilJage of Rubruck in French Flanders. He was about to  accompany the King on the crusade, and St. Louis was to  entrust to him some four years later a secret mission  to the Court of the Mongol Emperor, the report Of which  forms the subject of this volume. There is every reason  for supposing that Friar William met at Paris the two  returning travellers, and heard from their lips the story  of their adventurous journey ; and he may possibly  have conceived at that time the desire to visit those  remote regions, preach the true faith, and bring back  to the Church of Rome the Christians scattered through-  out the Mongol empire, whose existence Friar John had  revealed to him. During the next foiir years Friar  William was destined to hear and see much, while with  St. Louiis, tending to strengthen in him the desire to visit  the Mongols, and to supply him with valuable information  for his guidance.-

' Wadding, AnnaleSy iii, 125. Louis, when on his way in 1248 to  Aigucs Mortes, went to Lyons to see the Pope, and presumably to give  him an answer to the message brought him by Friar John (WilHam  of Nangis, Gestn^ 357)-

- The only source of information concerning Friar \yilliam known  lo exi'^t is his own narrative of his journey ; my statements are based  entirely on it. He speaks several times of the Seine, of Paris, and of  St. Denis. His prolonged residence in Paris may be inferred from  his refcience to the intimate friends {arnicas speciales) he had there,  thouj;h he may have become intimate with them while in the Holy  Land. It Friar William did not meet John of l^ian de Carpine  "^wA Be nt'di( I the Pole in Paris, he saw, probably as soon as w was

INTRODUCTORY NOTICE. XXVll

On September 2ist, 1248, St Louis landed on the island  of Cyprus, and three months later there arrived at Nicosia  an embassy from Ilchikadai, a Mongol General commanding  the forces in Persia, bearing letters complimenting the King,  "whose renown had already spread throughout western  Asia," and who, it was believed by all, was to deliver it out  of the hands of the Saracens, and offering Mongol assis-  tance against Islam for the recovery of the Holy Places.  The envoy was Sabeddin Morrifat David, or simply David,^  as he is called by Rubruck. He told the King much  pleasing news : he said the name of the Pope was already  famous among the Tartars ; that the mother of the GreaJ  Khan was a Christian ; and that on the day of the Epiphany,  three years before, the Great Khan himself and the greatest  princes of the Tartars had also become Christians, converted  by a Saracen bishop called Mallachias ; that Ilchikadai  even before that had been baptized ; that the Great Khan  of the Mongols was most favourable to the Christians ; and  much more to the same effect. This was translated to the  King by a Dominican monk, Friar Andrew of Longumeau  (or Longumel), who, besides possessing a good knowledge  of Arabic, had been among the Mongols with Friar Ascelin's

written, the short narrative of Benedict. In the only passage in v/hich  he refers to Friar John, he mentions a detail only found in Benedict's  account of the journey (see infra^ p. 38). Antonio de Macro, in  Wadding {Annales^ iii, 207), states that on June 20th, 1248, Friar  Benedict the Pole suffered martyrdom for the- faith, with another  meniber of his Order, called John of Piano (not to be confounded with  John of Pian de Carpinc), at Armaloch m Persia. If this be correct,  Benedict may not even have had time to go to Paris, b,ut, after  making his report at Lyons, have left at once for Armenia, in this  case, it is conceivable that a copy of this report was given William  of Rubruck by John of Pian de Carpine. f^hortly after, William of  Rubruck went to the Holy Lanci, not to retiTrn for eight or ten years ;  but at the time of writing his narrative, in 1255, he apparently did  not know of the existetice of the work of John of Pian de Carpine,  which must have been written not later than 1248. for the author does  not appear to have long survived the hardships of his journey  (D'Ave^ac, 599-601).

^ William of Nangis, 360 ; D'Ohsson, ii, 237.

xxv)ii INTRODUCTOUV NOTICE.

mission in 1247, and had there met this same David at the  camp of Baidju, the Commander-in-Chief of the Mongol  forces in western Asia.^ King Louis was destined to find  out, a few years later, that llchikadai's mission had been  undertaken without authority from the Mongol Kmperor ;  and that the information vouchsafed him by David was of  that unsubstantial kind Orientals are but too apt to give  when knowing it will afford pleasure to their hearers.- At  the tinfie, however, the King was so pleased with it and  with the corroborative evidence in a letter from the Con-  stable of Armenia to the King of Cyprus received at about  the same time, speaking of the vast numbers of Christians  he had found in the Mongol country, through which he  was travelling on his mission to the Great Khan,^ that  he at once determined to send, not only a return mission  to Ilchikadai, but also one to the Emperor of the Mongols,

^ William of Nangis (359), Jean Pierre Sarrasin (254), and all  contemporary writers who refer to the subject, state that Andrew had  been on Friar Ascelin's mission. The chronicler of the mission,  Simon of St. Quentin, only mentions Brothers Alexander, Alberic,  Ckiischard of Cremona (who joined the party at Tiflis, to act as inter-  preter probably), and himself Sarrasin calls Andrew, Friar Andrieu  de St. Jacques, and William of Nangis styles him Andreas, Andrus  and Andrien. Joinville refers to him, but not by name. Some writers  think that the Friar Asceiin of the mission of 1245 is die same as the  Andrew of that of 1249. Remusat {op. at., 27) thinks Andrew joined  Ascelin's mission during its journey to Mongol headquarters.

- Mangu Khan wrote to St. Louis (see infra, p. 249) that David was  an impostor, but I imagine that we are not to understand this  too literally. Ilchikadai had attempted to establish direct relations  with the French King without obtaining the sanction of the Emperor ;  he was consequently, and quite properly, disavowed. D'Ohsson (ii,  238) is of opinion that the envoys were impostors in every sense, and  their letters pure forgeries. If this be so, I cannot see why David  should have been vvilh'ng to return Avith the French mission to the  Mongol headquarters in Persia, and how it happened that his com-  panion and accomplice, Marcus, was at Sartach's <7r^/// in 1253, when  William of Rubruck passed through there, enjoying apparently some  influence on account of his knowledge of languages (see'/>(/m,  pp. 102, 10$). Copies of the letters brought by l3avid were sent to  t.^e Pope and to King Louis' mother, Queen Blanche (see Remusat,  fip. tit., 45, who has views identical with mine as to David's mission).

'^ William of Nangis, 360, 361.

INTRODaCTORY NOTICE XXIX

who the envoy told him was called Kuyuk Khan,^ for  the purpose of exhorting him and his princes to the per-  formance of Christian duties, and expressing his pleasure  at the happy disposition of the Mongols as regarded the  faith of Christ. Friar Andrew was naturally chosen as  ambassador, and accompanied by his brother, another  monk whose name has not reached us, four laymen, one  of whom would seem to have been an Englishman, and  David, he set out for the Emperor's camp about the  middle of February, 1249,^ bearing letters from the King  and Legate, and rich presents, among others a tent made  like a chapel, the walls adorned with scenes representing the  Annunciation and other events of sacred history, "pour  eulz montrer et enseigner comment ils devoient croire."  Kuyuk was dead when the mission arrived at the Mongol  court on the I mil, and it was the regent, the Empress Ogul  Gaimish, who received it, and who promptly put this most  unexpected advance of the great Frank sovereign to a very  practical use. *' When the great King (Queen) of the Tar-  tarins," says Joinville, " had received the messengers and the  presents, he sent for several kings, whose security he  insured, and who had not yet come to do him homage, and  he had the chapel set up, and spoke to them as follows :  * My lords, the King of France has come under my sub-  jection, and here is the tribute he sends us ; and if you  come not to our mercy, we will send for him to confound

* Sarrasin {loc. cit.) writes the name Quio Quaii.

- Saiiasin (255) says he was accompanied by "un siens frcre et  maistre Jehans Godericlie et uns autres clers de Poissy, et Herbcrs  11 sommeliers, et Gerbers de Sens." William of Nangis (367; sa\s  he had two other friars of his Order, two clerks, and two sergeants-at-  arms iserjans cVanncs; He adds that the envoy "envoia assez (tost)  lettres au roys Loys de ce que il avoit trouve ; lesquelles lettres li roys  envoya en France a. sa tres-chiere mere la royne Blanche." Perhaps  these letters may some day be found. Remusat {op. ci't., 52) mentions  the names of three other persons who, according to various con-  temporary writers, accompanied this mission : they are John of  Carcassonne, Guillaume, and Robert, a clerk.

XXX INTRODUCTORY NOTICE.

you.' And many there were among them who, for fear of  the King of France, placed themselves in subjection to that  King"i

In the spring of 1249, St. Louis, Queen Margaret, Friar  William of Rubruck,- and all the army of Crusaders set  sail fox Kgypt. The fatal battle of Mansurah, the captivity  of the King, and the capitulation of Damietta followed  shortly after; and in the spring or summer of 1250, the  King, with the remnants of his army, was landed at  Ptolemais, on the coast of Palestine, a much sadder though  hardly a wiser man, as his further conduct showed. Near  there, in 125 1, while occupied in fortifying the town of  Caesarea, he received Friar Andrew on his return from the  Mongol court with the envoys of the Empress-Regent, Ogul  - Gaimish — that " most abominable sorceress, viler than a  dog," as the Emperor Mangu described her a few years  later in a letter to King Louis — bearing a letter from  her to the French King. It was in the following terms (I  wi41 not spoil Joinville's quaint language by attempting to  translate it) : " Bone chose est de pez ; quar en terre de pez  manjuent ciF qui vont a quatre piez, I'erbe pesiblement.  Cil qui vont a deus labourent la terre dont les biens  viennent passiblement.^ Et cete chose te mandons, nous  pour toy aviser ; car tu ne peus avoir pez se tu ne I'as a  nous, et tel roy et tel (et moult en nommoient) et touz les  avons mis a I'espee. Si te mandons qui tu non envoies  tant de ton or et de ton argent chascun an, que tu nous  retieignes a amis ; et se tu ne le fais, nous destruirons toy  et ta gent aussi coinme nous avons fait ceulz que nous avons  devant nommez." " And be well assured," adds Joinville,

1 Joinville, op. cit, 48 ^ U?J "^.

2 I take it that Friar William accompanied the crusade to Kgypt,  for he speaks of the width of the Nile at'Damietta as one who had  %^t.\\ it, and of the annual rise of the river.

"^ Passibiemtnt . " laboriously."

INTRODUCTORY NOTICE. xxxi

'•that he (the King) repented greatly for ever having sent  thither." 1

If this mission was a diplomatic failure, it supplied King  Louis, nevertheless, with much valuable and original infor-  mation on the Mongols, their country, origin, customs and  history. He learnt that the Tartarins had come from a  great sandy desert, which began at the eastern end of the  world at some marvellous rocky mountains, which no one  had ever passed, and behind which were confined the people  of Got and Margoth,^ who areto come with Antichrist at the  did of the world. He then heard of their first great chief'and  his>+aws (though Friar Andrewdid not mention Chingis Chan  by name), of his miraculous conversion to Christianity after  a vision in which God had promised him dominion over  Prester John, and of his warring with him ; of Christianity  among the Mongols ; of the eight hundred chapels on carts  .seen in one camp; of the German prisoners at Talas;'^of the  many ruined cities passed on the long journey of a year,  travelling ten leagues a day ; of the huge piles of bleached  Ifuman bones marking the devastating march of the  Mongols ;* of the fires through which they had sought to  force his envoy to pass, with the presents he bore, before his  audience with the Regent. He must have heard with  special delight of the presence in south-eastern Russia of  a great Mongol Christian chief, Sartach, son of the  mighty 6atu — a story believed alike by Christians and

^ Joinville, op. cit., 148.

^ Clearly a reference to the Great Wall of China. The people of Gog  and Magog had been heretofore placed south of the Caucasus {siipra^  p. xvii). Friar Andrew now locates them to the east of the Tartars  conf. Marco Polo^ i, 276, 283).

^ See Rubruck's narrative, infra^ p. 136.

^ Sempad, brother of King Heythum of Little Armenia, wrote to the  King of Cyprus, that along his route to the Mongol court he had  passed a hundred thousand (I) piles of bones of those killed by the  Tartars (William of Nangis, 360. Conf, Friar John's account, infra,  P- i3)-

XXxn INTRODUCTORY NOTICE.

Mohammedans; and of many other things equallj- new and  strange, but all encouraging to the- Christian King's and to  Friar William of Rubruck's hopes of conversion and con-  sequent peace.^ We are able with the scanty notices at  our disposal to gain but slight knowledge of the route  followed by Friar Andrew. We know only that he started  from Antioch. h seems likely that he went by way of the  great northern route through Little Armenia, Caisarea in  Cappadocia, Sivas and Erzerum : the same road followed by  Friar William of Rubruck, but in the opposite direction, in  1255. After passing through Tiflis, he went either to  Taurinum (Tabriz) or to the camp in the plain of Mugan,  where were usually the Mongol headquarters for western  Persia; and where, I suppose, he found Ilchikadai, and  delivered the letters he bore ; and where also the prudent  David probably left him. Friar Andrew and his com-  panrions, having accomplished this part of their mission,  skirted the southern shores of the Caspian, and then<:e,  probably by way of the Syr daria valley, they reached  Chimkent and Talas.'^ Here they turned eastward, crossed  the Chu and Hi i-ivers south of the Balkash, and reached  the camp of Ogul Gaimish on the riveV I mil, a little to the  north-east of the lake. As to the route followed on the  return journey, we have but one indication concerning it —

' See for the above details, Joinville, 147, et seq.^ and ^Rubruck's  narrative, passim.

2 William of Nangis (365, 366) says that the King sent  "missions" to Ilchikadai and the Great Khan ; but they were both  entrusted to Brother Andrew, who. is styled capHaneus et ma^ster.  Rubruck tells us {infra., p. 119) that Friar Andrew had skirted the  southern and eastern shores of the Caspian ; he also refers [infra^  p. 136) to this envoy having mentioned (presumably to him in con-  versation) the presence of German c.ipli\es at Talas. I take ,it that  he had actually seen them there, for otherwise the e.xtremeiy careful  Rubruck would certainly have noted that Andrew had only heard of  their presence. Mangu told Rubruck th:it Ogul Gaimish received Friar  Andrew's mission ; and as this Regent resided in the ordu of Kuyuk  on the I mil, the envoy evidently did not go further east than this  point.

INTRODUCTORV NOTICK. xxxiif

that furnished by Rvjbruck — that they went along the  eastern shore of the Caspian.^ This suffices, however,  to estabh'sh the fact that the route followed coming west-  ward from the Balkash must have been, as far as the  Caspian, a nearly due east and west one, parallel to that  followed later on by Rubruck himself, thougji perhaps to  the south of it.

Friar Andrew had hardly finished relating his adventures,  and the King was still at Caesarea, when there arrived from  Constantinople a mission under Philip of Toucy, the  son of the former Regent of the Empire.^ From him the  King heard of the wonderful adventures ofthis knight and  other noblemen sent by the Emperor Baldwin II to the  Comans of southern Russia Philip told him of this  people's way of swearing friendship by the killing of a  dog ; of the bUrial he had seen of one of their chiefs, with  whom were interred a squire and a horse ; and many other  strange tales.' It seems likely that among this party  of knights (there were ten in all) was one called Baldwin  of Hainaut, who had not only been to the Comans' country  on this mission, but ha*! actually married while there the  daughter of the Coman Prince.^ More than that, he had

* It is highly improbable that the mission m going skirted both the  southern and the eastern shores of the Caspian, for there was iibso-  liitely no reason for the Mongols to make an envoy travelling east-  ward go up north ah)ng the eastern shore of the Caspian, neither  Batu nor any of the other great chiefs living between the Caspian  and the Aral. King Heythum, in 1253, going from Cilicia to the  Mongol court travelled by way of Derbend and the mouth of the  Volga, but then he was anxious to see Sartach.

* Joinville says Narjoe (Narjot) de Toucy, but Du Cange and sub-  sequent editors have shown thai the envoy to St. Louis must have  been Philip, son of Narjot.

' There can be little doubt that this Baldwin was on the mission,  for Kubruck in his narrative speaks of him as a person well known to  King Louis, which he could not have been otherwise, for he had been  for many years past in the service of the emperors of Constantinople.  On this personage, see infra^ p. 102.

xxxiv INTRODUCTORY NOTICE.

iravelled also through Asia, sent probably on a nnission b\-  the Emperor and had gone as far as the camp of the  Mongol emperor near Karakorum. From him Friar  William of Rubruck got much valuable information,  which finally decided him in favour of the road throug^h  Russia rather than that by way of Armenia in journeying  to the Mongols. The former route he was already familiar  with from. Friar John of Fian de Carpine's mission, and it  had the great advantage of taking him to the camp of  Sartach, the Christian Mongol, from whoin he might  expect hel-p on his journey, and a.ssi. stance in establishing  a mission among the Mongol.s.

So pleased was King Louis with De Toucy and the  knights who accom.panied him, that he retained them near  him for a year before he would let them go back to  Constantinople. This gave William of Rubruck, who had  long .since made up his mind to try the venture, all the  necessary time to complete his preparations. The King  readily gave him the small sum of money he needed  to defray his expenses, with letters to Sartach and to  the Emperor of the Mongols, commending him and his  companions to th^ir kindness, but carefully avoiding  giving them any official character. After the insolent  letter sent him by Ogul Gaimish, self-respect forbade his  attempting to open formal friendly relations with this  people — at least for the time being. Queen Margaret  gave the Friar ?. beautifully-illuminated psalter, and prob-  ably <<ome of the many rich church vestments he carried -  with him. These, together with a Bible, a present of the  King, his breviary, one or two cherished devotional  books, and, strangely enoagh, a valuable Arabic manu-  script, composed his simple outfit. And so equipped  he embanked, probably at Acre, and with the returning  De Toucy mission, some time in the early spring of  r2 52, reached Constantinople safely, and there remained

INTROD/CTORY NOTICE. XXXV

till May /th of the following year, when he started for  Mongolia.^

In the preceding pages I have endeavoured to indicate  briefly the extent of the knowledge possessed by Europe  of the Mongols and their empire down to the middle  of the thirteenth century, and to show the probable  sources of information Friar William of Rubruck had avail-  able as a preparation for his great journey of over ten  thousand miles through Asia. I should have liked to be  able to say something of the traveller himself, but we  know absolutely nothing about him save his own state-  ment, that at the time of his journey he was " a very  heavy man." France can claim him as her child, for  there is little doubt that he was a native of the village  of Rubruck in old French Flanders, and not of Ruysbrock  in Brabant, a few miles south of Brussels, as has been  commonly supposed ; but the date of his birth is unknown,  as is that of his death.^ His narrative affords us, fortu-

^ There is evidence in Rubruck's narrative that his travelling com-  panion, Bartholomew of Cremona, had been residing in Nicea  {infra, p. 170). As to his interpreter, nicknamed Homo Dei. it is  more likely that he took him along with him from Palestine. That  Rubruck left Palestine in 1252 seems to me probable from the strange  error he has made concerning the reigning emperor of Trebizonde :  an error which he could not possibly have committed had he been  with St. Louis throughout 1252, when the mission from Trebizonde  arrived at Sidon (see infra, p. 46, note 3) Yule {Ency. Brif,, xxi, 46)  thinks he must have received his commission at Acre, where the King  was residing from May 1252 to June 1253.

2 See Yule's admirable article in Ency. Brit. (Ninth Edition), xxi,  46-47 ; and his Marco Polo, ii, 536 ; Oscar Peschel, Erkuiide, 165 etsei^.;  F. M. Schmidt, Ueber Rubruk's Rcisi\ 163 ; Michel and Wright, ^^. r/V.,  205 ; de Backer, Rubrouck, iii et seq.; da Civezza, Saggio di Bihliografia^  San Fraud scana., 503 ; Nonvelle BiograpJiie General e, xxxii, 938-940;  Hist, litth'aire de la France, xix, 114^'/ seq.

The name of our author's birthplace is variously written. Of the  five MSS. used in the preparation of Michel and Wright's edition of  the text, four have Rubruc, and one Rubruk. In other works where  he is mentioned we find his name spelled Riibruk^ Rubruck^ Rubruc,  Rubrouck, Ihibroc,'Risbrojic, Risbrouke, Risbrooke, R2iysb7'ok, Ruysbrock^  Ruysbrocke, Rubruqitis, Rubricis and Rtibriqiiis. If, as seems highly  probable, the place of his birth was the village of Rubrouck, as  written in Flemish, we should write his name in English Rubruck

C 2

XXXvi INTRODUCTORY NOTICE.

natcly, abundant indications of his character. " These  ^int for us," says Yule, " an honest, pious, stouthearted,  acute and most intelligent observer, keen in the acquisition  of knowledge ; the author, in fact, of one of the best  narratives of travel in existence. His language, indeed,  is Latin o{ the most un-Cireronian quality — dog-Latin wn  fear it must be called; but, call it what we may, it is in his  hands a pithy and transparent medium of expression. In  spite of all the difficulties of communication, and of the  badness of his turgemanus or dragoman, he gathered a  mass of particulars, wonderfully true or near the truth, not  only as to Asiatic nature, geography, ethnography and  manners, but as to religion and language . . ."^

I would only venture to add to this well-deserved praise  of Friar William, bestowed on him by the greatest authority  on mediaeval geography of our century, that not only was  he keen and intelligent, but conscientious and thorough in  a high degree. Study of his narrative shows his careful  preparation for his work as an explorer. Solinus and  Isidorus of Seville are, it is true, his only geographical  auth(>rities ; still he makes careful use of them, not quoting  them blindly, but com.paring every statement of theirs  with the facts as he observed them. The only quotations  he makes are taken . from the Bible, and are not always  accurate, and from Virgil's Aeneid\ but we gather from  a few passing references in his narrative that he had  read historical works and the classical poets, and had  specially noted the movements Europewards of the tribes

Tht eflitors (if the BiograpJii>' Gt'nt'rale say lie was born about 1213.  Au^. St John (jis quoted bv the editors of the text of the Soi. tif  Cht)^raphir 20^ pists i at about 1 220 — Daunou i^Hist. liti. de la France  »26; thinks he (bed about 1270, but this is pureK coniectural — Da  Civ<;zza [Storitt Unh'er\ulh\ i, 429» says 1230, and .Schmidt V1631  l>ctween 1220 and 1230. There is, so fa» as I am aware. .ib^i»liJtely no  authority for any of these dates.

* Yule, Ency. Brit., \xi, 47 ; conf F. M. Srhniidt. 16O.

INTRODUCTOKV KOtlCE. xxxvii

of western Asia since the time of the great Hiinnic inva-  sions ; which latter presented to his nnind many striking  analogies with the Mongol ones just over. While pteparinii  for his journey at Constantinople in 'the winter and spring  of 1253, h^ saw the Armenian traders who then as now-  swarmed there, and most of whom had had experience  among the Mongols , and from them, and possibly from the  resident Armenian monks, he also secured information on  the Tartars and the countries he was to visit. During his  residence in Asia Minor and in Egypt he had probably  acquired a tolerable knowledge of Arabic, as h^ appears to  have beert able to converse freely with any of the " Sara-  cens " he met during his journey ; and lie tells us himself  that he picked up enough Mongol to be able to control, or  perhaps even dispense with, his very poor interpreter. In  short, I think, we may safely say that he left no stone  unturned to ^ himself thoroughly . for the work he had  undertaken.

Let us now note what Friar William was able to add by  his journey and careful observations to Europe's sum of  general and geographical knowledge. His prmcipal con-  tributions to geographical science were the .indication of  the true sources and course of the Don and Volga, the lake  nature of the Caspian,^ the identity of Catha)- with the  classical country of the Seres, a description of the Balkash  and of the inland basin of which it occupies the eastern  extremity, the first description of the city of Karakot urn,  the first mention oi Kaoli or Korea, and of the Tungusic  tribes of Orengai, the Orienguts of mediaeval MohamniCdan  writers. Natural historv owes to him the earliest mention

1 Albert of Bollstaedi had at about the same date stated that <he  Caspian was a lake, not a gulf, but he had simply accepted ihe views  of Ptolemy. The fact had alieady been established by the Arab  geographers of the tenth century — by Ibn Haukal for example— but  Kuropt: was in ijfnorance of thts.

XXXViii INTRODUCTORY NOTICE.

in western writers of the wild ass or kulan, and of the  nrgali or ovis Poli. Ethnology is indebted to him for  interesting facts too numerous to mention. To him h'n-  guistics and anthropology owe the first accurate information  on the Goths of the Crimean coast, on the identity of the  Comans with the Kipchak, Turks and Cangle, on the  difference between the Tartars and the Mongols, on the  connexily of the languages of the Bashkirds yPf>^catir) and  the Hungarians, on the origin of the Danu'oiau Bulgarians,  on the affinity between the languages of ihe Russians, Poles,  Bohemians and Slavs and that of the Wandals, and on that  of the Turkish language with that of the Uigurs and Comans.  He was the first to give a nearly accurate explanation oi  the Chinese script, to note the true peculiarities of the  Tibetan, Tangutan (Turkish), and Uigur modes of writing.  These discoveries in this special line of research are not  all we owe to this most perspicacious traveller ; but I will  not prolong the list, as we have a number of other im-  portant ones in the field of the history of religions to  credit him with He was the first to describe the Christian  communities in the Mongol empire, and to give details  of their rituals and the tenets of their faith ; we owe to  him the earliest description of the Lamas or northern  Buddhist monks, of their temples, their ritual, their Living  Buddhas, of their use of prayer beads, and of their favourite  formula, Oni inani padme, hum. He shows the peculiarities  of the Uigurs' form of worship, and likewise of their dress.  Peculiarities and superstitions of the Greek and Armenian  churches did not escape him ; in short, no one traveller  since his day has done half so much to give a correct  knowledge of this part of Asia.

It was Friar William's desire to present his report to  King Louis in person ; but on arriving in Cyprus in 1255  he found that the King, whom he hoped to see in Palestine-  had returned to France ; and the Provincial of his Order

INTRODUCTORY NOTICE. xxxix

refused to allow h\m to follow him there. He took him  with him to Acre, to the house of his Order, directing him  to transmit his report to the King from that place. This  the traveller reluctantly did, requesting at the same time  the King to use his influence with the Provincial of the  f^rSmciscans in Syria, who appears to have belonged to the  Province of France, to have him given permission to make  a visit to France, to see the King and the personal friends  he had there.

King Louis must have complied with Friar William's  request, for we learn from Roger Bacon that he met the  traveller in France a few years later, and conversed with  him about his discoveries and adventures. We know that  he made a careful examination of his report, nearly every  geographical detail of which we find embodied in his famous  Opus Majus}

It was fortunate for Friar William that he met, during  his probably short stay in France, this brilliant and ap-  preciative writer, for he alone saved him and the results  of his arduous journey from utter oblivion for three  centuries and a half: as it was only in 1600 tJiat Richard  Hakluyt published a portion of his report from a manu-  script belonging to Lord Lumleyr which Purchas in 1625  republished and completed, in his Pilgrimes, from another

* See Opus Majus^ i, 354 ei seq. Bacon says he had made special  use, in writing his geographical description of the northern ))arts of  the world, of the work of Williain of Rubruck, '''' guem librum diligenter  vidiy et cum ejus auctorc contuli^ et similiter cum multis aliis. qui  loca orientis et vicridavn n'mata sunt" {Opus Majus, i, 305). The  other travellers were probably returning crusaders. bacon was  familiar, however, with the work of John of Pian de Carpine {op. cii.,  i,370.

2 So little known was Rubruck at the rime when Hakluyt published  his work, that Gerard Mercator wrote to Hakluyt in 1580. in reply to a  letter telling him o( ihe /tineraritim : ^' \ have not yet seen the complete  treatises of William of Tripoli {sic) and John du Plan Carpin ; I have  only seen some extracts of them in other works" (Bergeron, Trnite des  Tartares, ii, 116, 121). The extracts were probably solely taken from

xl INTRODUCTORY NOTTCJE.

MS. in Hen net fnovv Corpus Christi) College, Cambricli;c,  ihc text h.'ivincT been supplied him, he says (vol. iii, p. 23),  *' by Master Hacluits industric."

Between the date of the writing of Bacon's Opus Majus  f 1264) and the middle of the present century, there are  found but the briefest mentions of Friar William in the  numerous works written by members of the F^Vanciscan  and other Orders. Vincent of Beauvais did not know of  the existence of Friar William's Itinerarium ; at all events,  not a single detail concerning the Mongols givenby him is  traceable to this work. \Vadding, the great historian of  the Franciscans, makes no mention of him at all in his  Afifin/es, though he devotes many pages to the missions of  Pian de Carpine, Lawrence of Portugal, Ascelin,etc. ; while  in his Sctiptorcs Ordinis Minoruin he misquotes an eailier  •cferc nee to him by John Pitts, though he makes him out  lo have been a native of Brabant instead of an English-  man, as Pitts had imagined him to be. He credits him  with having written an Itifierarium Orientis^ De Gcstis  Tartarortnn^ which matny subsequent writers have supposed  to be two distinct works, whereas it evidently designates  the two parts into which Friar William's report, like that of  his predecessor, Friar John of Pian de Carpine, is divided.  Laser a Varea (ii, 297) mentions Risbrooke among the  writers who refer to Palestine, and (ii, 555) as having  written a work de Tartarorum gcstis. De Soto (ii, 46) has k  short reference to our traveller, gives the title of his work  as Itinerariutii ad partes OrientaleSy una cuui relatione Tar-  tarornjii} and refers to the existence of several MSS. of it  in the British libraries, Lo Bergeron's translation, and to its

I liar John s Hts/oi/". Mo/igdtontffty \\\\\c\\ had been frequently quoted  in works of the ihirtecnth and subsequent centuries.

' Bacon {op. if/., ii, 368), speakin^ of the Tartars' claim to universal  dominion, says that it is referred to " /».. //^ <? fratris Cuilielm! d:  moyiluis Tartaroriun, l)ut this, I take it, is only a sub-title, as it were,  of the first part of liis work.

INTROnUCiORV NOTICE. xli

ha\ ing also appeared in Dutch in a collection of travels  published in Leyden in 1706.

We must come down to Father da Civezza's Storia  Univcrsallc Delle Mission c Franccscana (1857-1861), to find  a full account of Riibruck's journey, and appreciation of Jts  great worth, by a member of his Order ; and even in this  valuable work the tuthor has, it would appear, been con-  tent to quote from the faulty translation of Bergeron  (.'634) ; and throui^hout his notice of our traveller he writes  liis name Riihriqtiis}

The only explanation which sugge.'jts itself of this  iieij'lect of Friar William's wc^rk by writers of his Order, is  that his mission, like that of F'riar Andrew of Longumeau,  equally ignored in their works, was undertaken by order  of H,nd for the King of France, and not for the sole advance-  ment of the interests of the Church and the Franciscans  Thf^ugh this explanation is hardly satisfactory, for the  glory gained by the traveller redounded necessarily on the  Order to which he belonged, and the Franciscan, Roger  Bacon, had promptly made known to the Pope its grea.t  value, I cannot but think the neglect *»i which Friar  William was left for so many centuries was, to a great  extent, intentional. Even at the present day, the great  history of the Franciscan Order which is being published  by (he Fathers of the College of San Bonaventura, does  not contain a single reference to Friar William or Friar  Andrew of Longumeau.

^ I have not been able to consult a number of works which have  appeared since 1800, containing bioj;n'nhical notices of Rj.bruck. but  those I have seen consider hmi " u'ltrustworthy,'' "credulous,'"  " superstitions " (see, <^?., Noiivcilc Biographic Univ.^ xxxii, 938 ;  Hist. Hit. de la France^ xix, 126 ; and also see Da Civezza, op. cii.^ i.  429-457). The same writer, in his Saggic di Bihliografa. 503,  reproduces de Backer's biographical notice of our author, tlie only  good part of the book. Cahun, 392, speaks of " I'inintelligence di;  moijie Rubruquis . . . son etroitesse de jugement et d'informationsqui  eclate a cbaqiie ligne dans une relation pleine de mots spiriiuels, mais  vide de serieux."

xlii INTRODUCTORY NOTICK.

In 1839, the Soci^t^ de Gt^ographie of Paris published, in  the Fourth Volume of its Recueil de Voyages^et de M ^moires,  what, may be considered the editio pr biceps ol the Itiner-^  ariuin ; in which the editors, no less distinguished scholars  than Francisquc Michel and Thomas Wright, avai'ed  themselves not only of the texts published by Hakluyt and  Furchas, but of five other MSS. since discovered, three  from Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, one from the  British Museum, and one from the Library of the Univer-  sity at Leyden. None of the manuscripts present any vari-  ations of importance, the different readings in them being  clearly attributable in nearly every case to negligent  copying; all have been derived from a single original. It  is therefore hardly probable that the discovery of any new  manuscripts can alter in any important detail the text as  given by the two learned editors.^

Of the translations which have appeared of Friai  William's work little may be said ; all of them have been

' See Recueil de Voyages et de Memoires^ iv, 199-212. The MSS.  of Cambridge bear the numbers Lxvi, ccccvii, and CLXXXI in  Nasmith's Latalogue of the Parker Collection. The Brit. Mus. MS.  is numbered \i\. C. Xlli of the King's Library, and the MS. of Leyden  is No. 'jf of the Vossius Collection. The editors mention (p. 210)  another MS., said to exist in the Collection of Sir Thomas PhilHps,  but they were unable to consult it. Researches recently made by  Mr. W. Foster, at the request of the editor of the present volume,  have also failed to discover it. As to the MS. referred to by the same  editors (p. 202) as existing in the Vatican Libraiy, Father Francesco  Ehrle, the learned Prefect of that library, has very kindly made a careful  search for it, but without result. It is true that this MS. is catalogued  by Montfaucon {Bibl. bibl.^ i, 86) as in the Fetau Collection under the  two numbers 292, 933 ; but Father Ehrle is of opinion that the entry is  erroneous, or, at all events, that the MS. was not sent to the Vatican  when this collection was presented to it by Queen Christina of  Sweden. Mr. de Vries, the librarian of the University of Leyden,  to whom F'alher Ehrl^ wrote on the subject, is also of opinion thaif the  supposed Vatican MS. is in all likelihood the No. 77 of the Vossius  Collection, referred to previously. Henri Cordier {Odon\\ I.xxxiii)  mentions a MS. of Rubruck m the No. 686 of the Dupuy Collection  of the National Library of Paris. Mr. H. Leon Feer has kindly  collated this MS. with Michel and Wright's text, and shown that u  is an exact reproduction of the text as published by Hakluyt. It bears  date 1646, and was probably copied from Hakluyt's published text

INTnOt)UCTORV NOTTCE- xlfjj

made on Haklu\-t's or Purchas renderings Astle^,  Robert Kerr, Pinkerton in English , Bo gero i Fleury,  I'Abbe Prevost, La Harpe, and more recently (1888)  Eugene Miiller in French ; tlie AUgeinrtne Historoe dev  Reisen (1747) in German, and many others, are bnt 50 many  editions of the old English translations. The translations  of Hakluyt and Purchas, however valuable, were inevitably  inaccurate in man)- places, for a more thorough knowledge  of Asia and the Mongols than was possessed bv- Europe  at the time was necessary for a correct rendering of Friar  William's text. Pmch.as truly remarks : " the Friers Latin,  for some barbarous words and phrases, hath beene trouble-  some to translate." It is, however, to say the least, strange  that most writers of the eighteenth and the nineteenth  centuries have preferred to avail themselves of these  translations, instead of making use of the text as pub-  lished by Hakluyt, Purchas, or the Societe de Geographie.  Desguignes, Karamsin, Remusat, d'Ohsson, and even Henri  Cordier in his splendid edition of Friar Odoric, quote from  Bergeron's translation.

Though often quoting him, none of those who have used  the rich mine of information opened to them by the old  monk seem to have fully realised its value ; or, at all  events, they have not given adequate expression to their  appreciation of his great merit, Purchas alone excepted,  who says beholds the Friar's work " a Jewell of Antiquitie"  It was reserved for Oscar PcscheV ^ii^d especially for Sir

^ Oscar Peschel, Eniki/ndc '\6^)^^d)-^: "dei Bericht ties Ruysbroek.  fast unbefleckl durch storcnde Fabeln, durch seine Naturwahrheit al.s  ein grosses geographisclies Meistersluck des Mittelalters bezeichnet  werden darf."' In 1877 Lcuis de Backer published a so-called original  translation from the Latin of the lihierariui/i. To the errors ot  previous translators he has added so many extraordinary blunders of  his own that one is astonished that i; v/as ever accepted by the  learned editors of the valuable collection in which it appeared.  E-xclusive of Yule's invaluable noies on Rubruck, the only important  work on the subject— and its value is inestimable- -»s the study of

xllv INTRODUCTORY NOTICE.

Henry Yule, to whom geography owes so much, to put  Friar Winiam in ihe high place he so richly deserves  aaiong the great tfayellers of the world. " The jrencration  immediate'y pre.-^^eding his (Marco Polo's) own has be-  queathed to us,' the latter says, " in the Report of the  Franciscan Friar William de Rubwruquis on the mission  with which St. Lewis charged him to the Tartar Courts,  ih€ narrative ot one great journey which, in its rich  detail, its vivid pictures, its acuteness of observation and  strong govod sense, seems to me to form a Book of Trrivds  ofrKjnch higher claim than any one series of Polo's chapters ;  a bix>k, indeed, which has never had justice done to it,  for it has «ew superiors in the whole Library of Travel."'

Fraiu Max Schmidt, Ueber Rubruk*s Reise von 1253- 125 5, published  in 1885.

^ Yul«, iWnr£o Polo, i, 102.

ITINERARY  OF FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK.

^•-^S-V

May

7-

M

21.

June

I.

»?

?»

5-

»>

12,

-y-y

July

20.

»

3^-

August

3-

1'

5-

Septembei

•16.

M

27.

October

3'-

November

8.

»>

9.

V i:

8(?)

1?

30.

December

"^

>

»

6.

»>

13-

)}

27.

1254.

January

4-

March

29,

April

5-

May

24.

11

30.

August

8.

)»

18.

Septembe

r 16.

October

16.

November i.

M

15-

Left Constantinople.

Reached Soldaia (Sudak).

Left Soldaia.

Met Tartars for tirst time.

Reached Scatays camp (Remained tili 8th 1.

Camp at Isthmus of Perekop.

Reached first camp beyond Isthmus.

Reached bank of Tanais (Don. Remained till

23rd).  Reached Sartach's camp.  Left Sartach's camp.  Reached bank of Etilia (Volga).  Left Batu's camp.  Reached bank of jaic (Ural;.  Took southerly course.  Reached Kinchat.  Took easterly course.  Reached Cailac.  Left Cailac.

Reached head of Ala kuL  Accelerated speed.

I'assed throu^'^h gorge infested Aitl; devils.  Reached Mangu's camp.

Received in audience ijy Man^ju

Left for Karakorum

Reached Karakorum.

Audience of Mangu.

Public discussion with Tuin.

Received permission to leave.

Left Karakorum.

Reached Batu's camp,

Left Batu's camp.

Left Sarai.

Readied mountains of Alans.

xlvi TTfNERARY OF FRIAR WfLLIAM OF RUBRUCK-

1254.

November 17. Reached Iron Gate (Derbcnd).

„ 19. Reached Samaron.

21. Reached Samag.

22. Entered plain of Mogan.  Decejuber 23. Reached Naxiia (Najivaji)-

1253.

January 13 Left \a-Kua

February 2. At Ani.

,. 15. Reached head of Araxes.

„ 1 7 (?). Reached Marsengen.

,, 22 (?). Reached Camath on the Euphrates (Kara su).

March 23 (?). Reached Sebnste (Sivas^.

Apri' 4. Reached Caesa.ea in Cappadocia.

„ 19. Reached Iconium (KoniehV

May 5. Reached Curta on coast.

,. 17. Left Curta

jane 16. Reached Cyprus.

,. 29. At Antioch.

August 15. At Tripoli.

TITLES OE BOOKS CITED BY ABBREVIATED

REFERENCES.

Abulgasi Bayadur Chan, Histoire C^n^alO}(iQue dcs Tartajs. Tra-  duite du Manuscript Tartare par D*** Leyden, 1726. 1 vol.,  i2mo.

Acta Sancforuui. Ex Latinis et Graecis aliarunKjue t^entiiiui Afojjtt-  me)Uii, ctx_. Paris. In 4to.

A! iiekri. See Ibn Alathir.

AllDcricus Trium Fontium. Chronicdn. Edited by Leibnitz. Acces-  siones Historicae. Hanover, 1698. Vol. ii.

Animianus Marcellinus. Rrruin ^((cstaritm. Nisard edit., Paris, rS69  in 410.

Analecta Franciscana^ sk'c Chrojiica- aliaquc varia docuinenta od  historiam Fratrum Minorum spectantia. Edita a Patribus Col-  legii S. Bonaventurae. Ad Claras Aquas .Quaracrlii). 5887-  1897. 22 vols., 4to (all published).

Antoninos (?). Zametki xii-xv veka, otnossiastcliiasia k Kryfrnskomu  gorodii Sugdee (Sudaku), pripissanniya na Grecheskont Sinak-  sare. In Zapiski Odesskago obstchestva istorii i drevnostei, v,  1863, pp. 595-837.

Arrian. Expeditio Alexa?idri. Miiller's edit. In Didot's collection.

Assemanus, Joseph Simonius. Biblinfhec.i Orientaiu Clementino"'  Vaiicana. Rome, 1721. 4 vols., fol. Tome ii, De^Scriptotibus  Syris Monophyriiis.

Atkinson, Thomas Witlam. . Orienial and XVesiern Siberia : a Narra-  tive of Seven Years' Explorations and Adventures in Siberia,  Mongolia, the Kirghiz is'teppes, ^^liinese Tartavy and Part of  Central Asia. London, 1858. i vol., 8\«^.

Atkinson, Thomas Witlam. Travels in the Regions of the Upper and  f ':"!urr,Amoor and the Russia fi Acquisitions 07i the Confines of  India and China. Lorjdon, i860. 1 vol., 8vo.

Baber. Memoires de. Traduits par Pa\ et de Courteille. Parii, Diji.  2 ^ols., 8vo.

Bacon, Roger. Opus Majus, Edited by John Henry Bridges. Ox-  ford, 1897. 2 vols., 8vo.

Klviii TITLES OF BOOKS.

BatdgCT, Geoigf' Percy. The Nesforiavs and their Rituals : wiili a  Narrative ol a Mission lo Mesopotamia unci Cooidisiuii in 1842-  1844. London, 1852. 2 vols., 8vo.  Barliaro, Jos.'ifa. Vrtiirc/s /o Taiui nnd Persia. Thomas' translation,  edited by Lord Stanley of Alrl<Mlcy. Lpndon, 1873. ' vol., 8vo.  (Hakiuyt Soc.)  Bands, Max. Die Mrdicin dcr Naiunioiker. Ethnologisclic Beitrag-e

2111 IJrgcschichTc dcr Mcdicm. Leipzig, 1895. i vol., 8vo.  Bcal, Sanujel. Buddhist Records of the Western World. Translated  from ilie Chinese of Iliuen-lsiang (A.D. 629). London, 1884.  2 vols., 8vo.  Benjamin of Tudela. Voyage au tour du monde^ commence Tan

MCCXXili, !n ] Bergeron's Voyages^ i.  Bt^i'geron, Pierre. Voyages /aits principaleftient en Asie dans les xii,  xiii, xii/y ct Aif sihlcsyQii.. La II aye, 1735. 2 vols,, 410. (Though  usually quoted as JB^rgeron's, this work is a recast of that writer's  work of 1634, ]:>y Van der Aa of Leyden. See d'Avezac, op. cit.  439-442.)  Bergman, Benjamin Nomadische Strciferien nnter den Kalinuken^

in den Jahrcn «802 und 1803. Riga, 1605. 4 vols., i2mo.  Bitchurin, Father Hyacinthe. Du Chauiaftistuc en Chine. In Non'

vclles Annates des Voyage^ Nouv. s^rie, xxvi, pp. 287-316.  Kouch^-Leclerc, A. Histoire de la Divination dans PAntiquiti'. Paris,

1882. 4 vols., 8vo.  Bretschneider, E. Notices of the Medieevai Geography and History Oj  C€7itral and Western Asia. Drawn from Chinese and Mongol  writings, '-jnd compared with the observations of Western Authors  in the Middle Ages. In Journal of the North China branch of  the Royal Asiatic ^odety^ New Series, vol. x, pp. 75-307.  Bretsclnieider, E. On the Knowledge Possessed by the Ancient Chinese  Qu the Arabs and A radian Colonies and other Western Countries  mentioned in Chinese Records. London, 1871. In 8vo.  Brctsc hneider, E. Archtrological and Historical Researches on Peking

and its Emdrons. Shanghai. 1876. In 8vo.  BrciflPhneider, E. Notes en Chinese Medieevai Travellers to the West.

Shanghai, 1875. ^" ^vo.

Bunbury, E. H. A History of Ancient Geography among the Greeks

and Romans^ from the Earliest Ages till the Fall of the Roman

Empire. 2nd edit. London, T883. - vols., 8vo.

Busbcck. Bpistolae deque rebus Turcicis. Lei picig, 1689. 2 vols.» 8vo.

Cahnn, Leon. Introduction ii Phistoire de ''Asie. Turcs ^t Mongoli.

I)es origines \ 1405. Pans, 1896. » vol., 8vo.  Castren, Matthias Alexander. Ethnologische Vorlesungen Ubrr die  Altaische Volher^ nebst Samojedvschen Marchen und Tartarische  Hcldcnsagcn. St. Petersburg, \t%7. 1 vol., 8vo.

TITLES OF HOOKS xltX

Castren, Matthias Alexander. Reisen ini Sordcn. Leipzig, i&'53.

I vol., i2mo.  Chabot, J. B. Histoirc de Marjabalalui III, I'jtn'an/h- des Nestoricns  1281-13?/;, ^^ '^^^ moine Rabban Caiima, A^nbassodcur -fu koi  /irgoun en Occident {i2%j). Paris, 1895. i vol., Svo.  Chandra Das, Sarat. India>i Paiidits in the Land of Snow. Calcutta,

1893. I vol., 8vo.  Chardin, Le Che-alier. Voyages en Perse et an f res lietex de T Orient.

Nouvelle edit. Par L. Langles. Paris, 181 !. 10 vols., 8vo.  Cha\-annes, Edouard. Lc NestorianisjJie et ^inscription de Kara  Balgasoiin. Paris, 1897. In 8vo. Y.Y.Xx-A.(iX{xQii\Jcurrial Asiatiqite.,  1897.  Chavannes, Edouard. Voyagciirs Chint is chez les Khitan et les  Joutchen. Paris, 189S. i vol., 8vo. (Extracts fron-i Journal  Asiatiquc, No. 6, i897 ; No. 8, '89S.)  Chien Han shu. The Book of the Aoierior Han, or the Annals of the  Early Han Dyn^sty, covering the period from B.C. 206 to A.D. 34.  Chin shu. The Book of the Lhin Dynasty, covering the period from

A.D. 265 to 419.  Chou shu. The Book of Chou, or tno Annals of the Chou Dynasty,

covering the period from .^.D. 557 to 581.  Clai-ke, Edward D. Travels in Russia, Tartary., end Turkey. Edin-  burgh, 1852. I vol., 8\o.  Cla\ ijo, Ruy Gonzalez de. Narrative Oj the Embassy to the Court of  Timour at Samarcand^ A.D. 1403-6. Translated by Clements  R. Markham. London, 1859. \ \ol., 8\o. (Hakluyt Soc.)  Codinus. See Corpus Scriptorum Historiae Byzantinae.  Constantine Porphyrogenitus. IJv Thonatibus et de Administrando

Imperio. See Corpus Scriptorum Historiae Byzantinae.  Constantine Porphyrogenitus. De Ceremoniis Aulae Byzantinae. See

Corpus Scriptorum Historiae Byzantinae.  Contarini, Ambrosio. The Travels oj\ to the Great Lord Ussuncassan,  King of Persia, in 1473. Edited by Lord Stanley of Alderley.  London, 1873. ' ^'^^-^ ^^^- (Kakluyt Soc.)  Cordier, Henri. Les Voyages en Asze au X/V'' siecle du oienheurcux  frere Odoric de PordeJione., Religicux de Saint Francois.. Paris,  1 89 1. I vol., small 4to.  Corpus Scriptorum Historicae Byzantiiuie. Ediiio emendatior et  copiosior, Consilio B. G. Niebuhrii instituta. Bonn, 1831-  184 (?) 8vo.  Cosmas Indicopleustes. The Christian Topography. Translated from  the Greek by j. W. McCrindle. London, 1897. i vol., 8vo.  (Hakluyt Soc).  Da Civezza, Marcellino. Storia universale delle Missione Francescane.  Rome, 1857-1861. 5 vols., Svo.

1 TITLES OF BOOKS

Da Civezza, MarccUrno. Sa^io di Ribliop-afia ge>. 'tphica^ ethno-  £Tapkicu San Franciscana. In Frato, »879. i \o; Svo.

D Avezar, Relation d/s Monguh tm Tartares par h' fttre J,'ca. lu Plan  dc Carpin, dc l ordre des Fnres Mineurs, Lcgat du Saint-Siege  A{>osiolit|ue, Nonce en Tartaric, pendant les anne'es 1245, 1246 ct  1247, et Archeveque d'Antivari, etc. Paris, 1839. 4to. (In 2nd  part of vol. iv of the Rt-cueil de Voyages ct df Mhn aires puhlie  par la Society dt Geographie.)

De Backer, Louis Guillaume de Rtibrouck^ Ainbassadeur de Saint.

Louis en Orient. Recit de son voyage traduit dc l' original Latin

et annote par. Paris, 1877. ' vol., i8nio.  Deguignes. Hisioire G^ruraJc des Huns^ des Turcs^ des Mongols^

et des aufres Tartares Ocridentaux^ etc. Paris, 1756-1758,

5 vols., 4to. y

De Morgan, J. Mission scicntifique au Caw.ase. Et'-aes archeo-  logiques et historiqiies. Paris, 18S9. ' vol;.., 410. Tome ii,  Recherches sur les engines des peuples du Cauiv^se.

D'Ohsson, le Baron C. Histoire dci Mongols^ depuis Tchinguiz  Khan jusqu'a Timour T^ey on Tamefian. La Haye, 1834.  4 ^•o^s. 8vo.

De Soto, Fr. Joannis. Bibliotheca universn Franciscana. Matriti,  1732. 3 vols., 4to.

Deveria, G. Afusulmans et Manichcens Ckinois. \i\ Journal A si-  aiiguf.\ rX« scrie, vol. x.

Deveria, G. l^'otes d't'pigraphie MongoU-Chirwise. Paris, 1897, in 8vo.  (Extract iromJournaJ Asiatiquc^ 1896,'!'

Du Cange. Chssarium mediae ct infimac L.atiniiatis^ conditu a  Carolo Dufresne Domino Du Cange cum supplementls integris  D- P. Carpenterii at additamentis Adelungi et alioruir. digessit  G, A. L, Herschel. Paris, 1840. 7 vols., 4to,

Dulaurier, Ed. I^s Mongols d'apres les historicns Atttunism. Frag-  ments traduits sur les texts originaux. In Journal Asiatique^  Ve serie, vol. xi (1858).

£Has, Ney. See Mirza Hnidar.

Finlay, George. History oj Greece. Tozer's cdi< , London, 1877.  7 vols., 8vo.

Gibbon, F-dward. Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire. W.  Smith's edit., London, 1881. 8 vols., Svo.

Gombojcw, (iaisang. Randhemerkungen -^u Piano Carpi ni. \x\ Mr-  langes As-iatiques d^ PAcadt'mie des Sclent es de St. Petersbourg^  1856, ii.pp. 650-6W».

Grenard, F Mission scientifique dans la Haute Ane, 1800-1895.  Paris, yS^)i. 3 vol-^ , 410.

TITLES OF BOOKS. U

Haiton. Histoire Orientale ou des Tarfares. Traduit suivant I'^ditwn  Latine de Andrt^ Miiller, Greiffenhag. In Bergeron's Voyages^  vol. ii.

Hakluyt, Richard. Collection of the Early Voyages^ Travels and Dis-  coveries of the English Nation. London, 1809. 5 vols., 4to.  (Vol. i, pp. 80-101, text of Rubruck ; pp. 101-129, translation.)

Hammer, J. de.. Histoire de P Empire Ottoman., depuis son origine  jusqu'a nos jours. Traduit de Tallemand par J. J. Hellert. Paris,  1835. 5 vols., Svo.

H^amjiier-Purgstall. Geschichte der Goldenen Horde in Kiptchak.,  das ist der Mongoien in Russiand. Pesth, 1840. i vol., Svo.

Haroldus, Franciscus. Epitome Annalium Ordinis Minorum. Rome,  1662. 2 vols., fol.

Haxthausen, A. von. Transcaucasia. Sketches of the Nations and  Races between the Black Sea and the Caspian. London, 1854  I vol., 8vo.

Heyd, W. Histoire du Commerce du Levant au Moyen-Agc.

Edition fran^aise par Furcy Raynaud. Paris, 1885. 2 vols.,8vo.  Hou Han shu. The Book of the Posterior Han Dynasty, covering the

period from A.D. 25 to 220.

Ho worth, H. H. History of the Mongols., from the ninth to the  nineteenth century. London, 1876. 4 vols., 8vo.

Ibn Alathir. Fragments de geograpkcs et d'historiens Arabes ei

Persans inedits, relatifs aux anciens peuples du Caucase et de li,,

Russie meridionale. Traduits et accompagnes de notes critiques,

par M. Defr^mery. In Jotirn. Asiat.., 4^ serie, xiii, 457-522 ;

xiv, 447-513-  Ibn Batuta. Voyages d'Jbn Batoutak. Texte Arabe, accompagn^ d'une

traduction' par C. Defremery et le Dr. B. R. Sanguinetti. Paris,

1874-79. 4 vols., 8vo.  Ibn Foszlan. Ihi Foszlan und anderer Araber Berichte iiber die

Russen alterer Zeit. Text und Ubersetzung mit kritisch-philo-

logischen Anmerkungen, etc., von CM. Frahn. St. Petersburg,

1823. 1 vol., 8vo.  Ibn Haukal. The Oriental Geography of Ibn Haukal^ an Arabian

traveller of the tenth century. Translated by Sir William

Ouseley. London, 1800. i vol., 4to.  Ibn Khaldun. Notice sur les ProUgomims Historiques de^ par E.

Quatrem^re. I,n Notices et Extraits des Manuscrits, vol. '<tx,

Pt. 1.  Ibn Khordadbeh. Le livre des routes et des prn^nnces. Public, traduit

et annote par C. Barbier de Meynard. Journal Asuiti^ue,

VI« scric, v, pp. 5.T27, 446-532.

In TlTLi:S OF ROOKS.

iShuikrI. Das Pjuch dcr I jdnder^ von Sthcch Ebn IsHak el Farsi el  l$/l;\cliri. Alls dem Aiahisclien iibcrsctzl von A. D Mordim.inn.  Hamburg, 184$. 1 vol., 8vo.

• •^ulorus Sane it hidori Hispalensis Epurcpi F.tyniologiariwi,  Libii W. In J. I*. MigncS Pairoloi^itic Cursus Couipietus^  flmRium 5>S. Pniuini, Doctorum Scriptorumquc ccclesiasticorum  qui ab acvo Apostnliaj ad Innocentii III tenipora florueiuDt.  Vol. Ixxxii. Paris, 1850. In 4to.

Jcnkinson, Anthony. Early Voyages and Travels to Russia and  Persia. London, 1886. 2 vols., 8vo. (Hakluyt Soc)

Joinville, I.e Sieur de. Histotrt dc Saitil Louis. Francisque lyiichel  edit, Paris, 1867. i vol., 8vxd.

Joidanus. The Wonders of the East. Translated by Heniy Yule.  London, 1863. { vol., 8vo. (Hakluyt Soc.)

Jornandcs. De Getarum sive Gothorum Origine et rebus gesfiz  Nisard edit., 1869. In 4to.

Knramsin. Histoire de P Empire de Russie. Traduite par St. Thomas  et Jaiiflfret. Paris, 1819-1826. 11 vols., 8vo. Vols, x and xi  translated by De Divofif.

Lasor a Varea, Alph. Universus Terrarum Orbis scriptorum calnmo  dilenealus. Patavii, 1717. 2 vols., fol.

Lebcau ^^^foire du Bus Empire. Brosset edit. Par!S, t8':4. -j i  vols., 8vo.

Le liruyn, Corneille. Voyages de^ par la Moscovie en Perse, ^t -lax  Indes Orientales. La Haye, 1732. 5 vols., small 4to.

Lejennj G. Elhnograpkie de la Turquie d'' Europe. In P^'r--} mimn's  Geograph. Mittheilungen. Erganzungsband, i860 und 1861.

Liano shu. Rook of Liang, or the Annals q\ the Liang Dynasty,  covering the period from A. P. ^o'> <o 556.

Liverani, F'rancesco. Era Giovanni da Plan di Carpine., iiel contado  /i.i Magionc. Via^giaiore e descrittore. Perugia, 1S76. 8vo.

Ma Tuan-lin. Wen hsien I'ung k*ao. In 348 books. (The best-  known Encyclopi\:tlia in ChricbC It covers the period from the  commencement of Chinese history to the early part of cl.c  thirteenth century. Books 324-348 relate to foreign tribes and  nations, and are composed entirely of extracts from the Annals  and other authoritative works. See Wylie, A'ctes on Chinese  Literature., 55.)

Mamachio, Th. Maria. -Annalium Ordinis P raedieato^<m kome.  1756. I vol., fol. (all published .

Marco Polo. The Book of Ser Marco Polo., the Venetian, concerning

the Kmgdoms and Marvels of the East. Translated and edited ^y

Henry Yule. 2nd edit. London, 1875. - vols., 8vo.

• Masudi. Lcs Prairies d^or. Texte et traduction par C. Barbier dt

.Maynard et Pa\et de CourlciUe. Paris, 1861- 1877. 9 vols,, iiyd.

TITLES OF BOOK!^. lili

\fanhaeis Parisiensis. Chronica Majora. Edited by Henry R.

iyiiaici. London. 5 vols., 8vo.  Maundevile, Sir John. The Voia^e afid Travaile o/. Ediced by

]_,, Q. Halliweli. London, 1883. i vol., Svo.  vjenandcr Protector. In J^raguieiila Hisinncorum Graecorum^ of

C MuJkr, vol. iv. i'aris, 1868. 4to, Didot edit.  Mcsaleji al-'ihsa- . rxoticc de I'ouvrage qui a pour titre Mesalek

-al-absar, par M. Quatrem^re. In Notices ct Extraits des .Vlnnu-

serifs^ vol. xiii, pp. 151-384. Paris, 1838. 4to.  Michaud. Histoire des Croisades. Edit. Huillard Br^holles. Paris,

1867. 4 vols., 8vo.  Migne, P.'\bbe. Nouvclle Encyclopedic thiologique. Vol. ix. Dic-

tionaire de st(iti<t7-que religieuse. Paris, 185 1. 4to.  Mirza Haidar. Tarikh-i-Rashidi. N. Elias and E. Denison Rcsss

translation. London, 1898. j vol., 8vo.  Miiller, Carolus. Gcographi Gracci mino'res. Paris, 1882. 2 vols.,

4to. Didot edit.  Miiller, Eugene. Deux Voy<igc^ en A sic au XIII' sihle, par Guil-

laume Rubvuqui.s et Marco Polo. Paris, 1888. i vol., i8mo.  M uratori . Scrip tores rcnoii ilalicarum. M 1 Ian, 1 7 2 3- 1 7 5 1 . 25 vols., 4to.  Nestor- Chroniquc ditc dc Nestor. Traduite sur le textc slavon-russe,

avec introduction et commentaire critique par Louis Leger. Paris,

1884. I vol., 4to.  i 'achy meres, See Corpus Scriptorion Historiae By^aniinae.  Palladius, Arclninandrite. Elucidations of Marco PoUfs Travels in

North C/iina. drawn from Chinese sources. In Journal of China

branch of Royal Asiatic Society^ New series, vol. x, pp. 1-54.  1 'alias, Professor. Voyages dans piusieurs Provinces di I Empire de

Russie, etc. Paris, 1788- 1793. 5 vols., 410.  Pears, Edwin The Tall of Constantinople . London, 1885. 1 vol., 8vo;  Pci shin, riie Northern History, the history of the Northern Wei,

Tse, Chou, and Sui Dynasties, covering the period from .\.D. 386

to 581.  Peschel, Oscar, Geschichie der Erdkunde bis auf Alexander von

Huinholdtund Carl Ritter. 2nd edit. MUnchen, 1877. I vol., 8vo.  Plinius. Naturalis Historiae. Traduction de Littre. Nisard edit.,

1865. 2 vols., 4to.  Ploss. H. Das Kind in Branch iind Sitie dcr Volker. Anthropo-

logische Studien. Leipzig, 1884. 2 vols., 8vo.  Ploss, H.^ and Barteis, Max. Das Weib in der Natur- und Vdlkcr-

ku7ide. Anthropolog^ische Studien. Leipzig, 1895. 2 vdls., 8vo.  Pomponiiss Mela. De Situ Orbis. Nisard edit. Parlis, 1895.

i vol., 4to.  Ptolemaeus, Claudius. Geographia. Edidit C. F. A. Nobbi. Editio

stcreotyjxi. Leipzii^, 1843. 2 vols., i8rno.

liv TITLES OF BOOKS.

Purchas, Samuel, his PHgrivies. London, 1625. 4'o- V©^- >'J

Pan )i. ^^Booke 1, pp. 1-52, translation of Rubruck.)  Quatrem^re, Kticnne. Histoire des Mofii^ols de la T^srse. Ecrite en

persan par Raschid-EJdin. Tome i (all published), Paris, 183O.

1 vol., fol.  R«dloff, Wilhelni. Ethnvgraphische Vebersicht der TUrkstdmme^

Sibcriens und der Mongolei. Leipzig, 1883. 8vo.  Kadloff, Wilhelm. Aus Sibericn. Lose Blatter aiis meinem Tage-

buche. 2nd edit. Leipzig, 1893. 2 vols., 8vo.  Rawlinson, George. History of Herodotus. A new English version,

with copious notes and appendices, London, 1862. 4 vols.,8vo.  Rawlinson, George. Five Great Monarchies of the Ancient Eastern

World. 4th edit. London, 1879. 3 vols., 8vo.  Raynaldus, Odoricus. Annates Ecclesiasiici., ab anno MCXCVin.

Lucae. 1747. 21 vols., 4to.  Rechis, Elisee. Nouvelle Geographic Universelle, la terre ct les

hommes. Paris. In 4to.  Reinaud. Relation des Voyages f aits paries Arabes et les Persans

dans P hide et ct la Chine dans le JX' siecle de fere ckr^tienne.

Paris, 1845. - vols., i6mo.  Remusat, Abel. Mi^moires sur les Relations politiques des Princes

Chretiens et particulicremc/jj des Rois de P^ance avcc les Empcr^urs

Mongols. Paris, 1822-1824. 410.  Rockhill, William W. The Land of the Lamas. Notes of a Journey

through China. Mongolia, and Tibet. New York, 1891. I vol., 8vo.  Rockhill, William W. Notes on the Ethnology of Tibet. Washington,

189$. I vol., 8vo.  Rockhill, William W. Diary of a Journey through Mongolia and

Tibet in 1891 and 1892. Washingtor>, 1894. i vol., 8vo.  Sarrazin, Jean Pierre. See Joinville.  Schiltberger, Johann. The Bondage and Tra-vels of in Europe., Asia

and Africa, 1396-1427. Translated by J. Buchan Telfer. London,

1879. ^ vol., 8vo. (Hakluyt Soc.)  Schmidt, Franz Max. Ueber Rubruk's Reise von 1253- 125 5. \x\ Zeit-

schrift der Gesellschaft fiir Erdkunde zu Berlin., vol. xx, pp. 161 -

253. Berlin, 1885. In 8vo.  Smirnow, Jean N. Les Populations E'innoises des bassins de lu Volga

et de la Kama. Etudes d'ethnographie historique. Traduites

par Paul Boyer. Paris, 189S. i vol., 410 (all published).  Sohni, C. Julii. Collectanae Rerum Memorabilium., recognovic Th.

Momnisen. Berhn, 1864 i vol., 8vo.  Sporer. Die Seenzone des Balchash nach Russischen QuelUn. In

Pt'iernumn^s Geographische Mittheilungen, vol. xiv.  Strabo. Slrabonis Geographica. Graece ( um vcrsione rchcla G.

Mullero et F. Dubnero. Pari^, 1853. 2 vols., 4to

TITLES Ol^ BOOKS. Iv

Sui shu. Book of Si:!, or the Annals of the Sui Dynas.y, coverin^^

the period from A.D. 581 to 617.  T^ang s/iir Book of the T'ang Dynasty, covering the period from

A.D. 618 10906. (The " New" (//.«>/) History is the work here

referred to. )  Taylor, Isaac. T/ic Alphabet; an Account of the Origin and Develop-  ment of Letters. London, 1883. 2 vols., 8vo.  Theophanes, liyzantius. See Fraginenta Historicorum Graecorum,

vol. iv.  Theophylactus. See Corpita Scriptorum Historiae Byzantinac.  Thomsen, Vilhelm. htscriptions de rOrkhon dechiffr^es. Helsingfors.

1896. I vol., 8vo.  Tott, Baron, de. M^uioirs 0/, on the Turks and the Tartars. London,

1785 (?)• 2 vols., i2mo.  'T'oLirnefort, Pitton de. Relation dhtn Voyage du Levant. Amsterdam,

17 18. 2 vols., 4to.  Tylor, Edward B. Primitive Culture : Researches into the Develop-

meiu of Mythology, Philosophy, Religion, Language, Art and

Custom. 2nd edit., London, 1873. 2 vols., 8vo.

Tylor, Edward B. Researches into the Early History of Mankind  and the Developvieni of Civilisation. 3rd edit., London, 1878.  vol., 8vo.

Vincent of Beauvais. Specnli Majoris^ Vincettiii Burgzindi Prae-  sulis Belvaccnsis Ordijiis Praedicatoriim. Tomus quartus. Qui  Speculum Historiale\xi%(in\y\\.Mx. Venice, 159 1. i ^^oL, fol.

Waddingus, Lucas. Annates Minoi'um^ seu Trium Ordinum a St.  Francisco Institutorum. Rome, 1731-1745. 19 vols., fol.

Waddingus, Lucas. Scriptores Orditiis Minorum, Quibus accessit  syllabus illorum, qui ex eodem Ordine pro fide Christi fortiter  occubuerurit. Priores airan»enlo, posteriores sanguine Chri.stianam  religionem asserverunt. Recessnit Fr. Lucas Waddington. Rome,  1750. T vol., 4to.

Wei shu. Book of tlie Wei, or Annals of the Wei Dynasty, covering  the period from A.D. 386 to 5156.

William of Nangis. In Rccueil des Historiens des Gaules et de la  France.^ vol. xx. Paris, 1840. In 4to.

William of Tyr. Historia rerum in partibus transmarinis gestarum.

In Recueil des Historiens des croisades. Historiens occidentaux.

Tome i. 2 Pts., 1844, fol.  -Wft tai shih. The History of the Five Dynasties of Liang, T'ang,

Chin, Han and Chou ; covering the period from A.D. 907 to 959,

(The "■ New" {Hsi?t) History is the work here referred to.)

Ivi TITLES OK LiOOKS.

Yiian-chiiaiig. M^moires sur /es Con/rt-es Oaidentales. Tradiiit dii  Sanscrit en Chmois, en Km 648, par Hioucn Thsang, ei dii  Chlnois tn J-'ranc lis par S'.anislas Julicn. Paris, 1858. 2 vols.,  large 8vo.

Yule, Hcury, Cathav and the Way Thither , being a collection of  mediaeval notices of Oiina. Loiidon, 1866. 2 vols., 8vo. (Hakluyi  Soc.)

Yule, Henry, and Arthur C Burncll. A Glossary of Anglo-Indian  Colloquial Words ard Phrases^ tiz. London, [866. 1 vol., Svo.

ERRATA.

P. 102, /i/u- 5 jrovi holio'u^ oiuit it that.  P. J 22, „ 2 „ n'<7<'/ Batho.

P- '39> »» 15 /''-■'^^^ Lepsinsk.  P. 139, ., 17 „ Balkash.  P. 158, ., c) from oottonu read classical.  P. 160, „ 5 „ „ Hai iMfch shau

P. 162, „ 7 „ „ Kuyuk.

P. 190. „ 19, transpose reference (2) to line 20, after worn  daughter,

P. 198, „ I, read Orengai.  P. 253, „ II, „ his children.

THE

JOURNEY OF  FRIAR JOHN OF PIAN DE CARPINE

TO THE

COURT OF KUYUK KHAN,

1245-1247,

AS NARRATED B\ HIMSELF.

f.

Of the route we went, and of the countries through which we

passed.

(733)'

HEN therefore we had arranged, as has  been already stated elsewhere, to set  out for the (land of the) Tartars we  (left Lyons on the i6th April, J 245,  and after travelling throngh Germany)^  came to the King of Bohemia.^ And  having asked his advice (734), for v/e  were personally acquainted with this lord from of old,  which was the best road for us to go by, he answered that

^ Tlie numbers in brackets are those of the pages of the text in  d'Avczac's edition. References to Rubruck's narrative are to the  pages of the Latin text.

^ These details are supplied from Benedict's narrative. See also  d'Avezac, 480.

^ Wenceslaw I, born in 1205, reigned from 1240 to 1253. After  having been a friend of the Emperor Frederic, he had gone over to the  Pope's party, and become the leader of the German league against hmi.

B

2 JOURNFV OF VR]A}< JOMN OF PIAN DF CAKPINF

it were best, it seemed to him, to go by Poland and Ruscia :  for he bad relatives in Poland, with whose aid ^^•e;.ould ente*-  Kuscia ; so having given us his letters and a good escort to  take us through Toland, he caused also money to be given  Ub to defra\' our travelling expenses through his lands and  cities as far as (the court of) Bolcslas, Duke of Selesia, his  nephew, with whom -Isc v\e were personally acquainted.^

II. The latter also gave us his letters and an escort and  m(M}C\' for our expenses in his towns and cities, as far as  Conrad, Duke of Lenczy.^ At that time, through God's  special grace, the Lord Vassilko, Duke of Ruscia,^ had come  there, from whom we learnt more accurately of the Tartars :  for he had sent his ambassadors to them, who had come  back to him and to his brother Daniel, bearing to the lord  Daniel a safe conduct to go to Bati> And he told us that  if we wanted to go to them we must have rich presents to  give them, for they, were in the habit of asking for them  most importunately, and if they were not given them (and  this is quite true), an ambassador could not conduct his  business satisfactorily with them ; and that furthermore he  was looked upon as a mere nothing^ (735)- Not wishing  that the affairs of the Lord Pope and of the Church sh'ould  be obstructed on this account, with some of that which had

^ He resided at Lij^nitz (d'Avezac, 481). Karamsin, iv, 21, 'says he  was Conrad s son.

■^ Who was in Cracow (d'Avezac, 482).

^ Vassilko, Duke of Volhynia and Vladimir, son of Roman and  ^^randson of Rutik (Karamsin, iii, 134, iv, rcxD, 142 ; d'Avcxac, 482).

* Daniel, Duke of Calitch. He had fought against the Mongols  in the great battle of the Kalka, -?! May, 1223. Karamsin says Daniel  on^v- undertook this journev to Batu's camp in order to deceive him,  .ind inspire the MongoU with confidence in him, the better to be able  10 prepare means for delivering his country from their yoke. U was  for ihis purpose also that he sought the aid of the Church of Ramc.  and e.xpr'^ssed the wish to march against the Mongols under tlie  Pnpal flag. Pope Innocent W gave him the title of King of Callicia :  /Ut Daniel informed him that he wanted troops, not a title Nego-  tiations were finally broken off between Rome and Daniel in J 240  (Karamsin, iii, 28.8, 323, iv, 21, et seg.).

^ Conf. Rubruck's remarks, 218, 396.

TO THE COURT OF KTVUK KUANJ 3

oeen ^iven us in charily, so that we should nor be iv. want  and for use on our journey, we bought some skins of  beavers and of some other cinim.ils. Duke Conrad (he  Duchess of Cracow,^ some Ichights and the bishop of  Cracow, hearing of this, gave us some more of these skins  F'urthermore Duke Conrad, his son, and the Bishop oi'  Cracow besought nrost earn»^stly Duke Vassiiko to help  us as much as he could in reaching the Tartars; and he  replied that he would do so willingly.

III. So he took us with him to his countr\- ; and as he  kept us for some days as his guests that we might rest a  little, and had called thither his bishops at our request,

we read them the letters of the Lord Pope, in which he  admonished them to return to the unity of holy mother  Church ; we also advised and {736) urged them as much as  we could, as well the Duke as the Bishops, and all those  who had met there, to that same end. But as at the very  time when this duke had come to Poland, his brother,  Duke Daniel, had gone to Bati and was not present, they  could not give a final answer, but must wait his return  before being able to give a full reply.

IV. After that the Duke sent one of his servants with  us as far as Kiew.- Nevertheless we travelled ever in  dansrer of our lives on account of the Lithuanians, who  often committed undiscovered outrages as much as pos-  sible in the country of Ruscia, and particularly in these  places through which we had to pass ; and as the greater  part of the men of Ruscia had been killed by the Tartars  or taken off into captivity, they were unable to offer them

^ The duchess was called (irirmslawa, the dukes son, Lesko  (d'A\ezac, 482). Furs were used as ca'rency in Russia at the time ; see  Rubruck, 329.

- On the Dnieper. It had been captured by Batu in 1238, when  nearly the whole population was massacred and the city totally de-  stroyed (Karamsin, iv, 10, i»/ seg'.).

B 2

4 JOURNEY OF FRIAR JOHN OF PIAN DE CARPINE

the least resistance ;^ we were safe, however, froin the  Ruthcuians on account of this servant. Thence then, by  the grace of God having been saved from the enemies of  the Cross of Christ, we came to Kiew, which is the  metropolis of Ruscia. And when we came there we took  counsel with the Millenarius,^ and the other nobles who  were there, as to our route. They told us that if we took  into Tartary the horses which we had, they would all die,  for the snows were deep, and they did not know how to  dig out the grass from under the snow like Tartar  horses, nor could (737) anything else be found (on the  way) for them to eat, for the Tartars had neither straw nor  hay nor fodder. So, on their advice, we decided to leave  our horses there with two servants to keep them ; and we  had to give the Millenarius presents, that he might be  pleased to give us pack-horses and an escort. Before we  reached Kiew, when in Danilov^ I was ill to the point ot  death ; but I had myself carried along in a cart in the  intense cold through the deep snow, so as not to interfere  with the affairs of Christendom,

V. Having settled then all these matters at Kiew, on the  second day after the feast of the Purification of Our Lady  (February 4, 1246), we started out from Kiew for other  barbarous peoples, with the horses of the Millenarius and  an escort. We came to a certain town which was under  the direct rule of the Tartars and is called Canov ;* the  prefect of the town gave us horses and an escort as far as  another town in which was a certain Alan prefect who was

* Conf. Rubruck's remarks, 247.

- In Mongol mingafan.

' There are several places called Danilow and Danilowkain Russia,  but i do not rind any at thy present time on the route between Vladi-  mir and Kiew.

* The present town of Kaniew on the Dneiper, about 7$ miles  below Kiew,

TO THE COURT OF KUYUK KHAN. 5

called Micheas,^ a man full of all malice and iniquity, (738)  for he had sent to us to Kiew some of his body-guard, who  lyingly said to us, as from the part of Corenza,^ that we  being ambassadors were to come to him ; and this he  did, though it was not true, in order that he might extort  presents from us. When, however, we reached him, he  made himself most disagreeable, and unless we promised  him presents, would in no wise agree to help us. Seeing that  we would not otherwise be able to go farther, we promised  to give him some presents, but when we gave him what  appeared to us suitable, he refused to receive them unless  we gave more ; and s.o we had to add to them according  to his will, and something besides he subtracted from us  deceitfully and maHciously.

VI, After that we left with him on the second day of  QuinqUcigesima (19th February), and he led us as far as  the first camp^ of the Tartars, and on the first Friday after  Ash Wednesday (23rd February), while we were stopping  for the night as the sun went down, the Tartars broke in  oa us in arms m horrible fashion asking who we were.  We ansvveff^ ' them that we were envoys of the Lord Pope,  and then tiaving accepted some food from us, they left at  once. Starting again at morn, we had only gone a little  way ^\'hen their chiefs who were in the camp came to us,  and inquired of us why we came to them, and what was  our business. We answered them that we were the envoys  of the Lord Pope, who was the lord and father of Chris-  tians ; that he had (739) sent us to the King as well as  to the princes and all the Tartars, because he desired that

^ Conf. what Benedict says of him, infra, 34. Micheas' Mongol  title was probably Daruga.

'^ The name of this Mongol general is variously written Choranza,  Curoniza, and Karancha.

^ Cusiodia. Rubruck uses the word herbergia in th», same sense.  This "first camp" ia the same that Benedict {injra^ 34) states they  reached three days after leaving Brother Stephen of Bohemia.

6 JOIJRNKV OF FRIAR JOHN OF PIAN DE CARPINE

ail Christians should be friends of the ^aitars and at peace  with them. Moreover, as he wished that they should be  mighty with God in heaven, bo, the Lord Pope, advised them  as well through us as by his letters, that they should become  Christians and receive the faith of Our Lord Jesus Chiist  for otherwise they could not be saved. He told tlK^m  furthermore that he was astonished at the slaying of  human beinj^-s done by the Tartars, and especially of  Christians and above all of Hungarians, Moravians and  Poles, who were his subjects, when they had injured them  in nothing nor attempted to injure them ; and as the Lord  God was gravely offended at this, he cautioned them to  abstain henceforth from such acts, and to repent them of  thvjse they had done. Furthermore we said that the  Lord Pope requested that they should write to him hat  they would do and what was their intention ; and that  they would give answer to him to all the above points in  their letters. Having heard our motives, and understood  and noted them down, they said that, in view of what we  had said, they would give us pack-horses as far as Corenza,  and supply a guide ; and at once they asked for present?  (740), which we gave them, for we must needs do their  will.

VI 1. Having given them the presents, and taken as pack-  liorses some from which they got off, we started under  their guidance for Corenza ; but they sent ahead a swift  messenger to this chief with what we had told them. This  chief is lord of all those (Tartars) who are encamped  facing the peoples of the West, lest they suddenly and  unexpectedly attack them. This chief has under him, we  ..ere told, sixty thousand armed men. When we reached  him, he made us put our tents far from him,^ and sent u$

' This ci^iiin iMpptiied t Uatuscump. see ////V./, 9. Friar \sce!in  was treated in like iflamu <ii ttie >Mn;p of llchtkad«u in 1249.

TO THE COURT OF KUYUK KHAN. j

his slave stewards^ who asked us with what (74i)\v6^wanted  to bow to him, that is to say wlicther wc would make him  presents. We repUed that tiie Lorxi Pope had not sent  any presents, for he was not sure we could reach them :  and that furthermore we had had to pass through very  dangerous places, exposed to the Lithuanians, who make  raids along the roads from Poland to near the Tartars,  over which we had had to travel ; but nevertheless with  what we were carrying with us, by the grace of God ar.d  of our Lord the Pope, and for our personal use, we would  show him our respect as well as we could. But when we  had given him a number of things, they were not enough  for him, and he asked for more through intermediaries,  promising to have us conducted most honourably if we  complied with his request, which we had to do since we  wished to live and carry out satisfactorily the order of the  Lord Pope.

VIII. Having received the presents they led us to his  orda or tent, and we were instructed to bend three times the  left knee before the door of his dwelling, aud to be very  careful not to put our feet on the threshold of the door ;  and this we were attentive to observe, for sentence of death  is on those who knowingly tread upon the threshold of a  chiefs dwelling.^ After we had entered we were obliged  to repeat on bended knee before the chief and all the other  nobles (742), who had specially been convened there for  that purpose, what has been previously said. We pre-  sented 10 him also the letters of the Lord Pope ; but as  our interpreter, whom we had brought with us from Kiew,  was not able to translate them for hinfi, nor was there any  one else competent to do so, they could not be interpreted.  After this, horses were given us, and three Tartars, two of

Servos suos procuratores. I presume tbey were Christian, pro-  bably Russian, slaves.  - See Rubruck's narrative, 3,19.

8 JOURNEY OF FRIAR JOHN OF PIAN DECARPINE

whom were chiefs over ten, atid the other a man {homo) of  Bati, guided us with all speed to that latter chief. This Bati  is more powerful than all the other Tartar princes save  the Emperor, whom he is held to obey.

IX. We started (for Bati's camp) on the Monday after  the first Sunday of Quadragesima (26th February), and  riding as fast as horses could go trotting, for we had fresh  horses three or four times nearly every day, we rode from  morning to night, and very often even at night, and it was  not before VVednc^sday in Holy Week (4th April) that we  could^gct to bim.^ "^We crossed the whole country of the  Comans, which is all a plain, (743) and has four great  rivers. The first is called the Neper, along which, on the  side of Ruscia, roams Corenza, and on the other side through  those plains, Mauci, who ismightier than Corenza. Secondly,  the Don, along which roams a certain prince called Catan,  who has^ wife Bati's sister. The third is the Volga, a very  big river, along which^xgoes Bati.^ The fourth is called  Jaec, along which go two Millenarii, one along one side of  the river, thejDther along the other. All these (chiefs)  descend in winter time to the sea, and in summer go up  the courses of these rivers to the mountains Now this  sea is the Mare-Magnum from which goes out the arm of  Saint George which goes to Constantinople. We went  along for many days on the ice on the Neper. These rivers

^ The mission left Kiew on February 4th, 1246, reached Curenza s  camp on or near the west bank of the Dnieper somewhere about the  22nd, artd probably crossed the river between Yekaterinoslaw or  Alexandrwsk, where ic makes a south-westerly bend.

- Friar John is the first western writer to call the Dnieper, Don, and  Volga by these names ; even Rubruck does not use them. This is  explained by the fact that the former had a Russian interpreter,  accustomed, like all his countrymen, to use these terms ; the latter  got hib information fron^ the Mongols, and where that failed used  the classical terms. Mauci appears to be the Mauchy of Abulghazi ;  he was rhe second son ofChagatai. Catan is, I think, the same as  Rubruck's Srai^ii. Ht must not be confounded with Katan, meniicmed  in a subsequent passage. Conf also Benedict's narratue, tn/ra.  P- 34

TO THE COURT OF kUYUK KHAN. Q

are big", very full of fish, esperialK' the Volga, and they  fall into the sea of Greece which is called Mare-Magnum.  We went for many days along the shore of this sea, which  on account of the ice was very dangerous in several places ;  for it freezes along the coast quite three leagues out.^ But  (744) before we came to Bati, two of our Tartars went  ahead to tell him all we had said at Coreiiza's.

X. When then we came to Bati on the borders of  the Comans' country, we were made to camp a good league  from their tents,^ and before we were taken to his court  we were told we would have to pass between two fires,  which we refused to do under any consideration. But  they told us : " Fear not, we only make you pass between  these two fires lest perchance you think something injurious  to our lord,-or if you carry some poison, for the fire will  remove all harm-" We answered them : " Since it is thus  we will pass through, so that we may not be suspected of  such things." When we came to the orda we were ques-  tioned by his procurator, who is called Eldegai, as to what  we wp.ntcd to make our obeisance with, that is to say, what  gifts \vc desired to give Him ; we answered him as we had  previously answered Corenza, that the Lord Pope had sent  no presents, but that we ourselves, of those things which  we had by the grace of God and the Lord Pope for our

*■ D'Avezac (485) justly remarks : "We may feel surprise at the geo-  graphical ignorance of the friar, who, though he might have known  the truth by the testimony of his own eyes, remained imbued with  ancient errors, and confounds in a single sea the Pontus, the Palus  Maioiis, the Caspian sea, or sea of the Khazars, and also the great  lake of Aral." Rubruck's geographical knowledge was mtich superior  on all these points. He does not mention the Aral lake, and may  have taken it to be part of the Caspian ; I am inclined to think  however, that he passed some distance north of it.

2 Stationes^ which the friar says (616) were '"'' rotumias in modinn  tehtorii,^^ In another part of his work (770) Friar John says that he  found at Batu's camp the son of the Duke of Yaroslaw, who had with  him a Russian knight called Sanger, a Coman by birth, but then a  Christian. Tne friar's interpreter at Batu's camp was a Russian  from Susdal

10 JOURNEY OF FRIAR JOHN OF PIAN DE CARPINE

expenses, desired to show him our respect as best wo  could. Presents having been given and accepted, the  procurator called Eldegai questioned us as to our coming ;  and to him we gave the same reasons as we had previously  given to Corenza.

(745) XI. Having been informed of our reasons, they  led us into the dwelling, after having made a bow, and  heard the caution about the threshold, which has been men-  tioned. Having entered then we said what we had to say  on bended knees, and then we presented him the letters  (of the Pope), and requested that interpreters be given us  able to translate them. These were given us on Good  Friday (6th April), and wc carefully translated the letters  into the Ruthenian, Saracenic, and Tartar languages, and  this latter interpretation was given to Bati, who read it  and noted it carefully. After that we were taken back to  our dwelling, but no food was given us, save once on the  night of our arrival a little millet in a bowl.

XH. This Bati holds his court right magnificently, for  he has door-keepers and all the other officials like unto their  Emperor. He sits also in a raised place, as on a throne,  with one of his wives ; but every one else (of his family),  as well his brothers and his sons as others of lesser degree,  sit lower down on a bench in the middle (of the tent) All  the other people sit behind them on the ground, the men  to the right, the women to the left. He has tents made of  linen {^pannis lineis). (746) They are large and quite hand-  some, and used to belong to the King of Hungary. And  no outsider save a servant dare enter the tent, no matter  how great and mighty he may be, unless he is called, unless  perchance he knows he is wanted. When we had stated  our object, we took a seat to the left,^ for thus do all

^ With the women, placing them in a position of inferiority ; the  women sat on the ri^ht of the < hief, the traveller's left when fiu in^

TO TPIE COURT OF KUYUK KliAN. 1 1

ambassadors in going, but on coming back from the  Emperor they always placed us on the right. In the  middle of the dwelling near the door is a table, on which  is placed drink in gold and silver vases ; and Hati never  drinks, nor does any prince of the Tartars, especially when  they are in public, without there being singing and guitar  playing. And when he rides out, there is always carried  over his head on a pole an umbrella or little awning ; and  all the very great princes of the Tartars do likewise. This  Bati is kind enough to his own people, but he is greatly  feared by them. He is, however, most cruel in fight ; he  is very- shrewd and extremely crafty in warfare, for he has  been waging war for a long time.

XIII. On Holy Saturday (7th April) we were called to  his tent and that same procurator of Bati's came out to us,  and told us from him that we were to go to the Emperor  Cuyuc in their country, and that some (747) of our party  would be kept there (with Bati) in the expectation  that they would want to send them back to the Lord  Pope. We gave them letters concerning all we had  done to carry back (to the Pope), but when they  had got as far as Mauci, he detained them until our  return. As for ourselves, on the day of the Resur-  rection of the Lord (8th April), having said mass and  settled everything, accompanied by the two Tartars who  had been detailed to us at Corenza's, we started out most  tearfully, not knowing whether we were going to life or  death.^ We were furthermore so feeble that we could  hardly ride ; during the whole of that lent our only food  had been millet with salt and water ; and likewise on the

him. The left side of the host is the place of honour in China,  but ftot so in Mongoha and Tibet, where guests sit to the right of  the host.

* Benedict {infra^ 35) says they started on Tuesday after Easter,  i.e.^ loth April.

12 JOURNEY OK I'UIAR JOHN OF TIAN OE CAKl'lNK

otfu.. fast (lays ; nor had wc anythinp^ else to drink but  snow melted in the kxttle.

XIV. Coniania hath to the north of it, iinnieNiJiatcly  after Ruscia, the Moiduins, th'e Jailers, or j^reat Bulgaria,  the liascarts or great Hungary ; after the l^ascartj, the  Parrosits (748) and the Samogeds, after the Samogeds those  who are said to have dog-faces, vho live in the deserts  along the coasts of the Ocean.- To the south it (?>.,  Coniania) has the Alans, the Circasses, the Gazars, Greece  and Constantinople ; also the land of the Ibers, the Cachs,  the l^rutaches, who are said to be Jews, and who shave their  heads, the country of the Zicci, of the Georgians and of  the Armenians, and the country of the Turks.^ To the  west it has Hungary and Ruscia. And this country (of  Comania) is extremely long, for we v.-ere riding through  it at great speed, having every day fresh horses, five or  seven times a day, except, as I have said, when we were  riding through desert tracts when we got better and  stronger horses (749) able to stand more \^ork, and we

* Ttie Hilei s arc the Belar of mediaeval Mahommedan writers, the  Ikilgars of th^ Volga (d'Avezac, 490) ; Schiltberger (49) speaks of  the city of l>ohir. The country of the Bascarts is Rubruck's Pascatirj  Friar John uses the Russian form of the name, Bashkurt. The  Parossits arc the Borassyts of Edrisi, the Permiaks of modern writers  (d'Avezac, 492). The Samogeds are the Samoyeds, the inhabitants  of " the country of darkness" of Mohammedan mediieval writers;  Rul)ruck refers to them (266), but does not name them. PViar John,  in another part of his work (678), says *' the Samogeds live by the  chase, and make their dwellings and clothing of the skins of animals."  The dog-faced people, or Cynocephalc?^ as Benedict [injra, 36) calls  them, are a classical reminiscence (see infra^ 36, and d'Avezac, 493).  King Heythum of Armenia speaks of a country beyond Khatai,  where the men were shaped hke dogs (Dulaurier, 472). On the Alans,  Circasses (or Kerkis) and Gazars, see ;>//ra, 42, note i. On the Ibers,  or Georgians, see infra^ 46. In another passage of his work (70Q)  Pian de Carpine identities the Georgians with the Obesi^ the Abazes  or Abkhases (d'Avezac, 497). Friar John's Cachs appear to be the  people of Kakhethi in Georgia (d'A\ezac, 495). The Brutaches may  be the inhabitants of tlie Berdas^ o{ mediivval iMohan^medan wj iters  d'Avezac, 496). Kubruck refers (382) tajews living in this tlisinct.

n the Zicci, a western branch of the Cherkess, see tnj'ra^ 45,  note 4.

t

TO THE COURT OF KUYUK KHAN. 13

kept this up from the beginning of lent to the eighth day  after Easter (i6th Apriiy The Tartars killed these  Comans ; some fled from before them, and others were  reduced to slavery. Most of those who fled have come  back to them.

XV. After that we entered the country of the Cangitae,-  which in many places uffers from a great scarcity of  water, and in which but few people remain on account of this  deficiency of water. And so it happened that the men of  leroslav, Duke of Ruscia, who were going to join him in  the country of the Tartars, lost some of their number who  died of thirst in this desert. In this country and also in  Comania, we found many human skulls and bones scattered  about on the ground like cattle-dung.^ We travelled  through this country (of the Cangitae) from the eighth  day after Easter to nearly the Ascension of our Lord.*  These people are pagans, and the Comans as well as  the Cangitae do not till the soil, but only live on the  produce of their animals ; nor do they build houses, but  live in tents. The Tartars have also annihilated them, and  now occupy their country ; those of them who were left  they have reduced to slavery.

XVI. Leaving the country of the Cangitae we entered  that of the Bisermins.^ These (750) people used to speak the

^ Benedict {infta^ 35) says it only took them two weeks to ride  through Comania, but he counts merely from the time they left Batu's  camp. To this we must add the '' five weeks and more " he says  they took to ride from the Dnieper to Batu's camp, near Sarai, on the  Volga. The two narratives agree perfectly.

^ Rubruck (274) calls them Cangle^ and says they were Comans.  Benedict uses the same name for them as John.

^ Conf. the Constable of Armenia's remarks in Introductory Notice,  supra,

** /.^., from the i6th April, 1246, to the middle of May : Ascension  day falling that year on the 17th May.

° Bisermin is a corrupt form of Mussulman. P'u-su-man kitty  •'country of the Pusuman," occurs in Chinese works of the Mongol  period. In the Russian annals the name Bussurnian is also found  (^ Bretschneider, i1^/<?^. Travel.y^tZ i sXsoh'is Med. Geog.., 120). D'Avezac,

14 .lOURNEV OF FKIAK JOHN OF PIAN DE CAK'PlXf^

Coman languag^e, and do still speak it ; but they hold the  religion of the Saracens. We found in that country in-  numerable ruined cities, overthrown villages, and many de-  serted towns. Thjsre is a great river in that country whose  name 1 do not know, and on which stands a city called  lanckint, and also another called Barchin,'and still another  called Ornas, and many more whose names I do not  knovv.^ This country used to have a lord* who was called

(523) thinks Friar John used it to designate Turkestan ; it seems to me,  however, that he applies it more particularly to the Khorazmian  empire. Benedict {iiifra^ 37) calls this country Ttt7-kya (z..?., Tmkestan).  He says they travelled through it for 'ten days, or roughly 350 miles.  Anthony Jenkinson (79) uses the word Bussannans to designate the  Moslem, and says it means circumcised. See also infra, p. 48, note 3.  * The ''great river" is the Syr daria. The traveUer must have folloned  it up from its mouth to perhaps Chimkenf, which may be the town of  Lemfinc he mentions in another part of his work (771). D'Avezac,  (512) and Bretschneider {^Med. Geog.^ 135; identify lanckint with  Yenguikend, and Barchin with the Pa-erh-chen of the Chinese, the  Barkhalikend of the Persians. As to Ornas, Fraehn (/<^« Fozlan, 162)  thinks it is Urghendj ; d'Avezac, (505-511) tries to prove 'hat it was  the ancient Tanais, the mediaeval Tana at the mouth of the Don. I  accept, as much more probable Bretschneider's suggestion [Med. Geng.,  236) that it was Otrar, the ruins of which famous place have been  found on the right bank of the Syr daria, to the east of Fort Perowsky.  In another part of his work (672-674), Friar John says that after  the election of Ogodai as Emperor, Batu was sent agamst the Alti-  Soldan and the country of the Bisermins'(/.^., the Khorazm Shah and  the Khorazmian ernpire). In the latter country "a certam city called  Barchin resisted them for a long time. . . . But the people of another  city called lanckint hearing (of the capture of Barchjn), went out and  surrendered themselves into his hands, and so their city was not  destroyed. . . . And then they(/.^'., tlie Mongols) marched against  a city called Ornas (also written in some MSS. Orfiac and Orpnr), and  this city was a very populous one, for there were there not only many  (kinds of) Christians — Gazars, Kuthenians, and Slavs, and others-  hut also Saracens, and these latter had dominion ovar the city. And  this city was full of riches, for it is situated on a nver \/hich tlows by  lanckint and the land of the Bisermins, and which flows into a sea (^or  fake, mare\ so it is as it were a (sea) port, and all the other Saracens  had a very great market in that city. And as (the .Mongols) could  not capture ii otherwise, they cut the river which flowed by the town,  and flooded it with all its things and people." It is quite true that these  details of the siege of Ornas agree with what Mohammedan writers  tell us of the siege of Urghendj by the Mongols in 1221 (see d'Ohsson,  ii, .■»65. ei seq.),'M\di for liiat matter wuh what Vincent of Beau\ais  (bk. x\:x, ch. lxx\ix)saysof the siege of Bagdad in 1258 : but the siege  of Otrar in 1219 was also one of the longest and most difficult the  Mongols had undertaken in ihis famous campaign, and the inundating

TO TIIK COURT OV KUVUK KUAN. 15

the Great Soldan,^ and he \vas put to death by th'e Tartar.s  with all his progeny, but I am ij^norant of his name. The  country has very high mountains ; to the south of it is  Jerusalem, Baldach, and the whole country of the Saracens.  Near its borders are stationed the chiefs Burin and Cadan  who are uterine brothers.^ To the north of it is a part of  the country of the Black K'tayans and an Ocean, and in  that quarter is stationed Sitan, a brother of Bati "^ We  travelled through this country from the feast of the Ascen-  sion (17th May) to about eight days before the feast of  Saint John the Baptist (24th J^'nc).

(751) XVII. After that we entered the country of the  Black Kitayans, in which Ihcy (?.^., the Mongols) have  built anew, as it were, a city called Omyl, in which the  Emperor has erected a house where we were invited to  drink ; and he who was there on the part of the F- ^eror

of Urgliendj niay have been done on account of the success of this  expedient in the siege of Ornas. As to the identity of Ornas with Tana,  we have no knowledge even that the latter place existed in the thir-  teenth century ; in fact, we learn from Rubruck that in his time  the trade of the Sea of Azow was carried on at Matriga, and that only  small flat boats went to the mouth of the Don for fish and salt. Had  any trading port existed there at the time, he would surely have men-  tioned it. The Russian bishop Peter (1245} speaks of a very gieat  city called Ernnc^ or Ornachi^ which had been captured by B'jtha-  tarcan (Matth. Paris, Op. cit.^ iv, 387). Mohammedan mediae /al  writers say*<that J uchi in 12 19 captured Ozkend, Barkhalikend and  Eschnars (dtDhsson, i, 222). It is just possible that Eschnars, where-  cver it was on the :)yr daria, is Peter's Ernasox Ornachi^ and that this  place is the same as Friar John's Ornas and Benedict's {i?tfra, 36)  Ornarum. Sir John Maundevile (255) refers to the city of Octorar.

^ AHisoldanus : in some MS. Altisoldavi and Alti-Soldamts. I have  followed d'Ave^ac (504) in translating it as if it were Altus Soldanus.  The Sultan here referred to is Alayeddm Mohammed. According to  Mohammedan writers, he died a fi'.gitive from the Mongols, in a little  island in the Caspian, in 1220 (d'Ohsson, ii, 255).

^ Ikirin is" the same as Rubruck's Buri ; Kadan, according to  Rashideddin, was not a son of Chagatai, as Friar John states (666),  but of Ogodai (d'Avezac, 584).

^ Sitan is the Schiban of Mohammedan writers. Friar John (666)  says that he and Batu were sons of Tossuc-can, by which name he  designates Juchi, the eldest son of Chingis.

T6 JOIJRNEV OF FRTAR JOHN OF PIAN DE CARPINE

made the nobles of the town and also his own two sons  clap their hands before us (when we drank).^ Leaving  this place we found a not very lart^e lake, and as we did  not ask its name, we do not know it. On the shore of this  lake was a little hill, in where there is said to bean opening,  whence in winter there issue out such great tempests of  wind that people can barely and at great danger pass by,^  In summer, however, though one always hears the sound  of the winds, but little comes out of the opening, according  to what the inhabitants told us. We travelled along the  shore of this lake for several days ; it has several islands

^ Conf. Rubnick, 225. The original town of Imil, on the river whicli  still bears that name, and which flows into the Ala Kul, passing south  of the town of Chuguchak, was built by the Kara-Khitai somewhere  ab<Hit 1 125. Imil was Kuyuk's appanage {ulus) (Bretschniedcr, Med.  Geoi^.^ 109, 221, 305). In another passage (648), Friar John says that  Ogodai rebuilt the city. He adds that "to the south of it lies a great  desert (evidently the Takla-makan), m which it is credibly asserted  that wild men live. They have no speech, nor joints in their limbs.  If they fall do wQ they cannot get up without assistance. They have,  nowever, enough instinct {discretiontm) to make felt of camels' (wild  camels ?) wool, with which they clothe themselves and make shelters  against the wind. If any Tartars chase them and wound them with  arrows, they put grass in the wound and flee swiftly before them."  The presence of wild men somewhere in the deserts of Central Asia  has been reported by many travellers, from Heythum, of Armenia, to  Sir Douglas Forsyth and P. K. Kozloff, of Roborowsky's expedition in  1893-95.^ The latter heard of them living in the valley of the Urungur  (not far/from Omyl, by the way) — see Rockhill, Land of the Lamas,,  i 50, 256 ; also his Diary^ 144, and Geo^fr. Jour.^ ix, 554. Chinese annals  of the sixth century make mention of a race or tribe called K'o-lan,  living probably between Sa-chou and the Lob nor, which they describe  as the most degraded and unsightly of all savage tribes. They could  not distinguish colours or sounds ; they were stupid and weak, knew  not how to fight, or even quarrel ; in every respect they were like  brute beasts (MaTuan-lin, bk. 334, 4).

2 Either the traveller's memory served him badly, or else the text  is here wrong. The lake, it would seem, is the Ala Kul, and the wind,  that which blows through the Ala Tau coming from ihe.£bi nor and the  desert beyond (see note to p. 294 of Rubruck). If this be the case, he  cannot have come to the lake after leaving Omyl, but must have passed  it before getting there, or else he passed it on his return journey. If  the text is at fault, the only correction necessary would be to change  the first word " leaving," and read "before reaching." That he passed  the Ala Kul on his way east, seems clear from the fact that he states, a  few lines further on, that he travelled along it, " having it on his left."

TO THE COURT OF KUYUK KHAN. I 7

in it, and it lay upon our left hand. This country has great  abundance of .streams, not large ones, however ; on cither  bank of these rivers are woods, but of no great width.^ Ordu  lives in this country f he is older than Bati, in fact, older  than any (752) of the other chiefs of the Tartars, and the  orda or court is that of one of his wives who rules over it.  For it is a custom among the Tartars that the courts of  their princes and nobles are not broken up (on their death),  but som.e women are always appointed who govern them,  and the came proportion of presents are given them thai  their lord had been in the habit (during his life) of allowing  them. After this we came to the first orda of the Emperor,^  in which was one of his wives ; but as we had not yet seen  the Emperor they would not invite us nor let us come into  her ordUy though they had us well served in our own tent,  according to Tartar fashion ; and they kept us there for a  whole day, so that we might rest.

XVIII. Proceeding thence on the eve of the feast  of Saint Peter (2Sth June), we entered the country of  the Naiman, who are pagans.* On the day of the feast  of the apostles Peter and Paul (29th June) there fell in that  place a great snow, and we experienced great cold. This  country is exceptionally mountainous and cold, and (753)

^ Conf. what Rubruck says (281) of the country of the Kara-Khitai.

5 Urda or Orda of Mohammedan writers. Little is said of this  prince in the works to which I have had access. He took part in the  great wars in Europe and Asia, and seems to have been a faithful  adherent of Kuyuk, as it was he who made the report to that Emperor  on Ujugen's conspiracy to seize the throne before Kuyuk's election  (d'Ohsson, ii, 194, 203).

^ This must have been in the I mil country, as the Emperor ber^  referred to is clearly the then deceased Ogodai.

* Rubruck says the Naiman were Christians. Supposing they pro-  fessed the Uigur creed, which Rubruck states to ha\e been a  jumble of Manichaeism and Buddhism, with perhaps a slight tinge of  Nestorianism, they might be classed among his idolaters (as he, in  fact, sometimes does the Uigurs), or among Christians. Conf Nay  Elias {Tarikhi-rashidi, 290), where, translating from Jiwani, he speaks  of the NauTian as Tarsuy which he renders by *' Christians."

I 8 JOURNEY OF FRTAR JOHN OF PIAN DE'CARP-INE

there is very little plain in it. These two nations^ do not  til! the soil, but like the Tartars live in tents. These latter  have nearly exterminated them. We travelled through  tilts country many days.

XIX. After that we entered the ccuntry of the Mongajs,  whom we call Tartars. And wc journeyed through that  country for three weeks, I think riding hard, and on the  -day ot" the feast u[ blessed Mary Magdalen (22nd July)  we arrived at Cuyuc's, the present emperor. Along all this  (part of the) route we travelled very fast, for our Tartars  had been ordered to take us quickly to the solemn court  which had alrea<ly been convened for several years for the  election of an emperor,-- so that we might be present at it.  So we had to rise at dawn and travel till night without a  stop ; often we arrived so late that we did not eat at night,  but that which we should have eaten at night was given us  in the morning ; and we went as fast as the horses could  trot, for there was no lack of horses, having usually fresh  horses during the ^ay, those which we left being sent back,  as I have stated previously ; and in this fashion we rode  rapidly along without interruption.

II

Concerning the arrangement of the Emperors court and of

his princes.

(754) I. When we reached Cuyuc's camp, he caused us to  be given a tent and allowances such as the Tartars are in  the habit of giving ; but they treated us better than they did  the other ambassadors. We were not called (before Cuyuc)  however, for he had not yet been elected, nor had they

^ /.^., the Kara-Khitai and the Naiman.

- Ogodai died in 1241, but the parliament {/cun'/iiii) which tlected  Kuyuk onJ> met in the spring of 1246 (d'Ohsson, ii, i95^c/ st-i^,).

TO THE COURT OF KUVUK KHAN. V9

settled about the succession ; the translation of the letters  of the Lord Pope, and what cLhc we had said (to Corcnza  and Batu), had been sent him by Bati. And when we had  been there five or six days, he sent us ^o his mother,^ where  the solemn court was being held. When we got there  they had already erected a great tent (755; made of white  pUtplc, which in our opinion was large enough to hold  more than two thousand persons • and around it a wooden  paling had been made, and it was ornamented with divers  designs. ^

On the second or third day we went with the Tartars

who had .been assigned to guard us (to this tent) ; and all

the chiefs met there, and each one was riding around in a

circle over hill and dale with his men. On the first day

they were. all dressed in white purple ; on the second day,

cind then it was that Guyuc came to the tent, they were

dressed in red (purple) ; on the third day they were all in blue

purple, and on the fourth day in the finest baldakins.- ]n

the paling near the tent were twQ big gates i one through

which only the Em.pcror could pass, and at which there

was no guard though it was open, for no one would dare

to go in or out by it ; and the other way by which all

those who had admittance went in, and at this one were

guards with swords, bows and arrows, and if anyone came

near the tent outside of the set bounds, he was beaten if

caught, or shot at" with headless arrows if he ran away.

The horses were kept at about two arrow-fiights, I should

say, from the tent. The chiefs went about everywhere with

a number of their men all armed ; but nobody, unless a chief.

could go to the horses, without getting badly beaten for

^ The Empress Turakina. who was Regent from the time of Ogo-  dai's death to the election of Kuyuk.

- Conf. Benedicts accoiint [ijijru. p. 37), and Rubruck (230); also  d'Avezac (524). Purpura may have been a velvet stuff, but its meaniiig  remains uncertain. Baldakmus was a sHk brocade (Heyd, ii, 697).

C 2

20 JOURNEY OF FRTAR JOHN OF PIAN DE CAUPINE

trying to do so. And many (of the horses) there were which  (756) had on their bits, breast-plales, saddles and cruppers  quite tv\cnty marks worth of gold^ I should think. And  so the chiefs held counsel beyond- the tent, and discussed  the election, while all the rest of the people were far  away from the tent. And there they remained till about  noon, when they began drinking mare's milk, and they  drank till evening so plentifully that it was a rare sight.

III. They called us inside (the tent), and gave us mead,

for we Would not drink mare's milk at all ; and this was

a great honor they showed us ; and they kept on urging

us to drink, but not being in the habit of it, we could not

do so, and we let them see that it was distasteful to us, so

they stopped pressing us. In the great square was the

<h\k^ Je. oslav of Susdal in Ruscia, and several princes of

ijie Kitayans and Solanges, also two sons of the King of

Georgia,^ a soldan, the ambassador of the Calif of Baldach,

and more than ten other soldans of the Saracens,* I believe,

and as we were told by the procurators. For there were "

more than four thousand envoys, as well those bringing

tribute as those offering presents, soldans and other chiefs

who had come to present themselves (757) in person, those

who had been sent by their (rulers), and those who

were governors of countries. All these were put together

outside the paling, and drink was given to them at the

same time ; as for ourselves and the duke Jeroslav, when-.

ever we were outside with them they always gave us

a higher place. I think, if I remember rightly, that we

* About ^10 10.V. of Dur money.

- /;i/ra^ or " outside the paling,'" in the space reserved for them,  and which is called a little farther on vuif^nuui forinti^ or '* great  square."

■* These two princes were David, son of (jior^i Lascha, and David,  son of Queen Rusudan, his cousin. Kuyuk decided that t!ie hittei  should succeed the former on the throne of (ieorgia on his death  (Dulauiier, 451).

"* Conf. d'Ohsson, ii, 196.

TO THE COURT OF KUYUK KHAN» 21

were at that place for a good four weeks ; and I arn under  the impression that the electfon was made, there, though  It was not proclaimed. It was for the following reason that  it was generally believed (that Cuyuc had been chosen) :  whenever Cuyuc came out of the- tent, they sang to him,  and as long as he remained outside of it they inclined  before him certain fine staffs on the ends of which were  (tufts of) red wool, which was done to no other chief  They called this tent {statio) of court the Sira-Orda.^

IV. Coming out of the tent, we all rode together to  another place some three or four leagues distant, where  there was a fine large plain near a river flowing between

^ Simon of St. Quentin (Vincent of Beauvais, bk. xxxi, ch. xxxii,  452a) describes 'as follows ihe ceremonial of raising a new Mongol  emperor to the throne. He did not witness himselPsuch a ceremony,  and it may well be tiiat he got the details from Benedict the Pole,  who was back in Asia Minor in 1248, at about the time of the return  of Ascelin's mission from Daidju's camp (see Introductory Notice).  " All the Barons being assembled, they placed a gilded seat in their  . midst, and made this Gog (chan, ?>., Khakan) sit on it, and they put a  sword before him and said, ' We want, we beg, and we connnand  that you shall have dominion over all gf us.' And he said to them :  ' If you want me to reign over you, are you ready ^ach one of you to  do what I shall command, to come whenever I call, to go wherever  I may choose to send you, to put to death whomsoever I shall com-  mand you ?' They replied that they were. Then he said to them,  ' My command shall be my sword.' To this they all agreed. They  then placed a piece of felt on the ground, and put him on it, saying :  ' Look upwards and recognize God, and downward and see the felt  on which you sii. If you reign well over your kingdom, if you make  largess, and rejoice in justice, and honour each of your Princes  according to his rank, you shall reign in glory, all the world shall  bow to your rule, and God will give you everything your heart can  desire. F^ut if you do otherwise, you shall be miseraljle, lowly, and  so poor that this felt on which you sit shall not even be left you.'  After saying this, the Barons made tlie wife of Gog sit on the felt ;  and with both of them seated there, they lifted them up from the  ground, and proclaimed them with a loud voice and cries- Emperor  and Empress of all the Tartars" (conf Schiltberger, 48). The Sira  Orda, Friar John stales in another passage (608), was half a day's  journey from Karakorum. We learn from other sources that it was  situated at a place called Ormektua. The ernperor Ogodai used to  pass the summer there (d'Ohsson, ii, 84). The staffs with tufts of  red wool on the ends were tugks. BaSer, i, 217, says the Khan of  the. Mongols i» his time had nine tttghs.

23 JOUUNEY OF FRIAK JOHN OF PIAN DE CARPINE

mountains,^ where another tent was set up, and it is called  by them the Golden Orda ; and here it was that Cuyuc  was to have been placed on the throne on the day of the  Assumption ot our Lady (15th August); but it was  deferred on account of the hail which fell, to which I have  referred previously. This tent (758) rested on pillars  covered with gold plates, fastened with gold nails and other  woods, and the top and sides of it were covered with balda-  kins; the outside, how.ever, being of other kinds of stuff  Here we remained until the feast of Saint Bartholomew  (24th August), when there assembled a great multitude  and they all stood with their faces-, turned to the south,  some of them a stone's throw from . others, going ever  farther and farther away, making genuflexions towards the  south. As for us, not knowing whether they were making  incantations or bending tht;ir knees to God or what else  v/e would not make any genuHexions,'^ After doing this  for a long while they went back to the tent, and placed  Cuyuc on the imperial seat, and the chiefs knelt* before  him ; arid after that the whole people did likewise, except  ourselves who were not his subjects. Then they began  drinking, and as is their custom, they kept on drinking till  evening. After that they brought in carts of cooked meat,  without salt, and to each four or five they gave a quarter

1 This river must be the Orkhon, unless we identify the Sira Orda,  or Ormektua, with the modern Urmukhtin, about 60 miles south ol  Kiakhta, on the road to Urga, in which case the river would he the  Shara ossu In Mongol, '' Golden Orda' is .4//a/i or<iu.

2 As shown in the next paragraph, the friar made the prcscrilx'd  genuflexion to the li\ing emperor. See on this subject in general  Ayner. Hist. Review, ii, 42, <V seq., 627 <r/ sc(f.\ also Pauthior,  C^rhnonial a la Cour dc Khoitbilai. It is interesting to note that in  A.D. 981 the Chinese envoy, Wang Ycn-ie, sent to tlie Uigur Prince ol  Kao-chang, refused to make genuflexions {pai) to him, as being con  trary to the established u^.ages as regauls envoys. The prince ami  his family, hovve\er, on receiving tlic envoy, all faced east\rard  (towards Peking) and made an obeisance {f><ii) un receiving i''^'  imperial presents {shou tr,'i)) (Ma Tuun-lin, Bk. ^36, 13}.

TO THE COURT OF KUYUK KHAN. 23

To those who were inside ''the tent; they gave meat atid  salted broth for sauce ; and in this fashion they passed  days in feasting.

V. It was at this place (the Golden Orda) that we were  called into the Emperor's presence ; after that Chingay^  (759) the prothonotary had written down our names and the  names of those who had sent us, and also those of the chief  of the Solanges and of the others, he repeated them all,  shouting with a loud voice before the Emperor and all the  chtefs. When this had been done each of us had to bend  the left knee four times,^ and the\' cautioned us not tCK  touch the threshold, and having searched us carefully for  knives, and not having found any, we entered the door on  the east side, for no one dare enter that on the west side  save the Emperor ; and the same rule applies if it is the  tent of a chief ; but those of low rank pay little attention to  such matters. And when we entered his tent, it was the  first occasion since he had been made Emperor (that he  had given an audience). He received likewise the ambas-  sadors, but very few persons entered his tent. Here also  such great quantities of presents were given him by the  ambassadors, silks, samites, purples, baldakins, silk girdles  ^ybrked in gold, splendid furs and other things, that it was  a marvel to see. Here also it was that a kind of umbrella  or awning (760) that is carried over the Emperor s head  was presented to him, and it was alK covered with precious  stones.^ Here also a certain governor of a province brought

* Chingai was a Uigur; he had been minister, of Ogodai, but  during the regency of Turakina he was deprived of his office  (d'Ohsson, ii, 189).

'^ Probably an error for three times. Baber (i, 224) mentions the fact  of one of his uncles bending the knee nine times before his eldei  brother, but this is very unusual.

^ One of the insignia of royalty in the East from the earliest times.  .Such umbrellas are called, c^hattra in Sanskrit, chatia or chhatr in  Hindustani. Ibn .RatutaYiii, 228) speaks of a chhatr raised over the  elephant of the Sultan of Sindh, which was of silk set with precious  stones, and had a handle of pure gold.

24 JOURNEY OF FRIAR JOHN OF PIAN DF CARPINE

to him many camels covered with baldakin and with  saddles on them, and a kind o( arrangement inside of  which people could sit, I think there were forty or fifty of  them ; and (he also gave him) many horses and mules  covered with armour, some of hide, others of iron.' They  asked us if we wished to make any presents; but we had  alread}' used up ncail}- everything we had, so we had  nothing at all to give him. It was while here that on a  hill some distance from the tent there were more than five  hundred carts, all full of gold and silver and silken gowns,  all of which was divided up between the Emperor and the  chiefs ; and the various chiefs divided their shares among  their men as they saw fit.

VI. Leaving thi.s place, we came to another where there  was a wonderful tent, all of red purple, a present of the  Kitayans. We were taken into it aho, and here again when  we entered they gave us mead or wine to drink, and offered  us cooked meat, if we wanted it. There was a high platform  of boards- in it, on which was the Emperor's throne (761);  and the throne was of ebony, wonderfully sculptured ; and  there v/ere also (on it) gold, and precious stones, and, if I  remember rightly, pearls ; and one went up to it by steps,  and it was rounded behind. There were benches placed  arouuvl the throne, on which the ladies sat in rows on the  left side ;^ on the right side -no one sat on raised seats,  but the chiefs sat on seats of lesser height placed in the  middle (o( the tent), and the other people sat behind them  and the whole day there came there a great concourse of  ladies. These three tents of which I have spoken** were

^ On the aniK)Lu in use amonj^ the Mongols, see Rubriick, 381.  - Solarium de iabulis. Conf Rubruck's description of the palace  at Karakorum.

•^ From this it would seem that the seats occupied by the wives of  the Emperor were on a level uith his throne. Conf., however,  Benedict, i?ifra^ p. },%.

^ The tent of white purple, ihe Sira Orda, and the Golden Orda.

TO THE COURT OF KUYUK KHAN. 25

very big ; but his wives had other tents of white felt, and  they were quite large and handsome. It was here also that  they separated : the mother of the Emperor went in one  direction, the Emperor in another, for the purpose of  rendering justice. The paternal aunt of the Emperor was  in prison, for she had killed his father in the time when  their army was in Hungary, and it was for this that the  army had retreated from those countries. She and a  number of others were tried for this, and put to death, ^

VII. At this same time Jeroslav, grand-duke in a part  of Ruscia called Susdal, died at the Emperor's orda. It  happened that he was invited by the mother of the  Emperor (to her tent), and she gave him to eat and drink  with her own hand, as if to honour him ; and he went back  to his lodgings (762) straightway and fell ill, and after  seven days he was dead, and all his body became iivid in  strange fashion ; so that everyone believed that he had  been poisoned, that they might get free and full possession  of his lands. As an argument in favour of this (suppo-  sition, the Empress) sent at once, without the knowledge  of any of her people who were there, an envoy in all haste  to his son Alexander in Ruscia to come to her, for she  wished to give him his father's lands : but he w^ould not  ^o, but remained there (at home) ; in the meanwhile (the  Empress) sent also letters for him to come and receive his  father's lands. It was believed by all that he would be put  to death if he should come, or imprisoned perpetually.^

^ I cannot trace this story. After Kuyuk's election he had an  inquiry made into the conspiracy of Ujugen to seize the throne after  the death of Ogodai. A number of Ujugen's officers were, as a result,  put to death (d'Ohsson, ii, 203). .A.11 accounts agree that Ogodai diea  a natural though sudden death, which overtook him after 2. hunt and  a night of drinking.

- Yaroslaw II, Vsevolodvitch, Grand Duke of Russia, reigned from  1238 to 1247. He went to the Mongol Court in 1245 or 1246. Karan^sin  fiv, 38) refers to the rumour that he had been poisoned there, but dis-  misses it as highly improbable. He says that the Duke died on hi»

26 JOURNEY OF FRIAR JOHN OF PTAN' DF CARFINE

Vili. It was after this death (of Jeroslav) that our  Tartars took us to the Emperor, if I remcmhor correctly  the time ; and when the Emperor heard from our Tartars  that we had come to him, he ordered us to go back to his  mother, for he wanted two days after that to unfurl his  standard against the whole of the western world, as  was emphatically told us by those who knew, as has  been previously stated, and he wished us not to know it.  When we had returned (to the Empress), we remained  there a few days, when we were sent back again to him ;  and we remain^i^d with him for quite a month, in such  hunger and thirst that we were barely able to keep alive,  for the allowances which they gave the four of us were  scarcely enough for one ; and we could find nothing to buy,  the market bein^; too far awav. Had not the Lord sent  us a certain Ruthenian called Cosmas, a goldsmith, and  a great favourite of the Emperor,^ who helped us a little,  I verily believe we should have died, unless the Lord  (763) had helped us in some other wa}'. He showed us  before putting it in place the throne of the Emperor which  he himself had made, and also the seal he had manufac-  tured for him, and he told us the superscription on his  seal.- We also learnt many private details {secreta • about

way back to Russia, and that his body was carried back to Vladimir.  Alexander did visit the Mongol Court, with his brother Andrew, bu:  was lucky enough to get back to Russia in 1249 (Karamsin, iv. 78-80^  Tiiis Alexander is tlie famous St. Alexander Nevsky.

^ Rubruck's best friend at the Court of Mangu was the French  goldsmith, Ciuillaume Buchier.

'^ In another passage (715) he says the seal of the Emperor bore  the words: ""God in Heaven, and Cuyuc-Can on earth. Might ot  God. Tht' seal of the Emperor of all men.' The letter of Kuyuk to  i'ope Innocent IV begins by ^*" Dei fortitudo Cuyuc Can^ oiiifiium  hofninuin imperator^ which in Mongol would be Mongka Tangt-i  Kuchiindur^ Kiiyiik Khakhan. "By the power of eternal Heaver,  Kuyuk. Khakhan." This, 1 take it. was the inscription on the seal,  which in all probaljility was written in Mongol and in Chinese seal  ch:iracters (conf. Deveria. Nnies depigruphie Mongole, 31, and Sir  John .Maundevil»;, 23 r).

TO THE COURT OF KUVUK KHAN. 27

the Emperor, from those who had come with other chiefs,  several Ruthenians and Hungarians who knew Latin and  French, also Ruthcnian clerks and others who had been  with them, some as long as thirty years, in war and in  other events, and who knew all about them as they under-  stood the language, having been continually with them  some twenty, others ten years, more or less. From these  we were able to learn about everything : they told ys most  freely of all things without our having to question them, for  they knew of our desire.

IX. After these things had happened the Emperor sent  his prothonotary Chingay to tell us to write down what  we had to say and our business, and to give it to him ; this  we did, writing down all we had previously said at Bati's,  as has been stated above. After an interval of several  days, he had us again called, and told us, through Kadac,  the procurator of the whole empire, and in the presence of  the prothonotaries Bala and Chingay, (764) and of many  others of his secretaries, to say all we had to say , and this  we did right willingly. Our interpreter on that occasion,  as well as on the other, was Temer, a knight of Jeroslav's,  now a clerk with him, and another clerk of the Emperor's.^  And he (?>., Kadac) asked us on the latter occasion if  there were an)' persons with the Lord Pope who under-  stood the written languages of the Ruthenians or Saracens  or Tartars. We replied that we did not use either the  Riithenian, Tartar, or Saracenic writing, and that though  there were Saracens in the country, they were far distant  from the Lord Pope. We added that it appeared to us  the best plan for them to write in Tartar, and to have it  translated to us. and that we would careful !v v^rite it down

^ In another passage (jji) be gives the name of this clerk 3l>  Duharlaus, and says he was also in the service of Duke Yaroslaw.  He also mentions two servants of the Duke's called lacob aud  Michel.

28 JOURNEY OF FRIAR JOHN OF PIAN DE CARPINE

in our Linguaorc, taking both the (original) letter and the  translation to the Lord Pope. On this they left us and  went back to the Emperor.

X. On the feast of Saint Martin (nth November)  we were again summoned, and Kadac, Chingay, Bala  and several others of the secretaries came to us, and the  letter was translated to us word for word * and as we trans-  lated it into Latin^ they made us explain each phrase,  wishing to ascertain if we had made a mistake in any word ;  and when (765) the two letters were written they made  us read them together and separately for fear we had left  out anything, and they said to us : " Be sure you understand  it all, for it must not be that you do not understand every-  thing, when you have reached such very distant lands."  And having told them : " We understand it all," they  re-wrote the letter in Saracenic, so that it might be read to  the Lord Pope if he could find any one in our part of the  world able to do so.

XI. It is the custom of the Emperor of the Tartars  never to address in person a stranger, no matter how great  he may be ; he only listens, and then answers through the  medium of someone, as I have explained. Whenever  they explain any business to Kadac, or listen to an answer  of the Emperor, those who are under him («>., his own  subjects), remain on their knees until the end of the speech,  no matter how great they may be. .One may not, for it is  not the custom, say anything more about any question  after it is disposed of by the Emperor.^ This Emperor  has a procurator, prothonotaries and secretaries, and also  all the other officers for public as well as private affairs,  except advocates, for they carry out without a murmur all  judgments according to the Emperor's decision. The

' This translation is given in d'Avezac, 594. The letter contains  nothing of importance or interest.  - Conf. Rubruck, 360, 396.

TO THE COURT OF KUVUK KHAN. 2g

Other princes of the Tartars do in like manner as rcf^ards  those things which pertain to their offices.

XII. This Emperor may be forty or forty-five years or  more old ; he is of medium stature, very prudent and  extremely shrewd, and serious and sedate in his manners ;  (766) and he has never been seen to laugh lightly or show  any levity, and of this wc were assured by Christians who  were constantly with him. We were also assyred by  Christians who were of his household that they firmly  believed that he was about to become a Christian. As  signal evidence of this ho keeps Christian clerks and gives  them allowances, and he has always the chapel of the  Christians in front of his great tent, and (these priests)  chant publicly and openly and beat (a tablet) according to-  the fashion of the Greeks at appointed hours, just like  other Christians, and though there may be ever so great  a multitude oi^ Tartars and of other people. And the other  chiefs do not have this.

Xiri. Our Tartars who were to come back with us told  us that the Emperor proposed sending his ambassadors  with us. He wished, however, I think, that we should  ask him to do so, for one of our Tartars, the elder of the  two, told us to ask it ; but it not seeming to us good that  they should come, we replied that it was r^ot for us to ask  it, but that if the Emperor of his own will sent them, wc  would with God's help guide them safely. There were  various reasons, however, for which it seemed to us inex-  pedient that they should come. The first reason was ti>at  we feared they would see the dissensions and wars among  us, and that it would encourage them to march against us.  The second reason was that we feared they were intended  to be spies. The third reason was that we feared lest  they be put to death, as our people for the most part  are arrogant and hasty : thus it was that when the ser-  vants who were with us (j6/) at the request, of the

30 JOURNEV OF FRIAR JOHN OF PIAN HE CARPINF

Cardinal Legate in Germany were going back to him in  Tartar dress, they came near being stoned by the Germans  on the road, and were forced to leave off that dress-  And it is the custom of the Tartars never to make-  peace with those who have killed their envoys til! they  have wreaked vengeance upon them. The fourth reason  was that we feared they would carry us off, as was once  done with a Saracen prince, who is still a captive, unless he  is dead. The fifth reason was that there was no need for  their coming, for they had no other order or authority than to  bring the letters of the Emperor to the Lord Pope and the  other princes (of Christendom), which we (already) had,  and we believed that evil might come of it. Therefore it  pleased us not that they should come. The third day after  this, which was the feast of Saint Brice (13th November),  they gave us permission to leave (Jicentiain) and a letter of  the Emperor signed with his seal, and then they sent us to  the Emperor's mother, who gave to each of us a fox-skin  gown with the fur outside and wadding inside, and also a  piece of purple — of which our Tartars stole a palm's length  from each, and also more than half of another piece which  was given to our servant ; but though i-t was no secret to  us, we did not choose to make any ado over it.

in.

Concerning the route we travelled in coming back.

(768) L So we started on our way back, and we were  travelling the whole winter, resting most of the time in the  snow in the desert, save when in the open plain where there

^ Hugh of Santocaro, the Pope's Legate in Germany, had sont some  of his servants with the mission to assist it — probably as far as Kiew  (Wadding, Annales^ iii, 119, and d'Avczac, 481). Conf. Kubruck's  remarks 'suj about ihe danger of allowing Mongol en\oys to\isit  Europe.

TO THE COURT OF KUYUK KHAN. ^r

were no trees we coui3 scrape a bare place with our feet ;  an-d often when the wind drifted it we would find (on  wakin<^) our bodies all covered with snow.^ And so we  travelled along till we came to Bati, on the Ascension of  our Lord (9th May), and to him we told what (the  Einperor) had answered the Lord Pope. He replied that  he had nothing to ask other than what the Emperor had  written ; but he said that we must carefully tell the Lord  Pope and the other lords everything the Emperor had  written. Safe conducts having been given us we left him,  and reached Mauci on the Saturday after the octaA e of  Pentecost (2nd June), where were our companions and  servants who had been detained, and whom we caused to  be brought back to us. Thence we went to Corenza, who  again begged presents of us, but not having (anything)  we gave nothing. He gave us two Comans, who were  accounted of the Tartars, as far as Kievv (769) in Ruscia.-  Our own Tartar did not leave us till we had left the last  Tartar camp. The others who had been given us by  Corenza led us in six days from the last camp to Kiew.

H. We reached (Kiew) fifteen days before the feast of  Saint John the Baptist (9th June). The Kiewians who  had heard of our arrival all came out to meet us rejoicing,  and congratulated us as if we had risen from the dead, and

^ The only detail concerning the route followed by the mission on  its return journey is a brief reference (771) to its having passed  through a town of the Bisermins called Lemfinc. Although I am  unable to identify this town (it may, however, be Chimkent), it was in  all probabilityin the Syr daria valley; and it seems Hkely that the route  followed from Kuyuk's camp to this point was practically the same as  in going, and from there to Batu's also very nearly the same : though  on the 9th May, when the mission arrived at that Prince's camp, he  may have been somewhat farther north than the neighbourhood of  Sarai, his winter quarters.

'■^ In another passage (771) he notes that he met on the border of  Comania the Duke Roman (of Russia), then on his way to the Tartars .;  also the Duke Aloha and the Duke of Cherneglove (Chernigow;, who  accompanied him back through Russia.

32 FKIAR JOHN OK I'lAN J)K CARI'INE.

so thty did to us throughout Ruscia, Poland and Bohemia.^  Daniel and Vassilko his brother icccivcd us with great  rcjoicini;, and kept us, ag^ainst our will, for quite eight days ;  tlinini; which time they held counsel between themselves  •ind the bishops and other notables about those things on  which we had spoken to them when on our way to the  Tartars. And they answered us jointly, saying, that they  wished to have the Lord Pope for their particular lord and  father, and the holy Roman Church as their lady and  mistress, and confirming^ likewise all they had previously  transmitted on the matter through their abbot ; and after  that they sent with us to the Lord Pope their letters and  ambassadors.

^ He notes (772) that he met at Kiew a number of Constdntinople  traders who had come there through the Tartar country f all of them  wore Italians. He mentions among others Michel of Genoa, Manuel  of Venice, and N kolas of Pisii.

NARRATIVE OF

FRIAR JOHN OF PIAN DE CARPINE'S

MISSION ;

DERIVED FROM AN OR.VL STATEMENT OF HIS COMPANION,

FRIAR BENEDICT THE POLE.^

774;

N the year of Our Lord one thousand  two hundred and forty-five, Friar  John of the order of Minor Friars, and  of Pian de Carpine, despatched by the  Lord Pope to the Tartars in company  with another friar,- left L3^ons in  France, where the Pope v/as, on  Easter day f i6th April), and having arrived in Poland he  took at Breslau a third friar of the same order, Benedict by  name, a Pole b}- nationality, to be the companion of his  labour and tribulations and to act as his interpreter.  Through the ?ssistance of Conrad, Duke of the Poles, they  reached Kiew, a city of Ruscia, now under the dominion of

^ The text was published for the first time by d'Avezac {op. cit.^  774 779). It was found in MS. No. 2477 of the Colbert Collec.ion  in the Biblioth^que Nationale at Paris.

^ Stephen of Bohemia was h^ name, as we learn from Wadding-  {Scriptores^ 221).

34 NARRATIVE. OF

the Tartars. The headman of the city gave them an  escort for a distance of six days thence to the first camp of  the Tartars, near the border of Comania.^

(775) II- When the chiefs of this camp heard that they  were envoys of the Pope they asked for and received  presents from them. Friars John and Benedict, having by  their order left behind the third friar, who was too feeble,  also their horses and the servants they had brought with  them, set out for a second camp on the Tartars' own horses  and with pack animals provided by them ; and so, after  changing horses at several camps, they came on the third  day to the chief of an army of eight thousand men,^ and  his attendants i^ministri), Iiaving asked for and received  presents, conducted them to their chief Curoniza. He  questioned them as to the motive of their journey and the  nature of their business. This having been stated, he gave  them three of his Tartars, who got them supplied with  horf^es and food (expensis) from one army to another, til!  finally they came to a prince, Bati by name, who is one of  the greatest princes of the Tartars, and the same that  ravaged Ungaria.

III. On the route thither they crossed the rivers called  Nepere and Don. They spent five weeks and more on the  road, to wit, from the Sunday, Invocavit, to the Thursday,  Cetiae Domini, on which day they reached Bati,* finding  him beside the great river 'Ethil, which the Ruscians call  Volga, and which is believed to be the Tanais.^ The

* Apparentlv the town governed by the greedy Alan Micheas,  mentioned by Plan de Carpine {supra, p. 4).

2 Plan de Carpine {^supra, p. 5) refers to this camp as *' the first camp  of the Tartars."

^ The Sunday, Invocabit, is the first Sunday in Lent (26th February,  [246). Thursday, Coena Domini^ is Holy Thursday, i.e., 5th April,  1246. Friar John says they reached Batu's on the 4th April.

^ All classical geographers believed that the Volga jomed the Don  not far from iis mouth, and thai the combined streams flowed into the  sea of .A.ZOW. Even Ptolemy appears to have held this view. Conf.  Rubruck (252) who gives the course of the Volga correctly.

FRIAR JOHN OF PIAN DE CARPINE'S MISSION. 35

attendants of Bati having asked for and received presents,  consisting of forty beaver skins and eighty badger skins/  these presents vc^ere carried between two consecrated  fires ; and the Friars were obh'ged to follow the presents,  for it is a custom among the Tartars to purify ambassadors  and gifts by fire. Beyond the fires there was a cart with  a golden statue of the Emperor, which it is likewise  customary tO worship,- But the Friars refusing positively  to worship it, were nevertheless obliged to bow their heads  (before it). Bati, having heard the letter of the Pope  (legatione), and examined ev.ery word of it, sent them {iT^)  after five days, that is to say on the Tuesday after Easter,^  together with his letters which he gave to one of their  own Tartar guides, to the son of the great Emperor,*  which son's name is Cuyuc Kan, in the fatherland of the  Tartars.

IV. Leaving therefore Prince Bati, (the Friars), having  wrapped their legs with bandages, so as to be able to bear  the fatigue of riding, left Comania behind after two weeks.  In this country they found a great deal of wormwood  {absinciuni)^ for this country was once called Pontus, and  Ovidius says of Pontus :

" Tristia per vacuos horrent absinthia campos."^  While the Friars were travelling through Comania they

^ Pelles taxorum.

* Conf. Pian de Carpine's remarks (620) on the subject.

^ April loth, 1246. Pian de Carpine {Tii,^) states they left Batu's  camp on April 8th.

* Ogodai, son of Chingis Khan, died in 1241 ; his son Kuyuk was  only elected in 1246.

* Saksaul, or Anabasis Ammodendron. On the time, taken to  traverse Comania, see supra, p. 13, note i. Clavijo (104) states that  he was made to travel day and night in order to reach Timur's court  more promptly.

« Ovid., Eptsf., I, iii.

36 NARRATIVE OF

had oil tlieir riglu the coutitry o( tlic Saxi/ whom \vc  believe to be Gotlis. and who art-: C'hristraiis ; after them  the Ga/ars who are Christians.- \n this country is the  rich cit}^ of Ornarum,^ which was captured by the Tartars  by means of inundations of water. After that the Circasses,  and they are Christians ; after that the Georgians, and they  too are Christians. Prior to that, while in Ruscia, they  had the Morduans on their left, and the}/ are pagans, and  for the most part they shave the backs of their heads.  After them were the Bylers, and they are pagans ; and  after that the Bascards, who are the ancient Ungari ; then  the Cynocephales, who have dogfs' heads ; and then the  Parocitse,* who have a small narrow mouth, who can  masticate nothing, but who live on liquids and sustain  themselves on the odours of meats and fruits.  ' (777) ^ ' On the border of Comania they crossed a river  called Jaiac, and there begins the country of the Kangitae.  They travelled through this for twenty days, and they  found few people there, but many swamps and vast salt  marshes and salt rivers,^ which we take to be the Maeotide

^ The Goths of the Crimea (conf Rubru'^k, 219).

- Contemporary Mohammedan writers state chat .he G>iO::z or  Khazar Tvirks h^eci to the east of the sea of Tabaristar. or Cuspian  (Ibn Khaidun^AV'/'. ct exir.^xw, i, Ft. 1, 156). They may have occupied  the country around the Lake Aral, which the Kankali (the friars'  Cangiiae or dutglc) had e^•acuated in.the early pan of the Thirteenth  century (dOhsson, i, 196). The Khazars were mostly jews, but  Christians and Alohanimedans were also numerous among^jl ihem.

2 Pian (le Carpine (674) calls it Or/ias (see Schuyler, Turkestan^  i, 40(,and supra^ p. 14, note i).

* Solinus i,>p. cit., 207) speaks, on the authority of Me^fisthenes, of  a dog-headed people of India, without speech, and also of a people  which fed solely on the odour of \\ ild apples (^conf Pliny vii, 2, 282,  283 ; McCrindle, Ancient India, ^}) '* ^lso supra^ p. 12, note ; and  Schiltberger, 35). The Chinese annals of the sixth century {Liung  i/tu, bk. 54 ; Nan shih^ bk. 79) tell of a kingdom of dogs {Kou kuo'^  in some re?"note comer of north-eastern Asia. The men had huuun  bodies but dogs' heads, and their speech soimd.ed like barking. The  women were like the rest of their sc.\ in other parts of world.

^ Sa/sas, et Jlumina salsa. The salt marshes and lakes near the  r'rver Ural (Jaiac), the largest of which is the InJersky, into >.vluch

FRIAR JOHN OF PIAN DF CARPINES MISSION. 3/

swamp'^. For eight days they went throuijh a vast desert,  barren and sandy. After the country of the Kangitae  they came to Turkya, where they for the first time^ found  a big city (called) Janckynt, and they travelled for about  ten days in this Turkya,^ Now Turkya professes the  religion of Machomet. After Turkya they entered a country  called Kara-Kytai, which meaneth Black Kytai ; and these  people are pagans, and they found no town there. These  were once the masters of the Tartars.^ After that they  entered the country of the Tartars on the feast of Mary-  Magdalen.

VI. They found the Emperor in that country in a great  tent which is called Syra-Orda, and here they remained for  four months, and they were present at the election of Cuyuc  Kan, their Emperor. And the same Friar Benedict the Pole  told us orally t'^.at he and the other friar saw there about  five thousand great and mighty men, who on the first day  of the election of the king all appeared dressed in baldakin ;  but neither on that day nor on the next, when they  appeared in white samites, did they reach an agreement.  But on the third day, when they wore red samites, they

flow two salt springs. There are some thirty salt lakes in ihc Ural  province. The remark that these swamps may be the Maeotide  swamps is probably the editor's. Benedict and his companion did noi,  however, know of the existence of the Aral, nor did William of  Rubriick, nor Marco Polo either, for that matter. Friar William  passed probably a considerable distance to the north of it ; the two  first-named took it for a part of the Caspian, which in turn they  believed to be a portion of the Black Sea.

' Primo^ i.e.^ since leaving the right bank of the Dnieper. By  Turkya we must understand Turkestan. Friar John (680) calls the  Seldjuk empire of Asia Minor Urum, i.e., Rum. This Turkya he  calls (672) the country of the Bisermins.

- The part of Turkestan ( Turkya) through which they travelled was  the valley of the .Syr daria. They probably went from near Yengui-  kend or \anikent (janckynt^ Plan de Carpine's lanckint) to near the  modern town of Turkestan, or perhaps considerably to the east of it  (see Schuyler, i, 401 j.

" This phrase seems to me to show some knowledge on the part of  Benedict of the story of Unc Khan and Prester John.

38 NAkKATIVE OF

came to an agreement and made the election. This same  friar declared also that about three thousand envoys,  coming from different parts of the world, were present at  that same court with messages, letters, tribute or presents  of divers kinds and in great numbers. These same friars,  who were counted among them, had to put on, (778) as of  necessity bound, baldakin over their gowns, for no ambas-  sador may appear in the presence of the chosen and  crowned sovereign unless he be properly dressed.^

VII. Having been taken into the Syra-Orda, that is to

say, the tent {statio), of the Emperor, they saw him there

crowned and gorgeous in splendid attire seated on a raised

dais {tabulatuin\ richly ornamented with gold and silver,

and above it was trellis-work {cancellatuvi), and around the

edge four separate flights of steps led up to the platform.

Three of these flights were in front of the dais; by the

middle one the Emperor alone goes up or comes down, by

the two side ones the nobles and others (pass), but by the

fourth, which is behind (the Emperor), his mother, his wife,

and his relatives ascend. The Syra-Orda had three

openings in guise of doors ; the middle one, which far

exceeded the others in size, was always left without any

guard, the King alone entering by it. And if anyone else

should have entered by it, he would have been without a

doubt put to death. The two other side doors were closed

with silk (hangings), and had very rigid guards, who

watched them in arms, and through these everyone else

passed with signs of reverence for fear of the established

punishment.

VIII. On the third day the letter of the Lord Pope was  carefully listened to and gone over through (the medium ot)  officials and interpreters. After that the Friars were sent  to the mother of the Emperor, whom they fouml in another

Rubruck (268) r«jfers to this remark of Benedict.

■.' —

FRIAR JOHN OF PIAN DE CARPINE S MISSION. 59

locality, seated in like fashion, in a large and most beautiful  tent. After receiving them with great courtesy and  friendliness, she sent them back to her son. While they  were stopping there, they used frequently to have with  them some of the Georgians living among the Tartars.  They are quite respected by the Tartars, because they are  a strong and warlike people. They. are called Georgians  because Saint George aids them in their fights ; and he is  their patron and they honour him (779) above all other  saints.^ They use the Greek idiom in their Holy Scrip-  tures, and they have crosses over their tents and carts.  The customs of the Greeks are observed in divine service  among the Tartars.

IX. Th(? busine.ss on which the Friers had come iiaving  been settled, they took their leave of the Emperor, can yi ng  back with them letters of hh signed with his seal to the  Lord Pope ; and they went their way back, travelling  westward with the ambassadors o( the .soldan of Babylon,*  who after accompanying them for fifteen days then left  them and turned southward. The Friars continued orr  their journey westward, and after passing the Rhine at  Cologne, got back to the Lord Pope in Lyons, and pre-  sented to him the letters of the Emperor of the Tartars.

^ Conf Rubruck (383) where he derives the name from that of the  river Cur.

'^ The Ayubite Sultan of Egypt, whose capital, Cairo, was then.  Called liabyion.

THE  JOURNEY TO THE

EASTERN PARTS OF THE WORLD,

OF

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK,

OF THE ORDER OF MTNOR VRIARS,

IN THE YEAR OF GRACE MCCLIll.

(213)

O the most excellent lord and most  Christian Louis, by the grace of God  illustrious King of the French, from  Friar William of Rubruck, the meanest  in the order of Minor Friars, greetings,  and may he always triumph in Christ.  It is written in Ecclesiasticus of the Wise man : " He  shall go through the land of foreign peoples, and shall try  the good and evil in all things."^ This, my lord King,  have I done, and may it have been as a wise man and not  as a fool ; for many do what the wise man doth, though not

' Ecclesiasticus, xxxix, y The Vulgate has: '^ In tcrram alicni-  ^cnaru))i gentium pcrfrausiei : bon<x cnim et fnnla in homini^nts  tentabii^' whereas our monk has : " In terram alienaru.); gt-ntiifni  cransici^ bona ei nvda in omnibus temptabif.^' I fancy he quotes here  from memory, as lie does (391) in another passage oi tb.e Bible, which  lie also miscjuoies.

JOURNEY OF FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 4I

wisely, but most fcK)lishly ; of this number I fear I may be.  Nevertheless in whatever way (214) I may have done,  since you commanded me when I took my leave of you  that I should write you whatever I should see among t1ie  Tartars, and you did also admonish me not to fear writing  a long letter, so I do >vhat you enjoined on me, with fear,  however, and diffidence, for the proper w-ords that I should  write to so great a monarch do not suggest themselves  to me.

Be it known then to your Sacred Majesty that in the  year of our Lord one thousand CCLIII, on the nones of May  (7th May), 1 entered the Sea of Pontus, which is commonly  called Mare Majus, or the Greater Sea,^ and it is one  thousand CCCC miles in length,^ as T learnt from merchants,  and is divided as it were into two parts. For about the  middle of it there are two points of land, the one in the  north and the other in the south. That which is in the  south is called Sinopolis, and is a fortress and a port of the  Soldan of Turkia ; while that which is in the north is a

1 The name ruums, or Pontus Euxinus, was used by all classical  authors lo designate the Hlack Sea, and is also found in the early  Mohammedan writers (Masudi and Edrisi). The earliest u*.tr of the  name " lilack Sea" would seem to be in Constantine Porphyiogeniius  {I)e administrando, \'^2)\ he there refers to it as'S/corfirTj 6a\<i(jo-r),  though throughout the rest of the work he invariably uses the name  " Pontic Sea" (Oovrtx?} ^dKaaay])^ or Pontus (noi/ros-). F'riar Jordanus  (53) uses the name Mare Nigrum. His Mare Maurum seems to desig-  nate the eastern part of the Euxine. Som^ of the early Arab geo-  graphers use the name " Sea of Nitoch," and "Sea of the Khazars.''

'^ This is greatly in excess of the truth. Hakluyt has " 1008 miles  in length." The classical writers had \ery erroneous idea^ about the  size of the Black Sea (see Pliny, iv, 24, and Tchihatcheff, Asie  Mineurc, i, 34, ^t seq.y The greatest length of the Black Sea is about  550 geographical miles, its greatest width about 325 (Rawlinsou,  Herodotus^ iii, 65).

2 Sinopolis, or Sinope, was captured by the Turks in 1215 (Hammer,  Hist.^'X, 34). Strabo (xii, 3, 467) says it was a colony of the Milesians.  The city stood on a rocky peninsula, and had two ports. It was noted  from early times for its powerful fleet and its tunny-fish i/nr]\a[i.vh€'lg>,  fisheries (see also Ibn Batuta, ii, 348, and Heyd, i, 298, 531;. The  Seldjuk kingdojcn of Rum, with its capital at Iconium, ccmpVised most

4:? JOUUNEY OF

cc*'taiii province now called by the Latins Gazaria/ but  by the Greeks who inhabit aloiv^ its sea coast it is called  Cassaria, which is Cesaria. And there are certain promon-  tories projecting out into the sea to the south toward  Sitiopolis ; and there are three hundrcH miles between  Sinopolis and Cassaria, and so there are seven hundred  miles from these points to Constantinople in length and  breadth, and seven hundred to the east, which is Hybcria,  that is to say, the province of Georgia.

So we made sail for the province of Gazaria, or Cassaria^  which Is about triangular in s'hape, having on its wes-t side  a city called Kcrsona,- vyhere Saint Cleinent was martyred:

of Asia Minor. It was fojnied from the Seldjuk empire in 1084, and  lasted to 1300 fHanimer, o/>. cit.^ i, ii^ct seq.). Pian de Carpine (68oj  speaks of " tlie soldan of Urum," but nowhere uses the word Turkia»

^ Tliis name was given to the Crimea, prol^ably in the eighth  century on account of the Khazars who then occupied it as part of  their domam, which extended from north of the Caucasus to the  Don. This nation, which seen.s to have been of Turkish stock,  though some writers say of Finnish, is I'irst mentioned by Priscus in  A.D. 626. He writes their name 'Axar^'tpot and 'AKarlpoi. Menander  calls them Kar^ipoi, and Jornandes uses the form A^azirri. The form  Xai^^npot is also used. R-ashideddin says that when the descendants  of Oguz entered Persia, one of their tribes, having fixed its residence  amidst forests, received the name o^ Agacheris. Quatremere (53)  identifies the Khazars with the Agacheris, or *' Men of the Woods," ()ut  the latter name would seem to have been applied to many Turkish  tribes. Pian <ie Carpine (674) refers to the Khazars as Gazari.  and Friar Jordanus (54) speaks of "the empire of Osbei (Uzbejj), which  is called Cat/aria."

•^ The city of Sevastopol. Jornandes (428) says the Scythians  aUowed ihe Greeks^of Heraclea) to found this town of Chcrsonesus to  trade with them. He speaks of the Aulziagri Huns who lived in the  neighbourhood ofChcison, "where the greedy trader brought the rich  products of Asia.'' In the earliest limes, as in those of our traveller  and Ibf! Baluta, th« export trade of this place consisted piincipally in  fiirs and slaves. Jornandes, in fact, speaks ^oc. cit.) of the Hunuguri  as noted for the sable skins with which they supplied the market ; the  " rich p'*oducts of Asia" referred to above only means the silk and  other fabrics of western Asia, which wevf imported into Cherson by the  Greek traders. The exa t nature of the trade at this place mav  probabl be determined by what Strabo ;^xi, 2, 423) states in reference  to thai of fhe town of Tanals, at ihe mouth of the Don (Tanais), He  says thai ih^ nomads brought there slaves, furs, and various products  of native mdustry, while the Greeks imported principally tissues and  vMnc a real west coast trade I (sec also Heyd, i, ii, 48 ; and infro.  p. 43, noie 2, on the trade of Soldaia).

FRIAk WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK.' 43

And as we were sailing past it we saw (215) an island on  which is a temple said to have been built by angelic  hands.^ In the middle, at the summit of the triangle as  it were, on the south side, is a city called Soldaia,^ which

' Berlliier de la Garde says that this passage of Rubruck applies  very exactly to a point (or headland) in the harbour of Sevastopol,  and corroborates the legend which connects U with the martyrdom of  Si. Clement and the construction of a church dedicated to him on this  si)0t. This headland would seem to have been at one time an island,  arid it would at all events look like one to a ship sailing by. The  church on it is marked on Russian maps of as late a date as 1772. It  is'abt>ut 12 versts from the monastery of St. George, and the relics of  St. Clement were foUiid there by Constant? ne the Philosopher. Bacon  (ij 357)> nfter c|uoting this passage of Friar William, adds "in this  temple the body ot the saint was buried." Some writers have  located the place of St. Clement's martyrdom ac Inkerman, but  Berthier thinks this inadmissible {Materials for the Archceolo^ oj  Rus\-ia, No. 12 ; The Antiquities of Southern Russia^ Excavatiojis  in the Chcrsonesiis^ by A. L. Berthier de la Garde, 1893, 61, ^/ seq.).  .St. Clement is said to have been the immediate successor of Peter the  Apostle. He was exiled to the Chersonesus during the persecution of  Diocletian, and was martyred in about .\.D. 100, during the persecution  of Trajan. Whether our traveller referred to this spot or to another  in tlie neighboujhood must remain doubtful, for traditions are also  connected with Cape Chersones and Cape Fioraventi ; on the latter  now stands the monastery of St. George, but it is believed by some  archa.'ologists that the famous temple of Artemis of the Thracians, or  Parthenon, occupied the same place, though other authorities say it  v<is on Cape Chersones.

- The modern Sudak. The earliest mention I have found of this  place dates from the twelfth centuir;y ; then, as now, it was known to  Oriental writers as Sudak ; while western media_'val authors write the  name Sodaia, Soldackia^ Soltadia^ Sholtadia^ but more fiequently  Soldaia. The Greeks transcribed the name 2ovylai«. As Friar William  justly remarks, it was in his time the emporium for Western Asiatic and  Russian trade, monopolising that which in former centuries had been  carried on at Kherson and Tanais — for Tana hardly existed in his  time, at least we find no mention of it anywhere. Ibn Alathir (xiv, 456)  says it was the capital of the Kipchak, and that the inhabitants of the  country drew their supplies from it, for it was situated on the sea  •of the Khazars, and. ships came there laden with stuffs. The  Kipchaks bought from them, selling them young girls, slaves, black  fox, beaver, grey quirrel skins, and other products of their countiy.  Ibn Batuta tells us (li, 415) that when he visited this town "its p<Jrt  was among the largest and finest known. Outside the city are,  gardens and streams. Turks inhabit it, wlih a corps of Greeks, who  live under their protection and are artizans ; most of the houses are  built of wood. This city was formerly very large, but the greater part  was destroyed m a civil war beiween the Greeks and the Turks."  Sudak was first captured by the Mcngols in 1223, but los. shortly  aricr, being recaptured in 1239 Hammer Golden. Horde^ 87;

44 JOURNEY OF

looketh across towards Sinopolis ; and thither come all the  merchants arriving from Turkia who wish to go to the  northern countries, and hkewise those coming from Roscia  and the northern countries who wish to pass into Turkia.  The latter carry vaire and minever, and other costly furs ;^  the others (the former) carry cloths of cotton or boWbax,''  silk stuffs and sweet-smelling spices.^ To the east of this  province is a city called Matrica,* where the river Tanais

Antoninos, Zametki xii-xv veka, etc., 595 ; Heyd, i^ 299» et ^eq.).  Friar William thought — and in this he but followed the opinion of  Classical writers — that the Coasts of the Crimea ran due east and west,  north and south, Sudak occiifjying th<s south-east angle on the coast.

* Varium et grisiuvi. There is some uncertainty as to the exact  svpecies of furs called by these names. " Vair et ^riz," "v9ir6 and  minever," are constantly used in mediaeval works. Ducange (iii, 961)  says they are commonly synonymoi^s terms^ but soiiietlmes they are  used tx) indicate distinct kinds of furs. Vaire is supposed to be  Squirriel ; minever is also a kind of squirrel skin, possibly the same as  vaire, but with the white fur of the belly left on it. Others, however,  say that mine^fer was an inferior quality of ermine; Ibn Batuta (ii,  401), speakkig of the Russian ftirs, ranks ermine' first and. sable or  marten second. Pegolotti (Yule's Cathay^ 306) speaks of the  '•Sclavonian squirrel." In another passage (329), Rubmck says that  skins, vtirii et grisii^ formed the currency of the Russians. Hakluyt  renders these words by '' ermines and gray furres." Purchas (34;  translates this, "little spotted and griseld skins." Karamsin (i, 307),  quoting Russian annalists, says the skins used as currency were those  of marten and squirrel. I am inclined to believe thot, whatever the'  correct interpretation of these words may be, as used by Friar WiHi4m  they designate marten and grey squirrel skins.

* Heyd (ii, 614) says that the most ancient name given to cotton in  western works is bombachn/i, though, from the ^nd of the thirteenth  century, one occasionally finds the word cottonulii^ derived from the  Arabic roin. Rubruck uses the word cottone in several passages ;  Joinville also speaks of telie de coton,

■^ On the spice trade of the Levant in the thirteenth century, see  Heyd, ii, 61 1, 693, et seq.

'* Matrica, also called Matracka, Mait'ca, and Matrega, was situated  on the Taman peninsula, near the straits of Kertch, and on abranch  of the Kuban river, called by Edrisi the Sakir. I have not been able  to ascertain the date of its foundation, but in the tenth century it was  already an important political and conmiercial centre of the Khazars.  It is mentioned by Constantino Porphyrogenitus {De adminisir.^ iSi),  who calls it T«/udTap;^a (possibly ra Mtirapx")- ^'^ ■^•^- 9^^ '^ ^^'*^^  captured by the Russians under Sviatoslaw, and forn\ed part of a  Russian principality, Axhich derived its name, Fmutorkan ^Constantine s  Tamatarcha .'j, from it, down to the lime of the Coman invasion in the  early part of the twelfth century, when it seenis to ha\e regained its

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 4^

falls into the sea of Pontus, through an opening xii miles  wide. For this river, before it enters the sea of Pontus,  forms a kind of sea to the north which has a width and  breadth of seven hundred miles, with nowhere a depth of  over six paces,^ so large vessels do not enter it, but the  merchants of Constantinople who visit the said city ol  Matrica send their barks as far as the River Tanais* to  buy dried fish, such as sturgeon, barbel and tench,* and  other fishes in infinite varieties. The said province of  Cassaria is therefore encompassed by the sea on three  sides : to wit, on the west, where is Kersona, the city of  Clement, and to the south Vv'here is the city of Soldaia, to  which we were steering, and (216) which makes the apex  of the province, and to the east by the sea of Tanais.  Beyond this opening is Zikuia,* which does not obey the

independence (Karamsin, i, 214). In 1330 we hear of Matrica as  having a Greek prince, people and clergy. In the middle of the  fifteenth century Matrica was occupied by the Genoese, who held it  for a long time under the suzerainty of one of the Cherkess princes,

(Antoninos, 829 ; Heyd, i, 206 ; ii, 180, 379).

1 Friar William's view that the real mouth of the Don (Tanais) is at  the Straits of Kertch, and that the Sea of Azov {Pains Maeotis) Is  properly but part of the river, meets with the approval of modern  geographers. Reclus iGi'ographie, v, 792) says that " the Maeotide  Gulf is a river and a sea at the same time,"' Conf'our author's further  remarks on the subject, 252. The views of the ancients regarding  the Palus Maeotis, which Rubruck here only refers to as " a kind  of sea," were rather hazy. Strabo (vii. 5, 258) gives its circumference  as 9,000 stadia. Pliny ;iv, 24. 197) says that some authors state it is  1.406,000 paces in circuinlerence, others 1,125,000. Jornandes (428)  gives its circumference ya 1,400,000 paces, and adds that its depth  nowhere exceeds eight ells

2 Had the town of Tar.ais, or Tana, still existed at the time, it is  hardly credible that our traveller would have omitted to mention it.

2 Hosaa (or ihosns) ba?-botas. I have translated the terrns con  jecturally. Tench is tinc.i\\\ Latin, tenchem Old French. In anothei  passage, 249, our traveller refers to a barbota given him on the Don.  Hiikluyt has '* Sturgeon, Thosses, Barbils, etc."

'^ Strabo (ii, 31, 107; xi, 12, 45 ; xvii, 24,7l2)referstothe Zy^/, Zj/jor//;  or Zygioi\ among the tribes living between the Sea of Hyrcania  (Caspian) and the Pontus. He also mentions (xi, 11, 446) a tribe o(  Siginnol living near the Caucasus, probably in the plains north of it,  ;is he refers to the women being expert chariot-drivers. Constantine

46 jOUKNKY OF

Tartars, and to the east (of that) are the Suevi^ and Hiberi,-  who do not obey the Tartars. After that, to the south, is  Trapesund, which hath its own lord, Guido by name, who  is of the family of the emperors of Constantinople, and  he obeyeth the Tartars.-^ After that is the country of

Porphyrogenitus {De admin. ^ i8i) says : " i8 or 20 -miles from Tama-  tarcha (Matrica) is tlie river Ucruch (OuKpov;^) which separates Zichia  (Zi;^ias) from it ; from the Ucruch (probably a branch of the Kuban)  to the river Nicophin (^iko^lv) was Zichia.'' Pian de Carpine (748)  speaks of tlie terra Ziccornm. See also d'Avezac, 497, and Douglas  W. Fresh field, Proc. Roy. Geo. Soc, x, 328, ei seq.

^ The Suiuiians oi Pliny (vi, 4), or Soanes (Eoavax) of Strabo (xi, 14,  425). They are a people of Karthwelian race, and still occupy in the  western Caucasus the country (Suanetia) they did in classical times  (de Morgan, ii, 182, 189 : Finlay, iv, 339).

- By Hiberi our author has already told us he understands  Georgians. He would have stated the case more correctly if he had  said that the Georgians did not quietly submit to the Tartar yoke, for  Georgia had been subdued by the Mongols in 1239 or thereabouts.

•^ This is one of the very few errors into which our traveller  has fallen. The Emperor Andronikos Ghidos (his Guido) of Trebi-  zonde only reigned to 1235. From 1238 to 1263, Manuel I, surnamed  '' the Great Captain," was on the throne. Joinville (167) says : " Tandis  que le roy fermoit Sayeie {i.e., was fortifying Sidon, in 1252), vindtent  a li les messages a un grant seigneur de la profonde Gr^ce, lequel se  fcso^t appeler le grant Commenie et sire di Trafentesi (the Great  Comnenus, lord of Trebizonde) .... Au roy fequistrent que il li  envofiist une pucelle de son palais, et il la prenroit h femme. Et Ic  roy respondi que il n'en avoit nulles amenees d'outre-mer, et ieOr loa  que ilsalassent en Constantinobie k rempereur,*qui etoit cousin le roy,  et H.requeissent que il leur baillast une femme pour leur seigneur, tele  que feast du lignage le roy et du sien." Had not P'riar William left on  his journey befoie the lime of the arrival of this important mission at  Sidon, it cannot be conceived that he should have committed this  mistake as 10 the reigning emperor. The empire of Trebizonde was  founded in 1204 by Alexis Komnenos, son of Manuel, the eldest son  of Andronikos. He took the title of " Great Comnenus," which was  also borne by his successors. He died in 1222, and was succeeded  by Andronikos Ghidos, his son-in-law, who became a vassal of the  Seldjuk sui^tan of Iconium. When Ihe Mongols, in 1 240 or thereabouts,  had driver, the Queen- of Georgia, Rusadan, from Tiflib, and her son  David had been elected King of the Iberian and Lazian tribes,  Trebizonde th*-ew oft" the yoke of allegiance to the Turks, and united  itself with the new Iberian kingdom. Andronikos was sui cecded in  1235 by Joannes I (.Axuchos), who was killed while pUiymg tsukcDiion^  a g-ame reseinbling polo, in 1238, and was succeeded by Manuel 1,  " the Great Captain," a son of the founder of the empire, who  reigned until 1263. He' was in the early part of his reign a vassal of  the Seldjuks, and after the battle of Konsadac in 1244, of the Mongols  (Finlay, iv, 317-339). The name .Trebizonde is written 1 rapezounta  by Byzantine authors, e.g..^ Cons*. Porphyro., De Adminis , 226.

FRIAR WILLIAM OF kUBRUCK. 47

Vastacius, whose son is called Ascar after his maternal  ijrandfather/ and who is not subject (to them). From the  opening (of the sea) of Tanais to the west as far as the  Danube all is theirs (/.^., the Tartars'), even beyond the  Danube towards Constantinople, Blakia,"^ which is the land  of Assan,^ and minor Bulgaria as far as Sclavoniri, all pay  them tribute ; and besides the regular tribute, they have  taken in the past few years from each house one axe and  all the iron which they found unwrought.^

We arrived then in Soldaia on the i2th of the calends  of June (May 2ist), and there had preceded us certain

* John I>ucas Vataces, or John III, was the Greek emperor at  Micca from 1222 to 1255. He had by his first wife, Irene Lascaris,  daughter of the Emperor Theodon: Lascaris, vhorn he succeeded, a  son called al&o Theodore Lascaris, our ^rthor's Asdir (ste Gibbon,  vii, 358, ef ■i£(]. \ Lebeau, xvii, 326, et seq. ; and on this emperor's  character and administration, ibid.^ xvii, 413-415). Though Vataces  was not a vassal of the Mongols, he |>aid them tribute.

- The Vlachs or Vallachians of Thessaly (our author's Blakia)  called themselves, as do the modem Greeks, by the name of Romans.  The name of Vlachs, or Vallachians, appears to have been given them  bv the Sclavonians who colonized their depopulated country. This  country became known as Great Vlachia, orValkchia (Fmlay, iii, 227;.

•^ Or rather "the kingdom of the Asanides." This Bulgo-Vallachian  kingdom was founded in the latter part of the twelfth century by three  brothers, Peter, Asan Cor Yusan), and John. Asan first mounted the  throne in 1186, and on his death in 1 196 he was succeeded by Peter,  who shortly afterwards was murdered and succeeded by John. This  state seems to have been quite as much Vallachian as Bulgarian.  The old Bulgarian language had completely died out, the language of  the court was Vallachian, and Asan and his successors affected to  regard themselves as descendants of the Romans (Finlay, iii, 229, et  seg.^ iv, 28). After the first Asan, several monarchs of Bulgaiia bore  this name ; but from 1246 to 1277 the 1 signing sovereign was named  Mithel (Lebeau, xvii, 348, et seq.).

* In inassa. Hakluyt's text reads fnimentum, "corn." instead of  ferruvi^ as in all the other MSS. In his translation (i ic2; the passage  Vi rendered : '' exacted of ev'^ery household an axe, and all such come as  dey. found lying in heapes." Such tribute of iron seems to have been  Oivnmonly levied by the Mongols, a people little able to produce,  the quantity of that meta! needed by them. To cite only a few cases,  we lead that Huiaga demanded from each person on the capitation  lists of Armenia iho payment, among other things, of one arrow and  one horseshoe (Dulaurier, 483). We are told in the Chronicle 0/  Nestor {\2) that ihe Drevlians of Russia paid the Khazar? attribute of  one sword for each household (see also Karamsin, i, 50, 3i4\

48 TOURNEY OF

merchants of Constantinople, who had said that envoys  from the Holy Land were coming who (217) wished to go  to Sartach.^ I had, however, publicly preached on Palm  Sunday (April 12th) in Saint Sophia that I was not an  envoy, neither yours nor anyone's, but that I was going  among these unbelievers according to the rule of our order.  So when I arrived these said merchants cautioned me to  speak guardedly, for they had said that I was an envoy, and  if I said 1 was not an envoy I would not be allowed to pass.  So I spoke in the following way to the captains of the  city, or rather to the substitutes of the captains, for the  captains had gone to Baatu during the winter bearing ^he  tribute, and had not yet returned : " We have heard say  in the Holy Land that your Lord Sartach is a Christian,'^  and greatly were the Christians rejoiced thereat, and  chiefly so the most Christian lord the King of the French,  who has come thither on a pilgrimage and is fighting  against the Saracens^^ to wrench the holy places from out

^ This Mongol chief was son of-Batu. His name is variously,  written in the MSS., Sartach^ Sartath^ Sarhat^ Saraxth^ Sarchac^  SarthaCy Sarcach, Sarchaf, Scrtfah, and Salcath. I have uniformly  written it Sartach, a transcription which closely approxmiates that  adopted 'by Mohammedan contemporary writers (Bretschneider,  Med. (jCOi^., 298).

'■^ The belief tliat Sartach was a Christian was general at the time ;  most contemporary writers, Mohammedan as well as Christian, refer to  it. The Armenian chronicles say that Sartach had been brought up  by the Russian (or Syrian) Christians, was baptized, and lived as a  Christian ; Bar Hebraeus states that not only had he been baptized,  hut that he became a deacon (Klaprothj/^y/zr//. Asiat.^ xii, 211, 277 ;  Dulaurier, 452 ; see also Friar William's opinion of his Chri>tt:ujity,  263). In 1254, Pope Innocent IV wrote to him congratu'aiwg him  on his conversion, which he had learnt from a presbyier named  John, \vho had come to him from Sartach. On this mission of John to  the Pope, see Remusat, 61. He thinks it was a self-imposed one.

^ The Mongols called the Mohammedans Sartol. the S.irii of J*ian  tie Carpine (710). This word, the same as our Saracen, comes from  ihe Arabic sharki, "Oriental." 'I'he earliest use I have found of it iii  a western writer is in Eusebius {//n/. .AVfA'.r., vi, 42, _'88), who there  speaks of the Bapl:iapoL 2«/m»:»;»'<>t. Constantine Porphyrogenitu-^  ^De Ci'remon.f \, 739) refers 10 the K»r7rf/uot, ui tl»'-* Saracens uf iho

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 49

their hands : it is for this I wish to go to Sartach, and  carry to him the letters of the lord king, in which he  admonishcth him of the weal of all Christendom." And  they received us right favourably, and gave us lodgings in  the episcopal church. And the bishop of this church had  been to Sartach, and lie told me mucli good of Sartach,  which 1 later on did not discover myself.

Then they gave us the choice whether wc would have  carts with oxen to carry our effects, or sumpter horses.  (218) And the merchants of Constantinople advised m.e  to take carts, and that I should buy the regular covered  carts such as the Ruthenians carry their furs in,^ and in  these I could put such of our things as I would not wish  to unload every day ; should I take horses it would be  necessary to unload them at each stopping-place and to  load other horses ; and furthermoie I should be able to ride  more slovvU- following the gait of the oxen. Then T  accepted their advice, unfortunately, however, for I was  two months on the way to Sartach, which I might have  travelled in one had I gone with horses.

I had brought with me from Constantinople, on the  advice of merchants, fruits, muscadel wine and dainty-  biscuits to present to the first captains (of the Tartars),  so that my wa\' might be made easier, for among them  no one is looked upon in a proper way who comes w»th  empty hands. All these things I put in one of the carts,  since I had not found the captains ol the city, and I was  told they would be most acceptable to Sartach if I could  carry them to him that far. We set out on our journey

\\ est [£/ Magreb). Plan de Carpine's Risennins (V.d., Mussulmans}  seems to have applied more particularly to the Mohammedan states  of Turkestan (see Bretschneider, Med. G^o^., 120).

- Probably in all points similar to the higl^ two-wheeled Tartar carts  used in south-east Russia and Central Asia, and stili called arba. . a  name which Ibn Batuta (ii, 361, 362), who travelled in one from  Soldaia to the Kipchak court in the fifteenth century, gives to this  conveyance.

50 TOURNEY OF

about the calends of June (ist June) with our four covered  carts and two others which were lent us b}'- them and in  which was carried bedding to sleep on at night. And  they gave us also five horses to ride, for us five persons,  myself, and my companion Friar Bartholomew of  Cremona, and Gosset* the bearer (219) of the presents,  and Homo Dei the dragoman,^ and the boy Nicholas  whom I had bought at Constantinople by means of your  charity.' They gave us also two men who drove the carts  tind looked after the oxen and horses.

Now from Kcrsona all the way to the mouth of the

^ Homo Dei Turgetuannus. The name of Friar William^s interpreter  has puzzled former translators, and I confess that I do not feel sure  that the explanation I have to offer of it is acceptable. Hakluyt has  " the man of God, Turgemanus." Bergeron translates it by *V^ bon-  horttme,' while da Civezza and F. M. Schmidt retain the Latin name.  Assuming tliat this man was a half-bred Arabic-speaking Syrian,  a language with which the Friar was almost certainly familiar, and  that he was ajso a Mohammedan, it occurs to me that he may have  been called Abd-uUah, " the servant or slave of Allah," and that our  Irav.eller preferred to give him a name which had not such a strong  Mohammedan aichet about it. In mediaeval Greek and Latin, uvBpciTros  and 7towOy and in French hovtme^ had the meaning of " liegeman,  bondsman, slave."

Turgemannus is the Arabic tarjuman^ the Turkish tergttman^ the  medi;^eval and modern French truchement or iruchemaii. The form  terciman also occurs, as in the letter of Arghun to tlie Pope, dated  1285 (Chabot. 190), The word dragoman was also in use, even  before the time o^ Friar William. It occurs in Byzantine Greek under  the form S/jayo/u.^i/o? (Codinus, 40), and Joinville (loi) says, "11 avoit  gens illec qui savoient le sarrazinnois et le frangois, que I'on appele  drugemens." William Thomas (1550), in his translation of Barbaro's  Travels,, uses ($r) the \vord trouchman.

2 Very likely a native of the Kipchak, for his familiarity with the  anguages of the country through which Friar William was about to  travel would have made him a valuable addition to the party. The  slave-markets of the Levant were supplied at this time principally  from the Kipchak. A little later on, the Mameluks of Fgypt were  mostly recruited among these Kipchak slaves. The Mesalek al-absar  (269) says hat ** notwithstanding the superiority of the inhabitants of  the Kabdjak over the troops of the Djerkes, Russians, Madjar, and  y\s, these people carried off" their children, which they sold to traders.'"  (^n the slave trade of the Levant in the Middle .Ages, see Heyd, ii,  555, et seq. Nicholas only accompanied Friar William as far as  Batu's camp on the Volga. He was detained there, and sent back to  Sartarh to await the Friar's return.

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUHRUCK. $1

Tanais there are high promontories along the sea, and  there are forty hamlets between Kersona and Soldaia,  nearly every one of which has its own language ; among  them were many Goths, whose language is Teutonic.^

Beyond these mountains to the north is a most beautiful  orest,^ in a plain full of springs and rivulets, and beyond  this forest is a mighty plain which stretches out for five  days to the border of this province to the north, where it  contracts, having the sea to the east and the west, so that  there is a great ditch from one sea to the other.^ In this  plain used to live Comans^ before the Tartars came, and  they forced the cities referred to and the forts to pay them

1 Friar Benedict {supra, p. 36) speaks of the " country of the Saxi,  whom we believe to be Goths," which he says lay to the south of his  route when travelling through Comania. It would seem from the follow-  ing passage of Barbaro(27) that "forty villages" was the name of a place.  He says, speaking of the Isle of Capha, as he calls the Crimea, that it  has " twoo places walled, but not stronge, the one whereof is called  Sorgathi (Sudak?), which they also called Incremin*, that signifieth a  forteresse ; and the other Cherchiarde, which signifieth xl places.''  I am rather inclined to believe, however, that Barbaro slightly mis-  understood his informant. The word castella^ used by Friar William,  is old French ^<2J^<?/, or cazal; the modern French equivalent \s,^''bourg"  William of Tyr (mi, 1 1 1 2) has ''''quicumque . . . casalia habent^'' which  in the old French version is rendered "cil qui auront les viles cham-  pestres que Ton apele casiaus." Hakluyt renders casalia by "cottages  or granges" (107) ; castella he translates "castles" (103). Barbaro (30),  speaking of these Goths of the Crimea, says : " The Gothes speake  dowche, which I knowe by a dowcheman, my servunt, that was with  me there : for they understode one an other well enough, as we un-  derstande a furlane (/>., a man of Forli) or a florentine. Of this  neighborhode of the Gothes and Alani, I suppose the name Gotitalani  to be deryved, for Alani were first in this place. But than came the  Gothes and conquered these cuntreys, myngleng their name with  the Alani, and so being myngled togither called themselfs Gotita-  lani, who, in effect, folowe all the Greekish facions, and so also do  the Circassi." Busbeck^ in the middle of the sixteenth century, while  at Constantinople conversed with two of these Goths, one of whom,  he says, looked like a man from Flanders. He took down a vocabulary  in their language, some seventy-five words and phrases, about two-  thirds of which are pure Teutonic, if not English {EpistolcPy 383, et seq. ;  see also Heyd, ii, 208 ; Yule, Cathay, 200 ; d'Avezac, 49*).

- The southern Crimea is still noted for its beautiful and varied  orest growth (Reclus, v, 824).  •^ The ditch at the Isthmus of Perekop.  ^* On the Comans, see infra, note to p. 253 of text.

E 2

52 iourn?:y of

tribute ; but when the Tartars came^ such a multitude of  Comans cutereLl this province, all of whom Bed to the  shore of the sea, that they ate one another, the living the  d) ing, as was told me by a certain merchant who saw it,  the living devouring and tearing with their teeth the raw  flesh of the dead, as dogs do corpses. Toward the end of  this province are many and large lakes, on whose shores  are brine springs, the water of which as soon as it enters  the lake is turned into salt as hard as rcc. And from these  brine springs Baatu and Sartach derive great revenues, for  from all Ruscia they come thither for salt, and for each cart-  load they give two pieces of cotton worth half an yperpera.  There come there also by sea many ships for salt, and all  contribute according to the (220) quantity (they take).-

After having left Soldaia we came on the third day  across the Tartars, and when I found myself among them  it seemed to me of a truth that I had been transported  into another century. I will describe to you as well as  I can their mode of living and manners.

^ The Mongols invaded the Crimea for the first time in 1222.  D'Ohsson (i, 339) says : "' On the news of the unexpected invasion of  the Monj<ols, the Kipchacs (Friar William's Comans) retired from all  sides towards the extremities of their territory, abandoning their best  pasture lands to the enemy's army, which took up its winter quarters in  the heart of the country. Ten thousand Kipchac families passed the  Danube and entered the territory of the Roman empire ; the Emperor,  John Ducas, took them in his service .... A great number also took  refuge on Russian territory."

- Strabo (vii, 4, 2581 already refers to the great quantity of salt the  Cj reeks were in the habii of getting from the Palus Maeotis. At the  ))resent day the salt lakes of Perekop yield annually as much as  23 millions of poods, or 759 millions of pounds. There are four other  groups of salt lakes in the Crimea, but the Perekop group yields the  most (E. Stanton, Salt Production of Russia ; I'.S. Consular Reports,  vol. iv, 477 ; see also Tott, 358. and Clarke, 112). 'Y\\g yptrpera  appears to have been worth about ten shillings sterling (see infra^  note to p. 244 of text, for the value of \\\t. yperpcra).

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 53

O WHERE have they fixed dwelling-places, nor  do they know where their next will be. They  have divided among themselves Cithia,^ which  extendeth from the Danube to the rising; of the sun ;  and every captain, according as he hath more or less  men under him, knows the limits of his pasture lands  and where to graze in winter and summer, spring and  autumn. For in winter they go down to warmer regions  in the south : in summer they go up to cooler towards  the north. The pasture lands without water they graze  over in winter when there is snow there, for the snow  serveth them as water.- They set up the dwelling in  which they sleep on a circular frame of interlaced sticks

' Ijsidorus, lo whoni Friar William frequently refers as an authority,  says (xiv, 500) that formerly Scythia extended from India to the con-  nnes of Germany and the Danube, but that later on this term was  applied to a rej^Mon of smallej- extent, be-^inning in the east at the Seric  Ocean, and extending westward to the Caspian, while to the south it  reached to the Caucasus Hakluyt ',104) renders the first phrase-  ''They liavc in no place any settled citie to abide in, neither knowe  they of the celcstiall citie to come." Clavijo (112) says : '*TheZagaiays  have no other dwellings than tents, moving from the banks of the  rivers in summer to the warm districts in winter. Timur M-ith all his  host wande;5 in the same way o\'er the plains, winter and summer."

' Strabo (vii, 3, 254) says of the Scythians: "The tents of the  Nomads are of felt, and fixed on carts, and in these the\ li\e ; all  around them are the flocks which supply them with the milk, cheese,  and meat on which; they ietd. They follow them in their pas'urages,  changing- all the time for new places with grass. In \\ inter they live  in the marshes near the M^eotis, in summer in the steppes (ep toIs  TTf^iW)." The custom of dividing the pasture lands, or assigning  certain limits to the annual migrations of each band or tribe, existed  from the earliest limes among the Turks ; as it does, in fact, among all  pastoral tribes, or those living by the chase, as the Indians of North  America. In the Annals of the Chin dynasty of China (a.d. 557-581),  we read of the Turks that "though they wander about, each of the  tribes has its separate land"' {Chou shu^ bk. 50, 3 ; conf. also Marco  Polo, i, 244 ; 'R-A.dXo^^Aiis Sibericjt^ i, 414 ; and Sven Hedin, Through  Asia^ i, 419). The latter, speaking of the Kirghiz of the Pamirs, says :  "They spend the summer on \\\q yeylaus (summer pasture-grounds)  . . . . and in winter .... they seek the pastures \kistilaks) in the  valleys. The members of the same aul are, as a rule, kinsmen, and  always graze the same yeylaus arid the same kishlaks. No other aul  is permitted to encroach upon pastures thus appropriated without  previous agreement."

54 JOURNEY OF

converging into a little round hoop on the top, from which  projects above a collar as a chimney, and this (framework)  they cover over with white felt. Frequently they eoat the  felt with chalk, or white clay, or powdered bone, to make  it appear whiter, and sometimes also (they make the felt)  black. The felt around this collar on top they decorate  with various pretty designs. Before the entry they also  suspend felt (221) ornamented with various embroidered  designs in color. For they embroider the felt, colored or  otherwise, making vines and trees, birds and beasts.^

' Hie round felt-covered tent common to the Tartar, Turki, and  Mongol tribes has been described in about the same terms by every  writer on this part of Asia (see Herodotus, iii, 35 ; M^rco Polo, i,  244 ; Ibn Batuta, ii, 361, yjl-V% "h^l 5 Bergmann, ii, 82, etseq, ; Pallas,  Voyaoes^ i, 503). 1 will only give Pian de Carpine's description of it  t6i6) : *'They (/. ^., the M<inj^ols) have round tent-like dwellings  ijfatiojics), made of t\\ igs and small sticks. In the top they have a  round opening which admits the light, and by which the smoke can  escape, for they keep a fiie always in ihe cejitie. The sides and roof  are covered over with felt, and the doors are also made of felt. Some  dwellings are large, some small, according to the importance or  poverty of the people. Some of them can be taken down and^put up  hi a moment, and are always carried on pack animals ; while others  cannot be taken apart, and are carried on carts ; one ox hitched  to the cart could haul- the smaller ones : the larger require three, four,  or more, according to then size ; and wherever they go, either to war  o\- elsewhere, they take them along with them."

The cusiom of carrying set-up tents on carts, which at one time or  another has obtained among various peoples and tribes of Northern  Asia, is noted by Hesiod (Goettling's ed., 33) ; by Herodotus (iv, 46) ;  by Hippocrates (Z> aere, aqua ct locts, 44, 353) (this last-named author  mentioning a detail not found elsewhere, that the Scythian carts had  four and even six wheels^ ; Strabo (i, 104, 249, ^//aj.) ; Pomponius  Mela (i, 619) ; and many other classical writers also speak of them.  Ammianus Marcellinus, xxii, 176, tells us the Alans had their cart-  tents covered with bark {corticibus tectis).

Chinese annals state that a great branch of the Turkish nation was  known to them in the first centuries of the Christian era as the  Kao-cKi^ or "High carts ;' on account, it is said, of the high-wheeled  felt-covered carts in which they lived, but the characters with which  the name is written are purely phonetic. These Kao-ch'^, who at a  later period were called by them T'ieh-le, or K'i-le, comprised tlie  Kirghiz, the Uigurs, the Alans, the Karluks, nearly all the tribes, in  fact, called Oguz Turks by Mohamniedan writers \T\ing shu^ bk.  257 ; Ma Tuan lin, bks. 344, 347). In the twelfth and early pilrt of the  thirteeoih centuries, a binnch of these Kao-ch'e lived to the north-  east of the Caspian, <fi round the Aral lake. They were known to  mediaeval Mohammedan writers as the Kankalis, or Kankly, a name

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 55.

And they make these houses so large that they are  sometimes thirty feet in width I myself once measured  the width between the wheel-tracks of a cart xx feet, and  when the house was on the cart it projected beyond  the wheels on either side v feet at least. I have myself  counted to one cart xxii oxen drawing one house, eleven  abreast across the width of the cart, and the other eleven  before them. The axle of the cart was as large as the  mast of a ship, and one man stood in the entry of the  house on the cart driving the oxen.^

Furthermore they weave light twigs into squares of the  size of a large chest, and over it from one end to the other  they put a turtle-back also of twigs, and in the front end  they make a little doorway; and then they cover this

which Abulghazi (41) says was derived from the Turki word kang^

'' cart,'"' their first father having invented carts. Friar William (265)  refers to the C angle.

Pei skih (bk. 94) says that the Kitan tribes of Shih-wei, to the east  of Lake liaikal used ox-carts, on which they had straw-covered huts  like the felt-covered ones of the Turks (see also Marco Polo, 1, 244 ;  Ibn Batuta, ii, 361 ; Barbaro, 13 ; Anthony Jenkinson, 52, 55).

In modern times Pallas {Voytiges^ v, 154) notes that he met, near  the lower Volga, a band of Tartars or Mankates, who called them-  selves Kunduran, "like most of the people mhabiting the Kuban,  whence they came." "Their jurts, or Jurtens," he says, "differ in  shape and construction from those of the Kalmuks and other  Nomadic peoples of Asia. They are not susceptible of being taken  to pieces, but they are also hghter, and of a size to be on a cart,  that is to say, they are only 8 ft. or 9 ft. in diameter. .... When  they go from one place to another, they put this tent, or cabin,  on a two- wheeled cart {Arba\ so that it rests in front and behind  on the shafts, and reaches beyond the wheels on the sides ....  The rich have two or three cabins, according to the size of their  families. These have, besides, a private cart carrying a little kind  of house in wood, something like the moveable hiUs of our shepherds.  In these they sleep with their wives. In summer, when they ai*e  stopping for any length of time in any one spot with their flocks,  they do not lake the trouble to take the cabins off the carts ....  They harness bulls to their carts, usually two, with a third sometimes  as leader" (see also Le Bruyn, Voyages, 1, 305).

Mongol tents ot the present tij'ne have usually designs in stitcbwork  on the felt which covers the entry, and Kirghiz tents have broad  ornamental bands in fringe and stitch work around the sides.

^ These carts must have been exceptionally large ones. Conf.  Plan de Carpine's remarks in the preceding note.

$6 journ?:y of

coffer or little lioiise with black felt coatod with tp\lIow  or ewc"s milk, so that the rain caiuiot penetrate it, and  they decorate it ]i!ce\vi::e with embroider)^ woik. And in  such coffers they out all their oedding and valuables, and  they tie them tightly on high carts drawn by camels,  so that they can cross rivers (without getting wet). Such  coffers they never take off the cart.

When they set down their dwelling-houses, they always  turn the door to the south/ ana after that they place the  carts with coffers on either side near the house at a half  stone's throw, so that the dwelling stands between two  )ows of carts as between two walls. (222) The matrons  make for themscives most beautiful (luggage) carts, which  1 would not know how to describe to \'on unless by a  drawing, and I v. ould depict them all to you if 1 knew how  to paint. A single rich Moal or Tartar has quite c or cc  such carts with oolTers. Baatu has xxvi wives, axch of  whom has a large d^vel!ing, exclujive of the other little  ones which they set up after the big one, and which are  kke closets, in which the sewing girls live, and to each of  these (large) dwellings are attached c^uite cc cart.*?.' And

^ The tents faced south because the prevailing" winds of Northern  Asia, are westerly. I have often seen Mongol tents facing ea:?t and  south-east. When camped, as in the nanow valleys south of the  Ts'aidan) and around the Koko nor, *he tents always face down the  \'alley 'conf. Bergmann, ii, 96, and Yule, Marco Polo, i, 245). It is  interesting to find it noted in the Chou Shu ( bk. 50, 3) that the Khan  of tbo Turks, who lived always on the Tu-kin mountain, had his tent  invariably facing south, " so as to show reverence to the sun's rising  place."

^ Ibn Baiuta (ii. 413) tells us that one of the wives of the Tartar  Khan of the Kipchak, when on a short visit to her father, Andronicus 1 i  the Younger, Emperor of Constantinople, though she had ht't in the  Khan's camp most of her women and baggage, had snll with her  nearly 400 carts, 2,000 horses, 300 o.xen, 3oo camels, 5oc> horsemen,  aoo young slave-^girh, wy^d 20 pages. The Chinese traveller, Chang-  chun (122 1' 1224), speaking of the camp of Ochigin, the younger  brother o( Chingis Khan, says that it was composed of "several  thousands of black carts and felt tents standing in rows." The same  traveller tells us of the camp {ordu) of one of Chingis' consorts, which  was composed of "more than a thousand carts and tenls" (Bretsch-  neidcr, MaL /rave/., 21, 24).

FKIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 57

when they set up their houses, the first wife places her  dwelling on the extreme west side, and after her the others  according to their rank, so that the last wife will be in the  extreme east ; and there will be the distance of a stone's  throw between the iurt of one wife and that of another.  The ordii^ of a rich Moal seems like a large town, though  there will be very few men in it. One girl will lead xx or  XXX carts, for the country is flat, and they tie the ox or  camel carts the one after the other, and a girl will sit on the  front one driving the ox, and all the others follow after with  the same gait. Should it happen that they come to some bad  piece of road, they untie them, and take them across one by  one. So they go along slowly, as a sheep or an ox might  walk.

^jfi^^HEN they have fixed their dwelling, the door

^^g^ turned to the south, they set up the couch of

the master on the north side. The side for the

women is always the east side, that is to say, on the left

^ Curia. Friar William states (267) that he uses this word to render  the Mongol term orda, a word x\o\\ usually transcribed ordit or ordo.  Pian de Carpinc (609) says, '''' orda means the dwellings {staliones) of  the emperor and the princes." This interpretation of the word is con-  firmed by contemporary Mohammedan writers (Quatremere, 21, 23,  98). Chinese writers of the Mongol period translate the word by  hsing ku7ig^ or " moveable palace" (Bretschneider, i?/<?//. travel.. 25).  Palladius {40! says the term ordo is, properly speaking, a separate  palace of the Khan., under the management of one of his wives..  Bergmann (ii, 83; states that among the Kalmuks the word oergo iordu)  is used to designate either a collection of tents or else the dwelling of  a prince or high lama. The Kalmuk termb oeroo.^ garr, and kosh, he  adds, correspond to our " palace, house, hut." The Jihan Kushai  (Quatremere, 54) says the Mongols used the word iurt to designate a  camp or a dwelling (see also d'Ohsson, i, 83). Friar William, how-  ever, is not very careful in the use of the word curia; he applies it  alike to the camp of a prince, to a single tent — he does not use the  word tentoriiuu mure than two or three times — to the imperial court,  as court and as building, in which it is being held. I have there-  fore translated curia, sometimes by the Mongol term ordu, some-  times by rurt, and other times by com-t. Quatremere (loi) is of  opinion — and Friar Wiilianrs use of the word curiix seems to justify  his belief— that the word ordu designated originally those lents 6f the  Mongols whicJi were always set up and carried about/ on o.x-carts.

58

JOURNEY OF

of the house of the master, he sitting on his couch with  his face turned to the south. (223) The side for the men  is the west side, that is, on the right. iMen coming into  the house would never hang" up their bows on the side of  the women.^

And over the head of the master is always an image of  felt, like a doll or statuette, which the)' call the brother of  the master ; another similar one is above the licad of the  mistress, which they call the brother of the mistress, and  they are attached to the wall ; and higher up between the  two of them is a little lank one {jiiacilentd), who is, as it  were, the guardian of the whole dwelling The mistress

* So firmly establislied were these rules of etiquelte that they were  strictly adhered to by the Mongol emperors in their palaces. The  same rules still obtain throughout Mongolia, and among the Tartar  and Tibetan tent-dwellers. The annexed plan of the interior of a

urt of Altai Tartars, taken from '^\xA\o^{Aus Sibiricn, i, 270), explains  this interior arrangement of the tents >^see also infra, the descrip-  tion of the ceremonies in the palace at Karakorum, and conf. Pian  de Carpine, 745}.

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 59

places in her house on her right side, in a conspicuous  place at the foot of her couch, a goat-skin full of wool or  other stuff, and beside it a very little statuette looking in  the direction of the attendants and women. Beside the  entry on the women's side is yet another image, with a  cow's tit for the women, who milk the cows ; for it is part  of the duty of the women to milk the cows. On the other  side of the entry, toward the men, is another statue with  a mare's tit for the men who milk the mares.^

i Pian de Carpine (618-620) says : " They have certain idols made of  felt in the image of a man, and these they place on either side of the  door of their dwelling ; and above these they place things made of  felt in the shape of tits, and these they believe to be the guardians of  their flocks, and that they insure them increase of milk and colts.  They make yet others out of silk stuffs, and these they honour  greatly. Some persons put these in a handsomely-covered can  before the door of their dwelling, and whoever stealeth anything from  that cart is without mercy put to death. Now, when they want to  make these idols, all the noble ladies in the camp meet together, and  uiake them with due reverence ; and when they have made them  they kill a sheep and eat it, and tlie bones they burn in the fire. And  when any child falls ill, they make in this same fashion an idol and tie  ft over its couch. The chiefs, chiliarchs, and centurions have always  a he-goat in their dwellings. To these said idols they offer the first  milk of every flock and of every herd of mares ; and when they begin  to eat or drink, they first offer them of their food or drink. And when  they kill any animal, they offer the heart in a bowl to the idol in the  cart, and leave it there till the morrow, and then they take it away,  cook it and eat it.

" They also make an idol of their first emperor, which they place in  a cart in a place of honour before the dwelling, as I saw before the  orda of the emperor (Kuyuk Khan), and they offer it many gifts ; and  they offer it also horses, which none may ride till their death. They  offer it likewise other animals, and if they kill any of these to eat they  break none of their bones, but burn them in the fire. And they bow  to it facing the south, as they bow to God" (conf. supra, 35, Benedict's  account).

Marco Polo (i, 249, ii, 478) informs us that the chief of these " gods"  of felt is called Nati^s^ay, and that the image on his left hand is his  wife, and his children those in front of him.

Barbaro (34) says ; '' The Tartariens. worship Images that they carie  in their carts, though some there be that use daylie to worship that  beast that they liappen first to meete whan they go foorthe of their  doores."

Passing to modern times, Pallas ( Voyages^ iii, 433, iv, 51 1) tells us of  the '• idols dressed like dolls" found in the iurts of the Buriats. These  idols, he says, are also found among the Beitire Tartars of the Abakan  When sacrifices are made, their magicians take these idols and ble  them. The same traveller {op. cit., iv, 579) speaks of the Tus,

6o JOURNEY OF

And when they have come together to drink, they first  sprinkle with liquor this image which is over the master's  head, then the other images in order. Then an attendant  goes out of the dwelh'ng with a cup^ and liquor, and  sprinkles three times to the south, each time bending the  knee, and that to do reverence to the fire ; then to the east,  and that to do reverence to the air ; then to the west to do  reverence to the water ; to the north they sprinkle for the  dead. When the master takes (224) the cup in hand and  is about to drink, he first pours a portion on tlie ground.

household gods of the Tartars of Krasnoyarsk, which they also call  Ainiae. They sacrifice to them little animals, and offer them the  skins of the \'ictims, meat, or such other objects as they value or  wish to obtain. The idol placed on the east side of the entry of the  tent, but outside it, is the representative of an evil deity which they  have to propitiate by sacrifices. There is another idol, that of the  good deity On the day of its feast they hold it over the fire, perfuming  it with nbslnth, when it turns red. This idol is kept inside the iurt.

Radloff {Alls Sibirien^ i, 363), speaking of the Kumandin Tartars,  says that on entering one of their huts he found hanging over the  window opposite the door five idols. The first with its head upwards  was said to be Sary-kan^ the next one, which resembled it closely, was  called Kyrgys-kan, The third figure was called Tos-kanym, and its  head was downwards, while the second had its upwards. The fourth  figure was that of Kudy-kaJi^ and it was a little larger than the  previous ones. As to the fifth, it Mas called Kop-kiilgan. The two  last-named were provided with moustaches. The owner of the hut  did not show any special -reverence to these idols, though he asked  Radloff not to touch them.

Palladius (15), quoting the Hci-iung chiang wai cli2\ or *' Records of  the foreign tribes of the ."Vmur country," says: "The Dahurs and  Barhus have in their dwellings, according to the number of the male  member^, puppets made of straw, on which eyes, eyebrows, and mouths  are drawn ; these puppets are dressed up to the waist. When some  one of the family dies his puppet is taken out of the house, and a new  puppet is made for every newly-born member of the family. On New  Year's Day offerings are made to the puppets, and care is taken not to  disturb them by moving them, etc., in order to avoid bringing sickness  into the house.'"

The word o?igot^ ongon^ or ongotiii^ by which these idols are usually  designated among the Tungusic people, appears to be the original of  Marco Polo's Natigay (Yule, Marco Polo, 250 ; see also Cordier.  Odoric^ 486 ; d'Ohsson, i, 16 ; Combojew, 652).

^ Ciphiini. Wooden cups were then as now in general use among  all the tribes <.){ northern Asia. Ibn Batuta (ii, 392^ refers to '• the  pretty and light wooden cups" u^ed by the people oi the Kipchak i\\  his time.

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 6l

If he were to drink seated on a horse, he first before he  drinks pours a little on the neck or the mane of the horse.^  Then when the attendant has sprinkled toward the four  quarters of the world he goes back into the house, where  two attendants are ready with t -'o cups and platters to carry  drink to the master and the wife seated near him upon tht-  couch. And when he hath several wives, she with whom  he hath slept that night sits beside him in the day, and it  becometh all the others to come to her dwelling that day  to drink, and court is held there that day, and the gifts  ^^^hich are brought that day are placed in the treasury of  that lady.2 ^ bench with a skin of milk, or ;ome other  drink, and with cups, stands in the entry.^

^ The custom of making oblations towards the cardinal pomts, the  zenith and the nadir, is still adhered to by many Mongols and  Tibetans. It is noted by the Russian archbishop Peter in 1245  (Matth. Paris, op. cit.^ iv, 388), and by Pian de Carpine (622) who says  they specially reverenced and worshipped the sun, the moon, fire,  water, and the earth ; in the morning especially they made these  libations.

- Mesalek al-absar (264) referrmg to the Turks of the Kipchak,  has : '• Each of the princesses his wives (/.<?., of the Khan of Kipchak)  collects a portion of the taxes. Each day of the year this prince goes  to the house of one of his wives, with whom he passes the day and  takes his meals. She presents him with a full suit of clothes, and  he gives the clothes he takes off to some favourite courtier." Pian  de Carpine (642) sf^ys : *'When a Tartar has several wives, each has her  own tent and household, and he drinks and eats and sleeps with one  of them one day, and another day with another. One of them, how-  ever, is the greatest among them, and he stops more frequently with  her than with tht others ; and though they are so many they do not  often wrangle among tl\ems4lves."

- Pallas {Voya^cs^ 1,698) remarks : " The principal piece of.furniture  of the dirty cabins of the Bashkirds is a big skin or vase of leather in  the form of a bottle ; it is placed on a wooden stand, and is always  full of sour mi'k, which they Ctdl- afjcui.'' See on arjtm or uiraM^  Rubruck, p, 240 of text.

62 JOURNEY OF

N winter they make a capital drink of rice, of  millet, and of hone)- ; it is clear as wine : and  wine is carried to them from remote parts. In  summer they care only for cosmos? There is always  cosmos near the house, before the entry door, and beside  it stands a guitar-player with his guitar. Lutes and  vielles (225) such as we have I did not see there, but many  other instruments which are unknown among us.'^ And  when the master begins to drink, then one of the at-  tendants cries with a loud voice, " Ha!" and the guitarist

- These three kinds of drinks, which Friar William in another  passage (335) calls cervoise (beer) of rice, or terracina^ cervoise of  millet, and boal^vi^xt. imported probably from China and the Kipchak,  but were certainly not manufactured by the Mongols. The wine they  probably got from Persia and from Turkestan. Plan de Carpine (640)  states the facts more accurately. He says : " They (the Mongols)  drink great quantities of mare's milk, if they have it ; they drink also  sheep's, goat's, cow's, and camel's milk. Wine, cervoise, and mead  {medoncin^ Friar William's bal^ or boal?) they have not, unless it is  sent from other nations or is given to them." Ibn IJatuta (ii, 408) says  of the Kipchak : *' The principal drink of the Turks is a wine prepared  with honey, for they belong to the hanefite sect and consider the use  of wine permissible. When the Sultan wants to drink, his daughter  takes the cup in her hand ; she salutes her father by bending her knee,  then she hands him the cup. When the Sultan has drunk, she takes  another cup and hands it the great khatun, who drinks, then she  presents it to the other khatuns according to their rank .... Finally  the inferior emirs rise and serve drink to the sons of the Sultan, and  during all the time they sing nawaliyah (short . songs)" (see also  Quatrem^re, 356). Chinese travellers in the Kipchak in the thirteenth  century also refer to the use there made of a '' fermented beverage  from honey" (Bretschneider, Med. travel.., 118). The cervoise of rice  {cervisia de risio) is, of course, Chinese rice wine. Cosmos is Marco  Polo's kemiz, our kumiz or kumiss (see Yule, Marto Polo., i, 250).

2 1 he most ancient and commonly-used musical instruments of the  Turkish tribes appear to have been the reed-pipe, drum, and several  kinds of guitars with four, five, or nine strings {Pet shih., bk. 94).  Bergmann (ii, 175) says the Kalmyks use the drum, a kind of zither,  the flute, and a violin. Radloff {Aus Sibirien, i, 381) states that the  Tartars of the Altai have a reed-pipe, a guitar, a kind of violin called  kobys, a horizontal harp (zither ?) called tyatta^an. 1 ha\ e never seen  an instrument of the latter description used by Mongols, though  instruments of this description are employed in China, Japan, and  Korea. See also F. Grenard {Haute Asie, ii, 136, et seq.)\ and Clarke  (53), who says the commonest instrument among the Kalmuks is a  two-siringed lute {balalaika).

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUGK. 6^

Strikes his guitar, and when they have a great feast they  all clap their hands, and also dance about to the sound  of the guitar, the men before the master, the women  before the mistress. And when the master has dmnken,  then the attendant cries as before, and the guitarist  stops. Then they drink all arouiid, and sometimes they  do drink right shamefully and gluttonly.^ And when  they want to challenge anyone to drink, they take hold  of him by the ears, and pull so as to distend his throat,  and they clap and dance before him. Likewise, when  they want to make a great feasting and jollity with  someone, one takes a full cup, and two .others are on his  right and left, and thus these three come singing and  dancing towards him who is to take the cup, and they sing  and dance before him ; and when he holds out his hand to  take the cup, they quickly draw it back, and then again  they come back as before, and so they elude him three  or four times by drawing away the cup, till he hath  become well excited and is in good appetite, and then they  give him the cup, and while he drinks they sing and clap  their hands and strike with their feet.^

Of their food and victuals you must know that they  (226) eat all their dead animals without distinction, and  with such flocks and herds it cannot be but that many  animals die.^ Nevertheless, in summer, so long as lasts

' Plan de Carpine (637) goes so far as to say that drunkenness was  honourable among the Mongols. At all events, now, as in old times,  this people has shown a strong taste for drink. Friar William, in the  course of his narrative, frequently refers to this fact.

2 Gombojew (664) says it is still customary among the Mongols to  sing when bringing a guest wine.

^ Pian de Carpine (638) sayS : "Their food is everything that can be  eaten ; for they eat dogs, wolves, foxes and horses, and when pushed by  necessity, human flesh. They also eat abluviones quae egrediuntur ck  iutnentis cum pullis. I have also seen them eat lice, saying ; " Why  should I not eat them, that eat my son's flesh and drink his blood .'*"  i have seen them also eat rats. They use neither tablecloths nor  napkins. They have no bread, nor oil nor vegetables, nothing but

64 JOURNEY OF

their cosmos, that is to say mare's milk, they care not  for any other food. So then if it happens that an ox or  a horac dies, they dry its flesh by cutting it into narrow  strips and hanging it in the sun and the wind, where at  once and without salt it becomes dry without any evil

meat, of \vhicb, however, they eat so little that other people could  scarcely exist on it.

" They get their hands covered with the grease of the meat, but  when they have finished eating they wipe them on their boots, on  the grass, or something else, though the more refined among them  have some little bits of cloth with which they wipe their hands when  they have finished eating. One of them takes the food (out of the  kett4e), and another takes the pieces of meat from him on the point of  a knife, and gives to each one : to some more, to others less, as they  wish to show them more or less honour" (see also Gombojew, 659).

The habits of the Mongols are to-day exactly what they were in  Friar William's time. I may add that it is usual when one has finished  eating anything out of the little wooden bowl each one carries with  him, to lick it clean and put it back in the folds of one's gown.

The charge of cannibalism was frequently made against the Mongols  by mediaeval writers. The Russian Archbii:hop, Peter, stated, in 1245,  before the Council of Lyons, that the Mongols "eat the flesh of mares,  and dogs, and other abominations, and even when necessary human  flesh, not raw, however, but cooked ; they drink blood, or water, or  milk" (Matth. Paris, iv, 386-389). See also the letter of Ivo of  Narbonne in 1243 to the Archbishop of Bordeaux {ibU.^ iv, 273), and  the Introductory Notice, supra.

Joinville (147) states that the Mongols carried their uncooked meat  "entre leurs celles et leur paniaus (horse blankets), quant le sane en  est bien hors ; si la manjuent toute crue." This idea that the Mongols  cooked their meat under their saddles Is as old as Ammianus Mar-  cellinus at least. He says(xxxi, 347), speaking of the Huns, "they are  satisfied with wild roots for food, or with the flesh of the first animal  they find ; they mortify it for a while on their horse between thc\  thighs" (conf Schiltberger, 48). Coming down to more recent times,  we read in Busbeck {Epistola:^ 385) that some Goths of the Crimea  told him that the Tartars ate the raw flesh of dead horses, and that  they put bits under the saddles of their horses, which they ate with  dehght when ii had become heated by the bodies of the horses (see  also Gombojew, 657 ; and Clarke, 52, 70).

VVhile there is no doubt that the Mongols, like the Chinese, will eat  horses, camels, or cattle which have died naturally, I doubt whether  they ever do it t\QQ^X faute de inieit.v. Bergmann (ii, 1 16) agrees with  this view; see, however Tott (i, 349). V,\\\?iS {Voyages^ i, 512) says  they have the greatest aversion for wolf's flesh, and in fact for that of  all other small carnivorous animals.

I may note here, in connection with the Mongols' way of eating,  that they never take the scum off the pot in which meat is boilinK,  but eat it with the meat, holding it to be the choicest juice and essence  of the meat. This custom I find noted by John de Luca in his  delation des Tartares (Thevenot, i, 28 ; and also Rockhill, Diary, 207).

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 6$

smell.^ With the intestines oi horse; ihey make sausages^  better than pork ones, and they cai them fresh. The rest  of the flesh they keep for winter With the hides of oxen  they make big jars, which they dry in admirable fashion in  the smoke.^ With the hind part of the hide of horses they  make most beautiful shoes. With the flesh of a sinp^Ie  sheep they give to eat to L men or C ; for they cut it Up  very fine in a platter with salt and water,* for they make  no other sauce ; and then with the point of a knife or a  fork which they make for the purpose, like that which we  use to eat coddled pears or apples, they give to each of the  bystanders a mouthful or two according to the number of  the guests. Prior to this, before the flesh of the sheep is  served, the master takes what pleases him ; and further-  more if he gives to anyone a special piece, it is the custom  that he who receives it shall eat it himself, and he may  not give it to another ; but if he cannot eat it all he  carries it off with him, or gives it to his servant if he be  present. (227) who keeps it; otherwise he puts it away in  his captargaCy which is a square bag which they carry to  put such things in, in which they store away bones when

^ Sun-dried meat is used in Mongolia and among the nomads of  Tibet. It is usually eaten without any other preparation.

- Andnlges^ in French andouilles. Bergmann (li, 129) says that the  Tartar horse-sausages surpass all others. They are made of blood or  pieces of the intestines {maiigenstiicken). Andouille is made in the  same way.

3 Yd\\-A% {Voyae:es^ i, 516) describes in detail the manufacture of  these leather vessels, which are made both of l^orse and of ox hides,  the latter being the better. "They leave them in the smoke," he says,  " two, three, or even four days, when they become as iranslucid as  horn." RadlofF {Aus Sibii'ien^ i, 425) says that among the Kirghiz  they are called saba^ and that they hold four to six buckets (see also  Rockhill, Diary ^ 172). Those I have there described are of a more  primitive make.

"* ibn Baiuta (ii, 407) describing a feast given by the Khan of the  Kipchak, says that a golden or silver ladle containing salt dissolved  in water was put on each table. Salt dissolved in a little pot-Lquor  is, at the present day, placed, before the guests at a Mongol meal.  The most honoured guest will recei\e the brisket or the tail of the  sheep, these being the choicest pieces (conf. Bergmann, ii, 128).

66 JOURNEY OF

they have not time to c^naw them well, so that they can  j^navv them later and that nothing of the food be lost.^

This cosmos, which is mare's milk, is made in this wise.  They stretch a \oi\g rope on the ground fixed to two  stakes stuck in the ground, and to this rope they tic  toward the third hour the colts of the mares they want to  milk. Then the mothers stand near their foal, and allow  themselves to be quietly milked ; and if one be too wild,  then a man takes the colt and brings it to her, allowing it  to suck a little ; then he takes it away and the milker  takes its place. When they have got together a great  quantity of milk, which is as sweet as cow's as long as it is  fresh, they pour it into a big skin or bottle, and they set tc  churning it with a stick prepared for that purpose, and  which is as big as a man's head at its lower extremity and  hollowed out ; and when they have beaten it sharply it  begins to boil up like new wine and to sour or ferment,  and they continue to churn it until they have extracted the  butter. Then they taste it, and when it is mildly pungent,

^ Joinyille (148) speaking" of the way of eating of the Tartars,  remarks : " Ce Cjue il nc peuent manger jetent en un sac de cuir ; et  quant il ont fain, si oevrent le sac, et manguent touzjours le plus  viex devant : dont je vi un Coramyn (Korasmian) qui in des gens  I'empereour de Perse, qui nous gardoit en la prison, que quant il  Guvroit son sac nous nous bouchions (le nez), que nous ne pou\ions  durer, pour la puuoisie (puanteur) qui issoit du sac." The Dutch  envoys to Peking, in 1654, having been at an imperial banquet at  which Mongol chiefs were also present, noted that ''it was a pleasure  to see these famished Tartars fiUmg their leather pouches or skins  with the hair still on" (Nieuhoft, Embassy, 53-59). It is still  customary among the Mongols for the guests to dispose of all the  food placed before them, if one cannot cat all that is given him,  he may give it to the bystanders, or else he will stvjre it away in  his gown. I have never seen then> use a bag of the description  referred to. Kahta^a, or kabta^an, means " poucli or bag" in Mongol ;  and Mr. F Grenard has kindly informetl me that in Turki works of  the fifteenth or sixteenth centuries he has found \\ic\\<dx(\ K'aptorghai,  meaning "pouch, large purse," and sometimes "cartridge case.'  Plan de Carpine (640) notes that "it is a great sin among them 10  allow any portion of drink or food to he lost : so they may not gi\e a  bone to the dogs unless they have previously taken the marrow out of  it." The same habit obtains to-day among the Mongols and Kirghiz.

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 6y

they drink it.^ It is pungent on the tongue like rap6 wine  when drunk, and when a man has finished drinking, it  leaves a taste of milk of almonds on the tongue, and it  makes the inner man most joyful and also intoxicates  weak heads (228), and greatly provokes urine. They also  make caracosmos^ that is " black cosmosl' for the use of the  great lords. It is for the following reason that mare's milk  curdles not. It is a fact that (the milk) of no animal will  curdle in the stomach of whose fetus is not found curdled  milk.^ In the stomach of mares' colts it is not found, so the  milk of mares curdles not. They churn then the milk until  all the thicker parts go straight to the bottom, like the  dregs of wine, and the pure part remains on top, and ft  is like whey or white must. The dregs are very white, and  they are given to the slaves, and they provokes much to  sleep.* This clear (liquor) the lords drink, and it is  assuredly a most agreeable drink and most efficacious.  Baatu has XXX men around his camp at a day's distance,  each of whom sends him every day such milk of a hun-  dred mares, that is to say every day the milk of three  thousand mares, exclusive of the other white milk which  they carry to others.^ As in Syria the peasants ^w^ a

^ On the preparation of kumiss^ Friar William's cosmos, conf. Yule  {Marco Polo, i, 24.9) ; Pallas, {Voyages, i, 506^ 511) ; and Atkinson  ( Western Siberia, 287).

' Yule {Marco Polo, i, 252) says that "black kumiss'" is mentioned  in Wassaf. Bretschneider {Med. Geog., 249) says Chinese medisevai  writers sometimes call the Kipchak Ha-la-chih (Turkish, kalladj,  " black"), because the people sent black mare's milk as a present to  the Mongol emperors. I have found no other references to this  beverage, nor is it, I think, known at the present day. An alcoholic  drink called araka, or areki, is distilled by the Mongols from kumiss  (Pallas, Voyag.es, i, 510).

^ Regula enifn est quod nullius animalis in cujus fetus ventre lac non  invenitur coagulu77i coagulaiur. Previous translators have all failed  to understand this passage,

^ These dregs arc called bossa by the Kalmuks ; they are also used  in tanning skins (Pallas, Voyages, \, 511).

^ Pian de Carpine ^671) refers to the Emperor's herds of mares for  milking ; and Marco Polo (i, 291) says : " the Khan keeps an immense

F Z

58 JOURNEY OF

third of their produce, so it is these (Tartars) must bring  to the ordti of their lords the milk of every third day. As  to cow's milk they first extract the butter, then they boil it  down perfectly dry, after which they put it away (229) in  sheep paunches which they keep for that purpose ; and they  l)ut no salt in the butter, for on account of the great boil-  ing down it spoils not. And they keep this for the winter.'  What remains of the milk after the butter they let sour  as much as can be, and they boil it, and it curdles in  boiling, and the curd they dry in the sun, and it becomes  as hard as iron slag, and they put it away in bags for the  winter. In winter time, when milk fails them, they put  this sour curd, which they call gruit, in a skin and pour  water on it, and churn it vigorously till it dissolves in the  water, which is made sour by it, and this water they drink  instead of milk.'^ They are most careful not to drink pure  water.

The great lords have villages in the south, from which  millet and flour are brought to them for the winter. The poor  procure (these things) by trading sheep and pelts. The  slaves fill their bellies with dirty water, and with this they  are content. They catch also rats, of which many kinds

stud of white horses and mares ; in fact more than 10,000 of them, and  all pure white without a speck. The milk of the mares is drunk by  himself and his family, and by none else."

^ The Mongols of the present day prepare and keep their butter in  the same way. Bergmann (ii, 121) remarks that they make butter of  cow's, ewe's or mare's milk, but the soft mare's milk butter does not  keep as well as the other two kinds.

- In another passage Friar WilHam more correctly transcribes the  name grut. It is the kurt of the Kirghiz (Radloff, Aus Sibirien^ i, 428),  the kuruf of the Afghans, the chura of the Tibetans. Marco Polo (i,  254) says of it : " They also have milk dried into a paste to carry with  them, and when they need food they put this in water and beat it up  till it dissolves, and then drink it." This drink is called shuurmik  amonc; some of the Tartars (Pallas, Voyages^ i, 511, 699; see also  KadlofT. op. cit., i, 298 ; Yule, Marco Polo^ '\, 257 ; and Tott, i, 333;.  In the Koko nor country and Tibet, \\\\%krut or chura is put in tea to  soften, and then eaten either alone or mixed with parched barley meal  ijsauiba).

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 69

abound here„ Rats with long tails they eat not, but give  them to their birds.^ They eat mice and all kinds of rats  which have short tails. There are also many marmots,  which are called sogur, and which congregate in one hole  in winter, XX or XXX together, and sleep for six months ;  these (230) they catch in great numbers.^ There are also  conies,^ with a long tail like a cat's, and on the end of the  tail they have black and white hairs. They have also  many other kinds of small animals good to eat, which they  know very well hov/ to distinguish. I saw no deer there.  1 saw few hares, many gazelles. Wild asses I saw in great  numbers, and these are like mules. J saw also another  kind of animal which is called arcali^^ which has quite the  body of a sheep, and horns bent like a ram's, but of such  size that I could hardly lift the two horns with one hand,  and they make of these horns big cups. They have hawks  and peregrine falcons^ in great numbers, which they all  carry on their right hand. And they always put a little  thong around the hawk's neck, which hangs down to the  middle of its breast, by which, when they cast it at its

- Here, of course, their hawks, eagles (Juirkui)^ and other hunting-  buds are meant. The best hawks appear to have come from the  Upper Yenisei and the Lower Amur (d'Ohsson, i, 104).

- Probably the Mus citiilus, the suslik of the Russians, which  Pallas says the Mongols are very fond of eating. He says also that  they like the flesh of badgers and marmots {Voyages, i, 197, 512).  Mr. Grenard tells me that soghur^ more usually written sour in Turki,  is the ordinary name of the marmot.

' Cuniculi. Marco Polo (i, 244) states that the Mongols are very  fond of " Phaiaoh's rats,'' which is supposed to be some variety o^  gerboa.

* On p. 278 he gives the correct Mongol name, culan .{khiihm),  of this animal. He is the first western traveller to mention it by  that name, and the same remark applies to the argali^ the Ovi'^  Poll. Marco Polo (i, 181) speaks of the wild sheep of Badakshan,  whose horns were "good six pahns in length" (see Yule's remarks,  op. at., i, 185).

'' Falcon es, girfaus erodios (or kerodios). Bergeron has rendered  the latter term by "herodiens et faucons." The same words occur,  however, in Marco Polo ; and Yule (i, 262), renders them, no doubt  correctly, by *' peregrine falcons" (see Ducange, 1131, s. v. Herodius).

70 JOURNEY OF

proy, they pull down with the left hand the head and  breast of the hawk, so that it be not struck by the wind  and carried upward. So it is that they procure a large  part of their food by the chase.^

Of their clothing and customs you must know, that from  Cataia, and other regions of the east, and also from Persia  and other regions of the south, (231) are brought to them  silken and golden stuffs and cloth of cotton, which they  wear in summer.^ From Ruscia, Moxel, and from greater  Bulgaria and Pascatir, which is greater Hungary, and Ker-  kis,^all of which are countries to the north and full of forests,  and which obey them, are brought to them costly furs of  many kinds, which I never saw in our parts, and which  they wear in winter. And they always make in winter  ^t least two fur gowns, one with the fur against the body,  the other with the fur outside exposed to the wind and snow';  these latter are usually of the skins of wolves or foxes or  papions ;^ and while they sit in the dwelling they have

1 Falconry is still a favourite amusement among the Mongols,  Kirghiz, and the Manchus of China. At the present day hawks are  carried on the left hand, if small, or on the left forearm if the birds  are large (see Marco Polo, i, 384, ^iiS ; Yule, Cathay. 135 ; Bergmann,  ii, 187 ; Radloft", Aus Sibirien^ i, 466 ; and Rockhill, Diary ^ 13).  Anthony Jenkinson {^"^ says the Tartars used to kill wild horses  with their hawks.

^ Pan'ni serici ei aurei et tele de ivambasio. The first is probably the  same as the stuff called naahetti di seta e (Toro by Pegolotti, which,  he says, western traders went all the way co China to get (Heyd,  ii, 6.98} ; and which Friar William in another passage (317) calls  nasic. The ielcde wavibasio {ox bombasio) is called elsevNhere by our  traveller tele de cotione ; Joinville (107) also speaks of " telle de coion.^*  Heyd (ii, 612) mentions the cotton of Asia Minor, Persia, India, and  Egypt as the most esteemed in the Middle Ages ; the cotton fabrics  of Persia and India were especially fine.

2 Kerkis in this passage designates the Kirghiz ; elsewhere our  author uses the same word as the name of the Cherkess.

^ Papionibus. In another passage (315) he says Mangu Khan sent  him three gowns, dc pdlibus popionum. The papion — for the word  is still usetl in French — is a baboon, the cynocephalus papion. 1  cannot imai^ine, however, that monkey skins were ever nmch used as  furs among the Mongols ; the supply must have been small, the cost  considerable. There is a species of baboon, 1 believe, found in the

FPaAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 71

linother lighter one. The poor make their outside (gowns)  of dog and kid (skins).

When they want to chase wild animals, they gather  together in a great multitude and surround the district in  which they know the game to be, and gradually they come  closer to each other till they have shut up the game in  among them as in an enclosure, and then they shoot them  with their arrows.^ They make also breeches with furs.-  The rich furthermore wad their clothing with silk stuffing,  which is extraordinarily soft, light and warm. The poor  line their clothes with cotton cloth, or with the fine wool  which they are able to pick out of the coarser. With this  coarser they make felt to cover their houses and coffers,  and also for bedding. With w^ool and a (232) third of  horse hair mixed with it they make their ropes. They also

mountains north of Peking, and another kind of monkey, with long  reddish hair on parts of its body, in Eastern Tibet and Ssii-ch'uan.  The skin of the latter is used as a fur by the Chinese, thoui(h not  commonly. I am inclined to thincl that the papion of Friar Rubruck  was a badger, or some variety of fox. Ibn Hatuta (ii, 401) says  the most prized fur in the Kipchak was ermine, next sable, then grey  squirrel. Ibn Alathir (xiv, 456) speaks of the Kipchak selling at  Sudak borthasi or black ifox, beaver, grey squirrel, or other furs.

1 On the great hunts of the Mongols, see Marco Polo (i, 384, 386-  388) ; Yule {Ciiihoy, i, 135) ; and d'Ohsson (i, 321).

'■^ The Mongols of the present day commonly wear in winter trousers  of sheep or lamb skins, with the wool on the inside. The Kirghiz  wear in riding huge baggy trousers called cMmhar^'wWo which they  tuck their gowns. Pian de Carpine (614) thus describes the Mongol  dress : " The clothes of the men and women are of one pattern. They  do not use capes, cloaks, hoods, or skins {pellUms) ; but they wear  tunics of bukeran, purple or baldakin, matlc in the following fashion.  They are open from top to bottom, and double over the breast ; on the  left side they are fastened with a tape, and on the right with three,  and furthermore on the left side they are open to the a'mpit. They  make fur gowns of all kinds after the same pattern ; but ihey wear  the outside fur gown with the fur outside, and it is open behind, with  a tail down to the knees."

The purple, baldakin, and bukeran, of Friar John are probably, as  pointed out by d'Avezac (525), Rubruck's " silk and gold stuff, and  cloth of cotton.'' Though there seems little doubt \\\i\.x. bukeran was  a light cotton or stuff, muslin our author (290) speaks of a stift  bukeran {stamina rigidaia). (See also Yule Marco Polo, i, 48, and  supra, p. J 9).

72 JOURNEY OF

make with felt covers, saddle-cloths and rain cloaks ; so  thev use acrreat deal of wool.^ You have seen the costume  of the men.

The men shave a square on the tops of their heads, and  from the front corners (of this square) they continue the  shaving to the temples, passing along both sides of the  head. They shave also the temples and the back of the  neck to the top of the cervical cavity, and the forehead as  far as the crown of the head, on which they leave a tuft of  hair which falls down to the eyebrows. They leave the  hair on the sides of the head, and with it they make  tresses which they plait together to the ears.^

And the dress of the girls differs not from the costume  of the men, except that it is somewhat longer. But on the  day following her marriage, (a worhan) shaves the front  half of her head, and puts on a tunic as wide as a nun's

* Felt is still applied to all these and many other purposes by the  Mongols. They mix horse-hair with the wool in making ropes, so  that they may not Stretch when wet, and to prevent them fiom getting  kinkled. On the manufacture of felt, see Atkinson {Upper and Lower  A moot y 42), and Rockhill {Ethnology, 706) ■

^ Vincent of Beauvais (bk. xxix, ch. Ixxi, 420«) says : " They shave  across the top of the head and both temples to the ears, so that the  shaved part of the head has the shape of a horseshoe. They also  shave the back part. The rest of the hair they wear long and n^ake  into plaits behind the ears. And all those among them shave their  heads in this fashion, whether they be Romans (/.t*., Greeks), Saracens,  or others." Pian de Carpine (611) describes the Mongols as follows :  " l^hey differ in their appearance from all the rest of mankind, for they  are broader between the eyes and cheeks than other men, and their  cheekbones stand out a good deal from the jaws. Their noses are flat  and small ; they have small eyes, with Trds drawn up to the eyebrows.  They are usually small in the waist, a few only excepted ; nearly all  are of short stature. Nearly all of them have but \ery little beard , a  few have some hairs on their upper lip and as a beard, and this they  never shave. They wear crowns (of hair) on the tops of their heads,  like clerks (among us), and from one ear to the other, for a width of  about three fingers, they shave it all as a general thing, right round  the crown. On their foreheads they shave ofirall(the haii) for a space  of two fingers in breadth ; the hair left behind the crown and the  shaven part (on the forehead) they let grow down to the eyebrows,  while they Ic* the hair on either side grow longer than in front. The  rest of their hair they let grow like women, making two plaits of it,  tying them each behind the ear. They have also small feet."

FRIAK WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 73

gown, but everyway larger and longer, open before, and  tied on the right side. For in this the Tartars differ from  the Turks; the Turks tie their gowns on the left, the  Tartars always on the right^ Furthermore they have a  head-dress, which thc}- call bocca, made of bark, or  such other light material as they can find, and it is big and  as much as two hands can span around, and is a cubit and  more high, and square like the capital of a column. This  bocca they cover (233) with costly silk stuff, and it is hollow  inside, and on top of the capital, or the square on it, they  put a tuft of quills or light canes also a cubit or more in  length. And this tuft they ornament at the top with pea-  cock feathers, and round the fedge (of the top) with feathers  from the mallard's tail, and also with piecious stones.  The wealthy laoies wear such an ornament on their heads,  and fasten it down tightly with an amess, for which there  is an opening in the top for that purpose, and inside they  stuff their hair, gathering it together on the back of the  tops of their heads in a kind of knot, and putting it in the  boccciy which they afterwards tic down tightly under the  chin.- '^Q it is tK-rit when several ladies are riding together,

* The Mongols, Chinese, Japanese, Tibetans, and I believe most of  the other nations of northern Asia of the present day, fold their gowns  to the right across them. The Chinese annals of the sixth century  note the peculiar habit of the Turkish tribes, of folding their gowns  across them to the left. " They button to the left \tso jen)^' the  Chou shu^ bk. 50, 3, says of tliem.

- Vincent of Beauvais (bk. xxix, ch. Ixxxv, 421^), describes the  bogtaky but does not mention it by its» name. Pian de Carpine (614)  says : ''Married women wear a very full gown, open in front down to  the ground. On their heads they wear a round thin^ made of twigs  or bark, and it is an ell in height, and finishes on top in a square ; and  1: grows in size all the way up to the top, and on the summit of it is a  long slender rod of gold, sih er or wood, or else a feather. And it is  fastened on to a felt cnp {pUlolum) which reaches to the shoulders :  and the cap as well as this thing is covered vvith bukeran or purple or  baldakin ; and they never go before men without this thing {instrnmen-  tum) on, a-nd by it they are distinguished from other women. The  maidens and young women can be distinguished from the men with  great difficulty, for in' all respects they are dressed like them. They

74 JOURNEY OF

and one sees them from afar, they look h*ke soldiers,  helmets on head and lances erect. For this bocca looks  like a helmet, and the tuft above it is like a lance. And  all the women sit their horses astraddle like men. And they  tie their gowns with a piece of blue silk stuff at the  waist and they wrap another band at the breasts, and tie a  piece of white stuff below the eyes which hangs down to  the breast.^ And the women there are wonderfully fat,  and she who has the least nose is held the most beauti-  ful. They disfigure themselves horribly by painting their

(/.^., the men) have caps which are not like those of other nations, but  we are unable to clearly describe their shapes."

Quatremere (102) quotes a number of Persian authors who use the.  word bogtak to distinguish the head-dress worn exclusively by Mongol  princesses (see also Ibn Batuta, ii, 379, 388 ; Cordier, Odoric, 369, 409 ;  Yule, Cathay, 131 ; and ClaVijo, 154). Such high head-dresses seem to  have been worn at various timts by many Asiatic peoples or tribes ;  whether they were quite like the Mongol bogtak oi" not I am unable to  say. Wei shu {}o\i. 102, 13), speaking of an Uigur people called the  Yen-ta, says : " It was the custom of the Yen-ta for brothers to have  the same wife : if a man had no brothers, his wife worea head-dress  (or cap) with but one horn. If he had brothers, she added as many  {Joints (or horns) as he had brothers." Yiian-chuang describes in  about the same terms the head-dress of the women of Himatala. who  may, bylhp way, bethe Yen-ta of the Wei shu (Julien, Voyages^n^ i()7).  The nearest modern approach to the Mongol bogtak seems to mc to  be the high head-dress, covered with bark or red cloth, of the Votiak  women of Kasan (Pallas, VoyageSy v, 32). We find another head-  dress of like description, which may owe its origin to the bogtak^  worn at the present time by the Christian women of Urfah. between  Diarbekij- and Aleppo (Percy liadger, i, 329). The head-dress of  the Kirghiz women, and the high Fleniish head-dress called kennin^  introduced into France by Isabeau do Bavicre, should not be omitted  in this enumeration.

^ Vincent of Heauvais (bk. x.\ix, ch. Ixxxv, 42 1<^) describes the  gorgeous harness of the big stout palfreys the rich Mongol ladies rotlc.  *' All the wives of great Barons," he says, *' arc dressed in siimitcs or  golden purples (purptiris dvauratis)^ as are their husbands. Usually,  however, all women are clothed in boqueram (gowns) made with many  plaits at the waist .... They have *l*o another kind of gown of  white woollen %\w'i{ {panno laneo at'bo), vwhich all Tartars put on over  their clothes when it rains and in winter.' Vincent is here t|U<>tin^ from  Friar Simon of St. Quentin. The Mongols )efcrrcd to lived in Asia  Minor (w Persia. Tlie Kirghiz women still cover their faces when  riding and exposed to the cutting wind.

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 75

faces.^ They never lie down in bed when having their  children.-

(234) It is the duty of the women to drive the carts, get  the dwellings on and off them, milk the cows, make butter  and gntit, and to dress and sew skins, which they do with a  thread made of temdons. They divide the tendons into fine  shreds, and then twist them into one long thread. They  also sew the boots, the socks and the clothing.^ They  never wash clothes, for they say that God would be  angered thereat, and that it would thunder if ttiey hung  them up to dry.^ They will even beat those they find  washing them. Thunder they fear extraordinarily ; and

^ Conf., itifra^ his description of Sca,tay's wife. The custom of  rubbing the face with unguents, usually black, to protect the skin from  the effects of the wind, has been practised in northern Asia for a long  time. As early as the seventh century, we hear of it obtaining in  Tibet (Rockhill, Land of the Lamas, 214).

2 The Kalmuk women have their children in a crouching position ;  the Kirghiz bring forth theirs kneeling (H. Ploss, Das Weib., li, 276).  In China, Japan, Mongolia and Tibet, a crouching position is, I  believe, the rule. Pallas ( Voyages, i, 570), says that when a Kalmuk  woman is in childbirth, a lama is called in who reads prayers, while  the husband stretches a net round the outside of the t<nt, and beats  the air with a club till the child is bom ; crying the whik gart chetkir^  " be off, devil ! "

^ Pian de Carpine (643) says : " The maids and women ride and race  on horseback as skilfully as the men ; we saw them also carrying bows  and arrows. The women are able to stay on horseback for a very  long time as well as the men ; th'ey ride with very short stirrups.  They take good care of their horses, but then they are carefol of all  their things. Their women do all the work : they make the fur gowns,  the clothes, the shoes and boots, and everything else that is made of  leather. They drive the carts and load (reparant) them, they load  the camels, and they are most active and strong in all their work.  All the women wear trowsers (fetnoralia), and some of them shoot  with the bow like men." All writers of the period state that the  Mongol women accompanied the men into the battles, were fine  archers, and fought as bravely as they (Matth. Paris, iv, 388 ;  d'Ohsson, i, 329). The domestic duties of the Mongol women are the  same to-day as they were in Friar William's time (see Bergmann, ii,  165-167, and Radlotf, Aiis Sibirien, i, 295-297).

^ Conf. d'Ohsson, i, 409 ; ii, 93. The Mongols of the present day stttl  have this superstition (Rockhill, Diary, 154, 207). Rashidcddfn says  that they believed any liquor spilt in the tent, or wet boots put to dry  in the svm, would attract lightning (d'Ohsson, li, 618).

76 JOURNEY OF

when it thunders they will turn out of their dwellings all  strangers, wrap themselves in black felt, and thus hide  themselves till it has passed away.^ Furthermore, they  never wash their bowls, but when the meat is cooked they  rinse out the dish in which they are about to put it with  some of the boiling broth from the kettle, which they pour  back into it.'- They also make the felt and cover the  houses.^

The men make bows and arrows, manufacture stirrups  and bits, make saddles, do the carpentering on (the frame-  work of) their dwellings and the carts ; they take care '^f  the horses, milk the mares, churn the e^sirtos or mare's  milk, make the skins in which it is put ; they also look  after the camels and load them. Both sexes look aftei  the sheep and goats, sometimes the men, othertimes the  women, milking them.'*

They dress skins with a thick mixture of sour ewe's

* Plan de Carpinc (63'?) says : " If anyone is killed by thunder, all  the people who were in the camp (at the time) must pass through fire.  The tent, bed, cart, felt and clothing, and everytjiing of the kind they  have will be touched by no one till they have been purified." Schili-  berger (50) says that among the Tartars a man killed by lightning  was held to be a saint.

- Pian de Carpi ne (639) says : " They never wasji their bowls, and if  sometimes they rinse them out with the pot liquor, they pour it back  into the pot on the meat. In like fashion they wash their pots and  cooking utensils." The Mongols still follow this expeditious plan.  They never wash the pails in which they keep milk or curd : it would  bring bad luck ; but they leave on the inside a thick crust of hardened  curd, inixed with hair and dung (conf. Atkinson, Wejiern Siberia,  28(3 ; see also supra, p. 64).

- Cooperiunt domos I^y this, I take it, is to be understood that the  women put the sheets of felt in place over the framework of the tents  each time they were set up. I have not noticed that this work was  exclusively reserved to the women among the Mongols of the present  day.

^ Pian de Carpine (643) says : '* The men look after nothing at all  hut their arrows, though they give a little attention to the flocks.  They hunt and practise archery : for all of them from the smallest to  the biggest are good archers, and as soon as their children are two or  three years old they begin to ride, to manage horses, and to race.  Ar.tl they give them bows according to their age, and teach them to  shoot : tbey are \ery agile and daring."

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 77

miJk and salt.^ When they want to wash their hands or  head, they fill their mouths (235) with water, which they let  trickle on to their hands, and in this way they also wet  their hair and wash their heads.^

As to their marriages, you must know that no one among  them has a wife unless he buys her ; so it sometimes  happens that girls are well past marriageable age  before they marry, for their parents always keep them  until they sell them. They observe the first and second  degrees of consanguinity, but no degree of affinity ; thus  ;one person) will have at the same time or successively two  -■■srers.^ Among them no widow marries, for the following

• Lacte avium acetoso inspissato et saiso. Pallas ( F<9>/rt:^<?J, i, 5 14)  says that the Kalmuk women tan skins with the residuum of milk left  aiie^- the distillation of araka and a little salt. The skins are after-  \> aids softened and smoked. '' Sometimes,'" he adds, '^ they use a  mixture of ashes and salt water, and after the skins have been dried  aiid smoked, they are rubbed with a mixture of putrid sheep or ox  \ '^*zv and milk.'- The Mongols and Tibetans of the Koko nor country  ^ofien the skins with sour cream.

- This mode of washing the face and hands is still in vogue in  Mongolia and northern China. Persian authors say that the Yassak.  i.^r Ordinances of Chingis Khan, ordered all Mongols not to put their  hands in any water, but to take it up in their mouths to wash with  *Quatremere, op. cit.^ 436).

' Vincent of Beauvais (bk. xxix, ch. Ixxvi, 420^) states that a Tartar  did not consider a woman his wife till she had conceived or borne a  chrid. If she proved barren, he might send her away. Furthermore,  a nusband did not get the wife's dower till she had borne him a son,  nor did the woman receive it from her father and mother till she had  a child.

Piande Carpine (612) says of the Mongols' marriage customs : ''Each  one hath as many wives as he can support ; some have a hundred,  >:ome fifty, some ten, some more, others fewer. And as a general rule  they marry all their relati\es except their own mother, their daughters  and sisters by the same mother. They may however marry their  sisters through their father, and also their fathers wives after his  death. A younger brother, or some other younger member of the  family, is expected on the death of his elder to take the brother's wife.  All other women without any distinction they take as wives, and they  Duy them right dearly from their parents. After the death of their  husbands (the women) do riot easily make second marriages, except  some one wishes to take his step mother as a wife'' (see also Marco  Polo, i. 222, 245; Radh)tf, <?/ r//.,i, 476 ;and Rockhill, Z>'/<2;j, 156). The  Chinese annals attribute the above custonjs to a number of tribes of  northern Asia, to the Turks, to the Tu-ku-hun, a people probably of

^8 JOURNEY OF

rerison they beh'evc that all who serve them in this h'fe  sliall serve them in the next, so as regards a widow  they beheve that she will always return to her first hus-  band after death. Hence this shameful custom prevails  among them, that sometimes a son takes to wife all his  father's wives, except his own mother ; for the orda of the  father and mother always belongs to the youngest son,  so it is he who must provide for all his father's wives who  come to him with the paternal household, and if he  wishes it he uses them as wives, for he esteems not himself  injured if they return to his father after death ^ When  then anyone has made a bargain with another to take his  daughter, the father of the girl gives a feast, and the girl  flees to her relatives and hides there. Then the father  says : " Here, my daughter is yours take her wheresoever  you find her." Then he searches for her with his friends  till he finds her, and he must take her by force and carry  her off with a semblance of violence to his house.-

Kitan (or Moho) descent, to the T'ang-hsiang, a Tibetan people, and  to others {Chou s/ni, bk. 50 ; Vang shii^ bk. 221). Of the Turks the  CJwu shu says they could marry in the ascending lines of affinity, but  not in the descending. These customs still prevail among the Kafirs  (Robertson. Kafirs of the Hindu Kush, 535 ; see also Elias, Tarikh-i-  rashidi^ 251).

1 To cite but one example of this custom among the Mongols :  Tutukai (or Budugai), fourth daughter of Hulagu, married in the first  place Tenker Kurkan, then his son Sulamuh, then his son Jijak  Kurkan (Howorth, History^ iii, 213). Conf. Gomboiew, p. 652, and  Quatrem^re, op. cit , 89, 92. Clarke {Travels^ 52) says that in his time  (1799) a Kalmuk widow became the property of her husband's brother.  if he chose to claim her (see also Haxthausen, Transcaucasia, 403,  who notes this custom among the Orsethes). Pian de Carpine (642)  notes that there was no difference between the sons of the first wife  and those of concubines as to inheritance and other rights. It is stil  customary among the Kirghiz for the youngest son to receive as his  inheritance, besides a portion of the flocks and herds, his fathers  winter camp with its pasturages {kishlak) (Radloff, of>. cit., i, 416).  Hlackstone {Com7neniaries ii, Z^ says this custom once prevailed in  Scotland.

^ Clarke {op. cit., 70), speaking of the marriage customs of the Kal-  muks, says : "A girl is first mounted, who rides off at full speed. Her  lover pursues, and if he overtakes her she becomes his wife." /<'<•/

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 79

(236)

^^S to their justice you must know that when two  men fight together no one dares interfere, even  a father dare not aid a son ; but he who has  the worse of it may appeal to the court of the lord,  and if anyone touches him after the appeal, he is put  to death. But action must be taken at once without  any delay, and the injured one must lead him (^vvho  has offended) as a captive. They inflict capital punish-  ment on no one unless he be taken in the act or con-  fesses.^ When one is accused by a number of  persons, they torture him so that he confesses. They  punish homicide with capital punishment,^ and also co-

shu-> (bk. 103, 15) speaking of the Kao-ch'e (Turks or Uigurs), says the  man brought cattle and horses to the camp in which he wished to choose  a wife, and took the one who could sit a horse which he tried to make  throw her. This may be a survival of an older custom, in which the  bride fled with —or was carried off by — her lover. Tang shu (bk. 219,  7) says of Kitan (or Sien-pi) of Shih-wei, probably of the same stock as  the Mongols, that the man began by serving the family of the woman  for three years ; then a portion of her property was given to the woii^an  he had chosen for a wife, and he carried her off to the sound of drums  and with dancing. When the husband died, the woman did not marry  again. On the social organisation of the Mongols of the present day,  see K )pernicki {Journ. Anthrop. Inst.^ i, 413,^/ seq.)\ Grenard {pp. cit..  ii, 249, 250) states that in Chinese Turkestan, especially among the  Kazak, the idea of abduction of the bride is still clearly observed in  the marriage ceremonies

^ According to the Chinese code of the present dynasty, the death  penalty cannot be applied unless the criminal confesses. Torture is  permitted, however, to extract it.

2 Chingis Khan's Ulag yasmk^ or Great Ordinances, punished with  death homicide, robbery, adultery, fornication, sodomy ; also. him who  lost for the third time money entrusted to him, him who received stolen  goods or runaway slaves, him who picked up a weapon in battle and  did not restore it to its owner, him who used sorcery to another's injury,  him who interfered in a duel (d'Ohsson, i, 408). Haithon {Hist. Orient.^  72) says the Mongols considered it a mortal sin to leave the bit in a  horse's mouth when he was feeding. Pian de Carpine (641) mentions  capital punishment for adultery, brigandage, and open larceny. He  also remarks (635) : "Their women are chaste and nothing is heard  among them of lewdness ; but some of the expressions they use in  joking are very shameful and coarse." They have not changed since  then. Marco Polo (i, 259} says that for " horse-stealing or some other  great matter, they cut the thief in two with a sword. Howbeit, if he

8o JOURNEY OF

habiting- with a woman not one's own. By not one's own.  I mean not his wife or bondwoman, for with one's slaves  one may do as one pleases. They also punish with death  grand larceny, but as for petty thefts, such as that of a  sheep, so long as one has not repeatedly been taken in the  act, they beat him cruelly, and if they administer an  hundred blows they must use an hundred sticks •} I speak  of the case of those beaten under order of authority. In  like manner false envoys, that is to say persons who pass  themselves off as ambassadors but w^ho are not, are put  to death. Likewise sorcerers, of whom I shall however  tell you more, for such they consider to be witches.

When anyone dies, they lament with loud wailing,  then they are free, for they pay no taxes for the year.  And if anyone is present at the death of an adult, he may  not enter the dwelling even of Mangu Chan for the year.  If it be a child who dies, he may not enter it for a month.  (237) Beside the tomb of the dead they always leave a  tent if he be one of the nobles, that is of the family of  Chingis, who was their first father and lord. Of him who  is dead the burying place is not known. ^ And always

he able 10 ransom himself by paying nine times the value of the thing  stolen, he is let off." Ibn Batuta (ii, 364), referring to the Kipchak,  says : " He in whose possession is found a stolen horse, must return it  to its owner, and give him nine like it ; if he cannot do this, his  children are seized : but if he has no children, he is slaughtered like a  sheep."

' Marco Polo (i, 259) says : "When anyone has committed a petty  theft, they give him, under the orders of authority, seven blows of a  stick, or seventeen, or thirty-seven, or forty-seven, and so forth, always  increasing by tens in proportion to the injury done, and running up to  one hundred and seven."

•^ Vincent of Beauvais (bk. xxix, ch. Ixxxvi, 421^) says : "If the  tlead Tartar has been a rich and mighty man, he is buried in  his most costly robes, and in some hidden place remote from ail, so  that he be not despoiled of his raiment." He goes on to say that the  friends of the deceased kill his horse and skin it, fill the skin with  straw, and suspend it by poles over his tomb. rhe\- eat the tlesh, and  keep up their lamentations over the deceased for ^o days, more or  less. '• Fht re are some Tartars," he adds, "and some Christians also

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 8 1

around these places where they bury their nobles there is a  camp with men watching the tombs. I did not understand  that they bury treasure with their dead. The Comans

but very bad ones, among whom the sons, on the father getting old  and worn out by age, give him a certain fatty substance (pingnia) like  sheep's tail to eat, which oppresses him and he is easily suffocated.  When the father is dead, they burn the body and collect the ashes,  which they keep as something precious. And every day when they  eat they sprinkle their food with this powder' (see Gombojew, 658).  Pian de Carpine (628) says : " When a person is dead, if he is of the  nobles, he is buried secretly in the steppe wherever it pleaseth them :  he is buried however with his tent {static) and seated in the middle of it,  and they put a table before him, and a bowl full of meat, and a jar full  of mare's milk ; and a mare with her foal is buried with him, also a  horse with bit and saddle. And another horse they eat, and fill the  skin with straw and put it on two or four poles over him, so that he  may have a dwelling in the other world, and a mare to give him milk,  and that he may increase his horse herd, and have horses on which to  ride. And the bones of the horse which they eat they burn for the  good of his soul. And often the women come together to burn bones  for the souls of the men, as I have seen with my own eyes, and have  been told by others. I saw also that Occodai-can| the father of the  present Emperor (Kuyuk), had let a small tree grow for his soul, and  he ordered that no one was to cut a branch of it, and whoever did, as  1 found out myself, was beaten, despoiled and badly tieated. So ir  was that though I was greatly in need of something to whip my horse  with, I did not dare cut a switch there. Furthermore they bury gold  and silver with a person. They break up the cart on which he was  carried, destroy his dwelling, and his name may not be pronounced by  anyone for three generations." D'Ohsson (ii, 60) states that- when  Tului, son of Chingis, died, a mirror (iului) was called gueuzii^u^ the  use of the word tului having been tabooed. Vaiious other cases  might be cited (see Rockhill, Diary ^ 160).

Friar John adds (630) : " Some of their great people are buried in  another fashion. They go secretly into the steppe (f^w/^), and having  removed the grass in a certain spot together with its roots, they make a  g^reat pit, and in the side of this pit they rr^ke a grave underground ; and  the slave whichhe loved best they put under him, and he lies there so  long under him that he is about to draw his last breath, when they take  him out to let him breathe ; and this they do three times, and if he  escapes alive he is free thereafter, and does what he pleases, and is a  great man in the camp, even among the relatives (of.his dead master).  The dead man they place in the grave made in the side of the pit as  explained above ; then they filiup the pit which is in front of the grave,  and put back the grass as it was before, so that no one may find the  place afterwards. There is another mode of burial similar to the above,  except that they leave a tent above the grave on the, steppe.

" In their country there are two cemeteries. The one in which they  bury the emperors, chiefs and all the nobles : and wherever they may  be, whenever it is possible, they carry them thither ; jnuch gold and  silver i§ buried with them. The other is that in which were buried all  those who were killed in Hungary; for a great many were killed there.

82 JOURNEY OF

raise a great tumulus over the dead, and set up a statue to  him, its face to the east, and holding a cup in its hand at the  height of the navel. They make also pyramids to the rich,  that is to say, little pointed structures, and in some places I  saw great tiled covered towers, and in ethers stone houses,  though there were no stones thereabout. Over a persoi]  recently dead I saw hung on long poles the skins of xvi  horses, four facing each quarter of the world ; and they  had placed also cosmos for him to drink, and meat for him  to eat, and for all that they said of him that he had been  baptised. Farther cast I saw other tombs in shape likw  great yards covered with big flat stones, some round, some  square, and four high vertical stones at the corners facing  the four quarters of the world.^ When anyone sickens  he lies on his couch, and places a sign over his dwelling

To that cemetery no one dare come except the guardians who are  placed there to watch it ; and if anyone should come there, he would be  laid hold of, despoiled and beaten and very badly treated. It happened  that we ourselves in ignorance of this entered the bounds of the cemetery  of those who had been killed in Hungary, when they came on us and  v-'anted to shoot us with theit arrows ; but as we were ambassador^?  and did not know the customs of the country, they let us go."

The appellation of " first father' applied to Chingis is but the trans-  lation of his Chinese dynastic title of Vat tsu, " the great ancestor.  Most founders of dynasties in China since the third century, B.C., have  either borne this title or that of fCao isu^ " Exalted ancestor." In  the letter of Arghun to the Pope in 1285, he refers to " Gingiscam  primo pati i omnium Tartarorum" (Chabol, Hist, de Mar-Jabalaha., 190).

See also, on the burial customs of the Mongols and Comans, Ihn  Hatuta, iv, 301 ; Lebeau, Bas Empire, xvii, 397 ; and Palladius, 11, 12.  The Kirghiz still bury their dead •:» a recess dug in the side of the  grave (Svcn Hcdin, op. cit.^ i, 420). Conf. Journ. Roy. Asiat. Soc.,  n. s., xii, 443.

^ The tumuli of Southern Russia and of Northern Asia, the tombs  of Comans, Turks and of other peoples who have at various times occu-  pied these vast regions, hare been described by most travellers who  have visited these countries (Atkinson, West. Siberia, 168, 235 ;also his  Upfer and Lo-wcr Amoor^ 39, 157, 179, 191, etc.) One donic-shapcd  lomb he describes (p. 191) was 37 ft. high. In a place near Kopal the  lombs covered an area of four miles by one. Radloff(/^//fj Sibirien^  ii. \o\ et se<}\ gives a detailed desniption of similar tombs, and of  the interior arrangement and conients of a number which he opened.

The Choii shit ^bk. l.) s.iys that it was customary smtniQ the ancient  Tuiks to place around a tomb as many upright stones a> the deceased  h?d killed persons in his Kfctimc.

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 83

that there is a sick person therein, and that no one shall  enter. So no one visits a sick person, save him who  serves him.^ And when anyone from the great ordu is ill.  they place (238) guards all round the ordu, who permit no  one to pass those bounds. For they fear lest an evil spirit  or some wind should come with those who enter. They  call, however, their priests, who are these same soothsayers.

HEN therefore we found ourselves among these  barbarians, it seemed to me, as I said bsfcie.  that I had been transported into another world.  They surrounded us on their horses, after having made  us wait for a long while seated in the shade -under our  carts. The first question was whether we had ever  been among them before. Having answered that we  had not, they began to beg most impudently for some  of our provisions. We gave them some of the biscuit  and wine that we had brought with us from the city,^  and when they had drunk one flagon they asked for  another, saying that a man enters not a house with one  foot only ; but we gave it not, excusing ourselves on the  score of the smallness of our stock. Then they asked  whence we came and where we wanted to go. I told th^m  what I have already said : that we had heard that Sartach

^ Pian de Carpine (628) says : " When any one of them sickens unto  death, a spear is put in his tent and around it they wrap a black felt ;  and thenceforth no one who is a stranger dare enter the bounds of his  dwelling. And when he begins to agonize, nearly all leave him, for no  one of those who have witnessed his death can enter the orda of any  chief or of the emperor until the new moon' (conf. Rubruck, p. 344  of text).

'^ Vtl}a, Constantinople, 17 fl-oXts-, is of cours^^ meant. We usually  derive the Turkish name Stambul from rr^v TroXtv, but I am inclined to  belies e that Pears ij^all of Ccnstantinople, 177) is right in thinking  that the Turkish name is but an abbreviation of Constantinople, just  as Skanderun 13 of Alexandretta, Isnik of Niceaea, etc.

G 2

84 JOURNEY OF

was a Christiiin, and that I wanted to go to him, for I had  your letters to deliver to hinn. They made most diligent  inquiry whether I was going of my own free will, or  whether 1 was sent. I answered that no one forced me  to go, nor would I go if I did not want to, so I was going  of my own free will (239), and also of the will of my  superior. I was most careful never to say that I was your  ambassador. Then they asked me what was in the carts,  whether it was gold or silver or costly clothing that I was  taking to Sartach. I answered that Sartach would see for  himself what we were bringing to liim when we- reached  him, but that it was none of their business to ask : ihey  should have me shown to their captain, and that he, if it so  pleased him, should have me taken to Sartach, otherwise  I would go back.

Now there was in that province a relative of Baatu, a  captain by the name of Scatay,^ to whom the lord emperor  of Constantinople was sending (by me) letters that I be  allowed to pass. So they agreed (to do as I asked \  supplying us with horses and oxen, and two men to guide  us ; and those who had brought us went back. Before,  however, giving us all this, they kept us waiting for a long  time, begging of our bread, for their little ones, admiring  everything they saw on our servants, knives, gloves, purses  and belts, and wanting everything. I excused myself on  the plea that we had a long journey before us, and that we  could not at the start deprive ourselves of necessary things.  Then they called me an impostor. It is true that they  took nothing (240) by force ; but they beg in the most  importunate and impudent way for whatever they see, and  if a person gives to them, it is so much lost, for they are

^ The name is variously wriuen Scaiai, Scatay^ Scafatai\ Scataiay  and Scatanay. It may be that the chief is the same as the Cadan,  Cartan, or Catan, mentioned by Plan dc Carpine (667), and supr.x,  )j. 8, ai»».d whose wife, he says (743) was Batu's sister.

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 85

ungrateful. They consider themselves the masters of the  world, and it seems to them that there is nothing that  anyone has the right to refuse them :^ if he refuses to give,  and after that has need of their service, they serve him  badly They gave us to drink of their cow's milk, from  which the butter had been taken ; it was very sour, and is  what they call atraJ^ And thus we left them, and it  seemed to me that we had escaped from the midst of  devils. On the next day we came to their captain.

For two months, from the time we left Soldaia to when  we came to Sartach, we never slept in a house or tent, but  always in the open air or under our carts ; and we never  saw a city, but only Comans' tombs in very great numbers.^

That evening the man who was guiding us gave us  cosmos to drink, and at the taste of it I broke out in a  sweat with horror and surprise, for I had never drunk of it.  It seemed to me, however, very palatable, as it really is.

* Pian de Carpine (636) says : " They are haughtier than any other  people, and despise all the rest of the world, holding them as less than  nothing, be they high or low, . . . They are greater liars than other  men, and there is hardly any truth in them. At first some of them  are quite bland, but they bite like the scorpion. They are astucious  and deceitful, and where they can, they get around everyone by  trickery."

2 The ordinary drink of the Kirghiz is boiled milk mixed with water,  and allowed to get sour. It is called airan (see Pallas, Voyages,  i, 618 ; Radloff, Aus Sibirien, i, 439). Atkinson, Upper and Lower  AfHOor (42), calls it hyran.

^ Ibn Batita (ii, 363) reirarks that it is the custom of the people of  the Kipchak to travel in the same way as the pilgrims on the Hedjaz  road. They start after the morning prayer, camp towards nine or ten  o'clock in the morning, start again in the afternoon, and camp again  in the evening. Bergmann (ii, 182) says that the usual distance  travelied daily by a Kalmuk is estimated by them at from 20 to 25  cersts. 01' about 13^ to 16^ statute miles. In Mongolia and Central  Asia, the length \i{ the stage is regulated to a great extent by the supply  of grass and water ; the average distance, however, is, I think, from  20 to 30 miles when travelling on horseback, and 14 to 15 with camels.  Friar William probably went at about this latter rate, or even more  slowly, with his ox carts.

86 JOURNEY OF

N the morning then we came across the carts of  Scatay carrying; the dwellings, and it seemed  to me that a city was coming towards me.^  I was also astonished at the size of the herds of oxen  and horses and flocks of sheep, though I saw but few  men to manage them. So I asked how many men  (Scatay) had under him, and I was told that there  were not (241) over five hundred, of whom we had  passed half at another camp. Then the man who  guided us began telling me that I must give something  to Scatay, and he made us stop while he went ahead to  announce our coming. It was already past the third hour,  so they set down their dwellings near some water, and  (Scatay's) interpreter came to us, and as soon as he learnt  that we had never been among them before he begged of  our provisions, and we gave him some. He wanted also a  gown, for he was to act as translator of our words in the  presence of his master. We excused ourselves. He asked  what we were bringing to his master, so we got a flagon erf"  wine and filled a small basket'^ with biscuits and a plate  with apples and other fruit, but he was not pleased because  we were not taking some costly tissue. However we went  with this in fear and trembling. (Scatay) was seated on

* Ibn Batula (ii, 380) thus describes his first view of the camp of the  Kban of Kipchak : " Then the imperial cortege, which the Turks  call ardu, arrived. We saw a great city moving with its inhabitants,  containing mosques and markets, with the smoke of kitchens rising in  the air ; for the Turks cook their food during the march. Carts drawn  by horses transport these people, and when they have come to the  camping place they unload the tents which «are on the arbas^ and put  them up on the ground ; for they are very light. They do the same  with the mosques and the shops."

2 Ve7'ingal. Yule {Marco Polo^ i, 371) says there is a Venetian sea-  term, Vernegal^ applied to a wooden bowl m which the food of the  men is put. I have not found this word in any dictionaiy at my dis-  posal, but as Friar William in another passage (254) uses the word  cophinum^ the old French word coffin^ meaning " a small basket,"  1 have no hesitation in translating it as I have done. It was probably  a round flat basket, in shape and size like a plate. Hakluyt (p. iii)  rendei s it by *' maund. ' See also Pauthier, Marco J'oiOy 280.

FRIAR WILLIAM OF KUBRUCK 87

his couch, with a little guitar in his hand, and his wife was  beside him ; and in truth it seemed to me that her whole  nose had been cut off, for she was so snub-nosed that she  seemed to have no nose at all ; and she had greased this  part of her face with some black unguent, and also her  eyebrows, so that she appeared most hideous to us. Then  I spoke to him in the terms previously used, for it was  essential that we should everywhere say the same thing ;  about this we had been well cautioned by those who had  been among them, never to change what we said. Then I  begged him to be pleased to accept these trifles of us.  excusing myself, being a monk and not allowed by my  order to own gold or silver or costly robes (242) : so 1 had  nothing of the sort to give him, only of our food to offer  him for a blessing. Then he had the things accepted, and  at once distributed among his men who had gathered  there to drink. I also gave him the letters from the  emperor of Constantinople. This was on the octave of  the Ascension (5th June). He at once sent them to  Soldaia, to be translated there, for they were in Greek, and  he had no one with him who knew the Greek language.  He ksked us if we would drink cos7nos^ or mare's milk ; for  the Christians, Ruthenians, Greeks and Alans who live  among them, and who wish to follow strictly their religion,  drink it not ; for of a truth they consider themselves to be  no longer Christians if they drink it, and the priests have  to bring them back into the fold as if they had denied the  faith of Christ.^ Then I made answer that we had had  enough of our own to drink so far, but that if that liquor

' Greek priests whom I have consulted on this point have assured  me that such used to be in the twelfth century the general belief of the  Christians inhabiting among the Tartars. They have, however, been  unable to produce any documentary evidence. The Armenian  chronicles say that the Georgians would not partake of the Mongol  feasts nor drink their kumiss, "because they were Christians"  (Duiaurier, 236, 238).

88 TOURNEY OF

should give out, we should have to drink what he gave us.  He asked al)Out the contents of the letters we were sending  to Sartach. 1 toJd him that the sealed ones were our bulls  but that there was naught in them but good and friendly  words. He then asked what we would say to Sartach,  1 auiiwered : '* Words of the Christian faith." He asked  which, for he would be pleased to hear them. Then I  expounded to him as well as I could through my inter-  prcter, who was neither over intelligent nor fluent, the  s\'mbol of the faith. When he had heard it, he remained  silent, but wagged his head. Then, having made choice of  two men to watch over us, and over the horses and oxen,  he made us drive about^ with him until the return of the  messenger whom he (243) had sent to have the letters of  the emperor translated, and we went about with him until  the day after Pentecost (8th June).

|N" Pentecost eve (6th June) there came to us  cQ^rtain Alans, who are there called Aas, and  they are Christians according to the Greek  rite, and use the Greek writing and have Greek priests.^

* Bigare. Friar William seems to use this word to designate the  moving about of the camp with the big tents on carts.

- The Alans or Aas appear to be identical with the An-lsai or  A-lan na of the Hou Han shu (bk. 88, 9), of whom uc read that  "they led a pastoral life N.W. of Sogdiana (K'ang-chii) in a plain  bounded by great lakes (or swamps), and in their wanderings went as  far as the shores of the Northern Ocean" (Ma Tuan-lin, bk. 338).  Pel shih (bk. 97, 12) refers to them under the name of Su-le and  Wen-na-sha (see also Bretschneider, Med. Gcotr.^ 258. ei seq).  Strabo (xi, 2, 422, and 5, 434), refjers to them under the name of .Aorsi  living to the north but contiguous to the Albani, whom son»e authors  confound with them, but whom later Armenian historians carofull)'*  distinguish from them (De Morgan, A/'mVt^//, i, 251). Ptolemy (vi. [4)  speaks of this people as the " Scythian Alans" \ Wnvol 1.k\>B^u) ; but the  first definite mention of them in classical authors is, according to  Bimbury (ii, 486), found in Dionysius Periergetes (305), who speaks of

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 89

They are not however scisrnatics like the Greeks,^ for  without any respect to persons they honour all Christians.  And they brought us cooked meats, begging us to  eat of their food, and to pray for one of theirs who  had died. Then I told thenn that it was the eve of a  great festival, and that on that day we did not eat meat,  and I told them of the festival, at which they were  much pleased, for they were in ignorance of what con-  cerned the Christian rite, the name of Christ alone  excepted. And they and many other Christians,  Ruthenians and Hungarians asked v/hether they could  be saved, for they had to drink cosmos and eat carrion and  beasts slaughtered by Saracens and infidels, which those  Greek and Ruthenian priests consider about the same ai?

the uX/cj^tj/rey 'AXai/ot (see also De Morgan, i, 202, and Deguigncs, ii,  279, ct seq.).

Ammianus Marcellinus (xxxi, 348) says the /Vhins were a congeries  of tribes living E. of the Tanais (Don), and stretching far into Asia.  '' Distributed over two continents, all these nations, whose various  names I refrain from mentioning, though separated by immense  tracts of country in which they pass their vagabond existence, have  with time been confounded under the generic appellation of Alans."  Ibn Alathir, at a later date, also refers to the Alans as "formed of  numerous nations "(Dulaurier, xiv, 455).

Conquered by the Huns in the latter part of the fourth century,  some of the Alans moved westward, others settled on the northern  slopes of the Caucasus; though long prior to that, in A.D. 51, they had,  as allies of the Georgians, ravaged Armenia (see Yule, Cathay^ 316 ;  Deguignes, i, pt. ii, 277, et seq. \ and De Morgan, i, 217, et seq.).

Mirkhond, in the Tarikhi IVassa/, and other Mohammedan writers  speak of the Alans and A.s. However this may be, it is thought tliat  the Oss or Ossetes of the Caucasus are their modern representatives  (Klaproth, Tadl. hist., 180; De Morgan, i, 202, 231). See also on th«  subject of the Alans, Yule, Cathay\ 373, and Marco Poio^ ii, 164,  492 ; Vivien de St. Martin, Nouv. Ann. des Voyaj^es, Aug.-Sept., 1848,  164 ; I>e\6rm, Journ. Asiat.^ ixe serie, viii, 431 ; and Haxthausen,- op.  cit.., p. 385, <?/ seq.

^ In the tenth century, we find the Emperor of Constantinople  addressing the Alan chiefs as his " spiritual sons " (Const. Porphyro-  genitus, De adminis., i, 688). Bar Hebrccus also states that the Alans  admitted the unity of persons in the Trinity, but not the unity of  nature ; in other words, that they belonged to the church of Rome  (Quatremere, 80 ; see also Mosheim, Hist. Tart. Ecdes., Appendix,  167, et seq.).

90 JOURNEY OF

carrion, or sacrifices to idols ; and because they did not  know the facts, neither could they keep them if they did  know. Then I explained to them as well as I could,  teaching them and comforting them in the faith. The  meat which they had brought (244) we kept for the feast  day, for we could find nothing to buy with gold and silver,  but only with linen or other tissues, and of those we had  none. When our servants showed the yperpera, they  rubbed them with their fingers, and put them to their  noses to smell if they were copper.^ Neither did they  (i.e., the Mongols) give us food, but only cow's milk, very  scur and bad-smelling. Our wine was about exhausted,  and the water was so muddy from the horses that it was  not drinkable ; had it not been for the biscuits we had,  and God's mercy, we should probably have perished.

|N the day of Pentecost (7th June) a certain  Saracen came to us, and while in conversation  With us, we began expounding the faith, and  when he heard of the blessings of God to man in the  incarnation, the resurrection of the dead and the last  judgment, the washing away of sins in baptism, he

^ This proves that the Mongols had a pretty good idea of Byzan-  tine coins of the period. Pachymeres {Andron. PaleoL, \i, 343)  says that m the reign of John Ducas Vataces (Friar William's  V'atacius) the gold coins {aurea or hyperperd) contained one-third alloy.  Even at a later date, Ibn Batuta (ii, 444) says that one of the wives of  the Khan of Kipchak *' gave me three hundred dinars in gold of the  country, which is called alberberah (iperpera) ; but this gold is not  good."

Pian de Carpine (707) speaks of "yperpera or besants." Gibbon  [History, vii, 341) " guesses" from a corrupt passage of Guntherus that  " the Perpera was the nummus aureus, the fourth part of a mark of  silver, or about ten shillings sterling in value." Friar John use$ the  word yperpera as synonymous with bezant, as did Joinville Marco  Polo, and others (Yule, Marco Polo, ii, 535). It cannot be estimated  at less than \os bd. or 1 u.

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 91

said he wished to be baptised ; but while we were  making ready to baptise him he suddenly jumped  on his horse saying he had to go home to consult with  his wife. And the next day talking with us he said he  could not possibly venture to receive baptism, for then  he could not drink cosmos. For the Christians of these  parts say that no true Christian should drink, but that  (245) without this drink it were impossible to live in these  deserts. From this opinion I could not possibly turn him.  So you will see how far they are astray from the true faith  through this opinion, which has been implanted among  them by the Ruthenians, of whom there are great numbers  there.

On this same day (7th June) this captain (Scatay) gave  us a man to guide us to Sartach, and two to take us to  a camp which was five days off, as oxen travel. And  they gave us also a goat for food, and several skins of  cow's milk, but only a little cosmos^ for it is held very  precious among them. And so we set out due north,^ and  it seemed to me that we had passed through one of the  gates of hell. The men who conducted us began robbing  us in the most audacious manner, for they saw that we  took but little care. Finally, after losing a number of  things, vexation made us wise.

We came finally to the end of this province (of Gazaria),  which is closed by a ditch (running) from one sea to the  other,2 and outside of it was the camp of these (Mongols) ;

^ Rede in aquilonem. Friar William's bearings are always off a  great many points. In the present case, travelling from Sudak to  Perekop, he was going in a general N.W. by N. direction.

2 There is to my mind little doubt that the ditch, which Herodotus  (iii, 2, 15) states was built by the blind slaves of the Scythians to close  the Chersonesus, was at the isthmus of Perekop ; though some writers  think that it, like the wall mentioned by Strabo (vii, 4, 258), ran across  the Kertch peninsula from the bay of Kaffa to that of Arabat. That  there was a ditch at Perekop in ancient times is demonstrated by the  fact that Strabo (vii, 3, 255) places a tribe of Taphrioi (from Taqbpoy,

92 JOURNEY OF

and when we came among them they were such horrible-  looking creatures that they seemed like lepers. They were  stationed there to collect the tax from those who get salt  from the salt lakes of which I have already spoken. From  this point we should have to travel xv days, they said  without seeing anyone. We drank cosmos with them, and  gave them a basket full of biscuits ; and they gave the  eight of us (246) a goat for the whole long journey, and  I know not how many skins of cow's milk. So having  changed horses and (^xen we set out, and in ten days we  covered the distance to the next camp ; and along the  whole route we only found water in holes made in hollows,  with the exception of two small streams. Aiid v/e were  travelling due east from the time we left this province of  Gazaria,^ having the sea to the south and a vast wilderness  to the north, which extends in places over xxx days in  breadth ; and in it is neither forest, nor hill, nor stone, but  orvly the finest pasturage. Here the Comans, who are  called Capchat,^ used to pasture their flocks ; the Teutons,

"' ditch'*) immediately north of the isihmiis. The woid Perekop, I may  also remark, means "a cutting," "a ditch." The old ditch of our  traveller's time was repaired somewhere about 1470 by the Khan of  the Crimea, Mengli Cirai. Traces of it still remain, but the forts and  redoubts erected by the Russians at the time of the Crimean War  have taken the place of the old ramparts (Reclus, Geographie, v, 835).  The word Krun^ the same author (v, 826) says, has the meaning of  "fortress," a most appropriate name for the Crimea, which by the  cutting and fortifying of the isthmus of Perekop could be turned into  an impregnable stronghold.

* Recte in orientem. Again the bearing given by our traveller must  be wrong ; he travelled in all probability during the first ten days after  leaving the isthmus of Perekop, E.N.E. After reaching the first camp  beyond Perekop, his route lay probably nearly due N.E. till he  came to the Volga.

^ The Comans, or Kipchak Comans, as our author also calls them,  *are identical with the Polovtses, or ''dwellers of the iMain,"of the early  Russian annalists (Nestor, Chroniqiiey 12, 19, et pas.), the Turks of the  Desht (or " Plain'O Kipchak of Mohammedan contemporary writers.  Under the name of Kumam or Comans, they are frequently mentioned  by Byzant'ne writers. The origin of this name is not known. Some  writers, a^ Adelung {MtthridaieSy i, 479), think they may have taken

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 93

however, call thern Valans, and the province Valania. It  is stated however by Isidorus that Alania extends from  the river Tanais to the Palus Maeotis and the Danube; and  this country which extends from the Danube to the  Tanais (which is the boundary between Asia and Europe),  and which it takes two months hard riding, as ride the  Tartars, to cross, was ail inhabited by the Capchat Comans,  as was also that beyond the Tanais to the Etilia, between  which two rivers are x (247) good days. To the north of  this province lies Ruscia, which is everywhere covered with

it from the river Kuma, which discharges in the Caspian ; but as  d Avezac(487) remarks, the name already' occurs in Xenophonf A /ta^axis^  vii, 8, 15), under the form Comania (Ko/Aai/ia). Assyrian inscriptions  of the eighth century, B.C., speak of an expedition of Tiglath Pileser  (B.C. 747-727) against the Comam, who hved at that time in the  present Kurdistan. The king is there said to have defeated their ariny  of 20,000 men, captured and destroyed their castles and towns, and  laid waste "the fiir spreading country of che Comani " (Rawlinson,  Five Ancie)it Monarchies., ii, 67). It; would, therefore, seem more likely  that the river Kuma took its name from the Comani. Pomponius  Mela (i, 603) mentions the Comani among the nations of the interior  of Western Asia. Rashideddin gives the following legend concerning  the origin of the Kipchak : " Oghuz Khan having been defeated by  the tribe of the Itbarak, was forced to retire to an island between two  rivers. At that time it happened that a woman, whose husband had  been killed in the battle, was delivered of a child in the hollow of a  large tree. When Oghuz heard of this he said : 'As this woman has  no husband, I will adopt her son.' The child received the name of  Kipchak^ a word derived from the Turkish kubuk., meaning * a  decayed tree.' All the people of Kipchak are descended from this  adopted son of Oghuz. After seventeen years, Oghuz succeeded in  gainin.« the superiority over the Itbarak. He conquered Iran, and  reiuiTied to his origmal hom6. Afterwards, when the Itbarak revolted,  Oghuz settled the Kipchak between their country and the river Jaik  ;l^ral). .Since that time the Kipchak have remained, both in summer  and winter, in the same country.'"' The country is frequently called  "the Desht" by Mohammedan writers, but the name is usually  written Deshti-Kapchak (Quatremere, 67 ; Mesalek al-absar., 281,  284 ; Burnes, Travels ift Bokhara, i, 322, ii, 267). Ibn Alathir (xiv,  456) says the Mongols claimed the Kipchak as of their race. Ibn  Iiaiuta(ii, 356) describes the country in about the same.^terms as Friar  William : "This plain is covered with grass and liowers, but one sees  in it neither mountain, tree, hill norslope.^' See also d'Ohsson, i, 338 ;  Yule, Marco Polo, i, 52, ii, 491 ; Bretschneider, Med. Geog.^ 162 ;  Me.'ialek al-absar., 268. Rubruck (274) says the Cangle'were a branch  of the Comans. Radlonf (^//i Sibirien., ii, 10) and Sven Hedin iop. cit.^  i, 259) mention a tribe of Kirghiz entiled Kipchak still living in the  eastern I amirs.

94 JOURNEY OF

forests, and extends from Poland and Hungary to the  Tanais, and it was all ravaged by the Tartars, and is still  being ravaged evtry day. For the Tartars prefer the  Saracens to the Ruthenians, who are Christians, and when  the latter can give no more gold or silver they drive them  ofif to the wilds, them and their little ones, like flocks  of sheep, there to herd their cattle.^ Beyond Ruscia to the  north is Pruscia, which has all been recently conquered by  the Teutonic knights ;2 and of a truth they might readily  acquire Ruscia, if they would put their hand to it, for  should the Tartars hear that the great priest, that is the  Pope, was about to make a crusade against them, they  would all flee to their deserts.

E travelled eastward, seeing nothing but the sky  and the earth, only now and then to our right  the sea which is called Sea of Tanais,^ and  tombs of Com^ns visible two leagues off, on account of

1 Pian de Carpine (700) says that when he was in Russia " there was  a certain tax-gatherer sent there by Kuyuk Khan and Batu who took  from each man one child out of every three, and all the men who had  no wives. And as to the women he took all those who had no  husbands, and in like manner all paupers. Those left were counted,  and of each, down to the new-born babe, whether rich or poor, was  exacted the following tribute :. a skin of a white bear (or) one black  beaver (or) one black sable {zabulus or sabulus)^ one skin of a black  animal they have in the north, the name of which I know not in Latin,  but which in German is called ilHs (pole-cat), and which the Poles  and Ruthenians call dochori {choreke in Russian), (or) one black fox  skin. And whoever paid not this was led off to the Tartars and made  a slave."

2 The Teutonic order began the conquest of Prussia and Livonia in  1230, but it was not until about 13 10 that the whole country was  subdued (Karamsin, iii, 167-172).

3 Friar William more frequently gives the sea of Azov its classical  name of Palu; McEotis^ by which it was also known to many of the  Mohammedan writers : Masudi calls it Maitus^ and Abulfeda Matych.  Abulmahasen, Quatrem^re says <^Not. ct Extr.^ xiii, 272), gives it the  name of Sea of Sudak. and Ibn Alathir (xiv, 457) calls it Sea of the

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 95

the custom of burying the whole of^ a family in one  spot. As long as we were in the desert it fared well  with us, but such misery as I had to suffer when we  came to inhabited places, words fail me to express. For  our guide wanted (248) me to meet every captain with a  present, but our supplies sufficed not for that, for daily we  were eight persons eating our bread, without counting those  who came by hazard, who all wanted to eat with us. There  were five of us, and the three who were conducting us, two  driving the carts and one going with us to Sartach. The  meat they had given us was insufficient, and we could  find nothing to buy with money.^ To add to this, when we  were seated in the shade under our carts, for the heat was  intense at that season, they pushed in most importunately  among us, to the point of crushing us, in their eagerness to  see all our things. If they were seized with a desire to void  their stomachs, they did not go away from us farther than  one can throw a bean : they did their filthiness right beside  us while talking together, and much more they did which

Khazars, a name applied to the Caspian by Mohammedan writers,  but intelligible here, as some Mohammedan geographers of his time  believed that the Caspian communicated by the Sea of Azov with the  Black Sea. Barbaro (4, et passim) calls it " Sea of Tabacche," which  may be for " Sea of Tanais."

* Friar Ascelin and Simon of St. Quentin had similar experiences  (see Vincent of Beauvais bk. xxxi, ch. xl-lii, 4$3^-454(!^). Pian de  Carpine (670) remarks : " No matter whence the ambassadors come,  they are (on arriving among the Mongols) in dire distress as to  victuals and clothing ; for their allowances are poor and small,  especially when they reach (the camp) of any of the princes and are  forced to wait there ; for then they give so little to ten men that two  could barely live on it. Nor while at the courts of the princes nor on  the road do they give to eat but once a day, and little enough then ;  and if they insult one, it cannot be resented, but must be borne in  patience. Great numbers of presents are asked for among them,  as well by the princes as the great and the small^ and if they are not  given, they abuse one and hold him as nothing ; and if (the envoys)  are sent by a great personage, they will not receive a moderate present,  but sa.y : 'You come from a great personage, and you give so little ?'  So they scorn to receive it, and if the ambassadors want to do their  work satisfactorily, they must give larger ones,"

96 JOURNEY OF

was vexatious beyond measure.^ Above all this, however, I  was distressed because I could do no preaching to them ;  the interpreter would say to me : " You cannot make me  preach, I do not know the proper words to use." And he  spoke the truth ; for after awhile, when I had learned  something of the language, I saw that when i said one  thing, (249) he said a totally different one, according to  what came uppermost in his mind. So, seeing the danger  of speaking through him, I made up my mind to keep  silence.

We travelled along then in great distress from stage to  stage till a few days before the feast of blessed Mary  Magdalen (22nd June) we came to the great river Tanais,  which separates Asia from Europe,^ just as the river of  Egypt divides Asia from Affrica. At the place where we  came to it Baatu and Sartach had established a village of  Ruthenians on the east bank, who ferried envoys and  merchants across on small boats. They first passed us  across, then the carts ; putting one wheel in one boat and  the otHer in another and tying the boats together they  rowed them across.^ At this place our guide did a most

^ Plan de Caipiiie (637) remarks : " they are a filthy people in eating  and in drinking, and in all their other doings."

2 The south-eastern boundary of Europe appears to have been  fixed at the Tanais or Don from very ancient times. Herodotus (iii,  32) lefers to it, but says he cannot conceive why it should have been  adopted as the boundary (see Rawlinson's note on the subject). The  opinion that the Nile separated Africa from Asia was also adopted  by classical geographers (Pomponius Mela, i, 603). On the  sources of the Tanais, see infra. Rubruck tells us that after leaving  Perekop he travelled in an easterly direction till he came to the  Don, and that when he left that river it took him nine days to  reach Sartach's camp, which was thiee days \V. of the Volga. The  first three or four days he had to travel on foot, and so did not  probably cover more than thirty to forty miles. The point where he  came on the Don was therefore in all likelihood not over 200 miles  from the Volga by the route he followed, which was N.E. (see also  F. M. Schmidt, 178-179).

^ These boats were probably canoes. Harbaro (31) speaks of the  boats dug out of great trees growing along the Volga, and used by  the Russians on that river.

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 97

foolish thing ; thinking that the people had to supply us  with horses, he sent back to their owners from the near  bank the animals which had brought us ; but when  we asked for animals they replied that they were ex-  empted by Baatu from any other service than ferrying  across those who came and went. From merchants even  they collect much money. So we remained there on the  river bank for three days. The first day they gave us a  big barbeP just out of the water, the second day some  rye bread and a little meat which the headman of the'  village (250) collected from the different houses ; the third  day we got dried fish, of which they have great quantities  here. That river at this point was as broad as the Seine  at Paris. And before vv^e came there, we passed many fine  sheets of water full of fish, but the Tartars do not know  how to catch them, nor do they care for fish unless they  can eat it as tbey would mutton. This river is the eastern  boundary of Ruscia, and takes its rise in the Ivloeotide  fens, which extend to the ocean in the north.^ The  river, however, flows southward, forming a big sea of

^ Borbaia. Pallas {Voyages^ i, 202), enumerating the various kinds  offish found in the Volga, speaks of the "barbue" or rhombus piscis.  This may be our traveller's borbota^ or barbata as some of the MSS.  write it (see supra, p. 45).

- Oritur at pal miibus Meotidis. Hakluyt's MS. wrongly reads ;/z^r-  (^^itur on )>. 120, where this statement is repeated ; all the other MSS ,  however, have oritur. In the present phrase Hakluyt's text omits the  word Meotidis. The copyist was evidently disinclined to accept as  correct Friar William's statement, which was at variance with the  notion concerning the sources of the Don then universally held. Even  Roger Bacon {pp. cit.y i, 357), who has incorporated in his reviewof [he  geography of eastern Europe and Asia all Rubruck's remarks, adhere»  to the classical views on the sources of the Don, and places them in  the Rhipiean mountains. Our traveller was the first, since Herodotus,  to locate correctly the sources of the Don, which flows out of I win  Lake in Tula. Herodotus (iii, 42) had said that the Tanais " is: a  stream which has its source far up the country, in a lake of vast size,  and which empties itself into another still larger lake, the Palus  Mafotis." The name Don was already used by the Slavs in Rubrucks  time ; both Pian de Carpine (i'/z/r^, p. 8) and Friar Benedict {supru^  p. 34) call it by that name (see also F. M. Schmidt, 184).

98 JOURNEY OF

seven hundred mil- s before it reaches the Sea of Pontu§,  and all the streams we passed flow also in that direction.  This same river has a forest on its west bank. Beyond  this point the Tartars go no farther north, for at that  season, about the beginning of August, they commence  going back southward ; so there is another village lower  down (the river), where envoys pass over in winter. We  found ourselves here in great straits, for we could procure  neither horses nor oxen for money. Finally, when I had  proved to them that we were working for the common  good of all Christendom, they obliged us with oxen and  horses ; but we ourselves had to go on foot.

It was the season (251) when they were cutting the rye.  Wheat thrives not there ; but they have great abundance  of millet. The Ruthenian women arrange their heads as  among us, but their outside gowns they trim from the feet  to the knee with vaire or minever. The men wear capes  like the Germans ; on their heads they wear felt caps,  pointed and very high.

We trudged along for three days without seeing anyone,  and just as we and the oxen were well worn out, and  unable to find any Tartars, two horses came running  towards us ; we took them with great delight, and our  guide and the interpreter got on them, in the hope of being  able to find some people. Finally on the fourth day^ we  found some people, and we were as happy as shipwrecked  mariners on reaching port. Then we got horses and oxca  and went along from stage to stage till we reached the  camp of Sartach on the second day of the Calends of  August (July 31st).

^ Since leaving the ferry across the Don.

FRIAR WILLIAM OF KUBRUCK. 99

^HE country beyond the Tanais is most beautifnl,  with rivers and forests. To the north are great  forests, inhabited by two races of men : to wit, the  Moxe!,^ who are without any reh'gion, a race of pure pagans.  They have no towns, but only little hamlets in the forest.  Their chief and the greater part of them were killed in  Germany; for the Tartars (252) took them with them to  the borders of Germany, and so they have formed a high  opinion of the Germans,^ and they hope that through them  they may finally be freed of the Tartar yoke. If a trader  comes among this people, he with whom he first puts up  must provide for him as long as he sees fit to stay among  them. If one sleeps with another's wife the husband cares  not, unless he sees it with his own eyes ; so thc}/ are not  jealous.^ They have swine, honey and wax, precious furs  and hawks.

* The Moxel and Merdas form the two branches of the Finnish  Mordwin people. These names, according toTallas( Voyages^ i, 104),  correctly transcribed are Mokshad and Ersad. the first name being  applied by them to their race in general. The earliest mention I  have found of this people is in Jornandes (444), where he speaks of  the Mordensimnis among the peoples of Hermanaric's empire.  Constantine Porphyrogenitus {De Adjninis.^ 166) refers also to the  Mordia country. Nestor {Chronigue^ 2) calls them Mordwa. Pian  de Carpine (676) speaks of them as Morduani^ and in another  passage (709) as Mordut. Barbaro (33) calls this people the Moxii^  and adds that they were mostly pagans. Some of their customs, as  described by him, are purely Tartar, especially that of sacrificing  horses at burials and setting up the stuffed skin over the grave (see  also Castren, Ethnolog, Vor/esimgeji, 134, and especially Smirnow,  Populations Finnoises, i, 260, et seq.). This latter author (264, et seq.)  shows that the identification of the Merdas with the Burtas or Bartas  of the early Mohammedan geographers cannot be accepted.

- Referring to the conquests being made at the tirrie by the Teutonic  Order, and to the possibility of their extending them to the Volga.

^ Smirnow {op, cit.^ i, 337) says : " In the beginning the Mordwin  family was only the associati:.n of several persons living together. . . .  There is no question of marriage in the proper sense of the word."  The same author^ speaking of the Mordwms of the present day, says  {loc. sup. cit.) ' "The girls do not generally marry before twenty or  twenty-five ; but when barely at the age of puberty that is to say at  the age of fourteen, they have relations with the boys of their village.  . . . . Liaisons between cousins are frequent ; they are not unknown  between brothers and sisters,"

H 2

100 JOURNEY OF

After them are the others called Mcrdas, whom the  Latins call Merdinis,and they are Saracens. Beyond them  is the Etilia, the largest river 1 have ever seen, and it  comes from the north, from Greater Bulgaria and flows  south, and it falls into a certain lake which has a circum-  ference of iiii months journey, and of it I shall tell you  later.^ So these two rivers, the Tanais and the Etilia, in the  north where we crossed them, are only distant the one from  the other x days ; but to the south they are far remote  from one another. For the Tanais flows down into the  Sea of Pontus, while the Etilia forms with many other  rivers which flow into it from Persia, this sea or lake. To  the south we had very high mountains, inhabited, on the  side facing this desert, by the Kerkis^ and the Alans or  Aas, who are Christians and still fight the Tartars. Beyond  them, along the sea or lake of Etilia, live certain Saracens  called Lesgi,^ who likewise owe them no allegiance.  Beyond them are the Iron Gates, which Alexander made  to keep the barbarous nations out of Persia ; of these I

^ On Friar William's views concerning the Caspian, see infra^ p. 1 18.

2 The Cherkesses or Circassians are of course meant. Here, as on  p. 70, our traAcller writes the name Kerkis. In the present passage,  however, MSS. D and E give the correct reading, Ckcrkis. Pian de  Carpine (659) also writes Kermis for Chcrkis. The only detail he gives  concerning them (679) is their habit of taking a strip of skin off their  faces from ear to ear as a sign of mourning for their deceased  fathers. The Cherkesses, who descend from the ancient Sarmatian  tribes of classical authors, have occupied for the last two thousand  years the Caucasian slope of the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov, the  Kuban steppes (De Morgan, Mission^ ii, 277).

3 Strabo (xi, 5, 432) speaks of the Le^ai (Ajj-yat) and Gehii (r^Xm)  two Scythic natioils living between Albania {i.e.^ E. Caucasus) and  the Aorsi (the Alans). Latin authors called this people Legw. In  the seventh century, Jomandes (432) refei*s to them as occupyirng tht-  same country, and calls \\\^n\Lazi. Ibn Alathir(455) speaks of them  as the Lekz^ and says that in his time (tenth century) they were jjarliy  Mohammedan, partly Christian. The country occupied at the present  time by the Lesgians is called Daghestan. De Morgan (ii, 278) does  not think this people can be classed, on the vague statement of Strabo,  in the Turanian race, but sees in it an inextricable mixture of all tho  races and tribes which have successively overrun this country (ser  also infra^ 380, 381).

FKIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. lOI

shall tell you later, for I passed through this place on my  way back, and between these two (253) rk'ers in this  country through which we were travelling used to live  Comans Capchac before the Tartars occupied it

>0 we found Sartach three days from the Etilia, and  his or<^u seemed to us very big, for he has six wives,  and his eldest son who was beside him had two or  three, and every one of them had a big dwelling and perhaps  two hundred carts. Our guide went to a certain Nestorian,  Coiac^ by name, who is one of the most important men of his  or^u. This latter made us go a long way to an officer who  is called the /amzaju, for thus they call him whose duty it  is to receive envoys.^ In the evening this Coiac had us told  to come to him. Then our guide asked us what we were  going to take to him, and he was greatly scandalized when  he saw that we were getting nothing ready to take to him.  We stood in front of him seated in all his glory, striking a  guitar and making people dance before him. Then I  repeated what I had previously said elsewhere as to the  reason for which we had come to his master, begging him  to assist us that his lord might see our letters. I also  excused myself, being a monk, for neither having, receiving  nor carrying with me gold or silver or any precious thing,

^ The name is variously written in the MSS. Caiac, Coiat and  Coiac.

2 In another passage (298) the name is correctly written lam.  Marco Polo (i, 420) says : " And the messengers of the Emperor in  travelling from Cambaluc, be the road whichsoever they will, find  at every 25 miles of the journey a station which they call Yamb^ or,  as we should say, the 'Horse Post-House.''^ Pallas i^Voyages^ i, 698)  speaks of the y(2;«/, or " relais de poste,'' of Asiatic Russia when he  visited it in 1769 (see also Yule, Cathay^ 131 ; Cordier, Odoric,  374, 416 ; d'Ohsson, i, 406 ; and Yule, Marco Poh, i, 423). These post-  stations were establ'shed by Ogodai in 1234 throughout the Mongol  empire (, d'Ohsson, ii, 63).

I02 JOURNEY OF

but only books and the chapel,^ with which we served God,  so we were not offering presents to either him or his  lord, for having put away all worldly goods I could not  be the bearer of those of others. Then he replied  right pleasantly that (254) I did well, being a monk, to  keep my vows ; that he did not want of our things, but  would rather give us of his own if we were in want ; and he  caused us to sit down and drink of his milk, and after  awhile he besought us to say a blessing for him, which we  did. He also asked us who was the greatest lord among  the Franks. 1 said : " The Emperor, if his land were in  peace." " No," he said, " it is the King of France." For  he had heard of you from Mcssire Baldwin of Hainaut.'^  I also found there one of the companions of David,^ who  had been in Cyprus (with him), and who had told him of  all he had seen. Then we went back to our lodgings.

The next day (ist August) I sent him (Coiac) a flagon  of muscadel wine, which had kept perfectly good during the

^ Capella in qua serviebamus Deo. The waid capella in mediasval  Latin, and also in modem French, is used to designate both the place  in which nnass is celebrated, and by extension the chalice, candle-  sticks, censors, and other objects used in church worship. Friar  William uses it in the latter sense. See Ducange, Glossariuvty ii, 221,  and Littrd, Dictionnaire^s. v. chapelle.

2 Baldwin of Hainaut, a knight in the service of the Emperor  Baldwin of Constantinople, had married, in 1240, a Coman princess,  daughter of Soronius, on the conclusion of a treaty of peace between  that Prince's horde and Baldwin II (Lebeau, Ntstoire, xvii, 392).  We learn from our traveller (326) that Baldwin had travelled  through northern Asia, going as far, it would seem, as Karakorum.  I know no oth^r mention in any contemporary record of this  journey.

' Unum de sociis David. The DaVid referred to is he who in 1248  came to St. Louis, when at Nicosia in Cyprus, on a mission from the  Mongol general Ilchikadai. For some inexplicable reason all  translators have misunderstood tlie reference, and have translated  these four words by " a Knight of the Temple," supposing, I take it,  that it that socius David was for socius or miles Salotnonis (Hakluyt,  116, 117 ; Purchas, 13 ; Bergeron, 32 ; Karamsin, iv, 73 ; da Ciyezza,  Storia Universalle^ i»433 ; Deveria, Notes (ftfpigraphie^ 45). William  of Nangis (360) says David's companion when at St. Louis' camp  Avas called Marchus. This may be the person here referred to.

FRIAR WILLIAM OF KUBRUCK. IO3

whole long journey, and a hamper^ of biscuits which  pleased him very much ; and that evening he kept our  servants with him. The next day he sent mc word to  come to the court, bringing with me the king's letters, the  vestments and the church ornaments and the books, fo  his master wished to see them. We did accordingly,  putting in one cart the books and the chapel, and in  another bread, wine and fruit. Then he caused us to  explain all about the books and vestments, and many  Tartars and Christians and Saracens looked on seated on  their horses. When he had finished examining them, he  asked if I would give all these things to his master. When  I heard this I was shocked, and his words displeased me.  Dissimulating, however, I replied : " My lord, we beg that  your lord will deign receive this bread, wine and fruit, noi  as a present, for it is too trifling, but for a blessing, and so  that we appear not before him with empty hands. He  shall see the letters of the lord King, (255) and by them  he shall know why we come to him, and then we will await  his pleasure, we and all our belongings. As to these vest-  ments they are holy, and may not be touched except by  priests." Then he told us to put them on to go in unto  his lord, and this we did. I put on the most costly of the  vestments, with a most beautiful cushion (J>ulvinar) against  my breast, and took the Bible which you had given me,  and the beautiful Psalter which my lady the Queen had  presented me with, and in which were right beautiful  pictures. My companion took the missal and the cross,  while the clerk (Gosset) put on a surplice and took the  censer. And so we came before his {i.e.y Sartach's) dwell-  ing, and they raised the felt which hung before the entry,

^ CophitiuSy which 1 take to be the same as the veringal used on  p. 86. Isidorus (xx, 720) says cophimis is "^ax ex virgulis aptum  inundare stercora^ et terrain portarej' The French word cojjin is  still sometimes heard.

r04 JOURNEY OF

SO that he could see us. Then they made the clerk and  the interpreter to bow the knee (three times) •} of ui  they did not demand it. Then they enjoined us earnestly  to be most careful in going in and coming out not to  touch the threshold of the dwelling,'^ and also to chant  some blessing for him. So we went in chanting, *' Sah'c,  regina !" In the entry of the dwelling there was a bench  with cosmos and cups, and all Sartach's wives had come  thither and the Moal came crowding in around us.

Then this Coiac handed him the censer with the incense,  and he examined it, holding it in his hand most carefully.  After that he handed him the Psalter, at which he took  a good look, as did the wife who was seated beside him.  Then he handed him the Bible (256), and he asked if the  Gospels were in it. I said that it contained all the Sacred  writings. He also took in his hand the cross, and asked if  the image on it were that of Christ. I replied that it was.  Those Nestorians and Hermenians never make the figure  of Christ on their crosses ; they would thus appear to  entertain some doubt of the Passion,^ or to be ashamed of

^ This additional detail is only found in MS. A. The cushion  csdied pu/vinarzum is used to carry the Gospels on, but in this case the  Bible was probably placed on it.

^ Pian de Carpine, Marco Polo, Friar Odoric, all mention this point.  of Mongol etiquette. At a later date, when the Mongol emperors  occupied palaces, it was extended to the threshold of the audience  hall (Yule, Cathay, 152; and Marco -Ifolo, f, 370, 372). The pro-  hibition extended to the tent rope?. The same custom existed among  the Fijians, I believe. I may note that it also prevailed in ancient  China. It is said of Confucius "when he was standing he did not  occupy the middle of the gate- way ; when he passed in or out, he did  not tread on the threshold" {Lun-yii, bk. x, ch. iv, 2).

2 Male sentire de passione. " The Nestorians have no in.ages or  pictures in their churches, and are very much opposed to the use of  them, even as ornaments, or as barely representing historical facts  illustrative of sacred scriptures. They will not even allow of a crucifix,  and regard the mere exhibition of such an emblem, to say nothing of  adoration, as a monstrous iniquity. . . . The only symbol in use  among them is the plain Greek cross" (Badger, ii, 132, 414). Father  Alishar tells me that the Armenians will not have the image of the  Christ :>i\ their crosses, so as not to expose Hin) to the scoftin^ ot

FRIAK WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. I05

it. Then he caused the bystanders to withdraw so that he  could better see our ornaments. Then I presented to him  your letter, with translations in Arabic and Syriac, for I  had had them both translated and written in these languages  at Aeon ^ And there were there (at Sartach's camp)  Hermcnian priests who knew Turkish and Arabic, and  that companion of David who knew Syriac, Turkish, and  Arabic. Then we went out and took off our vestments,  and some scribes and this Coiac came, and they translated  the letters (into Mongol). When he (Sartach) had heard  them, he caused our bread and wine and fruit to be  accepted, and our vestments and books to be carried back  to our lodgings. All this took place on the Feast of Saint  Peter in chains (ist August).

HE next morning (2nd August) came to us a priest,  the brother of that Coiac, who begged for a little  vase with holy oil,^ for Sartach wanted to see it, he  said ; and we gave it to him. Toward vespers (257) Coiac  called us, and said to us : "The lord King hath written good  words to my lord ; but they contain certain difficulties,  concerning which he would not venture to do anything  without the advice of his father : so you must go to his  father. And the two carts which you brought here, with  the vestments and books, leave them to me, for my lord  wishes to examine them carefully." I at once suspected

unbelievers. Crosses with the image of the Saviour on them are  sometimes used by them, he adds, and some are known to have been  in use even before our traveller s time.

^ Or Acre, from which port I think it c^'ohable that Friar William  sailed to Constantinople.

^ Crismute.^ The Nestorians do not use holy oil or chrism, but only  pure olive oil. The Chaldeans, however, use chrism in baptisms  (J^adger, ii, 212, 213, 408). The A.rmeiiians make a great use of holy  oil, which they rail mieron n'ournefort, Voyage^ ii, 163).

I06 JOURNEY OF

evil of his ^reed, and said to him : " My lord, not oniy  these, but the two other carts which we have, will we leave  under your care." " No," he said ; " leave these, but do  what you wish with the others." 1 told him this was quite  impossible, but that we would give everything over to him.  Then he asked us if we wished to remain in the country.  I said : "If you have well understood the letters of the lord  King, you can sec that that is the case." Then he said  that we must be very patient and humble ; and with this  we left him that evening.

The next morning he (Coiac) sent a Nestorian priest  for the carts, and we brought all four of them. Then the  brother of this Coiac came up, and separated all our  belongings from the things which we had taken the day  before to the court, and these, to wit the books and the  vestments, he took for himself; notwithstanding that  Coiac had ordered us to take with us the vestments we  had worn before Sartach, so that, should occasion arise, we  might put them on before Baatu ; but the priest took  them from us by force, saying : " What, you have brought  these to Sartach, and now you want (258) to take them  to Baatu!" And when I sought to reason with him, he  answered me : ** Say no more, and be off with you." So  I had to bear it in patience, for we were not allowed to  go in unto Sartach, nor was there anyone to do us justice.  I was afraid also of the interpreter, lest he say something  differently from what I should speak, for he used to be  eager for us to make presents to everyone. I had one  comfort ; as soon as I discerned their greed, I abstracted  the Bible from among the books, also the sentences and  the other books of which I was specially fond.^ 1 did not

^ Sentencias ct alios lioros quos majis dili^€biiin. In another passage  (272) he says the only books he had were a IJible and a bre\ia!y ;  perhaps by Senit'/nias he refers to the latter book. Amon^^ the books  which Sartach kept, we are told (}^o), there vere a copy of the

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. lO/

dare abstract the Psalter of my lady the Queen, for it had  been too much noticed on account of the gilded pictures  in it. And so we were sent back with the two remaining  carts to our lodgings. Then came he who was to guide us  to Baatu, and he wanted to start at once. I told him  that on no account would I take the carts, and this he  reported to Coiac, who ordered that we should leave them  and our servant with him, and this we did.

Travelling then due east toward Baatu, we came on the  third day (5th August) to the Etilia,^ and when I saw its  waters, I wondered from where away up in the north (259)  so much water could come down.

Before we left Sartach, the above mentioned Coiac and  a number of scribes of the court said to us: "You must  not say that our lord is a Christian! He is not a Christian,  but a Moal." P'or the name of Christian seems to them  that of a nation. They have risen so much in their pride,  that though they may believe somewhat in the Christ, yet  will they not be called Christians, wishing to exalt their  own name of Moal above all others, nor will they be called  Tartars. The Tartars were another people of whom I have  heard as follows.

Bible in verses, and a work in Arabic worth thirty bezants, or about  £\(> los. These two books, together with the Psalter, w^ere perma-  nently kept by Sartach, but all the others were given back to the  traveller when he stopped at Sartach's camp on his way back to  Syria.

^ Ptolemy was the first classical writer to mention the Volga, which  he calls Rha. Menander (229) calls it Attilay Constantine Porphy-  rogenitus {Dc Admtnis,y 105) uses the two forms Atel {*KTr]\) and EUl  ('EreX), while Theophanes {Chronolo^a^ i, 545) calls \X. Atai CkrcX).  The original of these names is the Turkish atel or ////. meaning  '• river.*' The name Volga was already employed by the Russians in  Rubruck's time ; both Pian- de Carpine {supra, p. 8) and Friar  Benedict \sup)a. p. 34) use it, but they thought this river emptied into  the Black Sea. The name Volga is derived, I think, from that of the  Bulgars, who lived on its banks, in the present government of Kazan;  though ic has beer ^mmonly supposed they took their name from the  river.

I08 JOURNEY OF

?r®? "^ the time when the Franks took Antioch^ the sove-  §S^M iciy^nty of these northern regions belonged to a  certain Con cham. Con was his proper name, chant  his title, which means the same as soothsayer. All  soothsayers are called chain^ and so all their princes are  called c/uun, because their government of the people  depends on divination. Now we read in the history of  Antioch, that the Turks sent for succor against the Franks

^ The Crusaders captured Antioch in a.d. 1098. The ori^^inal of  our traveller's Con cham is Gur Khan, " the Universal Khan," a title  taken in 1125 by .Veh-lii Ta-shih, the founder of the Kara-Khitai  dynasty. In 1126 he established his capital at Belasagun, on the  Chu (or Hi) river (^JBretschneider, Med. Geog.^ loi, 109 ; d'Ohsson, i,  165). The title Khdn, Rubruck's Cham^ though of very great antiquity,  was only used by tiie Turks after A.D. $60, at which time the use of  the word A7!rf/;//«\( Rubruck's caten^ 2)^^) came in use for the wives  of the Khan, who himself was termed Ilhhan, The 'older title of  Shiin-yii did not, however, completely disappear among them, for  Albiruni says that in his time the chief of the Ghuz Turks, or Turko-  mans, still bore the title of Jemiyeh^ which Sir Henry Rawlinson  {Proc. Roy. Geo. Soc, v, 15) takes to be the same word as that tran-  scribed Shan-yii by the Chinese (see Ch^ien Han shu^ bk. 94, and  C/iou shiiy bk. 50,. 2).

Although the word K hakhan occnrs in Menander's account of the  embassy of Zemarchus, the earliest mention I have found of it in a  western writer i^.in the Chronicon of Albericus Trium Fontium, where  (571), under the -year 1239, he uses it in the form Cacamis. The proper  use of the works Khan and kaan is thus stated by Quatrem^re, 10, 84,  et seq. : " We find in the historians two different names to designate the  Mongol monarchs, that of khan and thai of kadn. The first, which is  common to the Mongol language and to the other Tartar dialects, was  the title that Chinghiz took, passed since to a portion of the princes of  his family, and is given still in our days to the sovereigns of the  different peoples of Northern Asia. As to the name kaany the first  monarch who lx>re it was Oktai, who transmitted it to his successors,  to the exclusion of all the other Mongol princes. This title was  doubtless higher than that of khan^ since the emperors of the prin-  cipal dynasty had adopted it to distinguish themselves from the other  khans, over whom they exercised the right of sovereignty .... I  do not hesitate to admit that kadn is only due to the slightly-altered  pronunciation of the (Mongol) word Kkakan ;" see also Lacouperie,  Khan^ Khakan and other Tartar Titles.

The title Khakhan is used by Simon of St, Quentin (Vincent of  Beauvais, bk. xxxi, ch. xxxii, 452^7) under the form Gogchain^ which  means, he says, "Emperor, King." The title Khakan being once  transcribed (jog-cham, it was but naturaj for Simon to give to Mangu,  whom he takes for the brother of Kuyuk, the bearer of the title, the  name of Magog, as he, in common with most Europeans of his time,

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK, 100

to King Con cham ; for from tlicse parts came all the  Turks.^ That Con (260) was of Caracatay. Now Cara means  black, and Catay is the name of a people, so Caracatay is  the same as *' Black Catay." ^ And they are so called to  distinguish them from the Cathayans who dwell by the  ocean in the cast, and of whom I shall tell you hereafter  Those Caracatayans lived in highlands {alpibus) through  which I passed, and at a certain place amidst these alps

believed that the Mongols were the people of Gog and Magog spoken  of by Ezekiel the Prophet (xxxviii, 1-5, 15, 16; xxxix, 6, 11-16).  He also uses the word Chan^ or Chaam^ which means, he says,  " King or Emperor, magnificent or ma.^nified" {magnijicus sive tnagni-  fwatus).

The word Kkam, meaning a sorcerer, a shaman, which our traveller  takes to be the same as Khan ox Khakdn^ has not even an etymo-  logical connection with it ; see infra.

^ The earhest mention of the Turks is found in the Chou shit  (a.d. 557-581), bk. 50. The customs of this people resembled  closely those which Rubruck and his contemporaries ascribe to the  Tartars in their limes, especially as regards the funeral rites and the  rules governing marriage, the worship of Heaven and Earth, etc.  Menander refers to them in his account of Zemarchus' mission ; he  calls them (227) " the Turks who used to be called Sacae." Theo-  phanes Byzantius {Frag Hist. Grace, iv, 270) speaks of " the Turks  who Used to be called Messagetae in olden times, and who are called  by the Persians in their language Kermichiones {Kift^Lxioiva)^' while  Theophylactus (124) refers to the " Huns who live in the north and east,  and whom the Persians call Turks." The same author (286) conhrms  what the Chou shu says about their cult. Plan de Carpine does not  mention the Turks, and only once Turkia, though he in one passage  (680) refers to the " Soldan of Urum," the Seldjuk kingdom of Rum,  Friar William's Titrkia. Our author would seem to be well aware  of the racial affinities between the Turks and the ^longols. Benedict  {siipriy p. 37) uses the word lurkia to designate Turkestan (see  also William of Tyr, 22, 24).

'^ The dynasty of the Khara-Khitai, called Hsi (or Western) Liao  by the Chinese, was founded in a.d. 1224 by Yeh-lii Ta-shih, a prince  of the Khitar dynasty of Liao, which had just been destroyed in  northern China by the Nu-chen Tartars. No satisfactory explanation  of the origin of the name "Black Khitai" has been given ; Bret-  schneider has given a complete translation of the article on the Hsi Liao  fbund in the History of the Liao {Liao shih\ followed by other trans-  lations drawn from the annals of the Kin and Yuan dynasties {Med.  Geog.^ 96, et seq. ; see also d'Ohsson, i, 165 ; and Yule, Caf/iay, 178, ef  seg.). Bretschneider states that the explanation given by d'Herbelot  {Bidl. Orient.., ii, 203) of the name Kara Khitai is absurd ; its name is  there derived from the people who bore it living in the v/oods :  d'Herbelot explains the name Kara Mongol in a like manner.

no JOURNEY OF

dwelt a certain Nestorian, a mighty shepherd and lord  over a people called Nayman/ who were Nestorian  Christians. When Con chain died, that Nestorian raised  himself to be king (in his stead) and the Nestor.ians used  to call him King John, and to say things of him ten times  more than was true. For this is the way of the Nestorians  who come from these parts : out of nothing they will  make a great story, just as they have spread abroad that  Sartach is a Christian, and so of Mangu chan and Keu chan,^  because they show more respect to Christians than to other  people ; though of a truth they are not Christians. So  great reports went out concerning this King John ; though  when I passed through his pasture lands,^ no one knew  anything of him save a few Nestorians. (261) On those  pasture lands lived Keu chan, to whose court went Friar  Andrew, and I also passed through them on my way back.  This John had a brother, also a rnighty shepherd, whose  name was Unc ;^ and he lived beyond the alps of the

^ Plan de Carpine (752) states that the Naiman were heathens. It  was not when the first Gur-Khan of the Kara Khitai died that the  Naiman prince seized the throne, but in 121 1 or 1212, when the last  Gur-Khan was dethroned by Guchluk Khan (Rubruck's King John) of  the Naimans. Mohammedan and Chinese authorities agree on this  point (d'Ohsson, i, 167, et seq. ; Bretschneider, Med. Geo^.^ 113). The  Naiman were a Turkish tribe (Howorth, History^ i, Pt. I, 20, 691).  Sven Hedin, op. cit., i, 316, ii, 672, mentions a tribe of Naiman  Kirghiz living on the Eastern Pamirs. The word Naiman means  " light'' in Turki. Ney Elias {Tarikh-i-rashidi^ 74, 93) says the name  of this people must have been Naiman-Uighurs.

^ Kuyuk Khan. The MSS. usually write this Kencham, but in  some passages we find the form Keu chan, which is a much better  transcription.

3 Pascua, which our author seems to use as synonymous with  nipes.

'' Unc chan is the Togriil of Rashideddin, a $on of Gurkhan Khan  of the Keiaits (d'Ohsson, i, 51). Marco Polo (i, 327) speaks of " Unc  Can, the same that we call Prester John." Palladius [op.rit., 23) has  shown how some of the confusion concerning Ung Khan has arisen,  the title of Wang Khan (Un^ Khan) being tran*ferr«<l from Prester  John^ already dead at the time, to the Turkish tribe of Wang-Ku

FRTAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 1 1 I

Caracatayans, some three weeks journey from his brother,  and he was lord of a little town called Caracarum,^ and  the people he had under his rule were called Crit and  Merkit,2 and they were Nestorian Christians. But that  lord of theirs had abandoned the worship of Christ, and  had taken to idolatry, having about him priests of the  idols, who are all invokers of demons and sorcerers.  Beyond those pasture lands, some x or xv days, were the

(Ongu, Raschideddin's Ongot). The whole subject of Prester John has  been so admirably discussed by Yule {Marco Polo, i, 220, et seq.) that  nothing remains to be said about it.

^ Villiile que dicitur Caracarum. The name of this famous town  is variously written in the MSS., Caracarum^ Caracaron, Carecarum^  Caratorum, Caratharmn. I have everywhere us^d the first form,  which is also that most frequently found in the MSS. Pian de Carpine  (608) is the first western traveller to mention it by name. He writes it  Caracaron ; he did not visit the city, though he got to within half a  day's journey of it.

2 D'Avezac {op. cit., 534) has suggesied that Friar William's Crii  and Merkit should be corrected to Crit and Mecrit^ so as to agree  with Pian de Carpine's statement (645). D'Avezac takes Crit,»Merkit for  a double word like Longa and Solanga, Chin and Machin, etc., and  identifies them with the Keraits. Howorth {History., i, Ft. i, 699) agrees  with d'Avezac's views. That our traveller should have grouped the  two names together on account of the similarity of sound is probable,  but that he meant to refer the two names to one people is very  doubtful. Yule {Marco Polo., i, 231) thinks Friar William's Crit and  Merkit are the Keraits and Mekrits, the latter already mentioned by  Pian de Carpine (645) under the form Merkit. While the Keraits  were undoubtedly Nestorian Christians (see Quatremere, 93), our  traveller is, it would seem, wrong in thinking that the Mekrits had  been converted to Christianity. The Keraits lived on the Orkhon  and the Tula, S.E. of Lake Baikal ; Abulfaraj relates their conversion  to Christianity in 1007 by the Nestorian Bishop of Merv. Rashided-  din, however, says' their conversion took place in the time of Chingis  Khan (d'Ohsson, i, 48 ; Chabot, op. cit.., 14). D'Ave7ac(536) identifies,  with some plausibility, I think, the Keraits with the K'i-le (or T'ieh-le)  of the early Chinese annals. The name K'i-Ie was applied in the  third century, A.D., to all the Turkish tribes, such as the Hui-hu  (Uigurs), Kieh-ku (Kirghiz) Alans, etc., and they are said to be the  same as the Kao-ch'e, from whom descended the Cangle of Rubnick  {Ta?icr sku, bk. 217, i ; Ma Tuan-lin, bk. 344, 9, bk. 347, 4). As to  the Merkits, or Merkites, they were a nomadic people of Turkish  stock, with a possible infusion of Mongol blood. They are called by  Mohammedan writers Uduyut, and were divided into four tribes.  They lived on the Lower Selinga and its feeders (d'Ohsson, i, 54 ;  Howorth, History^ i, Pt. I, 22, 698).

112 JOURNEY OF

pasture lands of the Moal,^ who were very poor people,  without a chief and without religion except sorcery and  soothsaying, such as all follow in those parts. And next

^ Moal. Friar William's transcription of the word Mongol sccnis  to be taken from the Turki form of that word, Mogul. The earliest  mention I have found of the name Mongol in oriental works occurs  in the Chinese annals of the After T'ang period (a.d. 923-934), where  it occurs in the form Meng-ku. In the annals of tlie Liao dynasty  (A.D. 916-1125) it is found under the form Men^-kn-H, The first  occurrence of the name in the Tung chien kang-mu is, however, in  the 6th year Shao-hsing of Kao-tsung of the Sung (a.d. i 136). It is  just possible that we may trace the word back a little earlier than the  After T'ang period, and that the Meng-wa (or ngOy as this character  may have been pronounced at the time), a branch of the Shih-wei, a  Tungusic or Kitan people living around Lake Keule, to the east of  the Baikal, and along the Kerulun which empties into it, during the  seventh and subsequent centuries, and referred to in the Ta^ig s/iu  (bk. 219), is the same as the later Meng-ku. Though I have been  unable to find, as stated by Howorth {History^ i, pt. i, 28), that the  name Meng-ku occurs in the T'ang shu, his conclusion that the  northern Shih-wei of th^t time constituted the Mongol nation proper,  is very likely correct. " On tracing the Mongols to the Shih-wei," he  says {pp. sup. cit., 2>^) "we connect them to some extent with the  Kitan who were descended from the Shi-vvei ; and if this be well  grounded, we connect them further with the Sian-pi and Uhuan, who  were of the same stock as the Khitans, and also with the Yuan-yuan."

I. J. Schmidt {Ssanang Setzen., -^^o) derives the name Mongol from  niong^ meaning "brave, daring, bold," while Rashideddin says it means  " simple, weak" (d'Obsson, i, 22). The Chinese characters used to  transcribe the name mean " dull, stupid," and "old, ancient," but they  arc useil purely phonetically. Simon of St. Quentin (Vincent oi  Beauvais, bk. xxxi, ch. xxxiv, 452<2) says that the Tartars called them-  selves Mongli or Mongol^ and Pian de Carpine (645) transcribes the  name Mongal. In Byzantine works the only mention I have found of  the name is in Pachymeres (i, 344), who speaks of " the Tochari who  call themselves Muguls (Oi»y avroi MovyouXiovj X*you<rti')."

The Mongols of the present day are commonly called by the  Chinese Ta-tzu, but this name is resented by the Mongols as oppro-  bious, though it is but an abbreviated form of the name Ta-ia-tzii.^ in  which, according to Rubruck, they once gloried.

Pian de Carpine (645) thus describes the country occupied by the  Mongols at the time of the birth of Chingis Khan. " There is a  certain country in the East which, as previously stated, is called  Mongal. That country had once four nations : one called Yeka  Mongal, or the Great Mongals, the second called Su- Mongal, or  Aquatic-Mongals, though they called themselves Tartars from a  certain river which flows through their country and which is called  Tatar (or Tartar) ; another was called Merkit ; the fourth Mecrit. All  these nations had the same physical appearance and spoke one  language, though they were divided among themselves into provinces  and principalities" (conf. Haithon, Hist. Orient., 26 ; see also supra,  p. Ill, note 2, and infra, p. J 1 5, note 2).

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. II3

to the Moal were other poor people, who were called  Tartars.^ Now King John being dead witho an heir,

* Tariari. The earliest date to which I have been able to trace  back the name Tartar is a.d. 732. Wc find mention made in a  Turkish inscription found on the river Orkhon and bearing that date, of  the Tokuz Tatar^ or " Nine (tribes of) Tatars," and of the Otuz Tatar ^  or "Thirty (tribes of) Tatars." It is probable that these tribes were  then living between the Oguz or Uigur Turks on the west, and the  Kitan on the east (Thomsen, Ins'criptions de P Orkhon, 98, 126, 140).  Mr. Tlios. Wallers tells mc that the Tartars are first mentioned by  the Chinese in the period extending from A.D. 860 to 874 : the  earliest mention I have discovered, however, is under date of a.d.  880 ( IVti tai skill, bk. 4). We also read in the same work  (bk. 74, 2) that "The Ta-ta were a branch of the Mo-ho (the name  the NiVchcn Tartars bore during the Sui and T'ang periods: Ma  Tuan-iin, bk. 327, 5). They first lived to the north of the Kitan.  Later on they were concjucrcd by this people, when they scattered,  a part becoming tributaries of the Kitan, another to the P'o-hai (a  branch of the Mo-ho), while some bands took up their abode in the  Yin shan in southern Mongolia, north of the provinces of Chih-li and  Shan-hsi, and took the name of Ta-ta.^^ in 981 the Chinese ambas-  sador to the Prince of Kao-chang (Karakhodjo, some twenty miles  south-east of Turfan) traversed the Ta-ta country. They then seem  to have occupied ihc northern bend of the Yellow River He gives  the names of some nine tribe? of Ta-ta living on either side of the  river. He notes that their neighbouis to the east were Kitan, and  that for a long time they had been fighting them after the occupation  of Kan-chou by the Uigurs (Ma Tu'an-lin, bk. 336, 12-14). Wc may  gather from this that these Tartars weie already settled along the  Yellow River and the Yin shan (the valley in which is now the  important frontier mart of Kuei-hua Ch'eng) at the beginning of the  ninth century, for the Uigurs, driven southward by ^he Kirghiz, first  occupied Kan-chou in north-western Kan-su, somewhere about

A.D. 842.

Turning to western sources of information, we find that Byzantine  writers have all cLissed the Tartars among the Sacae or Scythic  nations, which included all the tribes, withgut any regard to  ethnic or linguistic affinities, which at one time or another had  occupied northern and western Asia. Thus George Acropolita, in his  Amials, calls the Tartars by the name of Tachari (Tax"pt), or  T4icharioi i^VaxapLOi)^ though in one passage (Bonn edit., 58} he uses  the name Tatars (Tarapt). Pachymeres invariably calls these people  Tochari (To;j(>api), though in one place he uses the name Mugids.  Among the writers of the thirteenth century in Western Europe the  name is uniformly written Tartari in Latin, and Tariarins in French.  In one case only, in the letter of Ivo of Narbonne, dated 1243  (see supra^ Introduction), have I found the form Tatar^ or Tattar^  used.

Howorth {History^ i. Ft. I, 702) derives, on the authority of W^olff,  the name Tar^:ar from a Tungusic word, tartar or tata. "to drag, to  pull," and thinks it is equivalent to our word "nomad." Some  Western contemporary writers derived the name Tartar from a river

I 14 JOURNEY OK

his brother Unc was brought in {ditatns est), and caused  hifnself to be proclaimed chau, and his flocks and herds  were driven about as far as the borders of the Moal. At  that time there was a certain Chingis.a blacksmith,^ among  the people of Moal (262), and he took to lifting the cattle  of Unc chan whenever he could, so that the herdsmen com-  plained to their lord Unc chan. So he got together an  army, and made a raid into the land of the Moal, seeking  for this Chingis, but he fled among the Tartars and hid  himself 1?here. Then this Unc chan having got great booty  from the Moal and the Tartars went back. Then that  Chingis spoke to those Tartars and to those Moal, saying :  *' Tis because we are without a chief, that our neighbours  oppress us.'* And they made him chief and captain of

called Tar or Tartar^ Avhich flov.cd through their early home (Matlh.  Paris, Chron. Maj., iv, 78). Others thought the niume was taken from  the great island of Taraconta in their country, while othos again  imagined it was taken from ''the broad country of y/f^zrj/" (Matth.  Pans, op. cit.^ iv, 109. The Russian archbishop, Peter, who visited  Lyons in 1245, thought the Tartars descended from the Midianitcs, who,  fleeing before Gideon, had hidden themselves in the iarthcsi corners  of the north in a vast desert called Etrcu, where they lived in high and  impenetrable mountains, in caves and dens, whence they had driven  the lions and dragons, their first denizens. The English captive  among the iMongols, who supplied Ivo of Narbonne with most of the  details contained in his letter previously referred to, had also a vague  notion of the remote eastern origin of the Mongols. William of  Nangis (365) says that David, the messenger of Ilchikadai to St.  Louis in 1248, stated that the name Tartar was derived from that of  the country where the great Khan lived, and which was called Tarta.  Whatever the opinion concerning the origin of the name, nearly all  Christians in the Hrsl half of tlie thirteenth century believed that the  Tartars were of the lost tribes of Israel. So strong was this Ijelief  that the Tartars were of Jewish descent, that we are told that the  Jews of Europe, especially those of (Germany, thinking that the  Mongols were sent by God 10 free them fron) the Oj)pression of  the Christians, endeavoured in 1241 to snuiggle arms and provisions  to them (Matth. Pari?, op. ciL^ iv, 131-133;.

^ The name is variously written in the MSS. C/n'ji^is, Cynais., and  Cingf's. I have preferred the first nmde of transcription, the one  which Pixn dc Carpine (646 £t si-(/.) invariably uses. This writer make?»  no mentii>n of the legend giving to Chingis tJic iiade or a blacksmith,  on the origin of which see iu/ra; he only says (64O) that he was '*  mighty hunter before live Lord."

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. II5

the Tartars and the Moah Then he secretly got to-  gether an army and fell upon Unc chan and defeated  hini so that he fled to Cathay. Aryd it was there that  his daughter was captured, and Chingis gave her to  wife to one of his sons, who by hef had Mangu, who  now reigneth.^

Now this Chingis used to despatch the Tartars in every  direction, and so their name spread abroad, for everywhere  was heard the cry: "The Tartars are coming!" But  through the nnany wars they have been nearly all killed off,  and now these Moal would like to extinguish even the  name and raise their own in its stead/^ The country in  which they first lived, and where is still the ^nY« of Chingis

1 Dokuz Khatun, a daughter of Iku, son of Unc chan, married  Tului, and at his death his son Huiagu (Quatremere, 93). Chaur  Bigui (or lieighi), daughter of Unc chan, was to have mafried  Chingis' son Juchi in 1202, but Unc chan ai the last moment refused  his consent to the marriage. Mangu Khan was son of Siurkukieni, or  Siurkukiti 13eighi (Plan de Carpine, 666, calls her Seroctan), da'ighter  of Djagambo, brother of Unc clian, and his father wa"; Tului, Chingis'  son. Chingis himself married a daughter of this same brother of  Unc chan ; her name was Abgah Beighi (Quatremere, 91 ; d'Ohsson,  i, 67 ; ii, 59» 267 ; Yule, Cathay, 147).

2 Rashideddirt' says : " The name of Tatar has been celebrated the  world over from most ancient times. The 1 atar nation, divided into  a great many branches, comprised (at the tin\e of Chingis Khim)  about seventy thousand hats. Its territory was near the Chinese  territo y and lake Buyir . . . The Tatars were most of ihc time stb-  jects or tributaries of the eniperor.of Khitai . . . notwithstanding th iir  internal discords, they made in old times great conquests ; they be-  came so powerful and feared that the other Turkish peoples passed  themselves off as Tatars, and held themselves honoured by this name ;  just as to-day the Chelairs, Tatars, Ui.rats, Unguts, Keraits, Nairrian,  Tanguts and others glory in the name of Mongol, rendered illustrious  by Chinguiz Khan and his descendants ; a name they woutd before  that have spurned. The young men of all these nations believe at  present that their ancestors always bore the name of ^!ongol ; it is  not so, for anciently the Mongols were only ont of the Turkish natii.ru ,  It is only since Alankua, that is to say uiree centuries. 'i,hat rhe n,4mc  exists. It was given ^o the descendants <ii that prinosss, who had b.:-  come very numerous-' (d'Chsson, i, 428). Katihideddin brought h s  history of the Mongols down to the year 1303; therefore, according  to him, the name of Mongol had fust appeared in the eleventh  century. The Chinese authorities cited ';.c/f/r^^, p. ii2jnote) take it  back to the first half of the tenth.

r 7

I l6 TOURNEY OF

(263)chan, is; called OnankeruleJ But because Caracaruiri  is the district where their power first began to sproad,  they hold it their royal city, and near there they elect  their chan.

QF Sartach I know not whether he believes in  the Christ or not. This I do know, that he  will not be called a Christian, and it even seemed  to me that he mocked the Christians. For he is on  the road of the Christians, to wit, of the Ruthenians,  Blacs, Bulgarians of Minor Bulgaria, Soldaians, Kcrkis  and Alans, all of whom pass by him when going to  his father's ordu carrying presents to him, so he shows  himself most attentive to them. Should, however, Saracens  come along carrying more presents than they, they arc  sent along more expeditiously. He has Nestorian priests  around him who strike a board and chant their offices.^

1 Onankerule^ the country watered by the Orkhon and KeruUin  rivers, i.e.^ ihe country to the south and south-east of Lake Baikal.  The headquarters {ya-chang) of the principal chief of the Uigurs in  the eighth century was 500 //. (about 165 miles) south-west of the  confluence of the Wen-kun ho (Orkhon) and the Tu-lo ho (Tur.i).  Its ruins, sometimes but wrongly confounded with those of the Mon-  gol city of Karakorum, some twenty miles from it, built in 1235 by  Ogodai, are now known by the name of Kara balgasun, '' Black City.''  The name Onankerule seems to be taken from the form Onan-ou-  Kcloran^ which occurs in Mohammedan writers (Quatremere, \\^ et  seq. ; see also T'ang shu, bk. 43/^).

- Pidsiant tabulam. A board or bar of iron suspended to a rope  has, from apparently the earliest times, been used by the (ireek and  Eastern Christians in church \\orship instead of bells. This board or  bar is called seina/ifron {irrj^ai'Tfiov) or simandro ((rifjiavBpo) in Creek,  the Armenians call '\'ijan:ahar. The mallet used to strike it is called  roptron (ponTpov) (Constantine Porphyrogenitus, I^e Ct'rt'mo., ii, 235 ;  Chardin, lovirges, i, 234 and Tournefort, i, 45\ Plan de Carpinc  (766) says the Ncstorians at the court of Ku) uk Khan " beat ithe  setnantrori) at the hours, according to the fashion of the Greeks." Bells  were not, however, unknown among the Ncstorians. Rashideddin says  that the Christians at the chajiel before the tent of Ookuz Khatnn  — the Kerait Christian wife of Hulagu — ''rang the bells" (Quatre-  mere, 94, 95). The Constable of Armenia, Scmpad, also states that

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. II7

And there is another one called Berka, a brother of  Baatu/ who has his pasture lands toward the Iron Gate,  where passes the road followed by all the Saracens coming  from Persia and Turkia, and going to Baatu, and who  when passing through bring him presents ; and he has  made himself a Saracen, and he does not allow (264) pork  to be eaten in his ordu. When we came back Baatu had  ordered him to move from that place to beyond the Etilia  to the east, not wanting Saracens to pass by where he was,  it appearing to him harmful. During the iiii days we  were at Sartach's ordu^ we were not once furnished with  food, and only once with a little costJtos.

On the road between him and his father we were in great  fear, for the Ruthenians, Hungarians and Alans, their  slaves, of whom there are very great numbers among them,  are in the habit of banding together xx or xxx in number,  and run off at night (armed) with arrows and bows, and  whomsoever they find at night they kill. During the day  they hide, and when their horses are tired, they come by-  night to the herds of horses in the pastures and change  their horses, and take one or two with them to eat when  necessary. Our guide greatly feared some adventure with  them.^ On this part of the road we should have died of

the Christians in the Mongol camps puhant campanas et percittiuiit  iahiids" (Win. of Nangis, 362 ; see also Mosheim, iiist.Eecles, Tartar.^  Appendix 5o\ Tibetan lamas also use on some occasions, and to  summon the monks to atfend certain ceiemonies, a board about six  feet long and a foot broad, which is struck with a piece of hard wood.  This board is called gt^tj-ti. It is very likely that they originally got  this contrivance from the Nestorians.

1 This Mongol prince's name is alsu written Bercai^ Berekeh and  Bertkai. ?4e \^'as the third son of Juchl. His brothers were Batu,  Urda, Shiban, Tangkute, Bergachar and Tuka-Timur (dX)hsson, ii,8).  Pian de Carpine ^'668) writes his name Berca. Sartarh, dying shortly  after Batu, was succeeded in his command by his young son Ulagcli!;  but he also died after a few months, and was succeeded by Berka in  1256. This prince died \n 1265, and was buried at Sarai on the Volga  (d'Ohsson, iii, 37/, 419 ; Hammer-Purgstall, Goldeneii Horde^ 1 44-181).

* Conf. siipra^ p. 3, Friar John's account.

1 18 JOURNEY OF

hunger, had we not carried with us a small supply of  biscuit.

So we came to the Etilia, the greatest of rivers, for it is  four times greater than the Seine, very deep, coming from  Greater Bulgaria, which is (265) in the north, flowing  southward, and emptying into a certain lake, or sea, which  is now called Sea of Sirsan, from a certain city on its coast  in Persia.^ Isidorus, however, calls it the Caspian sea,^ for  it has the Caspian mountains and Persia to the south,  the Mulihec mountains, that is the mountains ot the  Axasins to the east,^ which touch the Caspian mountains ;  to the north is this wilderness in which are now the  Tartars, though at first there were here certain Comans

^ Mare Sirsan., One MS. reads Sir tan ^ and two others Sir can.  This may be a copyist's error for Mare Scrvanicum or '* Sea of  Shirwan," which Vincent of Bcauvais uses (bk. xxx, ch. xcvii, 440/') to  designate the Caspian. Sirsan may also be for (Taba;ristan, the  Caspian being known as " Sea of Tabaristan'- by the early Moham-  medan writers (Masudi, i, 263 ; Ibn Khaldun, 156). Both of these  suppositions are open to the objection that there was no town of  Shirwan or Tabaristan. The only other suggestion I have to make,  is that " Sea o( Sirsan" is the " Sea of Kegham," or '' Lake of Sevan,"  names the Armenians used in the thirteenth century to designate the  Caspian (Dulaurier, 235). Sea of Kegham is the same as Marco  Polo's (i, 54) "Sea of Ghel or Ghelan." Polo calls the Caspian in  r.nother passage (ii, 495) ''Sea of Sarain" (Sarai ?). Friar Odoric  calls it " Sea of Bacuc," and the Catalan map {Not. et Extr.y xiv. 126),  ^^ Mar del Sarra e de BacUy^ a combination of the two preceding  names.

2 Etymologiarum, 486, where he classes it among " the gulfs of  the sea."

3 Also written in the MSS. Muliech and Musihst. The correct  reading is Mulidei^ from the Arabic molhid^ ''impious, a heretic."  This famous sect of Melahideh^ or Hachichi/is, whence our word  Assassin, is also known as tlie Isma^ians and Bathenis, or "partisan^  of the inner cult." They were exterminai^rl by Hulagu. Joinville  (138, 139) gives some interesting details concerning them. He writes  their name Assarts (see Hammer, /fist, of the Assassins^ 41 et sty. ;  Micha».i.d, /h'stoire, \^ 472 et'seg.; Quatremc^re, 122; Breischneider,  Med. Travel.^ 63, 78 ; Cordier, Odoric^ 473, ct seq.). Friav William  is, of course, wrong in placing the Ismaelians to the east of the  Caspian. I'hcy were scattered through Syria, Irak, Dilem antl  Khorasan. Their stronghold, Alanrat, was north-east of Katvin, south  of the C jpian. It was taken and destroyed by Hulagu in M^^  .(see also ::r/ra).

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. U<^

called Cangle^ And on that side {i.e., the north) it  receives the Etilia, which rises in summer as does the  Nile of Egypt. To the west of it are the mountains of  the Alans, the Lesgians, the Iron Gate and the mountains  of the Georgians. So this sea has mountains on three  sides, but on the north it has this plain. FriaY Andrew  went himself along two sides of it, the southern and the  eastern, and I along the other two, the northern in going  from Baatu to Mangu chan, and again in coming back ;  and along the western side in coming back from Baatu to  Syria. One can go around it in iiii months,- and it is

1 The Cane;le of our traveller are called by Pian de Carpine ^749  Cangitae. They are called K'ang (or Hang)li ox Kanglin by Chines'j  writers of the Mongol period, and Kankali Turks by conteinporar}-  Mohammedan ^^'riters, who say that in the beginning of the thirteenth  century they lived to the east of the Jaik river (Ural), which is the  location assigned them by Friars John, Benedict and William (Bret-  schneider, J/(?^. Geog.^ 147 ; d'Ohsson, i, 197). Constantine Porphyro-  genitus {jje Adnmiis.^ 164, 167) speaks of a tribe of Kagcar (Kayxap)  or J^angar (Kayyap), which word, he adds, means " noble, strong,"  living between the Volga and the Jaik (Ural), and who were a branch  of the Patzinakitae (the Bejnak of the Arabs, the Petchenegs of the  Turks). Abulghazi, as previously remarked, derives the name  Kankali fro;m ka?tg, "a cart.'' The western Turks were also at  one time known as Kao-ch^e, " High carts," by the Chinese. These  characters, which happily describe a peculiar feature of Turkish life at  the time, were, however, used phonetically, and transcribe an original  which must have closely approximated to the name given this people  by Mohammedan writers. Deguignes {Histoire, i, pt. 2, 389), and since  then W. Schott, have endeavoured to identify the Kang-li with the  people ofKang-chiu or Sogdiana; but, as pointed out by Bretschneider  [Med. Geog.^ 150), similarity of sound is the only ground for the identifi-  cation. Klaproth {Tabl. de I'Asie^ 279) says that several Nogai Tartar  tribes still bear the name of Qanel}\ and Radloff {Turksidmme  Sibiriens^ 22) mentions a small branch of the Usbeks living in the  Sarafstan valley called Kangly (see Bretschneider, Med. Gcog.^ J 47,  and d'Ohsson, i,'i97).

'- This was the view held by classical authors. Dionysius Periegetes  says it has a circumference of three months' journey (Miiller, Geog  Graeci Minores, ii. 344J. Herodotus (i, 276) had stated that the  Caspian had no connection with any other sea, and that its length was  fifteen days in a row-boat, its greatest breadth an eight-days' xoyage ;  but all his successors down to Ptolemy believed that the Caspian  vas connected by a long and narrow gulf with the Ocean. Isidorus  simply followed Pliny (vi, 36), who believed in the gulf theory  (Bunbury, ii, 593). Marco Polo (i, 54) gives the length of the Caspian  as 700 miles (conf. Bacon, Opus Majus,^ i, 354, and Sir John Maujide-  vile, 266).

120 JOURNEY OF

not truCj as stated by Isidorus, that it is a gulf of the  Ocean. It nowhere reaches the Ocean, but is everywhere  surrounded by land.

pi^i^LL this country on the west side of this sea, (266)  v£^3^ from where are the Iron Gates of Alexander and the  mountains of the Alans, to the northern Maeotide  marshes where rises the Tanais, used to be called Albania.  Isidorus says of it that it has dogs in it so big and fierce  that " they seize bulls and kill lions" : the truth is, as I  have heard tell, that toward the Northern ocean they make  dogs to drag carts like oxen, so great is their size and  strength.^

At this place where we reached the Etilia, the Tartars  have made a new village with a mixed population of  Ruthenians and Saracens,^ and they ferry across the

1 Friar William takes this definition of Albania from Isidorus  {Etymolo^.y xiv, 501). He there says : " Albania^ thus called from the  colour of the people, who are born with light ialbo) hair : this begins  in the East at the Caspian sea, and extends through deserts and wilds  along the coast of the Northern Ocean to the Palus Maeotis. There  are great dogs in this country, and so ferocious that they seize bulls  and pull down lions." Sir John Maundevile(i43) refers to " Aibanyc*'  and its "gret Houndes so stronge that they assaylen Lyouns and slew  hem." Strabo (xi, 4, 431) had already spoken of the excellence of  the hunting dogs of Albania, but Albania for him was the north-  eastern slope of the Caucasus, the country of the Alans of our traveller  (380, 381), toj the north-west of Derbend. Isidorus, however, had  copied from Solinus (93), who in turn had taken his information  from Pliny (viii, 51, 343). Hakluyt's text wronfjlv'reads tnergitur,  " it empties into," the Paliis Maeotis, or Sea of Azov (see supra,  p. 97, note 2).

Our traveller, assuming the limits assigned to Albania by Isidorus  to be correct, has naturally enough supposed that the dogs he heard  of as used by the Samoyed and other tribes of the far north to draw  their sledges, were those spoken of by Pliny and others. Ibn Batuta  (ii» 399' 402) speaks of the dog-sledges used iri the "Country of  darkness" to the north of Bulgar, where the dogs are the traveller's  only guides (see also Marco Polo, ii, 479).

2 This would seem to be the town of Ukck, Marco Polo's Ucaca.  Our traveller says it took over thirty days to go from the town of

FKIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. ' 121

eav^oys going to and comtni^ from the oi'du of Baatu ; for  Baatu is on the fartlicr bank to the cast, neither does  he go beyond this point wc had reached when he comes  north in summer, and he had begun moving southward  (when we arrived). From January to August he goes up  to the cool country, a$ do all of them, and in August they  begin moving back.

So we went down the river in a boat from this village  to his (Baatu's) ordu^ and from that place to the cities of  Greater Bulgaria' to the north there are five days. I

Bulgav to Derbcnd, and he tells us further on that it took him fifteen  days to go from Sarai to Derbend, so the village in question must  ha.ve been about ten days north of Sarai. This corresponds well with  the position of Ukek. Yule (Encyd. Britan.^ xxi, 47) seems to adopt  this view. Ibn Batuta (ii, 414) says that Ocac (Ukek) was ten days  from Sarai, and that the mountains of the Russians were distant one  day from it. The present village of Uivek^ about six miles south of  Saratov, occupies probabl) the same position as the Mongol town  Yule, Marco Polo, i, 8 ; and F. M. Schmidt, 182).

^ Villas majoris Btilgarie, I have no doubt that " The Great City"  is meant, called Bulbar by Mohammedan writers. !t was situated  between Kazan and Simbirsk, below the confluence of the Kama and  the Volga near the left bank of the latter. The present village of  Bol^ary or Uspenskcye occupies the site of the Bulgar of the Mongol  period. Nicolas and Mafifeo Polo visited Bulgar, or Bolgara as  Marco Polo calls it, in 1 261 (Yule, Marco Polo^ i, 4, 6). Pian de Carpine  (747) calls t'.ie Bulgars Bilers (the j^^/^rof Abulfeda and Rashideddin).  See also d'Avezac (490) ; Ibn Batuta (ii, 398). On the commerce of  Bulgar in the Middle Ages, see Heyd (i, 61), and Quatrem^re (404).  The question of the early religion of the people of Bulgar is mixed.  The Mesalek al-ahsar (270) says : "Formerly, as stated by Masudi and  other writers, Islam, had spread among the Bulgars ; but for a long  time past this people has renounced the true faith, and is governed  by princes worshippers of the cross." Masudi states that it was in  the beginning of the tenth century that Islam penetrated to this  country, prior to which time the people were fire-worshippers, but  Prof. Berezin says this event took place as early as the ninth year of the  Hegira (Bretschneider, Med. Geog.^ 255-257). Yule {Marco Polo^ i. 7)  says that prior to their conversion to Islam, the people had probably  professed Christianity. He cites no authority for this opinion, and  \ can find no mention of this fact in eUher Nestor's Chronicle nor m  Russian history, where such an important fact would surely have  been mentioned. The statement in Mesalek al-adsariba.i Islam had  lost its hold on tne people at the end of the th rteenih century, seems  to 1>e confirmed by a statement made by the Arab historian Makrizi,  that in A,H. 780 the sheikh Amiueddin Mohammed Nasi-fi came to  Egypt, and stated that he had been to the Bulgar country, where he

122 JOURNEY OF

wonder what devil carried this reh'gion of Machomet  thither. From the Iron Gate, which is the door out of  Persia, there are more than thirty days through the desert,  going up (267) along the Etilia, to this Bulgaria, along  which route there is no city, only some, villages near where  the Etilia falls into the sea ; and these Bulgarians are the  worst kind of Saracens, keeping the law of Machomet as  no others.

When I saw the ordu of Baatu, I was astonished, for it  seemed like a great city stretched out about his dwelling,  with people scattered all aboxit for three or four leagues.  And as among the people of Israel, where each one knew  in which quarter from the tabernacle he had to pitch his-  tents/ so these know on which side of the ordu they must  place themselves when they set down their dwellings.  A court [curia) is orda in their language, and it means  " middle,'"- for it is always in the middle of the people,  with the exception, however, that no one places himself  right to the south, for in that direction the doors of the  court open. But to the right and left they may spread out  as they wish, according to the lay of the land, so long as  they do not bring the line of tents down right before or  behind the court.

We were first taken to a certain Saracen, who gave us no  food. The next day we were taken to the court, and they  had a great awning spread, for the dwelling could not hold  all the men and women who had come thither. Our guide  cautioned us to say nothing until Baatu* should have bid

had preached Islam to the people, who were plunged in the deepest  ignorance, and had converted a number (Quatremere, 404 ; see also

infra).

1 See Numbers, i, 51-53 ; li, 1-31. -^ Sec Siipra^ p. 57, note i.

^ Simon of Sr. ('^uentin writes the name Batoth, Plan de Carpine  Bati. IJatii, the c<>iK|Lieror of the Kipchak, the commander-in-chief of  the army which had ravaged Hungary, was son of Tului, son of  Chingis Khan. Sir John Maundevile (129) refers to "Uathol who  duellethe at the Cytec of Orda.'

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 123

US speak, and then to speak briefly. He asked also (268)  whether you had already sent ambassadors to the Tartars.  I said that you had sent to Keu chan,^ but that you would  not even have sent envoys to him and letters to Sartach if  you had not believed that they were Christians. Then  they led us before the pavilion, and we were warned not to  touch the ropes of the tent, for they are held to represent  the threshold of the door. So we stood there in our robes  and barefooted, with uncovered heads, and we were a great  spectacle unto ourselves. Friar John of Policarp^ had been  there ; but he had changed* his gown, fearing lest he should  be slighted, being the envoy of the lord Pope. Then we  were led into the middle of the tent, and they did not  require us to make any reverence by bending the knee, as  they are used to do of envoys. We stood before him the  time to say : " Miserere mei^ DeuSy' and all kept profound  silence. He was seated on a long seat as broad as a couch,  all gilded, and with three steps leading up to it, and a lady  was beside him.^ Men were seated about on his right, and  ladies on his left : and where the room on the women's  side was not taken up by them, for there were only present  the wives of Baatu, men occupied it. A bench with cosmos  and big cups of gold and silver, ornamented with precious  stones, was in the entry of the tent. He looked at us  intently, and we at him, and he seemed to me to be about  the height of my lord (269) John de Beaumont,* may his  soul rest in j^eace. And his face was all covered at that

^ Referring to the Mission of Friar Andrew in 1249.

2 All the MSS. read Policarp. Of course, Friar John of Pian de  Carpine is referred to. The detail concerning the change of dress is  not ttientioned in Friar John's work ; it is only found in that of his  companion, Friar Benedict the Pole {supra^ p. 38).

3 Probably his firSt wife, whose name was Borak.chin (d'Ohsson,  Ji, S37)-

* Jean de Beaumont accompanied St. Louis to the Holy Land.  Joinville calls him "le bon chevalier." His nephew was Quillaume  de Beaumont, marshal of France, and he also was on this crusade.

12^ JOURNEY OF

time with reddish spots.' Finally he bid me speak, and  our guide told us to bend the knee and speak. 1 bent one  knee as to a man, but he made sign to me to bend both,  which I did, not wishing to dispute over it.^ Ihcn he  bid me speak, and I, thinking I was praying God, having  both knees bent, began my speech by saying : " Oh lord,  we pray God from whom proceedeth all good things, and  who gave you these worldly goods, to give you hereafter  celestial ones, for the former without the latter are vain."  And as he listened attentively, I added . " You must know  for certain that you shall not have the celestial goods  unless you have been a Christian; for God saith : 'He  who shall have believed and have been baptized, shall be  saved, but he who shall not have believed shall be con-  demned"* At this he quietly smiled, and the other Moal  began clapping their hands, laughing at us, and my inter-  preter stood dumbfounded, and I had to reassure him that  he be not afraid. Then silence being reestablished, I said :  " I came to your son, because we had heard that he was a  Christian, and I brought him letters from the lord King of  the French. He {i.e.^ Sartach) it is who has sent me here to  you. You must know the reason why." Then he caused me  to rise, and he asked your name and mine, and that of my

* Perfusus gutta rosea. Ducange says gutia rosea is for gutta  rosaceuy and that it means ^^ rubido in facie. ^^ I can offer no explana-  tion, unless Batu was then recovering from snriall-pox or some other  eruptive disease. Hakluyt renders this by "he had a fresh ruddie  colour in his countenance.'"

- The etiquette of the Monf,^ol court appears to have exempted  those who belonged to clerical orders, whether Christian, IJuddhist  Taoist or Mohammedan, from performing some at least of the genu-  flexions and prostrations required of laymen. The Taoist Ch'aag-  ch'un, wlien received in 1222 by Chingis Khan, remarks : '* It must b»»  iaid here thai the professors of die Tao when prescntrd to the  Emperor w?re never required to fall upon their knees or to bend their  heads to the ground [kotow). On enteiing the iuiperial tent they  only made a bow and placed their hands together" (Bretschneider,  Med. iraiei.^ 47 ; see also J3u Halde, Dhcription^ i\ , 369, and infra).

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 1 25

companion and (270) of the interpreter, and he had it all  written down, and he also asked against whom you were  waging war, for he had heard that you had left your  country-witb.an.army.^ I replied: "Against the Saracens  who are, profaning Jerusalem, the house of God." He also  asked whether you had ever sent envoys to him. " To you,"  Prsaid, *' never." T'Hen he made us sit down, and had us  given of his milk to drink, and they hold it to be a great  honour when anyone drinks cosmos with him in his  d.welling.2 While sitting there I was looking down, but he  bid me turn my face up, either wishing to see me better,  or on account of their sorcery, for they hold it to be a bad  omen or sign, or as portending evil, if one sits before them  with face turned down as if in sorrow, and especially so if  he rest his chin or his cheek in his hand. Then we went  out, and after a little while our guide came to us, and  while conducting us to our lodging said to me : " The lord

^ As showing the care with which the rules of etiquette of the  Mongol courts were observed, it is not amiss to cite the following  description of the audience granted in 1262 by Berka (Sartach's  successor) to the envoys of the Sultan of Egypt, Beibars. The  ambassadors were brought into thQ-Khan's tent on the left side of ihe  ihrone, but after presenting their letters they passed to the right side.  (Pian de Carpine, 746, says that when on his way to the court of Mangu,  he was placed on the left side of Batu, when received by him, while  on his return he was seated on his right side.) They knelt on both  knees ; no one was allowed to enter the royal tent with arms, or even  strung bows. They were told not to touch with the foot the threshold  of the tent, not to eat snow, not to wash their clothes within the  precincts of the royal residence. The tent within which Berka was  seated was covered with white felt, and lined with silk stuffs, orna-  mented with pearls and precious stones. It was large enough to hold  five hundred persons. The Khan was seated on a throne, and his  first wife was beside him ; fifty or sixty of his officers were seated on  stools. When Berka's vizir «bad read the letter of Beibars, the ambas-  sadors passed with their suite to the right of the throne (d'Ohsson,  iii, 387-389 ; conf. also infra).

2 Quatrem^re (354-359) cites many passages from contemporary  Mohammedan writers, showing that it was a custom of the MongOi  princes to offer a cup of kumiss or wine to honoured guests. Batu  would appear to have been of rather pleasing manners. Pian  de Carpine (746) says he was satis benignus. The Mongols called  him Sain Khan^ or " The Good Prince'' (d'Ohsson, ii, 334).

126 JOURNEY OF

King requests that you remain in this country, but Raatu

may not do this without the permission of Mangu chan.

So you and your interpreter must go to Mangu chan. As

to your companion and the other man, they will go back

to Sartach, w here they will await your return/' Then the

interpreter Homo Dei began to lament, deeming himself

lost, and my companion to declare that they might sooner

cut off his head than separate him from me ; and I said

that without a companion I could not go, and moreover

that we really required two servants (271), for should one

happen to fall ill, I could not be left alone. So he went

back to the court and told Baatu what I had said. Then

he commanded ; " Let the two priests and the interpreter

go, and the clerk return to Sartach." He came back and

told us the decision ; but when I wanted to speak about

the clerk, that he might come with us, he said : '' Say no

more about it, for Baatu has settled it, and I dare not go

again to the court." The clerk Gosset had xxvi yperpera

of your alms and no more ;^ of these he kept x for himself

and the boy, and he gave the xvi others to Homo Dei for

us ; and so we parted from each other with tears, he going

back to Sartach, and we remaining there.

^^N the eve of the Assumption (14th August) he

(Gosset) reached the ordu - of Sartach, and the  next day the Nestorian priests were dressed in  our vestments in the presence of Sartach. As for us,  we were taken to another host who was to provide us  with lodgings, food and horses, but as we had nothing  to give him he did it all meanly. We drove about  {btgaviniHs) with Baatu for v weeks, following the Etilia

^ Twenty-six yperpera would make about ^^14 12^. The boy {^ufr)  was the slave called Nicholas, boii^jht at Constantinople.

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 12;

down its course.^ Sometimes my companion was so  hungry that he would say to mc, ahnost with tears in his  eyes: "It seems to me I shall never get anything to  eat." (272) The market always follows the ordu of Baatu,  but it was so faraway from us that we could not get there,  for from lack of horses we had to travel afoot.- Finally  some Hungarians who had been clerks found us out, and one  of them still knew how to sing with much expression, and  was looked upon by the other Hungarians almost as a  priest, and was called to the burial of their dead ; and  another of them was well versed in grammar, for he under-  stood accurately all we said to him, though he could not  reply. These men were a great consolation to us, bringing  us cosmos to drink and sometimes meat to eat. I was  greatly distressed w.hen they asked me for some books,  as I had none to give them, having only a Bible and a  breviary. So I said to them: "Bring us tablets {r.'?^/^?i'),  and I will write for you as long as we are here." And  this they did, and I wrote on both sides of them the hours  of the Blessed Virgin and the office for the dead. One day  a Coman joined us, who saluted us in Latin, saying : " Sal-  vite, domine r Much astonished, I returned his salutation,  and asked him who had taught it him. He said that he  had been baptized in Hungary by the brethren of our  order,^ who had taught it to him. He said, furthermore,

^ The rate of progress of these great camps must have been very  slow, probably not over six or eight miles a day, often less. In the  thirty-five days Friar William was with IJatu, they did not, in all likeli-  hood, travel i$o miles. This is the more likely since the Friar, who  was a very stout man, travelled on foot (see infra and F. M.  Schmidt, 189).

2 Conf. what Pian de Carpine says on his treatment at Kuyuk's  court, supra^ p. 26. S(mon of St. Quentin says that when at Baiju's  court he and his companions were reduced to bread and water, with  now and thert a little milk once a day.

•^ I have not been able to find out the date of the first establishment  of the Franciscans in Hungary. The Dominicans were there as early  as 1 22 1, working at the conversion of the Comans (Mamachio,

128 JOURNEY OF

that Baatu had asked him a great deal about us, and that  he had toW him of the condition of our order.

I saw (273) Baatu riding with all his horde {turbo) ; and  all the heads of families were riding with him, but accord-  ing to my estimate there were not over five hundred men.  At last, about the feast of the Elevation of the Holy Cross  (14th September), there came a rich Moal to us, whose  father was a chief of a thousand, which is a high rank  among them,^ and he said : " I am to take you to Mangu  chan. The journey is a four months one, and it is so cold  on it that stones and trees are split by the cold. Think it  over whether you can bear it." I answered him : " I trust  that, by the grace of God, we may be able to bear what  other men can bear." Then he said : " If you cannot  bear it, I shall abandon you on the road." I replied :  " That is not right ; we are not going of ourselves, but are  sent by your lord, so, being entrusted to your care, you  should not abandon us." Then he said : "All will be well."  After that he made us show him all our clothing, and what  seemed to him of little use he made us leave with our host.  The next day they brought each of us a sheepskin gown,  breeches of the same material, boots according to their  fashion, felt stockings, and hoods such as they use. The  day after the Elevation of the Holy Cross (15th September)  (274) we started on our ride,^ with two pack horses for the  three of us, and we rode constantly eastward until the feast

Annaliuiu^ 646). The Franciscans were established in l^ohcmia in  1232 {Ann decide ii, 56) ; they may have sent missionaries from there  to Hungary.

* In Mongol iniui^atan. 'I'iicrc were five classes of Mongol officers  bearing this title ; they managed certain administrative districts.  Over tl»em were ( hicfs of un thousand, and under them chiefs of  hundreds and of tens (sec Ymiu shih^ bks. 91, 98, and Deveria.yt?*/»/  Asiai,, w" serie, viii, 104).

Yulo {Eucy. Brit., xxi, 47) thinks the point whore the traveller left  the Volga must have been between 4S' and 50" N. lat. ; that is to say,  less than 150 miles S. of the point where he twid come upoo the  Volga. F, M. Schmidt accepts this view, which is also mine.

FkIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 129

of All Saints. And throu^fh all that country and beyond,  the Cangle used to live, and they were a branch {parentela)  of the Comans. To the north of us was Greater Bulgaria,  and to the south the Caspian Sea.

J6|^?^FTER travelling xii days from the Etilia,^ we found  ^^^ a great river which they call Jagac,- and it comei  from the country of Pascatir in the north, and falls  into this previously-mentioned sea {i.e., the Caspian). The  language of Pascatir is the same as that of the Hungarians.^  and they are shepherds without any towns whatever, and on  the west this country confines on Greater BuTgaria.** From  this country eastward, and on that side to the north, there  are no more towns ; so Greater Bulgaria is the last  country with towns. 'Twas from this country of Pascatir

^ J.e.j on the 26th September.

* The river Ural. We find this river already called by this name,  urder the form Daich (Aax'x), in Menander (229) ; while Constantine  Porphyrogenitus {De Admin., 151) writes it Geick {yf^r]x). Pian de  Carpine (743) transcribes the name JaiCy and Friar Benedict (777,

Jaiac (see also Bretschneider, Med. Geog., 151).

^ The Bashkirds. Pian de Carpine (708) speaks of" Bascart, which  is Great Hungary," and Friar Benedict (776 of '' the Bascarts, who  are the ancient Ungari." Mohammedan authors called them Bash-  guird. On their conquest by Batu, says d'Ohsson v'ii. 620), quoting  the Tarikh Djiha7ikushai, they were a ver)- considerable and Christian  nation. They are of Finnish stock, and now speak a Turkish dialect :  but Yule {Ency. Brit., xxi, 47; thinks it quite possible they formerly  spoke a language akin to Magyar. Mussulman historians of thai  period identified the Bashkirds with the Hungarians. E. D. Butler  \Ency. Brit., xii, 374) says: "The Magyar or native Hungarian  language is of Asiatic origin, belonging to the northern or Ural-Altaic  (Finnic Tartaric) division of the Turanian family, and formmg along  with the Ugro-Ostiakian and Vogul dialects the Ugric branch of that  family" (conf., however, Bretschneider, Med. Geog., 164).

* Constantine Porphyrogenitus {De Admin., 46) calls it '• Black  Bulgaria'^ {iiavpr) Xeyovfievr) BovXyapia), and says the people used to be  called Onogiinduroi (Ovoyowdovpoi), a name which connects then:  with the Huns. Tbeophanes {Chronograi)hia, i, 545) uses, however.  the name Great Bulgaria {p.€yakf] BovXyapia) (see supra^ p. 107, note ly.

130 JOURNEY OF

th;it went forth the Hun<5, who were afterward the Hun-  garians ; hence it is the same as Greater Bulgaria. Isidorus  says^ that with their fleet horses they crossed the barriers  which Alexander had built among the rocks of the Cau-  casus to confine the savage tribes, and that as far as  Kgypt all the country paid them tribute. They ravaged  all the world as far as France, so that they were a greater  power than are now the Tartars. With them also came  the Blacs (275), the Bulgars and the Wandals. For from  that Greater Bulgaria come the Bulgars, who are beyond  the Danube near Constantinople. And beside Pascatir  are the Iliac, which is the same word as Blac, but the  Tartars do not know how to pronounce (the letter) B, and  from them come those who are in the land of Assan.-  They call both of them Iliac, the former and the latter.  The language of the Ruthenians, Poles, Bohemians and  Sclavons is the same as that of the Wandals,^ and the  hand of all of them was with the Huns, as now is that of  the greater part of them with the Tartars, whom God has  raised up out of the remote parts of the earth, a mighty  people but a stupid race according to what the Lord  saith : " I will move them to jealousy (that is, those who  do not keep his law) with those which are not a people ;  I will provoke them to anger with a foolish nation."* This  is fulfilled to the letter as to all the nations who do not  keep the law of the Christ. That which I have told of

^ I have not found the passage referred to in Isidorus's writings ;  but they are so bulky that it may easily have escaped me.

' A branch of the Volga Bulgars occupied the Moldo-Vallach  country in about A.D. 485, but it was not until the first years of the  sixth century that a portion of them passed the Danube under ilie  leadership of Asparuk, and established themselves in the prestni  Bulgaria, Friar William's "land of Assan" (sec also p. 47, note 3).

2 This observation as to the connection of these languages is per-  fectly correct ; this is probably the earliest ntuice of the fact by eny  western writer.

* Deuteronomy, xxxii, 31 (conf. Romans, x, 19).

FRIAR V/ILLIAM OF RUBKUCK. 13!

the land of Pascatir 1 know from the preaching friars who  went there before the advent of the Tartars,^ but since then  (276) it has been subjugated by the neighbouring Saracen  Bulgars, and some of the people have become Saracens.  The rest may be learned from the chronicles, for it is a  well established fact that those provinces from Constanti-  nople (westward) and which were called Bulgaria, Blackia  and Sclavonia were provinces of the Greeks, and that  Hungary was Pannonia.

So we rode through the country of the Cangle from the  feast of the Holy Cross (15th September) to the feast of  All Saints (ist November), and nearly every day we  went, as well as I could estimate, about the distance from  Paris to Orleans, and sometimes more, according to the  supply of horses,- For sometimes we changed horses two  or three times in a day, while at others we went for two or  three days without finding anyone, so we had to go slower.  Out of XX or XXX horses we, as foreigners, always got the  worst, for they invariably took their pick of horses before  us. They always gave me a strong horse, on account of my

^ This early mission of the Dominicans seems to have been entirely  overlooked by the historians of the Order. The only reference I- have  found to it is in Albericus Trium Fontium {Chronicon^ 564), where,  under the date of 1237, he records that " Rumors having got abroad  (in western Europe) that the Tartar nation wished to invade  Comania and Hungary, four preaching friars travelled for an  hundred days as far as Old Hungary, and they on their return stated  that the Tartars had already invaded Old Hungary and reduced it to  their rule."

2 It probably appeared quite this distance to the portly Friar, but it  is highly improbable that his party travelled sixty miles a day, which  is about the distance from Paris to Orleans. When we take into con-  sideration what he^ays a few lines farther on about tired horses, poor  mounts, and riding he and Friar Bartholomew on one horse, I doubt  very much if the average rate was much over twenty-five to thirty  miles a day. It must be noted that our Traveller does not mention the  Sea of Aral. He either passed considerably to the north of it (and  this supposition is the more likely since he says (279) that he had  crossed the mountains beyond the Volga), or he took it for the Caspian.  It was unknown to the ancients.

K 2

132 JOURNEY OF

great weight;^ but I dared not inquire whether he rode  easily or not, nor did i venture to complain if he proved  hard, but I had to bear it all with equal good grace-  Consequently we used to have to endure extreme hardships;  ofttimes the horses were tired out before we had reached  the stage, and we had to beat and whip them, put our  clothing on other pack horses, change our saddle horses for  pack horses, and sometimes even the two of us ride one  horse.

^277)

IMES out of number we were hungered and athirst,

cold and wearied. They only gave us food in the  evening; in the morning we had something to drink  or millet gruel,- while in the evening they gave us meat, a  shoulder and ribs of mutton, and some pot liquor. When we  had our fill of such meat broth, we felt greatly invigorated ;  it seemed to me a most delicious drink and most nourishing.  On Fridays I fasted without drinking anything till evening,  when if was obliged, though it distressed me sorely, to eat

^ Ponderosus valde. This is the only personal detail in the whole  narrative.

' Sorbere milium. Parched millet is still a favourite food ot many  Mongol tribes ; it is either extendryand washed down with a gulp of  tea, or else it is put in the tea and softened. Boiled millet with mutton  is also oflen eaten. Ibn Batuta (ii, 364), speaking of the food of the  Tartars of the Kipchak, says : " They prepare a dish in that country  with an ingredient found there like millet, and called addughy. They  put water on the fire, and when it boils they put a little dttgky (millet)  m it. If they have meat, they chop it up and cook it with the grain.  Then they serve some to each person in his cup ; they pour a little  curdled milk over it, and swallow it down." Pian de Carpine (640)  says of the Mongols' food that in winter '' they cook millet in water,  and make it so thin that they cannot eat it but have to drink it. .And  each one of them drinks a bowl or two, and eats nothing else the day  long. In the evening they give to each a little meat, and they drink the  broth from the meat." This was the ordinary diet of the Mongols in his  day, and at the present day it is practically the same. Mongols,  Tibetans, and Chinese when travelling do not eat in the morning : the  one meal pf the day is taken in the evening.

FF<[AR WILLIAM OF RURJiUCK 133

meat. Sometimes we had to eat half-cooked or nearly raw  p^eat, not having fuel to cook it ; this happened when we  reached camp after dark, and vve could not see to pick up  CY or horse dung. Wc rarely found any other fuel, save  occasionall}' a few briars.' In a few spots along the banks  of some of the streams were woods, but .such spots were rare.  /• t nrst our guide showed profound contempt for us, and was:  disgusted at having to guide such poor folk ; bui after  awhile, when he began to know us better, he would take us  to the yurts {curia) of rich Moal, where we had to praj' for  them, and if I had had a good interpreter, I had oppor  luMiities for briiigU.i^ about much good. This Chingis, the  rlrjt Chan, had four sons,- whose descendants are very  rnnnerous ; and these all have big ordiis, and they multiply  d-'-ily and are scattered all ov<"r this vast scahke desert.  Our guide took us (278; to many of these, and they would  wonder greatl}' at our not receiving gold, silver, or costly  clothnig. They inquired also of the great pope, if he were  as old as they had heard, for. they had heard tnat he Vv-a-  five hundred years old. They asked about our countries,  if there were many sheep, cattle and horses there. As to  the Ocean sea, they were Cjuite unable to uriderstand that it  was endless, without bounds.

I'he eve of All Saints (31st October; we left the road o  the east,^ for the people had already moved a good deal to

' These briars were baksaul, with which Friar Benedict, who callb  It {supra, p. 35) absinciiim^ says this country was co\'ered.

- Juchi, Chagatai, Ogodai, and Tului. The eldest died during his  father's lifeti'ne .

^ It is, of course, irnpossible to determihe with any great degree of  exactitude the point where our traveller took a southerly "course.  .Assuming, as T have done, that he did not make over thirty miles a  day. he had probably nca traAelleri, in the thirty-four days since  passing the Ural river, cL ihousand statute miles. Allowing for the  .indings in the trai! foWow'ed, he would seem to have changed his  crirection somevbere about E. long. 69'. Yule {Cathay^ ccxii) thinks  ].e 3trurk south at about long. 67'' ; and F. M Schmidt on his map —  to/ i<> "the iDody vf his work he does liot attempt to settle the quesiion —

134 JOURNKY" OF

tri(? south, and we made our way by some alps due south  continually for viii days.^ In that desert I saw many  asses called culani.r and they greatly resemble mules ; our  guide and his companion chased them a great deal, but  without getting one, on account of their great fleetness.  '^he seventh day we begaiv to see to the south some very-  high mountains, and we entered a plain irrigated like  a garden, and here we found cultivated land. On the

places this point at ahout 70° 30'. It must not be thought that  the direction tlien taken was du<i south. Our traveller throughout  his narrative uses this term {recte). In the present case he probably  -travelled S.E. (see supra, p. 91, note i ; p. 92, note i).

* Dircxinws He}- per quosdam aJpes rectc in meridiem. Peschei  (p 166) understands this passage to ir.ean that the traveller travelled  in the direction of {per) certain Alps ; and F. M. Schmidt (p. 192),  miSanderstanding". I take it. Vale's translation, accepts this intefpre-  tanon. Yule {C itiuiw ccx)) translates as I have done. I have  followed Yule's ijn'.«-'preration, first, because Friar William speaks of  entering a plain arttr n a\elling seven days south, when he came in sight  C'l' a high range of mountains ; and second, because he uses in other  passages the preposition per, in the usual sense of '"through";  ai p 260 of the text he speaks of the mountain pasture lands {alpes)  of the Kara-Kitayam ""per quas transive'' ; and on p. 390 he says,  "" tendebamus per altissima montana et per inaximas nives in occi-  dentejn."' Furthermore, if we accepted Peschel's and Schmidt's trarjs-  lation, we should have to imagine that Rubruck travelled o\er n ])lain  for seven days in the direction of these alps without perceiving "the  very high mountains to the south of them"' ; how this could be done  I fail to see. Yule {Cathay, ccxii) supposes that our traveller crossed  die 'Alps' of the Kara tau, S.E. of the town of Turkestan, and then  entered the valley cf the Talas. This seems much more likely to me  than that he should, as indicated on Schmidt's map, havegont straight  through the desert to the north and south of the river Chu, until near  the present Aulie-ata. and then have turned eastward. Pian de  Carpi ne's route — which ran probably not far from the right bank of  the SsT-daria— joined that followed by Rubruck, I should think, not  far from the latter's Kinchat.

' See supra, p. 69. The Mongols call the wild ass kulan — often  pronounced hulan. This animal is also found in Persia (where it is  known as a^hor khar), in parts of western hidia, Turkestan, and  Tibet. Strabo i vii, 4,25^) states that the Scythians of southern Russia  used to hunt there ovaypat; and Herodotus (iv, 61) says that the  Indians in Xerxes' army had wild ones harnessed to their chariots.  This I think is untrue, for I do not believe that the wild ass has ever  been domesticated. On the wild ass hunting by the Mongols in the  thirteenth century, see d'Ohsson ''i, 322). I have often chased them  on horseback, but even when wounded they could get away from the  best pony I have ever seen.

FRIAK WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. I35

octave of All Saints (8th November) we entered a certain  town or Saracens called Kinchat,^ and its captain came out  of the town to meet our guide, bearing mead [cervisia) and  cups. For it is their custom that in all towns subject to  them, they come out to meet the messengers of Baatu and  Mangu chan with food and drink. At that season of the year  there was ice on the roads in those parts, and even earlier,  from the date of the feast (279^ of Saint Michel (29th  September) we had had frost in the desert. 1 inquired  the name of this province ; but as we had aheady passed  into another territory, they were unable to tell me  anything beyond the name of the town, which was a very  small one. And there came a big river down from the  mountains,'^ which irrigated the whole country wherever  they wanted to lead the water, and k flowed not into any  sea, but was absorbed in the ground, forming many  marshes. There (at Kinchat) I saw vines, and twice did  I drink wine.^

•HE next 'day we came to another village nearer the  mountains, and I inquired concerning these moun-  tains, which I understood to be those of the Cau-  casus, which confine at either extremity on the sea. from the  west to the east, and which we had already crossed at the sea

1 This town is mentioned under the name of Kendjek in"" the  Mesalek al-absar (224) as one of the cities of the Talas valley {see  note on next page ; and F. M. Schmidt, p. 193).

2 The Talas river, which is finally lost in the sands of the Muyum  Kum (Yule, Cathay ^ ccxii ; Bretschneider, Med, Travel^ 34 ; F- M.  Schmidt, p. 194).

•^ Grapes have been raised and wine made in this part of Turkestan  for at least two thousand years. At Vernoye, for example, which is  in the foot-hills of the Trans-Ili Ala tau, and at an altitude of 2,430 ft.,  grapes are successfully grown (^tUtrx^^iXm^ Mittheilungen^ xix, 402  and F. M. Schmidt, p. 193).

»36 joUKNEV or-

previously mentioned into which the Etiha flows.* I asked  also concerning the town of Talas- in wliich were Teuton  slaves of Biui, of whom Friar Andrew had spoken (to me),'^  and concerning whom I had made much inquiry at the  ordus of Sartach and Baatu. I was unable to learn any-  thing concerning them, only the following circumstances  of the death of their master Buri. Not finding his pasture  lands good, one day while drunk he spoke to his men,  saying : '* Am I not of the race of Chingis chan as well as  Baatu ? (for he was the nephew or brother of Baatu).^

The mountains he had in view were those of the Ala tau, those  nearest him being what is now designated as the Alexander range.  Classical geographers, whom our traveller follows in this, thought the  Caucacus traversed Asia from east to west, and conceived the Ural  mountains to be a branch of this great range (conf. F. M. Schmidt,  p. 195, and infra).

'^ The town of Talas appears to have been situated on the river of  the same name. It is first mentioned by Menander (228), in his  account of the mission of Zemarchus. Its* position is not known, but  it was on the highroad from eastern to western Turkestan. The  Chinese pilgrim, Yuan-chuang (Julien, P^ierins., i, 14), visited it, and  states that it was an important trading point. It is also referred to by  Chinese travellers in the thirteenth century (Bretschneider, Med.  Travel., 34, 75, 114; and Med. Geog.., ni). ')^\i(t M.esalek al-ab^ar  (224) says it was frequently called Jenghi-Taias : "From Samar-  kand to Jenghi they count twenty days' march. Jenghi is composed  of four towns, separated the one from the other by the distance of  a parasang (about four miles). Each one of them has a particular  name ; one is called Jenghi, the second Jenghl-balik, the third  Kendjek (Rubruck's Kinchat ?), and the fourth Talas.'- If this Talas  is the same as the one referred to by our traveller — which seems  nardly possible — he must, on leaving Kinchat, have taken an easterly  direction with a little southing, which v/ould have t/ought him nearer  the mountains, as required by his narrative, but still Talas would have  been a great deal nearer than was told him. See also F. M. Schmidt,  pp. 195-200 He places Talas near the present Aulie-ata. Conf. also  N. Elias, op. cit.., p. 79.

' There is no mention made of these Teuton sla^•e3 in the brief  accounts which have reached us of Friar Andrew's mission ; but  there is every reason to suppose that Friar William had often seen  Andrew after his return from Mongolia to Syria (see supra., Intro-  ductory notice).

* Buri was, according to d'Ohsson (ii, lu), a grandson of Chagatai,  and therefore a second cousin of Batu. Bretschneider, however  {Med. Geog.., 169), says he was Chagatal's son, and Pian de Carpine  (666) ^.grees with this, thus making him Batu's first cousin.

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK 137

Why should I not go to the banks of the Etilia like Baatu,  to graze there?" Now these words were reported to  Baatu, and he wrote to Buri's men, teUing them to bring  him their lord in chains, and this they did. Then Baatu  asked if he (280) had spoken such words, and he confessed  that he had, though he sought to excuse himself as being  drunk, for they usually condone the offences of drunken  men. But Baatu replied : " How dare you mention my  name in your drunkenness !" and he had his head cut off^  I As to those Teutons I was unable to learn anything con-  cerning them all the way to Mangu chan's ordii, but in the  village just referred to I gathered that Talas was beyond  us in the direction of the mountains, vi days' travel. When  1 reached the ordti of Mangu chan I gathered that Mangu  had transported these Teutons, with Baatu's permission, the  distance of a month's tra'"'el to the east of Talas, to a  certain town called Bolat, where they are digging for gold  and manufacturing arms,"^ so I could neither go nor come

^ The origin of the quarrel between Batu and Buri is thus stated  in the " Secret history of the Mongol dynasty" {Yuan chao pi shih\  in Batu's report of the event to the Emperor Ogodai : "When the  army returned (in 1243, after the conquest of eastern Europe), a  bancjuet was arranged, at which all the princes were present. Being  the eldest, I drank one or two cups of wine before the others. Buri  and Guyuk were incensed, left the banquist and mounted their horses,  at the same time reviling me. Buri said : ' Batu is not superior to  me ; why did he drink before I drank ? He is an old woman with a  beard. By a single kick I could knock him down and crush himP  Guyuk raid : ' He is an old woman with bow anc' arrows. I shall  order him to be thrashed with a stick ! ' Another proposed to fasten  a wooden tail to my bod^'. vSuch is the language that was used by the  princes when, after the war with the different nations, we had assembled  to deliberate on important matters ; and we were obliged to break up  without discussing the affairs. Such is what 1 have to report, O  Emperor, my uncle " (Bretschneider, Med. Geog.^ 169). After Shira-  mun's conspiracy (see infra., p. 164) Buri was in 1252 delivered to Batu  by Mangu Khan and put to death, probably to avenge the old insult.  The Mongols did not, when putting to death any of their princes,  spill their blood : they were wrapped in felt and crushed to death, or  else drowned (d'Ohsson, ii, 269, 458 ; iii, 243).

■^ The Mongols and Tartars have never been able to extract iron  from the ore, except in a very primitive way, and must always have

<3^ JOURNEY OF

back their way. However, in going I passed quite near  that town (of Bolat), perhaps three days from it, but I was  unaware of it, nor could I have turned from my route if  I had known it.

From the village I have mentioned we went eastward,  close to the mountains above referred to, and from that  point we entered among the subjects of Mangu chan, who  everywhere sang and clapped their hands before our guide,  because he was an envoy of Baatu. For they show each  other this mark of honor ; the subjects of Mangu receive in  this fashion the envoys of Baatu, and those of Baatu  the envoys of Mangu. The subjects of Baatu, however,  are the stronger, so they do not observe the custom so  carefully. A few days later we entered the alps in which  the Caracatai used to live, and there we found a great river  which we had to pass in a boat.^ After that we entered

been largely dependent for the supply necessary for the manufacture  of their arms and domestic utensils on what they could import or levy  as tribute. Our traveller has referred to the tribute of iron they had  exacted from the people of north-eastern Europe {stipra, p. 47). We can  easily imagine how useful these Germans must have been to them,  smelting iron and manufacturing weapons. Bolat is the Pulad of  Persian mediceval writers, the Po-lo or Fu-la of Chinese travellers  of the thirteenth century, the Phiilat of King Heythum, who mentions  it between Dinka-balekh (which Hrctschneider, Med. Qco^.^ 300,  thinks may perhaps be traced in the modern Tsing-ho, a river and  town east of Lake Sairam on the road between Urumtsi and Kuldja)  and the Sut Kul (Lake Sairam) (Klaproth, Jour. Asiat.^ xii, 282)>  It is worthy of note, in connection with what we are told of the  occupation at Bolat of these Germans, that the name Pulad is said  to mean "steel" — I know not in what language (Klaproth, /^r. j«;).  cit.). The Chinese traveller Ch'ang-te, who passed through this town,  which he calls Po-lo, in 1253, says that wheat and rice were raised  there, that the houses were built of clay, and the windows furnished  with glass (Bretschneider, iMed. Travel, p. 70). It would seem highly  probable that this use of glass — which then, as now, was practically  unknown in this part of the world — had been introduced by these  same Germaiis. Quatremere {Nol. el Exlr., xiii, 229) makes the  extraordinary mistake of identifying Rubruck's Bolat with Balkh  (see also Bretschneider, Med. Geog., 221, 300).

^ Leaving Kinchat our traveller followed in an easterly direction  along the northern base of the Alexander range, then crossing the  Chu, which at that season of the year was probably an insignificant  stream — for he does not mention it— he took an E.N.E. direction

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. I39

a (281) valley, where we saw a ruined camp, whose walls  were nothing but mud, and the soil was cultivated there.  And after that we found a goodly town called Equius/  in which were Saracens speaking Persian, though they

through tlie hills which separate the Chu from the Hi, and in which  he says the Kara-Khitai had their summer pasturages {alpes).  Leaving tliese hills he came on the Hi river, which he had to pass in a  boat. Yule had (in Ci^Mf?)/, ccxiii) identified the *' great river" of our  traveller with the Chii, but in a later study on Rubruck [Ency. Brit.,  xxi, 47), he accepts the view that it was the Hi, as does F. M. Schmidt  (202). From here our traveller probably followed the great military  road up the broad valley, in which are the feeders of the South branch of  the Kara-maL This road, then as now, passed by the modem town of  Kopai. Thence Friar William went along the foot-hills of the Ala tau, to  the present Lepinsk, from which point, probaVjlyby a rather circuitous  trail, he came to the head of the Ala kul. The Chinese traveller,  Ch'ang-td, who travelled through this country south of Lake Baikal  little more than a year before Rubruck, speaks of it as being thickly  inhabited : " The country was intersected in all directions by canals,  which irrigated ihe fields. Numerous ancient walls and otlier ruins  were seen. The people said that in former times the Ki-tan dwelt  there." Four days after passing this place, he reached the Talas  (river {*) (Hretschneider, Med. Travelyj^ \ see also F. M. Schmidt,  203).

' The identification of Rubruck's " great river "' with the Hi obliges  us to reject Yule's identihcation of Equius with the Aspu?'ch of  .Shah Rokh'ii mission, which was on the Chu, son^ewhere near the  present Pishpek, or Tokmak {Cathay., ccxiii). Likewise, we must  consider as unlikely Floworth's identification of Equius with the  Chinese mediaeval traveller Ch'ang-te's Yi-tu, which was in the  neighbourhood of a river ''^flowbig eastward''^ called the Yi-yiin ;  and which place Howorth thinks he finds in the modern It-kiyu  or Sari Kurgan on the Chu (Honoith, History^ i, pt. l, 282). The  Yi-tu of Ch'ang-te might be Rubruck's Equius. if we could identify  his Yi-yim river with, say, the Borotala mal, v/iiich flows eastward into  the Ebi nor, and suppose that the Chinese traveller had followed  along the southern slope of the .Ala tau up the course of the  I:»oroiala, and then crossed over into the' valley of the Kok su. This  would have brought him exactly to the place where F. M. Schmidt  places Equius on his map, a position whicn I think m.ay be provision-  ally accepted as at least possible. Schmidt (203) says that Equius  was cnly one day's travel from Kailac, which all writers on the  subject agree upon placing a little to the west of the modern Kopal.  The text does not bear out Schmidt's statement, although I am fain  to admit that our author has succeeded in conveying that idea to  his readers. See, however, Yule {E??cy. Brit.., xxi, 47), where he  thinks. .Schmidt misapprehends the text. Quatremere {Not. ct Extr..,  xiii, 288, 234) identifies the Isigheul of the Mesalek al-absar with  Equius, but this does not help matters, for we do not know where  isigheul was.

f40 . JOURNEY OF

were a very long way off from Persia. The next day,  havtng crossed these alps which project from the high  mountains in the south, we entered a beautiful plain with  high mountains to the right, and a sea or lake which is  xxv^ days in circumference to the left. And all this plain  is well watered by the streams which come down from  the mountains, and all of which flow into this sea. hl the  summer tiine we came back along the north shore o( this  sea, and there likewise were great mountains. In this  plain there used to be many towns, but most of them were  destroyed, so that the Tartars might graze there, for there  were most excellent pasturages in that country. We  found there a big town called Cailac,^ where there was a  market, and many traders frequented it. Here we rested  xii days,^ waiting for a certain secretary of Baatu, who was  to be associated with our guide in the matters to be settled  at Mangu's ordu. This country used to be called Organum,*  and the people used to have a language and letters of their  own ; (282) but now it is all occupied by Turcomans.*

^ Hakluyt's MS. reads ''fifteen."

2 As pointed out by Yule {Cathay^ ccxii, 576), Rubruck's Cailac is  the Kayalik of Persian med'aeval writers, and probably the Kaligh  of Sadik Isfahan, the Haulak or Khaut k of Edrisi (d'OhcT-on,  ii, 246, iii, 516). Chinese writers of the Mongol period call it //(7/-  va-li {Med. Travel.^ 70). F. M, Schmidt (204), as well as all other  writers on the subject, places Cailac a little to the west of the modern  Kopal (N. Elias, op. cit., 288).

^ Some of the M.SS. read xv. Yule {Cathay., ccxiv) has suggested that  these figures are possibly a clerical error for vii, as otherwise we are  obliged to suppose that the traveller covered the distance from Kinchat  to the head of the Ala kul in fourteen days. The distance between,  these two points is about five hundred miles ; this supposes an  average progress of over thirty-five miles a day, which is- especially in  a hilly country, as was part of this — an excess over what Friar William  appears to have done in any other part of his journey.

* As pointed out by Yule {Cathay., 522), the name of Organa, the  widow of Kara Hulagu, grandson and successor of Chagalai, and regent  of his ulns on his death, has been transferred to the country itself  She lived at Almalik, at or near the modern Kuldja ( Bretochneider.  Med. Travel., 62 ; and M^d. Geog.., 217).

^Benjamin of Tudela (36) speaks of the Thogarmans or Turks,  and Haithon, Hisi. Or tetit. {21), refers to the Turqitiatis. Pian

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 141

Moreover, the Nestorians of those parts used to perform  their services in that language, and write books in those  letters,^ and perhaps it was by them that those people  were called Organa on account, as was told me, of their  having been excellent guitar players (or organiste)? 'Twas  here I first saw idolaters, of whom you must know there  are many sects in the east.

The first are the lugurs, whose country confines on  this said country of Organum, being situated among the  mountains to the east of it ;^ and in all their towns is found  a mixture of Nestorians and Saracens, and they are also  scattered about towards Persia in the towns of the Saracens.

de Carpine (701) mentions the Turcomans among the nations con-  quered by the Mongols. D'Ohsson (i, 196) tells us that the name  Turcman, or " resembling Turks," was gi\'en by the Persians to the  Kankalis (Rubruck's Cangle)^ when at the beginning of the thirteenth  century they migrated to the Kharizm. Some authors, however, derive  the name from the Turki tir^ " to draw, to shoot," and oman^  ''arrow " (Pears, Fall of Const aijiuioplc^ 15). William of Tyr (22, 24)  says : "The people of the Turks, or of the Turcomanns (for they have  the same origin) was at first a northern one. The Seldjuks took the  name of Turks ; those who continued to lead a pastoral life, that of  Turcomanns."

' On the Introduction of writing among the Uigurs and Mongols  by the Nestorians, see infra.

2 Organiste in medi;eval Latin, French and Greek (opyauupios)  means a musician, a player on any kind of instrument.

^ The position here assigned to the country of the Uigurs is quite  correct. In the thirteenth century they occupied Urumtsi, Turfan,  Karakhodjo and adjacent localities, all situated S.E. of the Kuldja  (Organum) country (Bretschneider, Med. Geog,^ 194)- Chinese  writers say the Uiglirs (called by them at various epochs Yuan-hOy  Hui-ho., Hiii-hic, and Hni-htii) were at one time known as Kao liin  ch^S or "high-wheeled carts" and as Kao ch'e., "high carts." They  descended from the ancient Hsiung-nii, who becam^e later on the  Tu-kiieh (Turks) {Wei shu.,hV. 103 ; Vang shu, bk. 217a ; Ma Tuan-  lin, bk. 344, s.v.., Vieh-ie; see also Bretschneider. Med. Geog;.,  189-21 1, where the subject • is fully treated from Chinese sources).  Mohammedan historians agree with Chinese in puttin;^ the Uigurs  with the Kankalis (Kao-che of the Chinese), Kipchaks, Karluks, etc.,  among the Oguz Turks (d'Ohsson, i, 423, 429 el Scq.; Howorth,  History^ i, pt. i, 21, 694, and/.7?.^.5., 1898, 809-838). Vllh. Thcmsen  {op. cit.. 147) suggests that the name Uigur is but a corruption of the  Turkish Oguz ; if this can be accepted, it might be Jhe original of  the Chinese name Kao-ch^e. Pian de Carpine (650) writes the name  Huiurs.

142 JOURNEY or

In the said city of Cailac they had three idol temples, two  of which I entered to see their foolishness. In the first  one I found a person who had a little cross in ink on his  hand,^ whence I concluded he was a Christian, and to  all that I asked him he replied that he was a Christian.  So I asked him : " Why have you not here the Cross and  the figure of Jesus Christ ? " And he replied : " It is not our  custom." So I concluded that they were Christians, but  had omitted this through some doctrinal error. I noticed  there behind a chest which served in the place of altar  (283) and on which they put lamps and offerings, a winged  image like Saint Michel, and other images like bishops  holding their fingers as if blessing.^ That evening I could

^ Theophylactus (225) tells us of some Turks, sent in the sixth  century as prisoners to Constantinople, who bore the sign of the cross  pricked in black dots on their foreheads. They said that, many years  before, when a pestilence was ravaging" their country, Christians  (Nestorians) had suggested to them to do this, and that by this means  the pestilence had been averted. The cross seen by our traveller may  have been a hooked cross or sivastika^ which I have sometimes seen  tattooed on the hands of Mongols and Tibetans. Tattooing is not  common among the people of central and northern Asia (omitting,  of course, such tribes as the Chuckrhes and others of the far north-  east). Pomponius Mela (622) says the Agathyrsi, a Scythian tribe  living N. of the Sea of Azov (probably the same as the Kha/ars, see  supra, p. 42, note i), tattooed their faces and hands, the amount of  tattooing increasing with the social rank (conf Herodotus, iii, 179).  Chinese annals tell us that among the Kirghiz in the third or fourth  century--, the men had tatioo marks on their hands, and the ^^omen  when they married had them made on the nape of their necks (Ma  Tuan-lin, bk. 348). The- Chinese pilgrim Yuan-chuang states that  the people of Kashgar {Kieh-sha) were in the habit of compressing  the heads of their new-born children between boards — a custom  attributed also by classical autiiors to the Huns, Sidonius Apoll.  Pane^r. Anthem., 245 e( seg.) — and "decorated their bodies with  bluish-green designs." julien {Pelerins, ii, 220) and i>eal {Records^  ii, 307) have mistranslated this passage, having read ching "eye"  instead of eking ** blue."

*' This idol temple was, I take it, a Buddhist one. I am, however,  quite unable to say whether the Buddhist monks of Cailac professed  tho Tibetan or the Indian form of that religion, for Buddhism was first  introduced there directly from India, or i-at her from Khotan, though  Tibetan Buddhism may ha\e spread there in the thirteenth century.  The winged iigure would seem to be one of the yi-daui or patron  saints of the Lamaist's pantheon, many of whom are represented with

FRTAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 1 43

find out nothing more, for the Saracens shun these  (idolaters) so much that they will not even speak of them,  and when I asked Saracens concerning the rites of these  people, they were scandalised. The day following was  the first of the month and the Easter of the Saracens,^  and I changed my host and was lodged near another  idol temple, for the people entertain envoys each as he  may and according to his ability. Going into this idol  temple I found the priests of the idols there, for on the  first of the month they throw open the temples and  put on their sacerdotal vestments, offer (incense, hang  up lamps and offer) the oblations of bread and fruit of  the people.^ Now, in the first place, I will tell you of the  rites common to all idolaters, and after that of those  of the lugurs, who form as it were a sect distinct from  the others. They all worship to the north, with joined  hands, prostrate themselves to the ground with bended  knees, placing their foreheads on their hands. As a result  of this, the Nestorians in those parts never join their  hands in praying, but pray with their hands held extended  before the breast.'

They (the idolaters) place their temples east and west;

wings. The images with hands held in the position of blessing are  seen in all Buddhist temples, but they represent the liuddha or  Bodhisattwas in the act of preaching.

^ I suppose that the feast of Bairam is meant. Schiltberger ijo)  also refers to " the Infidels' Easter*day,'' and to "another Easter-day"  which is the feast o{ K urban Bairam.

'^ Buddhists have always kept the first and fifteenth of each montli  as special church feasts, on which the monks make general confession.  The eighth and twenty-fifth are also religious feasts. These four days  are called dus bzang^ " good days," by the Tibetans. (Rockhill, Land  of ike LamaSy 100.) The first of tlie month is the most important, the  ceremonies lasting during the whole day ; incense is burnt, and offer-  ings made of bread, fruit, water, and lamps lit before all the images.

^ At the present day, at all events, I am quite sure that there is no  special orientation observed by Buddhists in praying, though— as  wherever possible the temples have a southern exposure — they do  usually face to the north. Nor do they clasp their hands, but hole;  them together with opened palms.

144 JOURNEY OF

on the north side they make an alcove projecting out like  a choir, or sometimes, if the building Ms square, it is \n the  middle of the building. So they shut off on the north side  an (284) alcove in place of a choir, and there they put  a coffer as long and as broad as a tabie,^ and after that  coffer to the south they place the chief idol, and that  which I saw at Caracarum was as large as we paint Saint  Christopher.^ And a Nestorian who had come from  Cathay told me that in that country there is an idol so  big that it can be seen from two days off.^ And they  place other idols around about (the principal one), all most  beautifully gilt. And on that coffer, which is like a tabl^,  they put lamps and offerings. Contrary to the custom  of the Saracens, all the doors of the temples open to the  south. They also have big bells like ours : 'tis for this  reason, I think, that the eastern Christians do not have.

^ The text is rather confused, and there is a useless repetition,  perhaps the result of hasty dictation. The meaning is, that the altar  is either placed in front of the apsis of the temple, or in the centre of  the building when it is square. The arrangement as indicated by  Friar William applies perfectly to Lama temples and Chinese Bi.ddhist  iliosha7tg) temples of the present day, in which there is a long table  in front of the images on which lamps and offerings are placed.

* In the Christian legend Saint Christopher was a giant. Many of  the early representations of him are more than life-size.

•^ Colossal statues of Buddhas are numerous in China, Mongolia  and Tibet. Marco Polo fi, 221) speaks of "the great stone statues  ten paCes in length " at Campichu (Kan-chou in N.W. Kan-su), and  King Heythum mentions a very large clay image of Shakenwnia  (Shakyamuni) and an enormous one of A/^e^n" (Maitreya, the coming  Buddha}, also of clay, in a fine temple which he saw, or heard oi^ in  China f Klaproth,y<?wr,v. Asiat.^\\\^ 289). The largest stone ima^e I  have seen is in a cave temple at Yung-kan, about ten miles N.W. of  Ta rung Fu in .Shan-hsi. Pere Gerbillon says the Emperor K'ang-iisi  measured it himself and found it to be 57 (hih high (61 ft.) (DuhaKIe,  Descriptum^ iv, 352), 1 have seen another colossal statue in a cave  near Pin chou in N.W. Shan-hsi ; and there is another about forty-five  miles S. of Ning-hsia F'u, near the left bank of the Yellow Rivei  (Rockhill, Land of the Lamas^^ 26 and Diaiy, ^j). The great recum-  beiu figure of the " Sleeping Buddha" in the Wo Fo ssi\, near Peking,  i-. ol clay.

FI<I\! WILLIAM Or RUBRUCK. I45

any. The Ruthenians, however, have them, and so do  the Greeks in Gazaria.^

All the priests (of the idolaters) shave their heads, and are  dressed in safifron colour, and the}- observe chastity from  tfie time they shave their heads, and they live In congre-  gations of <'ne or two hundred.^ On the days when they  i<o into the temple, they place two benches, and they sit in the  region of the choir but opposite the choir,^ with books in  their hands, which they sometimes put down on these  benches ; and they keep their heads uncovered as lon^ as they  are in the temple, reading in silence and keepini^ silence. And  V. hen I went into one of their temples at (285; Caracarum.  and found them thus seated, I tried every means of inducing  them to tail;, but was unable to do so. Wherever they

' Bells were, however, used among the Christians living vvi;.h the  Mongols. Trigauit [Exped. Chrit.^ i, 87). in the early par<^ of the  seventeenth century, mentions having seen one of these early  Christian bells, which he says was in cast-iron (see also supra, p. i 16,  note 2).

^ Saffron colour wa»j that prescribed for all monks by Buddhist canon  law ' Vinaya), and is still worn hy the southern Buddhists, and since  the fifteenth century hy a large part of the Lamas of Mongolia and  Tibet. The absence of any reference lo red garments, which in the  thirteenth century were, i think, universally worn by all the Tibetais  clergy, is interesting, as it would tend to show that the Buddhism  professed at the time a'riong the Mongols was not entirely of either  Tibetan or Chinese origin, but retained probably many of the customs  derived from the early Indian Buddhism of Central Asia. The use  of high church hats, of the formula Om main p'-idme hihn, and either  details noticed in subsequent pages, show, however, that Til^etati  Buddhism had already begun to exercise a considerable influence m  the ccuntry. On Buddhist monasteries in the Mongol times, see  Palladius {op. at., 29), and Yule {Marco Polo^ i, 293). Rubruck make>  reference in one passage to a priest wearing led clothes. He had  come from Cathay, but was probably a Mongol or Tibetan.

- Sedent e regionc corus co7itra coria/i. At the present da\', as  apparently in Rubruck's time, the Lamas when holding church services  sit in rows on either side of the temple from the altar to the doors.  They have low benches or tables before them, on which they place  the heavy, cunibrous volumes they read. They wear while -n ih'.-  temple, on occasions of ceremony, their high yellow hats ft*' dfoi).  but on ordinary occasions they go through their devotion* bn;^  headed. Ji is customary for all laymen to take >>ti iheir hats in Laii^a  temples.

146 JOURNEY OF

go they have in their hands a string of one or two hundred  beads, like our rosaries, and they always repeat these  words, on mnni baccam, which is, " God, thou knowest/* as  one of them interpreted it to me, and they expect as many  rewards from God as they remember God in saying  this.^ Around their temple they make a fine courtyard,  well surrounded by a wall, and in the side of this facing  the south, they make the main gate where they sit and  talk. And over this gate they set up a long pole, which,  if it be possible, rises above the whole city, and by this pole  it may be known that this building is an idol temple.^ This  practice is common to all idolaters. When I went into the  idol temple I was speaking of, I found the priests seated in  the outer gate, and when I saw them with their shaved  faces they seemed to me to be Franks, but they had  barbarian mitres on their heads.^ These lugur priests  have the following dress : wherever they go they are always  dressed in rather tight saffron-coloured tunics, over which  is a girdle like the Franks, and they have a stole {paJliuni)  over their left shoulder, passed round the chest and the

^ The rosaries used by the Lamas and people of Mongolia and Tibet  at the present day have io8 beads, corresponding to the " io8 doors  of the Law." Their varieties are endless. (See Waddell, /t^z^r. Asiat.  Soc. Bengal^ Ixv, 2^, et seq. ; Rockhill, j&Mwf^/^^y, 736). This is the  earliest reference I know of to the famous formula Chn^ iHani padmc  hum'. " Cm, the jewel in the Lotus, hum." It appears, however, to have  been in use as early as the tenth century, for it is found in a Chinese  translation of the Vyuha ratnaradja siitfa., made between a.d. 980 and  looi (Sensho Fujii, Hansei^ Zasshi^ xiii, No. 2, etc. ; se^: also  Rockhill, Land of the^LamaSy 326 et seq.).

- Such poles, often topped with a big black bundle to resemble a  yak tail, and so identifying these poles with the Turkish tughs^ an  emblem of authority used in Asia fron\ remote times, are always  placed before Lama temples. Somewhat similar ones are placed before  Chinese temples.

' The variety of hats and caps worn at the present day is very  great. Waddcll {^Buddhism in Tibet^ 196) shows twenty styles of  Lama hats and coats ; see also Cunningham, Ladah^ 238, r»nd Rockhill,  Ethnology., 731.

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. I47

back to the right side like (286) the chasuble {casulu) worn  by a deacon in Lcnt.^

The Tartars have adopted their (i.e., the Uigurs') letters.  They begin writing at the top, and run the line downward ;  and in like manner they read it, and they make the lines  to follow each other from left to right.^ They make great  use of drawings and letters for their sorcery, so their  temples are full of short sentences [brevibus) hung up  there.2 The letters which Mangu chan sends us are in th^  Moal language, but in their script.

They burn their dead according to the custom of  the ancients, and put the ashes in the top of pyramids.'*

^ This dress is a purely JJuddhistone : X\\^ pallimn or shawl thrown  round the body is worn as well in southern Buddhist countries as  in northt^rn. Friar William does not, I think, wish it to be understood,  though he mixes them in his account somewhat, that the Uigur priests  were identical with the Buddhists, or "idolaters" as hie styles them;  though it would seem tnat not only did they dress like them, but that  their temples had images in them similar to those of the Buddhists.  The Friar's discussion with these Uigur priests about the soul could not  have been held with Buddhists, who neither believe in a soul nor in a  personal God. Apparently, as st>^ted a little farther on by our traveller,  the only article of Christian faith these Uigurs believed was that of one  God. Pian de Carpine (650) says, " the Huiurs are Christians of the  sect of the Nestorians." This mayweil.be; from Friar William's  account of the tenets of this latter sect as professed among the  Mongols, they were no more Christians than the Uigurs (see supra.,  page 17, note 4).

^ On the origin of the Mongol script, see infra., p. 150, note i.

^ Cartis et caracteribus pro sortilt^o. A considerable source of

Crofit for Lamas and Q\\\vlq^^ hoshang of the present day is stamping on  its of paper or cotton n\agic formulas or prayers, usually surrounding  acentral ^gure of some God or guardian sair>t {ch^os-chyong). Over the  houses and tents of the people, as well as around the temples, or  attached along th'^ high poles which Rubruck has mentioned in  front of the temples, are innumerable bits of white cotton stamped with  such sentences. The mtei ior walls of the temples are also covered  with most elaborately-finished charms or pictures, often beautifully  illuminated. Like charms are worn on the person, tied to guns  or fastened around the necks of horses, and vast quantities of them  are frequently scattered about for the beneftt of whoever may find them  (Rockhill, Land of the Lamas., jy, 98; Diarv., 93, i 53, and infra, p. 162).  ^ It is not quite clear whether the author refers to a custom of the  Uigurs, or of both them and the Buddhists The Chinese hoskangs.r\d  the southern Buddhists always burn their dead. Sung-yun, a Chinese  pilgrim who p?»=sed through Khotan in A.D. 518, states that it was

I 2

14^ JOURNEY OF

When then I had Siit down beside these priests, after  having been in the leniple and seen their many idols, j^reat  and small, I asked ihem what they believed concerninp^  God. Tliey answered : " We only believe that there is one  God." Then I asked : " Do yon believe he is a spirit, or  somethinj; corporeal ? " " We believe that he is a spirit,"  they said *' Do you believe that he has never taken upon  him human nature?" They said : " Never." " Tho-n," said I,  ''if you believe that he is one and a spirit, why do you make  him bodily images, and so many? Furthermore, if you do  not believe that he became man, why do you make him in  human shape rather than in that of some animal?" Then they  replied : " W^e do not make these images to (of) God,^ but  when some rich person among us dies, his son, or wife, or  someone dear to him, has made an image of the deceased,  and puts it here, and we revere it (287) in memory of h'm."  Then 1 said : " Then you only make these out of flattery  for man." " Only," they said, '*in remembrance."

Then they asked me, as if in derision : " Where is  God ? " To which I said : " Where is your soul ? " " In  our body," they said. I replied : " Is it not everywhere  in your body, and does it not direct the whole of it,  and, nevertheless, is invisible? So God is everywhere,  and governs all things, though invisible, for He is in-  telligence and wisdom." Then, just as I wanted to  continue reasoning with them, my interpreter got tired,  and would no longer express my words, so he made  ne stop talking.

The Moal or Tartars who are of this sect, though they

customary there to burn the dead, and collecting the ashes build  towers over them (Beal, Records, i, Ixxxvii). Perhaps a similar custom  was in vogue in Rubruck's time among the Uigurs.

' Non Jiguranius istas yma^inas Deo^ which may be '' we do not  make these images to God," but the context seems 10 require that we  should read Dei, though all the MSS. have Deo. The images referred  to must be the fell ones ^poken of by Pian dc Carpine \supra^ p. 59,  note i), and mentioned again in the next paragraph.

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRTJCK. 149

believe in one God, make nevertheless images of thei'-  dead in felt, and dress them in the richest stuffs, and  put them in one or two carts, and no one dare touch  these carts, which are under the care of their soothsayers,  who are their priests, and of whom I shall tell you further  on. These soothsayers are alv/ays before the oj^cin of  Mangu and of other rich people, for the poor have none,  but only those of the family of Chingis. And when they  are on the march, these (soothsayers) precede them as the  pillar of a cloud did the children of Israel, and they decide  where to pitch the camp, and when they have set down  their dwellings, all the 07^du follows them. And when a  feast day comes about, or the first of the month, they  take their images and arrange them ^288) in a circle in  their house. Then the Moal come, enter the house, and  bow before the images and do them reverence. And no  stranger may enter that house. I tried to force my way  into one hut, but was most rudely treated.

HOSE lugurs who live interspersed with the Chris-  tians and Saracens, through frequent disputations,  as I believe, have reached the point of having no  belief but that in a single God. These lugurs used to inhabit  the cities which first obeyed Chingis chan, who therefore gave  his daughter to their king.^ And Caracarum is as it were

' Friar William would seem to have been Lnisinformed on this  point, for I can find no record of Chingis having given one of his  daughters in marriage to an Uigur prince. He did, however, give his  daughter Chichegan as wife to Turalji, son of Kuiuke Bigni, chief  of the Uduyut or Merkites (d'Ohsson, i. 419). The positions here  assigned to the people of Prester John (the Keraits) and to the  Uigurs (prior to their overthrow in the ninth century by the Kirghiz)  is correct. The Merkites lived on the Selinga, just to the north of  the Keraits, and the confusion is thus easil} explained. Howorth  {History^ \. pt. I, 698) does not understand this passage of the text as I  have. It was not at the time when the Uigurs were living near Kara-  korum that the Mongols borrowed their script and applied it to their

150 JOURNEY OF

in their territory, and all the land of the king or ihe Prcster  John and of Unc his brother, was round about this country,  though they occupied the pasture lands to the north, while  the lugurs lived amidst the nnountains to the south. So  it happened that the Moal adopted their letters, and they  are their best scribes, and nearly all the Nestorians know  their letters.^ Beyond them to the east among those  mountains are the Tanguts, most valiant men, who captured  Chingis in war ; and he, peace being made, and once  freed by them, subdued them.* These people have very

language, but at a much later date. There is, so far as I know, no  information available as to the date of the introduction of Nestorianism  among the Uigurs, and of the adaptation of the Syriac-estrangelo  alphabet to their language ; but, prior to its spread among them, Mani-  cha^ism appears to have taken strong hold of them ; and that its tenets  were still believed in the thirteenth century is clearly evidenced in the  theological discussion which Friar William had with one of the tuins  (possibly an Uigur, but at all events evidently professing their creed),  and related in a subsequent chapter. Manicha^ism was introduced  among the Uigurs about A.D. 762, as we learn from the famous  inscription of Kara Balgasun published by KsidXoii {Atlas A iterthumer  der Mongolci^ xxxi-xx.w). See also Chavannes {Le Nesiorianhtn ,  16, 45, 47) and Deveria {Mustdmans et M anicheens Chittois^ 454)«

Mn 1 204, after the defeat of the Naiman by Chingis Khan, he caused  the first minister of that kingdom, an Uigur called T'a-ta-tung-o, to  teach the language of his native land to his sons, and to apply his  script to the Mongol language (d'Ohsson, i, 89 ; Drouin,/^///'//. Asiat.,  ix« serie, vii, 488). Pian de Carpine (650) says tliat the Uigurs *'have  adopted their {i.e., the Nestorians') alphabet, for they did not before  that have any script ; but now they call it the script of the Mongals  {litterain Mongaloruiii).^^ (See also Isaac Taylor, The Alphabet, i, 29  et scq.)

'^ The kingdom of Tangut, or Hsi Hsia, as the Chinese called it,  ruled over the present province of Kan-su and adjoining country, from  A.D. 1004 to 1226, when it was finally destroyed by Chingis Khan  (d'Ohsson, i, 370 et seq.). The founder of this dynasty was Li Te-  ming of the To-pa clan of the T^ng-hsiang, a Tibetan people of  N.E. Tibet. It is supposed by some writers that the name Tangut  is derived from Ting-hsiang. Chinese authorities terl us that the  name was originally borne by a people living in the Altai, and that  the word is Turkish (Howorth, /J^.A.S., xv, Pt. IV, 4 : Rockhill,  La/iJ of the Lain as, 73; and/.A^.^.^., 1891, 6). At all events, the  population of Tangut was a mixture of Tibetans, Turks, Uigurs,  Tukuhuns, Chmese, etc. I cannot find any reference to the capture  of Chingis by the Tangut. In his campaign of 1209- 12 10, he was  forced to raise the siege of Nin^»hsia on the Yellow River, by the  Tanguts inundating the surrounding plain. This may be the event  which gave rise to eur author's story (d'Ohsson, i, to6).

FRIAR WILLIAM GF RUBRUCK. 151

strong cattle, with very hairy tails like horses, and with  bellies and backs covered with hair They are lower  on their legs than other oxen, but much stronger. They  draw the big (289) dwellings .of the Moal, and have  slender, long, curved horns, so sharp that it is always  necessary to cut off their points. The cows will not  let themselves be milked unless sung to. They have also  the temper of the bull, for if they see a man dressed in red  they-throw themselves on him to kill him.^

Beyond these are the- Tebet,^ a people in the habit  of eating their dead parents, so that for piety's sake they  should not give their parents any other sepulchre than  their bowels. They have given this practice up, how-  ever, as they were held an abomination among all nations.  They still, however, make handsome cups out of the heads

* Yaks are here referred to. The first western author to refer  to them was Cosmas Indicopleustes, in his Christian Topography  (360), where he calls them agrioboiis. The average load carried by a yak  is about 250 lbs. The wild yak bull is an enormous animal, and the  people of Turkestan and North Tibet credit him with extraordinary  strength. Mirza Haidar, in the Tarikhi Rashidi {^\ti), says of the wild  yak 01 kutds : "This is a very wild and ferocious beast. In whatever  manner it attacks one it proves fatal. Whether it strikes with its  horns, or kicks or overthrows its victim. If it has no opportunity  of doing any of these things, it tosses its enemy with its tongue  twenty gaz mto the air, and he is dead before reaching the ground.  One male /v^/^i- is a load for twelve horses. One man cannot possibly  raise a shoulder of the animal" (,see also Marco Polo, i, 266, 268).

- The natives call Tibet Bod^ pronounced Beu^ and Central or  Upper Tibet was, and still is, called Siod Body pronounced Teu-Beu^  whence the name Tibet^ Tebet^ 7'<9/^<^«/, and the other forms of the name.  Pian de Carpine (658) calls Tibet Bwithahet. which d'Avezac (565)  thinks may be the Mongol Baron-Tala^ by which name the Mongols  designate Tibet. Rashideddin (d'Ohsson, i, 83) also uses the word  Buri Tibet. I am inclined to think it is a hybrid word, composed  of the native appellation Bod and of the word Tibet. Pian de Carpine  {loc. Slip, cit.) says of the people of Tibet : "They are pagans. They  have a most astonishing, or rather horrible, custom, for when anyone's  father is about to give up the ghost, all the relatives meet together,  and they eat him, as was told to me ior certam. They have no hairs  in their beard ; for they carry an iron (pincher) in their hand, as  I sav/ myself, with which thev always pluck out theii beard, if some  hair grows out in it : and they are very ill-shaoen." Tibetans and  Mongols still pluck out their beards as here described.

152 JOURNEY OF

of their parents, so that when drinking out of them they  may have them in mind in the midst of their merry-  making. This was told me by one who had seen it^  These people have much gold in their country, so that  when one lacks gold he digs till he finds it, and he only  takes so much as he requires and puts the rest back in the  ground ; for if he put it in a treasury or a coffer, he believes  that God would take away from him that which is in the  ground.^ I saw many misshapen individuals of this people.  Of the Tanguts I have seen big men, but swarthy. The  lugurs are of medium size, like us. Among the lugurs  the Turkic Coman language has its source and root.*  After Tebet are Longa and Solanga,^ whose (390) envoys

^ As shown in the preceding note, Pian de Carpine makes this  same charge of cannibalism against the Tibetans ; and Marco Polo  (i, 292) says of the people of Tibet (or Kashmir, for the text is not  clear) that they ate all those who had been put to death by lawful  authority. So far as I am aware, this charge is not made by any  oriental writer against the Tibetans, though both Arab travellers  to China in the ninth century and Armenian historians of the  thirteenth century say the Chinese practised cannibalism. The  Armenians designate Chma by the name Nankas^ which I take  to be Chinese Nan kuo^ "southern country," the Manzi country  of Marco Polo (Reinaud, RelatUns^ i, 23, 52, 68 ; Dulaurier, 486).  Chinese writers say that the Liu-chiu islanders in the southern portion  of the group ate their dead (Ma Tuan-lin, bk. 327). The Tibetans  still make libation bowls out of human skulls, and some of the lamas  use such bowls to eat out of The ancient Turks and the Naiman  made drinking bowis ouf of their enemies' skulls (see d'Ohsson, i, 82 ;  Rockhill, Ethnology^ 727 ; Yule, Cathay^ clii, 151, and Marco Polo,  i, 292 ; conf Herodotus, iii, 46 ; and Strabo, xi, 7, 439, 1 1, 445.

^ Gold is found in most of the streams and rivers of Tibet, from  the sands of which the people wash it with pans or wooden cradles.  The belief referred' to by our author i? still general in the country,  and mining is not allowed, under the impression that if nuggets ol  gold are removed from the earth no more gold will be found In the  river gravels : the nuggets being held to be the plants which produce  the dust gathered in the rivers (Rockhill, Land of the Lamas, 209).

^ The Tibetans, with their huge sheepskin gowns forming a big bag  at the waist, in which half the wearer's goods are stored, their long  matted locks, their hare legs with small calves, look misshapen  enough. The dress this people woie in the thirteenth century, we  learn from Chinese sources, was the same as they still have.

^ This is an interesting and perfectly accurate statement.

' Longa and Solanga are the Churches and Suianj^ka of the  mediaeval Mohammeoan writers. The t ountry of these two peoples

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. T53

I saw at court, and they had brought with them more than  ten big carts, each of which was drawn by six oxen. They  are little men and swarthy like Spaniards, and they wear  tunics like the chasuble { super Uinicale) of a deacon, except  with narrower sleeves. On their heads they wear a mitre  like a bishop's, except that in front it is slightly lower than  behind, and it does not terminate in a point, but is square  on top, and is of stiff black buckram, and so polished that  it shines in the sun s rays like a mirror or a well-burnished  helmet^ And at the temples are long strips of the same  stuff, which are fastened to the mitre, and which stand out  in the wind like two horns projecting from the temples  When the wind strikes it too violently, they fold them up  across the mitre over the temples, where they remain like  a hoop across the head ; and a right handsome ornament  it is. And whenever the principal envoy came to court

formed one ot the twelve governments of the Mongol empire The  Churches are called Nu-chen by the Chinese, but they called them  selves, we are told, Lu-chen or Lu-chih. This may be the original  of our traveller's Longa. The name Solan^a is still borne by some  of the Manchus, the Solons. The country of Longa and Solanga  comprised probably a large part of northern and eastern Manchuria,  and even northern Korea. According to mediaeval Mohammedan  writers, Sulangka comprised the cultivated parr of the Churches'  coimtry--that which contained towns and villages (d^Ohsson, ii, 47.8,  638). Some writers have supposed that Longa and Solanga was one  of those "double jumbles," as Yule calls them, Uke Gog- Magog,  Chin-Machin, Koli-Ukoli, etc. Chinese annals also refer to the fact  that the carts cif the Nu-chen were tirawn by oxen. Pian de Carpine  {supra, p. 20) speaks of the Solanocs.

^ The dress and head-dress of these envoys is very similar to  that still worn by the Koreans. Chinese histories inform us  that this Korean head-dress was worn by many of the nations  neighbours of Korea (see Ma Tuan-lin, bks. 326, i, 327, 17). Our  traveller says this cap was made of stamina rigidata per colaram  7iio;ram. As a matter of fact, il is made of horsehair and very fine  strips of bamboo, dyed black, and very highly varnished. I may  note here that, after the Mongol occupation of Korea, the official  classes adopted for a while the Mongol dress and coiffure {Korean  Repository, v, 179). The wings of these Korean caps do not project  from in front, but from behind ; those woi-n by the envoys seen  by Friar William must h^ve differed slightly from those of the  Koreans.

154 JOURNEY OF

he carried a highlv-polished tablet of ivory about a cubit  long and half a palm wide. Every time he spoke to the  chan or some great personage, he always looked at that  tablet as if he found (291) there what he had to say, nor  did he look to the right or the left, nor in the face of him  with whom he was talking. Likewise, when coming into  the presence of the Lord, and when leaving it, he never  looked at anything but his tablet.^

Besides these people there is another, as I was assured,  called Muc,^ who have towns, but who take no animals for  themselves. There are, however, many herds and flocks  in their country, but no one herds them ; when anyone  wants some, he goes to a hill and calls, and all the animals  hearing the call come around him, and let him treat them  as if they were tame. If an ambassador or any foreigner  come to that country, they put him in a house, and give  him all he requires, until his business has been settled ; for  should- a foreigner go about the country, his odour would

^ These tablets are called hii in Chinese, and were used in China  and Korea ; ni the latter country down to quite recent times. They  were made of jade, ivory, bamboo, etc., according to the rank of the  owner, and were about three feet long. The hu was originally used  to make memoranda on of the business to be submitted by the bearer  to the Emperor, or to write the answers to questions he had had  Submitted to them. Odoric also refers to "the tablets of white ivory  which the emperor's barons held in their hands as they stood silent  before him" (Yule, Cathay^ 141 : Cordier, Odoric^ 37S).

- One MS. has Funi\ but this is no help in solving the question.  F. M. Schmidt (218) thinks Mucvc\di\ be the Mouky^ or Molio^ of north-  east Asia. This is quite out of the question. Chinese histories tell  us that the Nu-chen Tartars were called Mo-ho only during the Sui and  Tang periods (a.o. 589-905), but that in the tenth century the name  Nu-Chih, or Nu-chen, was assumed as the national name (Ma Tuan-  iin, bk. 327, 5). 1 am inclined to think that aboriginal populations of  Ssu-chuan and Kan-su, often called Mart, or Mivi-tzii^ by the Chinese,  are referred to. or perhaps even the Mosso of Yun-nan. These people  lived in fortified villages on hill-tops, and then, as now, had the village  flocks herded together in the adjacent valleys. I may note that  il is still a custom among Tibetan and Mongol chiefs to keep traders  who may visit them more or less in seclusion, so as to retam all the  trading in their own hands. This, and not the danger of the cattle  funning away on account of the peculiar odour of the foreigners, may  have originated the story told Friar William.

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 155

cause the animals to run away and they would become  wild.

There is also great Cathay, whose people were anciently,  as I believe, called Seres. From among them come the  best silk stuffs (which are called seric by that people), and  the people get the name of Seres from one of their cities ^  I was given to understand that in that region there is  a city with walls of silver and towers of gold. In that  land are many provinces, the greater number of which  do not yet obey the Moal, and between them and India  there is a sea. These Cathayans are small men, who

^ Friar William was the first western writer to identify Cathay with  the classical country of the Seres. Yule {Cathay^ xliv, cxxv) thinks  that Rubruck's seric is probably derived from the Mongal sirkek^  which in turn is the Chinese ssii^ silk ; and thai the name Ser^ and  Seres may have been formed by inverse analogy from the word sericum^  taken as an adjective. I can find no better authority for our traveller's  statement ihat the name Seres is derived from that of a city than  Isidorus (op. cit.^ 500;, who says " Seres is a fortress of the Orient,  from which the people of the Seres and the country take their name.''  He probably quoted from some earlier writer, but 1 have not been  able to trace his remark (see also Yule, Cathay^ cxxv). Our author  writes the name Cafaya, or Cathaia. Sempad, of Armenia, writes  it C hatha ; Will, of Nangis (360) and Pian de Carpine, Kitaia. This  latter traveller's remarks (653) on Cathay supplement our author^s so  veil that I will give them in full. "The Kitayans,'' he Says, "are  pagans, and have a special script ; and they have a Nev,- and Old  Testanient, it is said, and they have Lives of the Fathers, and hermits  and houses made like churches, in which they pray at appointed  times ; and it is said they have some saints. They worship one God,  they honour the lord Jesus Christ, and believe in a life eternal, but  do r.ot baptize at all. They honour and revere our Scriptures, are  fond of Christians, and do many acts of charity they seem to be  quite a kind-hearted and humane people. They have no beard, and  in the shape of their face they resemble a good deal the Mongals, but  they are not so broad in the face ; they have a tongue of their own ;  no better anizans are to be found in the whole world, in all the works  which men are wont to perform. Their country is very rich in corn,  wine, gold, silver and silk, and in all those things on which human  beings depend for subsistence." The Old Testament I take to be the  " Five Classics" {Wti Chiftg\ the New Testament the " Four Books"  'SsH Shu). The Lives of the Fathers are probably the Confucian  Analects and the works of Mencius ; and Confucius, Mencius and  Lao-Tzu are in all likelihood the saints referred to. The one God  they worship is either T^ien^ "Heaven," or T^ien Chu^ "the Lord  of Heaven." The other points in his remarks are too well known  to require comment.

15^ JOURNEY OF

ui «speaking aspirate strongly through the nose, and ir  v292) common with all Orientals, have small openings  for the eyes. They are most excellent artisans in all  manners of crafts, and their doctors know full well the  \'irtues of herbs, and diagnose very skilfully the pulse ;  but they do not use diuretics, nor do they know anything  about the urine : this I have seen myself^ There are  a great many of them at Caracarum, and it is their  custom for all sons to follow the same trade as their  fathers. 'Tis for this reason that they pay such a great  [ribiite ; for they give the Moal daily a thousand five  hundred iascots or costnos ; an iascot is a piece of silver  weighing ten marks ; so this is XV thousand marks»  exclusive of the silk tissues and the provisions which  they receive from them, and the other servitudes which  are put on them.-

^ Yule (Cathay, cxxv; says Martin Martini, in his Atlas Sinensis^  alludes to a popular Chinese saying about the golden walls of Hsi-an  Fu. " This passage," he adds, " is remarkable with reference to the  remark of Ptolemy about the metropolis Tkinae, that there was no  uuth in the stories of its brazen walls."' It was in all probability  a poetical figure of the Chinese lo give an idea of the magnificence  of the great city, with its yellow-tiled palaces and walls. Mr. Waiters  tells me that he thinks something of the kind was also written about  Lo-yang in the T'ang period.

At the time Rubruck wrote, China south cf the Yellow River was  still independent.

As regards the statement about the Chinese doctors not using  diuretics iurinalibus non iituntur)^ our author is certainly wront^.  as Chinese botanical works and their pharmacopeia contain frequent  mention of diurectics, and the exammation of the urine is an im-  portant part of their diagnoses. Yule {Cathay^ cxw) has misundei-  siood this phrase ; he translates it : "but they don't examine the  urine or know anything on the subject.'" See the interesting remarks  on this subject by the Arab travellers to China in the ninth century  (Reinaud, op. cii., i, 1 18).

- I have no explanation to offer of the word insect, but agree with  Yule {Cathay^ cxxv) in thinking that the cosmos is the sot/mu) of Pego-  lotti, which I may add is the saum of Ibn Batuta (ii, 41 2, 414). Pegolotti  estimates the sonuno at five gold florins {^^s. 6</.), while Ibn Batuta  says the saum weighed five ounces. The value assigned to the iascot  would be about ^^5 5i-., assuming, as I have done \supra^ p. cx>\ that  the mark was worth \os. ivi. The difference in the values assigned  to the sotnmo of Pegolotti, and to the cosmos of Rubruck, is noi

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 1 57

LL these nations are in the mountains of the  Caucasus,^ but on the north side of these mountains,  and (they extend) as far as the eastern Ocean, and  (this is) also to the south of that Sithia which the pastoral  Moals inhabit, and whose tributaries they all are. And all  of them are given to idolatry, and tell fables of a host of  gods, and of deified human beings, and of the genealogy of  the gods, as do our poets.

Living mixed among them, though of alien race {tanquam  advene), are Nestorians and Saracens all the way to Cathay.  In XV cities of Cathay there are Nestorians, and they have  an episcopal- see in a city called Segin,^ but for the rest they

material, as neither were coins, but simply lumps of bullion, what are  now known in China as yuan pao, and in Turkestan and Tibet as  yambu. According to our author, the Chinese paid the Mongols  a daily tribute of about ^7,875. or £2,Sy6,^y$ a year. On p. 329,  speaking of the Manse, he says they paid the Mongols an annual  tribute, by which they bought peace from them, of two thousand  tuman of iascots, or 200 millions of iascots I These sums must be  greatly in excess of what we have reason to believe the people of  northern and southern China (for Rubruck's Manse must be the Sung  empire, Marco Polo's Manze) paid the Mongols. Under the reign  of Ogodai, China, subject to the Mongols, was assessed at about  5c>o,cxX) ounces of silver, 80,000 pieces of silk, and 400,000 sacks  of grain. The population was reported at the same time to be  1,100,000 families (d'Ohsson, i, 372 ; ii, 69). Asiatics, Chinese and"  Mongols especially, are never very particular about figures, and  I fancy these were given our traveller off-hand by some person who  had but a very vague notion of the subject.

Inter monies Caucasi. Classical geographers thought the Caucasus  extended from the Indian Ocean to Asia Minor, its branches covering  all Asia. Jornandes (432) says "it begins in the Indian Ocean. Its  southern slope is arid and "burnt by the sun, while ^its norihern is  swept by violent winds and snows. This mountain chain makes a  bend towards Syria, and after that it trends northward and extends  towards Scythia, where it makes long loops, advancing as far as the  Rhipaean mountains." Isidorus, who is Rubruck's geographical guide,  iays {pp. cit., xvi, 521) : '-The Mons Caucasus extends from India to  the Taurus ; and on account of the diversity of peoples and languages  it is called by different names in different places."

* Segin is usually supposed to be Hsi-an Fu, which was in the eighth  and ninth centuries the centre of Nestorianism in China. This city in  the thirteenth century did not bear the name of Hsi-an Fu, but was  called by its older name, Chan^-an. However, in popular parlance it may*  have retained the other name, k is strange, however, that the two

15B JOURNEY OF

are purely idolaters. The priests of idols of the nations  spoken of all wear wide saffron-coloured cowls. There are  also among them, as I gathered, some hermits who live in  forests and mountains (293) and who are wonderful by their  lives and austerity.^ The Nestorians there know nothing.  They say their offices, and have sacred books in Syrian, but  they do not know the language, so they chant like those  monks among us who do not know grami lar,^ and they  are absolutely depraved. In the first place they are  usurers and drunkards ; some even among them who  live with the Tartars have several wives like them. When  they enter church, they wash their lower parts like  Saracens ;^ they eat meat on Friday, and have their  feasts on that day in Saracen fashion. The bishop rarely  visits these parts, hardly once in fifty years. When he  does, they have all the male children, even those in the  cradle, ordained priests, so nearly all the malis among them  are priests. Then they marry, which is clearly against  the statutes of the fathers, and they are bigamists, for when  the first wife dies these priests take another."* They are all

lamous Uigur Nestorians, Mar Jalababa and Rabban Cauma, wh t on  their journey fi*om Koshang in southern Shan-hsi to western Asia in  about 1276, while they mention "the city of Tp.ngut," Or Ning-hsia  on the Yellow River as an important Nestorian centre, do not once  refer to Hsi-an Fu or Chang-an, Had Chang-an been at the time the  Nestorian episcopal see, oi)e would think that these pilgrims  would have visited it, or at least referred to it (Chabot, Mar Jalababa  21). Segin may represent the Chinese Hsi C king {ox King) " western  capital," a name frequently applied to Hsi-an Fu.

' Hermits have always been numerous among the Chinese  Buddhists, as well as in the countries where Lamaism is professed.

'^ Badger (ii, 146), speaking of the Nestorian clergy of the present  day, says that the clerical Syriac in which their ancient rituals are  written is so little understood, that many of the clergy have no certain  knowledge of what they read in the churches.

* The Manichaeans also performed ablutions before each of the  four daily prayers (Hamack, Ency. Brii.^ xv, 484;.

^ Thi3 practice arose under the patriarchat of Babaeus, who required  that all patriarchs, bishops, presbyters and monks should marry.  Later on, the marriage of patriarchs and bishops was forbidden  (Assemani, ii, 403, 406, 409, 412 ; Badger, ii, 178, 180). At the present

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. I 59

simoniacs, for they administer no sacrament gratis. They  are solicitous for their wives and children, and are con-  sequently more intent on the increase of their wealth  than of the faith. And so those of them who educate  some of the sons of the noble Moal, though they teach them  the Gospel and the articles of the faith, through their evil lives  and their cupidity estrange them from the Christian faith,  for the lives that the Moal themselves and the Tuins^ or  idolaters lead are more innocent than theirs.

|N the feast of Saint Andrew (30th November) we left  this city (of Cailac), and at about three leagues from  it we found a village entirely of Nestorians. We  entered their church, singing joyfully and at the tops of our  voices : ^' Salve, regina\'' for it had been a long time since (294)  we had seen a church. Proceeding thence three days we came  to the head of that province, at the head of the said sea,  which seemed to us as tempestuous as the ocean. And we  saw a big island in it.'^ My companion approached its shore

time, all priests and deacons among the Nestorians may marry a  second or third time, being widowers, "as they shall judge the same  to serve better to godliness" (Badger, ii, 178).

* The word Ttiin would seem to be an Uigur term. Quatiem^re  (198) says, that in a certain Uigur-Chinese vocabulary of the Paris  National Library (title and number not given), thjs word is explained  by the Chinese shih^ " scholar" ; and that in a Persian-Chinese  vocabulary it is rendered hy seng^ "a Buddhist priest." The term  Tuin is used by King Heythum. He says of them that they shaved  their heads and beards, wore yellow cloaks, married at twenty, and  Jived with their wives to the age of fifty. {KXsl^^toX^ /ourn. Astat.y  xii, 289 ; see nlso d^Ohsson, ii, 264, Yule, Cathay^ 241). In using  the term, our traveller generally applies it to Buddhists, though here  at least it would seem to include Uigur priests also.

* The Ala kul is the sea referr'»d to ; the traveller took it to be the  eastern extremity of Lake Baikash, which is hardly probable, though  it is thought that these lakes were connected within the historical period.  It may well be, however, that in the thirteenth century the AJa kul  and the Sai^syk kui to the north of it formed one lake. The island

l6o JOURNEY OF

and moistened a cloth in it, and tasted the water, which  was brackish, though drinkable. There opened a valley  which came from out high mountains in the south-east, and  there amidst the mountains was visible another big sea, and  a river came through that valley from that sea into the first  one, and there blows nearly continuously such a wind  through that valley, that persons cross it with great  danger, lest the wind should carry them into the sea.  So we crossed this valley, following a northerly direction  towards great mountains covered with deep snow, which then  covered the ground.' On the feast of Saint Nicholas (6th  December) we began greatly accelerating our speed, for we  already found no one, only those tarns, that is to say those  men who are stationed a day apart to look after ambassa-

referred to is the Ala tyube, or " island peak," a small extinct volcano  m the Ala kul (Yule, Cathay, ccxii ; Bretschneider, Med. Travel, 71 ;  F. M. Schmidt, 206; Sporer, 73, 81). See supra, p. 16, Pian de  Carpin«'s account of this part of the route.

^ This lake to the south-east is the Ebi nor, about ninety-five  versts from the Ala kul. A broad straight gorge separates the  two lakes, but the stream which flows into the south end of the  Ala kui does not come from the Ebi nor, but out of the Ala tau:  F. M. Schmidt (207) and Yule {Ency. Brit., xxxi, 47), make out  that our traveller went through this gorge (called Dolan kol on  th^ Russian maps), and passed beside the Ebi nor, but the text does  not bear out their statement, nor is it all comprehensible why he  should have made this dt!tour, since, after passing the Ala kui, lie says  he turned north and passed near Omyl. Yule {Cathay, ccxiii) had  nghtly laid down the route followed ; I do not know why he changed  his opinion. The violent wind which blows through the Dolan kol is  the dbe ox ynbe of the Kirghiz, the prevailing south-easterly wind of this  -egion from autumn to spring ; it frequently carries such masses  cf snow and sand with it, that whole camps have been buried in ii.  This same phenomenon occurs in various other similarly-shaped  localities in this region (Sporer, 84). Yian-chuang noted the violence  of the wind of this region (Julien, P^lerins, i, 11); while the Chinese  traveller, Ch'ang-te, in 1253, refer^^ 10 the same locality mentioned by  Rubruck, and to the furious wind which comes out of the mountains  blowing passers-by into the lake. He also speaks of the island in the  Ala kul, which he calls Hai t'uhshan or "the iron hill of the lake"  (Bretschneider, Med. Travel, 713). The Chinese taoist traveller  Ch'ang-ch\m, who passed through this region in 1224, also  refers to a "wind hill" somewhere west of Uliassutai (Bretschneider,  op. cit., 51).

FRiAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUClC. i6l

dors, for in many placet m the mountaPiS' t!ic road is  narrow and the grazing bad, so that from d^.wn to night  we would cover the distance of two za7/is, tha6 making  v)f two days one, and we travelled more by night ihar; by  day. It was extremely cold, so we. turned our sheepskins  vvith the wool outside.

On the second Sunday in Advent (13th December) m  the evening, while we v»^ere i^assing. through a certain place  amidst most terrible rocks, our guide sent me word begging  me to say (295) some prayers {hondverba\\yy which the devils  could be put to flight, for in this gorge devils were wont  suddenly to bear men off, and no one could tell what  the)' might do. Sometimes they seized the horse, and left  the rider ; sometim.es they tore out the man's bowels and  left the body on the horse, and many such things happened  there frequently. So we chanted in a loud voice ''Credo in  unum Denial' when bv the mercy of God the whole  of our company passed thiough.- From that time they

^ These must be the Tarba^atai mountains. I presume that the  traveller followed the river Imil up to its source, and then, crossingf  the Mus tau in a general easterly direction, came to the southern  extremity of the Ulungur nor. From this point, the road he would  natqrally follow would be up the course of the riverUlungur, as F. M.  Schmidt (20b and I'lo) makes him do. Yule {Cathay^ ccxiii) supposes  that he crossed the mountains north of Tarbagaiai, then followed the  Kara Irtish, and having crossed the Altai to the east of this rivtr,  entered the valley of the Jabl<an river. I cannot believe that the traveller  can have taken such a roundabout and difficult road, especially  in winter. While Schmidt makes him follow a too southerly course,  between the Ala kul and the upper Ulungur, Yule makes him take  one entirely too far to the north. This pan of the narrative is rather  difficult to follow, for it is not at all clear why the traveller, after  leaving the Ala kul, and before reaching the neighbourhood of  Kuyuks o?-iiu^ which we know 10 have been on the river Imil, should  speak of the gorges of the mountains which he must only have  passed later on. The natural explanation is- that a paragraph of the  narrative has been transposed by an early copyist. If we place after  the present phrase the paragraph beginning " After that mc entered  the plain in which was the ordu of Keu chan," the narrative reads  much more smoothly and intelligibly.

^ The Chinese pilgrim, Yuan-chuang, when travelling by the Issy  kul, noted the ferocity of the dragons in those parts, and says that  travellers must not wear red gowns going through these n»ountains

M

1 62 JOURNEY OF

began asking me to write cards {cartas) for them, to carry  on their heacls,^ and 1 would say to them : " i will teach  you a phrase to carry in your hearts, which will save your  souls and your bodies for all eternit\^" But always when  I wanted to *each them, my interpreter failed me. I used  to write for them, however, the *' Credo in Deum " and the  " Pater noster^' saying : '' What is here written is what one  must believe of God, and the prayer by which one asks of  God whatever is needful for man ; so believe firmly that  this writing is so, though you cannot understand it, and  pray God to do for you what is written in this prayer,  which He taug-ht from His own mouth to His friends, and  I hope that He will save you." I could do no more, for it  was very dangerous, not to say impossible, to speak on  questions of the faith through such an interpreter, for he  did not know how.

After that we entered the plain in which was the ordu of  Keu chan, and which used to be the country of the  Naiman,2 who were the real subjects of that Prester John.

(Julien, Pderins, i, ii). When Ch'ang-ch'un was travelling in the  .^Itai, in 122\, his followers rubbed the heads of their horses with  blood to prevent them being charmed by the goblins in the mountains.  This traveller mentions a place somewhere north of the Altai which  had a very bad fame for goblins. One of his escort told him that  a goblin had once pulled him by the hair; and the head of the  escort narrated that once the Khan of the Naiman, when passing  through ihis countrv, was charmed by a goblin (Bretschneider, Med.  Travel^ 27, 29;. Friar Qdoric tells us that " the Minor Friars (in China)  thought it a mere nothing to expel devils from the possessed, no more  indeed than to drive a dog out of the house'' (Yule, Cathay^ 1.55).  Orenard (ii, 254) says the people ot Chinese Turkestan still believe in  ^ gnome, Albasly., who frightens travellers.

* Mongols and Tibetans fasten on their j^uns and spears chara^s  written on bits of paper or cotton, to keep orf the devils (see sttpra.,  p. 147, note 3).

'^ Kuyak Khan lived on the Unil, which flows into the Ala ku!.  I'jan de Carpinc (648, 751) speaks of the new city of Omyl which  the Emperor Ogvxlai had rebuilt, and where he wiig invited to drink.  To the south of it whs a great desert; in which savages {s/tveslres  homines) lived (d'Ohsson, i, 56, ii, 234 ; Bretschneider, Meii Geog.,  aal, 305;. The country supposed to have been at the time referred  to occupied Vjy tl>«f Naimaii, was to the east of ihc I nil vnlley, and

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 1 63

r did not at that time see this c^du, but on my way back.  I will tell you, however, what befel his family, (296) his son  and his wives. When Keu chan died, Baatu wanted  Mangu to be chan. As to the death of this Keu i could  learn nothing definite. Friar Andrew says that he died  from some medicine which was given him, and that it was  supposed tnat Baatu had had this done. I, however, heard  another story. He had called upon Baatu to come and do  him homage, and Baatu had started in great state. He  was in great . fear, hov/ever, he and his men, so he sent  ahead one of his brothers, Stican by name, and when he  came to Keu, and had to present him the cup, a quarrel  arose, and they killed each other. The widow of this  Stican detained us a whole day, to ^o to her dwelling and  bless it, that is, that wc might pray for her. So this Keu  beikig dead, Mangu was elected by the will of Baatu, and  had already been elected when Friar Andrew was there.*  . Keu had a brother called Siremon, who on the advice of  the wife of Keu and her vassals, went in great state toward  Mangu as if to do him homage. Jn truth, however, he  intended to kill him, and to exterminate all his ordu.  (297) And when he had already got to within a day or  two of Mangu, he had to leave on the road one of his carts  which broke down ; and while the carter was fixing it, there

included the Kara Irtish and the Ulungur valleys, though it may have  comprised also that of the Imil, but of this I have no positive  knowledge.

^ The quarrel between Kuyuk and Batu has been referred to in a  previous note ijufira^ p, 137, note i). None of the Mohammedan  mediaeval writers confirm these stories of our traveller. Kuyuk  suffered greatly with rheumatism, and his fondness for drink and dissi-  pation seems to have been the primary causes of his premature death  at the age of 43 (d'Ohsson, ii, 234). Kutan, a brothei- of Kuyuk. a«d  Khoja Ogul, Kuyuk's son, are said to hr.ve been put to death by  poison (d'Ohsson, ii, 232, 234). This Stican, Strican, Stjchan, ot  Stichin — for the MSS. write his name in all these ways — is the Syba^i  of Pian de Carpine (667)^ the Shiban of Mohammedan writers  (d'Ohsson, ii, 8). The presentation of the cup to the Emperor was a  recognized mark of submission. Friar Andrew never saw Mangu, as  we learn from Mangu himself.

164 ioukm:y of

came along one of Man<^u s m.^n ^vho helped him ; and he  asked so much about their journey that the carter revealed  to him what Siremon proposed doing. Then the other,  leaving him as if he did not care about it, went to a herd of  horses, and taking the strongest horse he could pick in it,  rode day and night ii^ great haste till he came to Mangu's  of'{ilu, and told him what he had heard. Then Mangu  promptly called all his men, and caused to be made three  circles of mon-at-ai n.s around his on///, so that no one could  come in. The rest he sent against this Siremon, and they  captured him, for he did not suspect that his designs had  become knou n. and led him with all his men to the ordu  When Mangu charged him with the crime, he at once  confessed. Ihen he was put to death, he and the elder  son of Ken chan, and with them three hundred of the  greatest mm among the Tartars. And they sent also  for their ladies, that they all might be whipped with  burning brands to make them confess. And vvhen they  had confessed, they were put to death. A young son of  Keu, too small to take part in or to know of the  plot, was alone left alive, and to him reverted his ^ ' . s  on^n with all that belonged (298) thereto ' jn and

animaL.' And on our way back we passea by it, but

^ According to d'Ohsson (ii, 187), Shrramun - Pian de Carpine, 667,  rails him (^hirencn) was the eldest son of Guchu, third son of Ogt>dai,  and had been chosen by his grandfather as his buccessov. Kuyuk was  therefore his uncle. D'Ohsson (li, 255, et seq.) tfells the sto y of  Siremon's conspiracy from Mohammedan sourCfes in practically the  same manner as ou. tr... eller. He adds that the n)an who discovered  the plot, and informed Man;^u, was a muleteer named Kischk. The  Kniperor rewarded him with a large sum of money and the title of  iarkkan .d'Ohsson, n. 255. 27 ri. This title is an old Turkish one,  which insured the holder great privileges. We find it already  mentioiied by Menander (227), where it is correctly written r«px"''-  According to d'Ohss n, however, Siremon was not put to death at  this time, but later on Mangu caused him to be drowned. The  Empress, Ogul-Gaimish (Rubruck'S Ca/nu.<(j, the widow of Kuyuk»  and apparently the instigator of the conspiracy, and also Slremon'i  mother, were drowned on pretext that they had tried to k.U Mangu  1>y Nvitchcrufi (sec d'Ohsson, ii, 268V

FRIAR WILLIAM OF KUBRUCK. 165

m}- guides did not date, cithei when ^uing or when  coming back, to turn off to it, -lor " the mistress of  nations sat in sorrovv, and there was no one to console  her."

^^GAIN we ascended mountains, going always in a  northerly direction.^ Finally, on the day of the  Blessed Stephen (December 26th; \(ie' entered a  plain vast as a sea. in which there was seen no hillock, and  the following day, on the feast of St. John the Evangelist  (December 27th), we arrived at the 07'du of the great  Icrd. When we were five davs from it, an mm at whose  (station) we were sleeping, wanted to send us by a round-  about road, over which we should have had to plod for  more than fifteen days. And this, as I learnt, so that  we might pass by Onankerule, which is at it were their  original home, and in which is the ordu of Chingis chan.  Others, however, said that they had w,'nued to make the  journey longer, so as to magnify their importance ; and  they are in the habit of doing this to persons who come  from countries not subject to them. And it was with  great difficulty that our guide obtained that wq should  travel the direct road, after they had detained *us over this  matter from dawn to the third hour.^ It was on this part

^ Along some portions of his route while crossing the extremity  of the Altai, after lea\ing the course of the upper Ulungur, the  traveller may have followed for a sliort while a northerly direction.  but there can be no doubt that the general direction in this part of the  jmnney was very nearly due east (see F. M. Schmidt, 209).

' I have no d(jubt that the reason given by our author for the  attempt to make him follow a roundabout trail is the correct one.  The Chinese have often done the same thing to envoys. They used  to make them travel overland, from Canton to Peking, for no otl^er  purpose. I am reminded in this connection of the remark of  Bernardino of Escalanta concerning the missions sent by the kings  ofvAva, Siam, etc., to Peking: that they always sent four or five

1 66 . JOURNEY OF

of the journey that that secretary, the one we had waited  for at Cailac, told me that in the letters that Baatu was  sending to Mangu, it was stated that you asked for troops  .and aid from Sartach against the Saracens. At this I was  (299) much astonished and also annoyed, for I knew the  tenor of your letters, and that there was no such request  in thern, only that yon advised him to be the friend of  all Christians, to exalt the Gross, and to be the enemy  of a!l the enemies of the Cross. (I feared) that as those  who had interpreted (your letters) were Hermenians from  Greater Hermenia — great haters of the Saracens — they had  perhaps through hatred and for the discomfiture of the  Saracens, gratuitously translated as had suited their fancy.  I remained silent, saying nothing for or against this, for  I feared to contradict Baatu's words lest I should he  accused of trickery without reasonable cause. So we  came on the day I have mentioned to the said ordu. To  our guide was assigned a big dwelling, but to us there  was given a very small hut in which we could barely store  our things, make our beds, and a little fire. Many came  to see our guide, and there was brought him rice wine  in long narrow-necked flagons, and I could not discern any  difference between it and the best Auxerre wine,^ save that

envoys on each mission, because the Chinese used to poison one  or two of them in a banquet, " unto whom they make very sumptuous  sepulchres, with epitaphs concerning what they were, and the cause  of their cpming, and by what prince they were sent. And this is for  to continue the niemoiy and greatness of the r6nown of his (the  Emperor of China's) realm." — Account of the Empire of Ckina^ 57  (Osborne's Collection, ii).

* Cervtsta de risio^ or, as he calls it in another passage (305),  terracina^ the Mongol tarassun^ " wine," but here Chinese rice made  wine, or shao ksing ckiu^ is meant. Marco Polo (;, 427) says of* it :  "It is a liquor which they brew of rice with a quantity of excellent  spice, in such fashion that it ma.kes a better drink than any other  kind of wine ; it is not only good, but clear and pleasing lO the  eye. And being very hot stuff, it makes one drunk sooner than  any other wine." Odoric calls it hi^ni^ or bigwn (Vule, Cathay\ 117;  Cordier, Odoric^ 503, 317). There is another stronger liquor dit^tilled  Uofti mi41ei, and called shao chiu ; in Anglo-Chinese, samshu, Mongols

FKIAK WILLIAM OF KUBR'JCK. 1 6/

it had not the perfume of wine. We were called and closely  questioned as to the business which had brought us. I  replied: "We have heard that Sartach was a Christian;  we came to him. Tlic King of the French sent him sealed  letters by us ; he sent us to his father, his father sent  us here. He must have written the reason why.' They  asked if you wanted t(j make peace with them. I replied :  *' He sent to Sartach letters as to a Christian, and if he  had known, thai he was not (300) a Christian, he would  never have sent him letters. As to making peace, ! tell  you that he nexer did you any harm. If he had done  something for which you had to make war on him or his  people, he would willingly, as a just man, make ^ology  and ask for peace. If you without motive should want to  wage war against him, or his people, we trust that God,  who is just, would aid them.'' And they always wondered,  repeating : " But why did you come, if you did not come  to make peace?" For they are already so puffed up in  their pride, that they believe that the whole world must  want to make peace with them. Of a truth, if it were  allowed me, I would, to the utmost of my power, preach  throughout the world war against them. I did not, how-  ever wish to clearly explain the reason of my coming  lest I should say something contrary to what Baatu bad  stated ; and so I gave as the only reason for my coming  there that he (Baatu) had sent mc.

The next day we were conducted to court, and I  thought I could go barefooted, as in our own countries,  so I left my shoes. Now, those who come to the court  get off their horses about an arrow's flight from the

call it araka^ arrak, and arreki. Ma Tuan-lin (bk 327) says that the  Moho (the early Nu-chen Tartars) drank rice wine [mi chin), but  I fancy that they, Hke the Mongols, got it from the Chinese.

The dwelling idomus) given his conductor, and the little hut {par  vulum tuguriimculum) assigned him and his party, were in both  cases felt yurts.

t68 JOURNEY OF

dwelling of the Chan, and there the horses and the  servants keeping the horses remain. So when we had  ah'ghted there, and while our fjiiide went to the dwelling  of the C'han, there came an Hungarian servant, who  recognised us — that is our Order: and as they surrounded  us and gazed at us as if we were monsters, especially  because we were barefooted, and they asked us if we had  no use for our feet, because they supposed that we would  at once lose them,^ this Hungarian (301) gave them the  reason, telling them of the rules of our Order. Then came  the grand secretary,- who was a Nestorian Christian, and  whose advice they nearly always follow, to look at us : and  he examined us carefully, and called that Hungarian, of  whom he made many inquiries. Then we were told to go  back to our lodgings ; and, as we were going back, I saw  before the east end of the ordu, the distance of two cross-  bow shots from it, a dwelling with a little cross over it.  Greatly pleased, and imagining there was something  Christian there, I boldly went in, and found an altar  right beautifully decked. For there was embroidered^ on  a cloth of gold an image of the Saviour, of the Blessed  Virgin, of John the Baptist and of two angels, and the  lines of the body and of the garments were marked out  with pearls, and there was a great silver cross with gems  in the angles and the middle, and many other church  ornaments, and an oil lamp having eight lights was  burning before the altar ; and there was seated there  an Hermenian monk, swaVthy and lank, and he was  dressed in a tunic of the rous^hest hair-cloth reaching

* Quia supponcbant quod statim admittereintis eos. As the U'\t  stands in the MSS., I can make nothing' out of it. 1 have read  edmittereimis {emittcremus). Previous translators have either omitted  this phrase, or rendered it in the most fanciful manner.

* Bulgai by name (see infra).

^ Brosdate sive bistrate. These embroidered images took the place  among the Armenians and Greeks, of images, the use of which was  forbidden them.

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RURRUCK 169

halfway down to his shins, and over it he had a stole

of black silk lined with vaire, and under his hair-cloth

garment he wore an iron girdle. As soon as we entered,

and even before saluting the monk, we sang on our knees :

''Ave regina coelorum'' and he arose and prayed with us.

Then, having saluted him, we sat down beside him, and he

had a dish with some fire in it before him. We told him

the cause of our coming, and he began encouraging us

greatly, telling us to speak boldly, for we were the envoys

of God, who is greater than any man. (302) After that he

told us of his coming there, saying that he had preceded

us by a month, and that he had been a hermit in the

country of Jerusalem, and that God had appeared to him

three times, enjoining on him to go to the Prince of the

Tartars. But as he neglected going, God threatened him

the third time, striking him down to the ground, and saying

that he should die if he did not go ; and that he should

say to Mangu chan that if he would become a Christian, all

the world would come under his rule, and that the Franks

and the great Pope would obey him ; and then he

admonished me to speak in a like way. Then I answered :

"Brother, I will willingly advise him to become a Christian ;

for I have come to preach that to all men. I will promise

him also that the French and the Pope will rejoice greatly,

and will have him for a brother and a friend. But that

they would become his slaves, and pay him tribute as these

other nations, that will I never promise, for I should be

speaking against my conviction." At this he remarried

silent. When we went to our lodgings, we found it cold

and we had eaten nothing that day. We cooked a little

meat, and a little millet with the broth of the meat to

drink. Our guide and his companions had got drunk at

the court, and had little care of us. There were then near

them (us) envoys of Vastacius, but we did not know it

At dawn (the next day) some men from the court made us

170 JOURNEY OF

get up in all haste. I went with them bare-footed a little  way to the dweliing of these envoys, and they asked them if  they knew us. Then a Greek knight, recognizing oui  Order, (303) and also my companion, whom he had seen at  the court of Vastacius with Friar Thomas our provincial,  he and all the envoys bore great testimony of us. Then  they asked if you were at peace or at war with Vastacius.  "Neither at peace,'* I answered, "nor at war," and they  enquired how that could be. '' Because," I said, " their  countries are remote from each other, and they have nothing  to do with each other." Then the envoy of Vastacius said  that there was peace, and this made me cautious, and I kept  silence.

That morning the tips of my toes were frozen, so that I  could not thereafter go bare-footed. The cold in these  regions is most intense, and from the time it begins freezing  it never ceases till May ; even in the month of May there  was frost every morning, though during the day the sun's  rays melted it. But in winter it never thawed, but with every  wind it continued to freeze. And if there were wind there  in winter as with us, nothing could live ; but the atmos-  phere is always calm till April, then the wind arises. And  when we were there, the cold that came on with the wind  about Easter killed an infinite number of animals. But  little snow fell there during the winter, but about Easter,  which was at the end of April, there fell so much that all  the streets of Caracarum were full, and they had to carry it  off in carts.^ They brought us from the ordu of the first

* Plan de Carpine (609) says of the climate of northern Mongolia :  "The climate there is ntost unsettled ; in the middle of summer, when  in other countries it is usually very hot, there is much thunder and  lightning, by which many persons are killed. At the same season  there-falls there snow in great quantity. They have there also such  violent tempests of exjremely cold winds, that sometimes men can  hardly keep in the saddk .... Ii never rains there in winter, but  often in summer ; but so little, thiit ofttimes it biirely moistens the  dust and the roots of the gra^s. Hail falls there, often of gr'iat

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 171

(wife)^ sheepskin gowns and breeches and shoes, which  my companion and the dragoman took ; for my part I  did not think I was in need of them, for it seemed to  me that the fur gown I had brought with me from Baatu's  sufficed me.

(304)

N the Octave of the Innocents (3rd January, 1254)

we were taken to court ; and there came certain

Nestorian priests, whom I did not know to be

Christians, and they asked me in what direction I prayed.

I said " to the east." ^ And they asked that because we had

shaved our beards, at the suggestion of our guide, so as to

appear before the chan according to the fashion of our

country. 'Twas for this that they took us for Tuins, that

is idolaters. They also made us explain the Bible. Then

they asked us what kind of reverence we wanted to make

the chan, according to our fashion, or according to

theirs. I replied to them : " We are priests given to the

service of God. Noblemen in our country do not, for the

glory of God, allow priests to bend the knee before them.

Nevertheless, we want to humble ourselves to every man for

the love of God. We come from afar : so 'in the first place

then, if it please yo'.i, we will sing praises to God who has

brought us here in safety from so far, and after that we

size .... In summer there is suddenly excessive heat, followed  immediately by great cold. In winter great quantities of snow fall  in some parts, while in others little," Our author's memory served  him badly as to the date of Easter in 1254 : — it fell on April 12th.

* Attulerufti nobis de curia primo pelliceas arietinas, etc. It seems  to me that primo is a clerical error, though all the MSS. give it, for  either principi or prime ; the latter would refer to the first wife of  Mangu, whom Rubruck calls Cotata Caten (Kutuktai Khatun), and  who seems to have greatly favoured the Christians.

2 The Tuins (see sup^a^ p. 1 59) prayed facing north. The Nestorians  faced also the east in praying (Badger, ii, 415).

172 JOURNEY OF

will do as it shall please your lord, this only excepted, that

nothing be required of us contrary to the worship and glory

of God." Then they went into the house, and repeated

what I had said. It pleased the lord, and so they placed

us before the door of the dwelling, holding up the felt

which hung before it ; and, as it was the Nativity, we began

to sing :

" A soft's ortus cardine  Et usque terre limitetn  Christum canamus principem  Natum Maria virgine.^^

When we had sung this hymn, they searched our legs  and breasts (305) and arms to see if we had knives upon  us. They h^d the interpreter examined, and made him  leave his belt and knife in the custody of a door-keeper.  Then we entered, and there was a bench in the entry with  cosmos, and near by it they made the interpreter stand.  They made us, however, sit down on a bench near the  ladies.^ The house was all covered inside with cloth of gold,  and there was a fire of briars and wormwood roots — which  grow here to great size^ — and of cattle dung, in a grate in  the centre of the dwelling. He (Mangu.) was seated on a  couch, and was dressed in a skin spotted and glossy, like a  seal's skin."^ He is a little man, of medium height, aged  forty-five years, and a young wife sat beside him ; and a  very ugly, full-grown girl called Cirina, with other children  sat on a couch after them. This dwelling had belonged to  a certain Christian lady, whom he had much loved, and  of whom he had had this girl. Afterwards he had taken

' That is to say, on the left of Mangu (see supra, pp. 24, 58).

'' Saksaul is meant (conf. Benedict's narrative, supra, p. 35).

^ Bovis marini, Ii was probably otter s)c'"> though a variety of seal  was found in lake Baikal, the Caspian, and possibly in other localities  then subject to the IVlonjM^Is. The BulgarS of the Volga carried on a  targe trade in sea otter skins.

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 1/3

this young v/ife, but 'the girl was the mistress of all this  ordu, which had been her mother's.^

He had us asked what we wanted to drink, wine or

terracina, which is rice wine {cervisia), or cafacosmos, which

is clarified mare's milk, (306) or bal, which is honey mead.-

For in winter they make use of these ^ four kinds oi

drinks. I replied : " My lord, we are not men who seek

to satisfy our fancies about drinks ; whatever pleases you

will suit us." So he had us given of the rice drink, which

was clear and flavoured like white wine, and of which I tasted

a little out of respect for him, but for our misfortune our

interpreter was standing by the butlers, who gave him so

much to drink, that he was drunk in a short time. After

this the chan had brought some falcons and other birdii,

which he took on his hand and looked at, and after a long

while he bade us speak.^ Then we had to bend our knees.

He had his interpreter, a certaift Nestorian, who I did not

know was a Christian, and we had our interpreter, such as

he was, and already drunk. Then I said: " In the first

'place we render thanks and praise to God, who has brought

us from so far to see Mangu Chan, to whom God has given

so much power on earth. And we pray Christ, by whose

will we all live and die, to grant him a happy and long life."

For it is their desire, that one shall pray for their lives.

Then I told him : " My lord, we have heard of Sartach that

he was a Christian, and the Christians who heard it rejoiced

greatly, and principally my lord the king of the French.

So we came to him, and my lord the king sent him letters

by us in which were words of peace, and among other

^ Conf., however, p, 321 of text, which seems to disagree slightly  with this statement.

2 See supra^ p. 67. Bal {ox boat) may be the Turkish buzzah.

^ This was done to show how qnimportant were the envoys and  their affairs. When the Chinese Emperor. Yung-lo, received m 1240  the envoys of Shah Rokh at Peking, he kept them standing before him  without paying any attention to them, while he tried a number of  criminals (Yule, Cathay^ ccvj.

4 74 JOURNEY or

things he bore witness to him as to the kind of men we  were, and he begged him to allow (307) us to remain in his  country, for it is our office to teach men to live according  to the law of God. He sent us, however, to his father  Baatu, and Baatu sent us to you. You it is to whom God  has given great power in the world. We pray then your  mightiness to give us permission to remain in your  dominion, to perform the service of God for you, for your  wives and your children. We have neither gold, nor  silver nor precious stones to present to you, but only our-  selves to offer to you to serve God, and to pray to God for  you. At all events give us leave to remain here till this  cold has passed away, for my companion is so feeble  that he cannot with safety to his life stand any more the  fatigue of travelling on horse- back."

My companion had told me of his infirm condition, and  had adjured me to ask for permission to stay, for we  supposed that we would have to go back to Baatu, unless  by special grace he gave us permission to stay. Then he  began his reply :^ "As the sun sends its rays everywhere,  likewise my sway and that of Baatu reach everywhere, so  we do not want your gold or silver." So far I understood  my interpreter, but after that I could not understand the  whole of any one sentence: 'twas by this that I found out

' Pian cle Carpine (765) says : *' It is the custom of the Emperor  of the Tartars never to address directly a foreigner, no matter how  great he may be, but to listen and answer through the medium of  someone.'* This custom is still adhered to in audiences granted  to foreigners at the Court of China. Rubruck does not refer to il ;  he only states that he was not at liberty to speak on a subject after  the Emperor had once spoken what he had to say about it The  bombastic remark of the Emperor is in pure oriental style. Menander  litates Xhsit Turkhan Khan of the Turks told Valentius, the envoy  of Tiberius Constantinus, that his realm extended from the rising sun  to the farth'^^st point it reached in the west. Theophylactus {Hisiotia^  282) says the Khan of the Avars began his letter- to the Emperor  Maurice by styliig himself " Mighty ruler of the seven nations, lord  of the se\en climes of the world."

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RURRUCK. I75

he was drunk, and Mangu himself appeared to me tipsy ^  His speech, it seemed to me, however, showed that he  was not pleased that we had come to Sartach in the first  place rather than to him. Then 1, seeing that I was  without interpreter, said nothing, save to beg him not  to be displeased with what I had said of gold and silver,  for (308) I had not said that he needed or wanted such  things, but only that we would gladly honour him with  things temporal as well as spiritual. Then he made us  arise and sit down again, and after awhile we saluted him  and went out, and with us his secretaries and his interpreter,  who was bringing up one of his daughters. And they  began to question us greatly about the kingdom of France,  whether there were many sheep and cattle and horses  there, and whether they had not better go there at once  and take it all. And I had to use all my strength to  conceal my indignation and anger ; but I answered :  '• There are many good things there, which you would  see if it befel you to go there."

Then they appointed someone to take care of us, and  we went to the monk. And as we were coming out of  there to go to our lodgings, the interpreter 1 have men-  tioned came to me and said : " Mangu Chan takes com-  passion on you and allows you to stay here for the space  of two months : then the great cold will be over. And he  informs you that ten days hence there i.s a goodly city  called Caracarum. if you wish to go thcve, he will have  you given all you may require ; if, however, you wish  to remain here, you may do so. and you shall have what

* Mangu, like Chingis, Ogodai, Kuyuk, Tului, Chagatai, and  most of the imperial family, was a hard drinker. The empresses.  followed in their lead ; Rubruck mentions seeing Kutuktai (Cotata;  drunk. The Emperor Baber's fondness for majum and atak is well  known. Chingis Khan spoke veiy strongly against drunkenness in  his Ordonnances, but he was not able to live up to hib rules dX  conduct.

176 JOUKNEY OK

you need. It will, however, be fatiguing for you to ride  with the court." I answered: *'May the Lord keep  Mangu Chan and give him a happy and long life ! VVe  have found this moi^k here, whom wo believe to be a holy-  man and come here by the will of God. So we would  willingly remain here with him, for we are monks, and wc  would say our prayers with him for the life of the chan."  Then he left us without a word. And we went to a big  house, which we found cold and without a supply of fuel,  and we were still without (309) food, and it was night.  Then he to whom we had been entrusted gave us fuel and  a little food.

Our guide being about to return to Baatu, begged of r.s  a carpet or rug which v/e had left by his order in Baatu's  ordu. VVe gave it him, and he left us in the most friendly  manner, asking our hand,^ and saying that it was his fault  if he had let us suffer from hunger or thirst on the journey.  We pardoned him, and in like manner we asked pardon of  him and all his suite if we had shown them an evil example  in anything.

J^^^^CERTAIN woman from Metz in Lorraine, Paquette  ^^^^ by name, and who had been made a prisoner in  Hungary, found us out, and she gave us the best  food she could. She belonged to the ordu of the Christian  lady of whom I have spoken,- and she told me of the  unheard-of misery she had endured before coming to the  ordu?' But now she was fairly well off. She had a young

' Posiulans dex train nostyam. Hand-shakiiig is not <i Mongol or  Chinese custom ; the Iriar's guide had either seen him siiake hands, or  had noticed the Nestorians do it (^ee p. 315 of vext, where this custom  of theirs is noted).

- A wife 01 Mangu, and the mother of the ugly girl Cirina, of whom  he has already spoken.

•^ The terrible condition of the captives among the Mongols is thu-.  described by Pian de Carpine t,7n 713;. " Ir the country of the

FKIAK WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK 1/7

Ruthenian husband, of whom she had had three right fine-  looking boys, andhe knew how to make houses,^ a very good  trade among them. Furthermore, she told us that there  was in Caracarum a certain master goldsmith, William by  name, a native of Paris : and his family name was Buchier,  and the name of his father was Laurent Buchier.^

She believed that he had still a brother living on the  Grand Pont, called Roger Buchier. She also told me that  he supported a young man whom he considered as his  son, and who was a most excellent interpreter. But as

Saracens, and in those of other nations who live as it were in the  midst, the lords take all the best artisans, and use them for all their  works : the other artisans pay them of their labour as tribute. They  (the captives) store all their crops in the granaries of their lords ; they  allow them, however, seed com and eiiough for their food ; to the  others they give to each one daily a small weight (of meal), and nothing  else but a little portion of meat three times a. week. And this they  only do for those artisans who live in towns. Whenever it pleases  the masters, their wives, or their sons, they take all the young  (captives), and make them go after them with all their body servants,  )vho are counted among the Mongols or rather among the captives :  for though they are reckoned with them, they are not held in respect  as are Tartars, but arje looked upon as slaves, and are exposed to  all dangers just as other captives ; for they are placed in the foremost  rank in battles, and if it be necessary to cross a swamp or a dangerous  piece of water, they must first try the ford. Furthermore, they must  do everything there is to be done. And if they give offence in any-  thing, or if they do not ob^y orders, they beat them like donkeys. To  be brief, they have little to eat, little to ^rink, and are miserably clad,  unless they are able to make some m.oney, as may goldsmiths and  other good artisans. But some have such bad masters that they give  them nothing, and they have no time to do anything for themselves  an account of the amount of work of their masters, unless they take  some of the time when they might be resting or sleeping. And this  only can they do if they are allowed to have wives or their own tent ;  but those who are kept in the tent as slaves are full of every kind of  misery. I have seen them going about in all weathers with leather  breeches, and all the rest of the body bare, under the hottest sun, and  enduring the severest cold in winter. I have seen some wKo have  lost their toes and fingers from the great cold, and I hear^ of othei-s  >vho had died from the intense cold, or had becorpe bereft of the use of  all their limbs." See also on foreign captives among the Mongols,  d'Ohsson (ii, 133) : and Heyd {(?p. ck.^ ii, 71).

^ Facere domos. Probably t^nt-fram^s are meant, for all the houses  at Karakorum were made by the Chinese.

"- For some details concerning thi? kind friend of Friar William's  see infni.

N

T78 JOURNEY OF

Mangu Chan had given this said master three hundred  iascot, that is three thousand marks, and L workmen to do  a certain worK, she (310) feared he would not be able to  send his son to me. She had heard people in the ordu  saying : " The men who have come from your country are  good men, -and Mangu Chan would be pleased to speak  with them, but their interpreter is worth nothing." 'Twas  for this that she was solicitous about an interpreter. So I  wrote to this master of my coming, asking him if he could  send me his son ; and he replied that in that month he  could not, but the following he would have finished his  task and then he would send him to me.

We were stopping then with the other envoys ; for they  do differently as regards envoys at the court of Baatu and  the court of Mangu. At Baatu's court there is an lam  on the west side who receives all those who come from the  west ; and it is arranged in like fashion for the other  quarters of the* world. But at the court of Mangu all are  under one lam^ and may visit and see each other. At tht  court of Baatu they do not knov/ each other, and one  knows not whether another is an envoy, for they know  not each other's lodgings, and only see each other at  court. And when one is summoned, another perhaps is  not : for they only go to court when summoned.

We found there a certain Christian from Damascus, who  said he had come for the Soidan of Mont Real and of  Crac, who wished to become the tributary and friend of  the Tartars, Furthermore, the year before I arrived there, a  certain clerk had come there from Aeon, who called himself  Raymond, but whose name was in truth Theodolus. He  had started out from Cyprus with Friar Andrew, and had  gone with him as far as Persia, and he brought certair  instruments from Ammoric^ there in Persia, and he rc-

' Quedam organa ah Amviorico, Organa in Latin and Creek  {opyava) means both drums and ^-ind instruments; but ab in another

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 179

mained there after Friar Andrew. When Friar Andrew  had gone back, he went on (311) with his instruments and  came to Mangu Chan, who asked him why he had come ;  and he said that he was with a certain holy bishop to  whom God had sent letters from heaven written in letters  of sold, and had ordered to send them to the lord of the  Tartars, for he would become the lord of the whole world»  and he must persuade men to make peace wath him. Then  Mangu said to him : " If thou hast brought these letters  which have come from heaven and letters of your lord,  then thou art welcome." He replied that he had been  bringing letters, but that they and his other things being  on an unbroken pack-horse, it had run away through  forests and over hills, and he had lost everything. Now it is a  truth that such accidents frequently do occur, .so one must  be very careful to hold one's horse when obliged to get  off it.

Then Mangu asked the name of the bishop. He said  that he was called Oto.^ And he went on to tell him  of Damascus and of master ^William, who was clerk of  the lord legate. Then the Chan asked him in whose  kingdom he dwelt. And he answered that he was under  a certain king of the Frank.s, who was called King Moles.^

passage (362) Friar William says '"''sonant timpana et organa^^  i lake it that-. he uses it in the sense of horns or wind instru-  ments. Pian de Carpine (662) has '''' percuticbant in organis et  tynipanis et aliis instrumentis.^^ Ab Amviorico is more ejiibarrassing.  Bergeron translates these words by "certains instruments qu'ils  appellent d'Amoricus." It is just possible that Ammorico is a clerical  error for Herincnia (Armenia). Joinville (160) speaks of four musicians  who came to .St. Louis' camp with the Prince of Antioch, "et avoient  troiz cors, dont les voiz leur venoient parmi ies visages. Quant il  encommen^oient k corner, vous deissiez que ce sont les voiz des cynes  qui se partent de I'estanc ; et fesoient les plus douces melodies et les  plus gracieuses, que c'estoit mervieilles de Toyr."

^ Odon or Eudes de Chateau-Roux, or Chateau-Raoul, in Berri,  Cardinal- Bishop of Tusculum, had preached the crusade in France,  and had accompanied St. Louis to the Holy Land as Pi^pal Legate  (Michaud, iii, 85).

2 Or McUs^ according to some M SS. I am unable to offer any explana-  tion of this word : the whole phrase is obscure, nor do I quite see its

N 2

i8o journb:y of

For he had before that heard of what happened at Mansura,  and he wanted to say that he was one of your subjects.  Furthermore, he said to the chan that the Saracens were  between the Franks and him blocking the way: that if the  road were open they would send envoys and would gladly  make a peSce with him. Then Mangu Chan asked if he  would (312) take envoys to that king and that bishop. He  replied that he would, and also to the Pope. Then Mangu  had made a very strong bow that two men could hardly  string, and two arrows with silver heads full of holes,  which whistled like a pipe when they were shot.^ And he  told the Moal whom he was to send with this TheodohB :  " Go to the king of the Franks, to whom this man shaft  take you, and ofifer him these from me. And if he will  have peace witH us, and we conquer the land of the  Saracens as far as his country, we will leave hi«i all  the( rest of the earth to the west. If not, bfihg b^ck the  bow and the arrows to us, and tell him that with sucA bows  we shoot far and hit hard."

Then he made this Theoduius leave his presence, an<i  his interpreter was the son of master William, and T\e  heard (the chan) saying to the Moal : "Go with this man ;  examine well the roads, the country, the towns, the men  and their arms." Then this young man upbraided  Theoduius, saying that he did wrong to take envoys  of the Tartars with him, who only went to spy. Then  he answered that he would put them to sea, so that they

connection with the one which follows. Did Theoduius want to  invent a name for St. Louis, and so coined the word Moles from  Mcnsura f On the battle of Mansurah in 1249, '"^d St. Louis' captivity,  see Joinville(6o£'/'5'^</',) ; he writes the name/rt Massoure^ and Sarrasin,  /a Nhissore (see also Michaud, ili, 142, 469).

^ Already in the sixth century, A.D., the Turks used "sounding  arrows'' (/////2^ /i). Chou shUyhk. 50, 3. Such arrow-heads are still  used by the Mongols and Manchus, and are called in Chinese /t\i,ute  chieti, ''signal arrowv».'' The name sufficiently explains ihc Ukc to  which they are put (see also d'Ohsson, i, 6/, note).

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. l8l

would not be able to know whence they came nor how  they had come back.

Mangu also gave the Moai his bull, which is like a plate  of gold a palm broad and a half cubit long, and on it  is written his order. He who bears it can command what  he pleases, and it shall be done without delay.^

So when this Theodulus had come as far as Vastacius,  and was wishing to pass on (313) to the Pope, to deceive the  P<jpe as he had deceived Mangu Chan, Vastacius asked him  if he had letters of the Pope, since he was an ambassador  and had to lead envoys of the Tartars. And when he was  unable to show any letters, he seized him and took away  from him all that he had got together, and threw him into  prison. As to the Moal, he fell ill and died there. Vas-  tacius, howdVer, sent back to Mangu Chan by the attendants  of the Moal the bull of gold, and I passed them on the  road at Arseron (Erzerum) on the border of Turkuie, anu  they told me what had befallen this Theodulus. Such  adventurers wandering through the world, the Moal put to  death when they can lay hands on them.

|.HEN the feast of the Epiphany (6th January) was  nigh, that Hermenian m.onk called Sergius* told  me that he would baptize Mangu Chan on that  feast. And I begged him to do all in his power that I mign:

^ Yule {Marco Polo^ i, 342) has a coloured representation of one  of tliese Mongol paiza. The name paiza^ by which Mohammedan  medineval writers call these tablets, and which was also probably the  term used by the Mongols, is Chinese pai-tzti, " tablet." Deveria  {Journ. Asiai., ixe seric, viii, 105) describes the various shapes and  ornamentation of the Mongol paiza. The Kin, in the thirteenth  century, used badges of office mude of silver. They were rectangular,  bore the imperial seal, and an inscription indicative of the duty jf the  bearer (Chavannes, Voyagetirs chez les Khitan^ 102). The Nii-chcn  at an earlier date used wooden pai-tzii tied to each horseman and  horse, to distinguish them by (Ma luan-lin, bk. 327, 1 1 ; see also  Palladius, op. cit.^ 39).

^ Ijfguignes (iii, 127; tliinks that this Sergius was the Chanceiior of

l8a JOURNEY OF

be present, and be an eye-witness to it. And this he  promised me. The feast came, but the monk did not  call me ; however, at the sixth hour I was called to court,  and I saw the monk with the priests coming back from the  court bearing his cross, and the priests had a censer and  the Gospels. Now on that same day Mangu Chan had  had a feast, and it is his custom on such days as his  diviners tell him are holy, or the Nestorian priests say for  some reason are sacred, for him to hold court, ^ and on such  days first come the Christian priests with their apparel, and  they pray for him and bless his cup. When they have left,  the Saracen priests come and do likewise. xAfter them  come the priests of idols, doing the same thing (314). The  monk told me that (Mangu) believed only in the Christians  but he wanted all to pray for him. But he lied, for he  believes in none, as you shall learn hereafter, and they all  follow his court as flies do honey, and he gives to all, and  they all believe that they are his favourites, and they  all prophesy blessings to him.

So we sat for a long time before his ordu, and they  brought us meat to eat, but I told them that we would not  eat there, but that if they wished to provide us with food,  thev should give it to us in ou,r dwelling. Then they said:  " Go then to your dwelling, for you have only been called  to eat " So we went back by way of the monk's, who was  ashamed of the lie he had told us, and to whom I would  not therefore speak of that matter. Someof the Nestorians,  however, wanted to assure me that he (Mangu) had been

King Heythum of Armenia, who Kaitbon in his Hisi, Orient. '39)  says baptized Mangu and his family. This is impossible, as King  fieythuin only arrived at Mangu's court n month after Rubruck had  started on his way back to Europe. Furthermore, as our author tells  ws ' 323), this Sergius was an impostor, who had never taken holy orders.

^ The jfreatest festivals were on the New-year and on the Emj^eror's  birthdaN.

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 1 83

baptized ; I told them that I would never believe it, nor  say so to others, for I had not seen it.

We came to our cold and empty dwelling. They had  supplied us with couches and bed covering, and brought us  fuel, and given to the three of us the flesh of one poor thin  sheep for food for six days. Daily they gave us a bowl full  of millet and a quart of millet mead,^ and they borrowed  for us a kettle and a tripod to cook our meat ; and when  it was cooked we boiled the millet in the pot liquor. This  was our diet ; and it would have been quite sufficient, if  they had let us eat in peace. But there were so many  suffering from want of food, who as soon as they (315) saw  us getting our meal ready, would push in on us, and  who had to Ije given to eat with us. Then I experienced  what martyrdom it is to give in charity when in poverty.

W|M^T that time the cold began to grow intense, and  ^fe^ Mangu Chan sent us three gowns of papion skins,  which they wear with the fur outside, and these  we received with thankfulness. They inquired alsa whether  we had all the food we required. I told them that a little  food sufficed us, but that we had no house in which we  could pray for Mangu Chan ; for our hut was so small that  we could not stand up in it, nor open our books as soon as  we lit the fire. So they reported these words to him, and  he sent to the monk to know whether he would like our  company, and he replied cheerfully that he would. From  then oil we had a better dwelling, living with the monk  before the ordu, where no one lodged except ourselves and

^ Cervisia de inilio. This must be the common huang chiu, or  "vellow wine," made in north China with glutinous millet. This  is the only passage in the narrative in which Friar William refers  to this beverage.

1-84 JOURNEY OF

their diviners ; but these latter were nearer and in front of  the ordu of the first lady, while we were on vthc extreme  eastern end, before the ordu of the last lady. This was on  the day before the octave of the Epiphany (i2rh January;.  The next day, that is on the octave of the Epiphan\%  all the Nestorian priests assembled before dawn in the  chapel, beat the board, and solemnly sang matins ; then they  put on their church vestments, and prepared a censer and  incense. And as they thus waited in the court of the church,  the first wife, called Cotota Caten {eaten is the same as  *' lady," Cotota is a proper name),^ entered the chapel with  several other ladies, and her first-born son called Baltu.and  some others of her childreri ; and they prostrated themselves,  the forehead to the ground, according to the fashion of the  Nestorians. and after that they touched (316) all the images  with their right hand, always.kissing their hand after touch-  ing them ;^ and after this they gave their right hands to all  the bystanders in the church. This is the custom of the  Nestorians on entering church. Then the priests sang  a great deal, putting incense in the lady's hand ; and she put  it on the fire, and then they incensed her. After that when  it was alrecidy bright day, she began taking off her head-  dress, called bocea, and I saw her bare head,^ and then she  told us to leave, and as 1 was leaving, I saw a silver bowl  brought in. Whether they baptized her or not, I know  not : but I do know that they do not celebrate mass in

^ Called Kutuktai Khatun by Mohammedan contemporary writers.  She was of the Ykiras tribe. , She bore Mangii two sons, Baltu and  Orenguias. After Mangu's death she espoused the cause of Arik  Buga against Kublai (d'Ohsson, ii, 334, 347). The title Khdtun^ In  Turkish Khartum, is formed from Khan, and was given by the Mon-  gols as a title to the wives of emperors or princes (Quatremcre, 88).

2 An old custom among Eastern Christians and Russians ;  when one cannot kiss a holy image, one kisses the hand which  has touched it. The author tells us (320) that lialtu was already  married at this time.

^ Friar William notes this, because married women never appeared  in public ^ iihout the bogtak on.

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 1$$

a tent, but in a substantial church. And at Easter (t2th  April), I saw them baptize and consecrate fonts with  great ceremony, which they did not do then.

And as we were going back to our dwelling, Mangu  Chan came, and entered the church or oratory, and they  brought him a gilded couch, on vvhich he sat beside bis  lady, facing the altar. Then they summoned us, who did  not know of the arrival of Mangu, and the door-keeper  searched us, lest we had knives on us. I entered the  oratory, with my Bible and breviary in my bosom. First  I bowed to the altar, and then to the Chan, and passing  to the other side, we stood between the monk and the  altar. Then they made us intone a psalm according to  our fashion and chant. VVe chanted this prose : '* Vem\  Sancte Spiritus."

The Chan had brought him our books, the Bible and  the breviary, and made careful inquiry about the pictures,  and what they meant. The Nestorians answ^ered as they  saw fit, for our interpreter had not come with us. The  first time I had been before him, 1 had also the Bible in  my bosom, and he had it handed him, and looked at it  a great deal. Then he vvent away, but the lady remained  there and distributed presents to (317) all the Christians  who were there. To the monk she gave one iascoty and to  the archdeacon of the priests another. Before us she had  placed a nasic, which is a piece of stuff as broad as a cover-  lid and about as long,i and a buccaran ;- but as I would

1 According to Heyd (ii, 698), the nassii or ?iassitk of Italiayi  niediseval traders in the Levant, which I take to be our author's ?tasic,  is a silk gold brocade. The word is derived from the Arabic necidj.  There was another stuff, differi^jj only from it prohably very slightly,  called nacco^ derived from the Arabic nakh (see also Yule, Cathay^  295, 306 ; and Marco Polo^ i, 6^, 276, 285 5 and Bretschneider  Med. Geo^,, 288).

2 Heyd (ii, 703) says it is s^r-^ difBcult to determine what kind  of stuff was sold in the Middle Ages wnder this name. Victor Gay, he  adds, the last writer to have studied the question, is of opinion that it  was of fine flaxen cloth. Yule {Marco Polo^ i, 48) has a very exhaustive

1 86 JOURNEY OF

not accept them, they were sent ^o the interpreter, who  took them for himself. The nasic he carried all the way  to Cyprus, where he sold it for eighty bezants of Cyprus,  though it had been greatly damaged on the journey.  Then drink was brought, rice mead and red wine, like wine  of La Rochelle,^ and cosmos. Then the lady, holding a full  cup in her hand, knelt and asked a blessing, and the priests  all sang with a loud voice, and she drank it all. Likewise,  I and my companion had to sing when she wanted to  drink another time. When they were all nearly drunk,  food was brought consisting of mutton, which was at  once devoured, and after that large fish which are called  carp, but without salt or bread ; of these I ate. And so  they passed the day till evening. And when the lady was  already tipsy, she got On her cart, the priests singing and  howling, and she went her way. The next Sunday, when we  read : '' Nuptie facte sunt in Chanal' came the daughter of  the Chan, whose mother was a Christian, and she did like-  wise, though with not so much ceremony ; for she made no  presents, but only gave the priests (3 1 8) to drink till they  were drunk, and also parched millet to eat.

Before Septuagesima Sunday, the Nestorians fast three  fiiys, which they call the fast of Jonah, that he preached  to the Ninivites ; and then also the Hermenians fast for  five days, which they call the fast of Saint Serkis, who is  .>ne of the greater saints among them, and who the  Greeks say was a canon.'-^ The Nestorians begin the fast

note on the subject. He thinks it was a quilted material. In a previous  passage (290) Friar William uses the expression stamina rigidaia^  where the first word has evidently the meaning of the modern French  etamine^ our buckram.

' Red wine was probably brought to the Mongol court from Persia  and Turkestan, but it rrtUst have been an uncommon drink. Can the  drink of which our author speaks have been tea ? This beverage  was already in general use in Tibet, and probably Mongolia, in his  time.

-^ This Nestorian fast is called the fast of the Ninivites or of the  Rogation ; it is kept on the Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 187

on the third day of the week, and end it on the fifth, so  that on the sixth day they eat meat. And at that time I  saw that the chancellor, that is the grand secretary of the  court, Bulgai by name, gave them a present of meat on the  sixth day ; and they blessed it with great pomp, as the  pascal iamb is 'blessed. He himself, however, did not eat  (meat on Friday), and this is alsC' The principle of master  William the Parisian, who is a great friend of his. The  monk directed Mangu to fast during the week, and this he  did, as I heard say. So on the Sunday of Septuagcsima  (8th February), which is as it \v€re the Easter of the  Hermenians, we went in proce.ssion to the dwelling of  Mangu, and the monk and we two, after having been  searched for knives, entered into his presence with the  priests. And as we were entering a servant came out  carrying some sheep's shoulder-blades, hurnt to coals, and  I wondered greatly what he could do wifh them. When  later on I enquired about it, I learnt that he does nothing  in the world without first consulting these bones ; he does  not even allow a person to enter his dwelling without first  consulting them. This kind of divination is done as follows :  when he wishes to do (519) anything, he has brought .him  three of these bones not previously charred, and holding  one, he thinks of the thing about which he wishes to consult  it, whether he shall do it or not ; and then he hands it to  a servant to burn. And there are two little buildings beside

before Lent. Their dominical fast, which corresponds with our 1 ent,  lasts seven whole weeks, from our Sunday of Quinquagesima which  they call Entry to the Fast, to Easter, Saturdays and Sundays not  excepted (see Chabot, "jt^ and Badger, ii, 187). The Arraenian? write  the name of Sergius, Sarkis. Father Alishan tells me the Armenians  still celebrate with great pomp after this fist the feast of Saint Sarkis  the General, of his son Sergius, and of the soldiers martyred with them.  The feast of this 5a' at Sergius in the Roman church falls on October  7th (Tournefort, Voyage, ii, 164 : Chardin, ii, 168). I suppose that our  author uses the word canort in the Greek sense, KavortKor, meaning  that he was a bishop canonically elected. The text is ^'' qui est majo>  tanctus inter eos que at Gfeci dicttnt fuisce canon,"'

!88 JOURNEY OF

the dwelling in which he lives, in which they bum these bones,  anil these bones are looked for diligently every day through-  Oiii the whole camp. When they have been charred black,  they cire brought back to him, and then he examines  whether the bones have been split by the heat throughout  their length. In that case the way \s open for him to act.  If, however, the bones have been cracked crosswise, or  round bits have been started out of them, then he may not  act. For this bone always splits iti the fire, or there appear  some cracks spreading over it. And if out of the three he  finds one satisfactory, he acts,^

When then we were going into his presence, we were  cautioned not to touch the threshold. The Nestorian priests  carried incense to him, and he put it in the censer and they  incensed him. They then chanted, blessing his drink ; and  after them the monk said his benison, -and finally we had  to say ours.2 And seeing us carrying Bibles before our

^ This is an extremely accurate description of the method of prac-  tising scapulomancy or onioplatoscopy, a form of divination widely  spread over Asia and Europe (see Pallas, Nachrichten^ ii, 350 ;  Quatrem^re, 272 ; Klemm, Culttirj^eschichte, iii, 200 ; Radloff, Aus  Sibc-rien, i, 474 ; Gombojew, 654 ; Rockbill, Land of the Lamas, 341 ;  also Diary ^ 198 ; Vaml)ery, Sketches of Central A sia^ 219 ; Lubbock,  Origin of Cil.'ilisation, 238 ; Tylor, Friiuiiive Culture, i, 124). ll was  formerly practised in England, where it was known as "reading the  speal-bone " (Brand, Popular Antiquities, iii, 339). It was also  known to the Greeks and Latins. " They sacrificed a sheep or lamb,  after having formulated in the mmd the question to be answered ;  then they took a shouider-blade and roasted it over the fire. According  as the middle ridge remained white and intact in ihe fire, or became  cracked, it signified life or death ; if the right-side reddened, or if the  left-side blackened, it was a sign of war : white signified on either  side peace" (Bouch^ Leclercq, Divination, i, 180). In Greece, wheic  this form of divination Js still in use among the shepherds, the colour  and arrangements of the ^pots on the bone alter being charred are the  important '^.gns, while with Asiatics the fissures are chiefly consukeil.  Rubruck is careful to note the very important fact, that it ts  ivecessary, prior to charring the bone, to think of the object of the  divination.

'*■ Friar Odoric tells of having gone In a procession to meet the  Emperor seated in his chariot. The friars carried before them a cros«i  on A high pole, so that it could be seen better, and they sung V'eni,  Sancic Spiriius. " V\ hen wk- came to the chariot b> permission *>t

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 189

breasts, he had them handed him to look at, and he  examined them very carefully. When he had dmnk, and  the highest of the priests had served him his cup, they  gave the priests to drink. After this we went out, and my  companion who had turned his face toward the Chan  bowing to him, and following us in this fashion hit the  threshold of the dwelling ;^ and as we were proceeding  in all haste to the house of Baltu, his son, those who were  guarding the threshold (320) laid hands on my companion,  stopped him, and v/ould not allow him to follow us ; and  calling someone, they told him to take him to Bulgai, who  is the grand secretary of the court, and who condemns  persons to death. But I was in ignorance of all this.  When I looked back and did not see him coming, f  thought they had detained him to give him lighter clothing,  for he was feeble, and so loaded down with furs that  he could scarcely walk. Then tl^iey called our interpreter,  and made him stay with him.

We on our side went to the house of the eldest son  of the Chan, who has already two wives, and who lodges  on the right side of his father's ordu ; and as soon as he  saw us coming, he got up from the couch on which he was  seated, and prostrated himself to the ground, striking the  ground with his forehead, and worshipping the cross. Then  getting up, he had it placed on high in the most honourer*  place beside him. 1 ie had as a master a certain Ncslorian  priest, David by name, a great drunkard, who was teaching  him. Then he made u.« sit down, and had given the priests

the Lord, for otherwise no one dare approacii it, the bishop blessed  him, and the Empcrov ki.s:>ed the cross quite (ievoiJitly ; aixi as the  fashion is that no one shall appear bef«i«re the Emperor tvitiiout k'^'**^  him somethirig, we prescniod him » silver platter full f)i apples"  (Cordier, Odortc, j^^^ S''-H)-

* Friar Bartholomew uied to foiiow the usage ot v/estejii courts,  and not to turn ins back on the sovereign. Like Jiiany otiHii., sjnce  him, he came to grief in this most awkward perfcrm^uice.

I go JOURNEY OF

lo drink. And he also drank, after having been blessed  by them.

Then we went to the ordu of tne second lady, who is

called Cota,^ and who is an idol follower, and we found

her lyin^ ill in bed. The monk obliged her to get up from

her bed, and made her worship the cross with bended knees

^na prostrations, the forehead on the ground, he standing

with the cross on the west side of the dwelling, and she

on the east side. When this was done, they changed

places, and the monk went with the cross to the east side,

and she to the west ; and he commanded her boldly,

though she was so feeble she could scarcely stand on her

fett, to prostrate herself three times, worshipping the cross

facing the east, in Christian fashion : and this she did.

And he showed her how to make the sign of the cross

before her face. After that, when she had lain down again

on her (321) bed, prayers having been said for her, we

went to a third house in which the Christian lady used

to live. On her death she was succeeded by a young girl*

who, together with the daughter of the lord (Mangu ?X

received us joyfully, and all they in this house worshipped

the cross most devoutly; and she had it placed in a high

place on a silk cloth, and ^ad food brought, to wit, mutton,

and it was placed before the master (mistress ?), who caused

her to distribute it to the priests. I and the monk, however,

cook neither food nor drink. VV^hen the meat had been

devoured and a great deal o{ liquor drunk, we had to

go to the apartment of that damsel Cherina, which was

behind the big ordu which had been her mother's ; and

when the cross wa<* brought in she prostrated herself to

' I have not ffMjnd the names of Mangti's concubines m any con-  lt-i.»jK>rary work. D'Ohsson (ii^ 334) says he had two sons by his  Circubmc.^ ; their names were Shiregui and Assutai.

2 'I'his is the youn^ j^irl Cherina (or Ciriha) spoken of in the next  ^A^iX^x.:^^.. Fnar William had his first audience of Mangu in this tent  (sec sitpra^ p. 172)

KRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 191

the ground and worshipped it right devoutly, for she had  been well instructed in that, and she placed it in ? high  place on a piece of silk ; and all these pieces of stuff on  which the cross was put belonged to the monk.

A certain Hermenian who had come with the monk had  brought this s«^id cross from Jerusalem, as he said, and  it was of silver, weighing perhaps four marks, and had  IIII gems in the angles and one in the centre ; and it did  not have the image of the Saviour, for the Hermenians and  Nestorians are ashamed to show the Christ fixed to the  Cross. And they had presented it to Mangu Chan, and  Mangu asked hini what he wanted. Then he said he was  the son of an Hermenian priest, whose church had been de-  stroyed by the Saracens, and he asked his help to restore this  church. (322) Then (Mangu) asked him wjth how much  it could be rebuilt, and he said two hundred ;«i-«?/— that is  two thousand marks. And he ordered that he should be  given letters to him who receives the tribute in Persia and  Greater Hermenia,^ to pay him this sum of silver. The  monk carried this cross with him everywhere, and the  priests seeing how he profited thereby began to envy him.

So we were in the dwelling of this damsel, and she gave  the priests much to drink. Thence we went to a fourth  house, which was the last as to its position and its im-  portance. For he {i.e., Mangu) did not frequent that lady,  and her dwelling was old, and she herself little pleasing;  but after Easter the Chan made her a new house ai>d new  carts. She, like the second, knew little or nothing of  Christianity, but followed the diviners and idolaters.  However, when we went in she worshipped the Cross,  just as the monk and priests had taught her." There

^ Arghun, I take it, is the person referred to. Rubfuck states  (384) that he resided at Tauris, or Tabriz, in Persia.

- The worship of the Cross was reckoned as one of the sacraments  n the Nestorian Church (Badger, ii, 132, 414).

192 JOURNEY OF

again the priests drank ; and thence we went back to  our oratory, which was near by, the priests singing with  great howling in their drunkenness, which in those parts is  not reprehensible in man or in woman.

Then my companion was brought in and the monk  chided him most harshly, because he had touched the  threshold. The next day came Bulgai, who was the judge,^  and he closely inquired whether anyone had warned us  to be careful about touching the threshold, and I answered :  " My lord, we had no interpreter with us ; how could we  have understood ? " Then he pardoned him, but never  thereafter was he allowed to enter any dwelling of the  Chan.

|T happened after this that the lady Cota (323), who  had fallen ill aboi;t the Sunday of Sexagesima  (15th February), fell sick even unto death, and  the sorcerers of the idolaters could do- nothing to drive it  out. Then Mangu sent to the nonk, asking him what  could be done for her, and the monk rashly, replied that if  she did not get well he could cut off his head. Having  made this promise the monk called us, telling us of the  affair with tears, and begging us to keep vigils with him  that night in the oratory ; this we did. And he had a  certain root called rhubarb,^ and he chopped it up till it

1 Bulgai Aka was not only Chancellor of Mangu, but head of the  department of finances and of internal affairs of the empire (d'Ohsson,  ii, 260).

'^ Marco Polo (i, 219) says : " Over all the mountains of this province  (of Tangut) rhubarb is found in great abundance, and thither merchants  come to buy it, and carry it the world over." North-western Kan-su,  western Ssii-ch'uan, and eastern Tibet, stili supply the world with a  great deal of this root. The Mongols use it n\edicinally for animals, as  do the Chinese, I believe, but not often for themselves. The Mongols  sometimes use it as a dye. See, on the preparation of the root in  China, Geinelll Carreri (Churchill's Coilec. hk. iii, ch. v, 365). It is  said tliai when Chinghis Khan was pillag;: Tangut, the only things

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 193

was nearly powder, and put it in water with a little cros^  which he had, and on which was a raised image of the  Saviour, and by which he said he could find out v/hether  a sick person would recover Or die. If he was to escape, it  stuck on the sick person's breast as if glued there ; if not, it  did not stick. And I thought that this rhubarb was some-  thing holy which he had brought from Jerusalem in the  Holy Land. And he was in the habit of giving this water  to. drink to all sick ^^ersons, and it could not be but their  bowels were stirred up by such a bitter draught. But  they considered this movement in their bodies something  miraculous.

Then I said to him, as he was preparing it, to make the  potion with holy water as is done in the Church of Rome,  for it has great virtue in expelling devils for we supposed  that she was beset of a devil ; and at his request we made  him (324) holy water, and he mixed rhubarb in it, and put  the cross to soak in it the whole night. I told him also  that if he was a priest, the sacerdotal order had great  power \n expelling devils. Arid he said he was ; but he  lied, for he had taken no orders, and did not know a single  letter, but was a cloth weaver, as I found out in his own  country, which I went through on my way back.

The next day then w6 went to this lady, the monk,  I, and two Nestorian priests, and she was in a little (tentj  behind her larger dwelling. When we went in, she got up  from her couch, worshipped the Cross, put it reverently  beside her on a silk cloth, drank some holy water and  rhubarb, and washed her breast (with it) ; and the monk  requested me to read the Gospel over her. I read the  Passion of the Lord according to John. Finally she

his minister, Yeh-lii Ch'u-ts'ai, would take as his share of the booty  were a few Chinese books and a supply of rhubarb, with which he saved  the lives of a great number of Mongols when, a short rime after, an  epidemic broke out in the arm.y (d'Ohsson, i, 372).

194 JOURNEY OF

revived and felt better, and she caused to be brought four  iascol o( silver, which she first put at the foot of the Cross, and  then gave one to the monk, and she held out one to me, which  I would not receive. Then the monk held out his hand and  took it. And to either of the priests she gave one ; so she  gave that time forty marks. Then she had wine brought,  and gave the priests to drink, and I also had to drink three  times at her hand in honour of the Trinity. She also  began to teach me the language, joking with me because I  was silent, not having an interpreter with me.

The next day we again went back to her, and Mangu  Chan, hearing that we had passed that way, made us come  in unto him, because he had heard that the lady was better ;  and we found him with a few of his attendants, and he was  drinking what looked like liquid mud, a dish made of  paste for (325) the comforting of the head,^ and charred  sheep's shoulder-blades lay before him, and he took the  Cross in his hand ; but whether he kissed it or worshipped  it I did not notice, but he looked at it, asking I know  not what.

Then the monk asked permission to carry the Cross on  high on a lance, for he had previously spoken to the monk  about this, and Mangu replied : " Carry it as you like best."  Then, having saluted him, we went to the said lady, and.

we found her well and bright, and she drank again of the

«

holy water, and we read the Passion over her. But these  miserable priests had never taught her the faith, nor  advised her to be baptized. I sat there, however, silent,  unable to say a word, so she again taught me some of the  language.

* Sorbantem liquidatn t'-rram^ hoc est cibum de pasta^ pro com-  fortatione capitis. The Chinese in northern China and in Mongolia  make a ki'nd of brown gruel, with hot water or tea and parched flour,  in which a few very small pieces of fat mutton have been pu[. It is  much used by travellers, and also taken after a drinking boui — such  as Mangu had probably been having. The Emperor Haber, on  similar occasions, tells us he took a madjum.

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. IQ5

The priests do not condemn any form of sorcery ; for I  saw there four swords half way out of their scabbards, one  at the head of the lady's couch, another at the foot, and one  of the other two on either side of the entry. I also saw  there a silver chalice, of the kind we use, whieh had  perhaps been stolen in some church in Hungary, and it  was hung on the wall full of ashes, and on the ashes was a  black stone ; and these priests never teach that such things  are evil.^ Even more, they themselves do and teach such  things.

We visited her (?>., Cota) on three days, so that she was  completely restored to health. After that the monk made  a banner covered with crosses, and got a reed (326) as long  as a spear, and we used to carry the Cross on high. I  showed him the respect I would to my bishop, because he  knew the language. He did, however, many things which  did not please me. Thus he had made for himself a  folding-chair, such as bishops are wont to have, and gloves  and a cap of (with) peacock feathers, and on it a little gold  cross, which, so far as the cross went, pleased me well.  He had rough claws, which he tried to improve with  unguents.^ He showed himself most presumptuous in his  speech. Furthermore these Nestorians used to recite  I know not what verses, of a psalm according to them,  over two twigs which were joined together while held by  two men.^ The monk stood by during the operat on ; and

^ I cannot explain thej arpose of -the four swords. The black stf)ne  may either have been a rain or thunder-stone, or a sharir {sharira in  Sanskrit, a relic) which Rashideddin says was found in the human  body after cremation, and was supposed to bring the fortunate posses-  sor every kind of good luck (Quatremere, 439). Different localities in  Asia were famed for the various magic stones found in them CVui^.  Cathay, clxxxvii).

■^ Habebat ufigulas scabiosas qiias labcrabat decorare uui^^uentis.  Can our author mean that he used henneh^ or some such substance to  improve the appearance of his nails "i

^ See the interesting note of Yule {Marco Polo, i, 237-238'. The  mode of divining here referred to is apparently the same as that

O 2

\q6 JOURNEY OF

other vanities appeared in him which displeased me.  Nevertheless, we kept to his company for the honour of  the Cross ; for we used to carry the cross on high through-  out the whole camp, singing " Vexilla regis. prodeuntl\ at  which the Saracens were greatly astonished.

Jf^^ROM the time when we reached the court of Maneu.  g^^ he never moved his carts {bigavif) but twice to-  ward the south ; and then he began going back  northward, which was toward Caracarum. One thing I  remarked throughout the whole journey, which agreed  with what I had been told by Messire Baldwin of Hainaut  in Constantinople,^ who had been there, that the one thing  that seemed extraordinary was that he ascended the whole  way in going, without ever descending. For all the rivers  flowed from east to west, either directly or indirectly — that  is to say, deflecting north or south. And I questioned  priests, (327) who had come from Cathay, who bore  witness to it, that from the place where I had found  Mangu Chan to Cathay was XX days journey between  south and east ; while to Onan Kerule, which is the  true country of the Moal, and where is the ordu of  Chingis, was ten days due east, and that all the vvay  to these eastern parts there was no city. There were,  however (they said), people called Su-Moal, which is  " Moal r)f the waters ; " for sii is the same as *' water."

(icscribed by Polo. It must not, Jiowever, he confounded with rabdo-  mancy, in which bundles of wands or airows were used. Aniinianus  MarceHinus (xxxi, ?, 350) says this 'mode of divination was practised by  the Alans. '' 'i'hcy have a singular wav of divining : they take straight  willow wands and make bundles of them, and on examining them at  a certain time, with certain secret incantations, they knoAv what is  going to happen.''

' See supyu^ p. 102, note 2.

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 197

They live on fish and by the chase, fdr they have no  flocks, no herds.- Likev/ise to the north there is no city,  but a people raising flocks, and called Kerkis.^ There

1 Piun de Carpine (708) (see also supra, p. il2) speaks of the Su-  Monmh. D'Avezac (532) says that Hammer and Klaproth have  found this name, or its Chinese equivalent, in Mohammedan and  Chinese works. To judge by their mode of living, this people were  prrobably Tungus, not Mongols. Le Bruyn ( Voyages^ v, 224) speaks  of the Saniongals; but he is only quoting Pian de Carpine.

2 Here the Kirghiz are meant. In previous passages {supra^ pp. 100,  1 16) the traveller used the name Kcrki: to designate the Cherkesses, or  Circassiafts. From Chinese sources we learn of the existence of the  Kirghiz as a nation as early as the third centurv, a.d. : they were then  known as Kien-k'tin. KHeh-ku or ICii-wti^ and lived where Rubruck  placed them, f\orth of northern Mongolia, on the head-waters of  the Yenissei, and west of the Baikal. In course of time the  Chinese changed the mode of writing this name, first to Ho ku  and HokU'SsH] and in the latter part of the eighth century to  Kieh (or Hsiaykia-ssu : meaning in Uigur, we are told, some-  thing like "yellow and red face.'' Down to the time of the  adoption cf this last name, the earliest form of their name, or  Kicn-kun^ remained in use among the Chinese. The following  description of their country and customs, probably in the latter  part of the eighth century, is very interesting^. I abridge it slightly  from Ma Tuan-lin (bk. 348). The Kirghiz country was marshy in  summer, and in winter covered with deep snow. The people were  tall, and most of them had blonde (liieraUy red, ch'th) hair and green  eyes. Those who had black hair were rLtre, and thc»se who had black  eyes were said to be descendants of U-iing, a famous Chinese general  of the Han period, who had taken refuge among them. They raised  crops of wheat and barley, and made flour by crushing the grain  on querns, and they used also the grain to make wine. They owned  great numbers of camels, sheep,^cattle and horses. The wild animals  m their country comprised wild asses, ku-tu (possibly for ^2^-«<?, a kind  of seal), antelope, argali and sables. They had also a variety of fish  called maoy the smallest of which were seven or eight feet long, with-  out marks on them or any bones, and their mouths were underneath  the jaws (sturgeons?). Of birds they had geese, ducks, magpies and  hawks. Pine, birch, elm, willow, and a coniferous tree called /*«-j//«^  (cypress ?), so tall that a man could not shoot an arrow to the top, grew  there. Gold, iron and tin were found there. After every rain they  found (in the beds of the streams ?) a kind of iron called kia-skq^ which  could be made into weapons of extraordinary temper, and which they  usually gave to the T'u-kiieh (Turks) as tribute. Men were few among  them, as compared to women. They wore earrings. The men were  brave. They had tattoo-marks on their hands, and the women when  they married had them made on the nape of the neck. They lived  together promiscuously. Their arms consisted of bows and arrows,  and they carried flags and pennons. They made shields of split  wood, long enough to cover a horseman to the ground, and had other .  smaller round ones, reaching to the shoulder, to ward off arrow and  sword blows. Their food, besides the flour previously montioned,

198 JOURNEY OF

are also the Oengai/ who tic polished bones under their  feet, and propel themselves over the frozen snow and on  the ice, with such speed that they catch birds and beasts.  And there is a number of other poor peoples to the north  as far as they can extend on account of the cold, and  they confine to the west on the land of Pascatir, which is  Greater Hunt;ary, of which I have spoken to you pre-  viously. The northern end of the angle is unknown,- on  account of the great cold. For there is eternal snow and  ice there.

I asked (these same priests) about the monsters, or  human monstrosities, of which Isidorus and Solinus speak.^

consisted ot meat and mare's milk. Their language was very lii;e  that of the Uigurs. This people first sent a mission to the court  of China in A.D. 648, when they came with a mission of the T'ieh-le  (Oguz Turks). In A.D. 840 the Kirghiz, after more than a century  of warfare with the Uigurs, finally overthrew their empire. The name  Kien-k^un is derived from that of the river Kem, or upper Venissei.  Kich-ku and JK!"teh-{ox Hsia) kia-ssii are transcriptions of the word  Hakas, the early name of the Kirghiz. The name Ki-/i-ki-ssi'i^ or  Kirghiz, first appears in Chinese works during the Mongol period (sec  dOhsson, i, 103; Bretschneider, Anc. Chin, and Arab i^ 13; ibid.^  Med. Travel., 74 ; and Klaproth, Tabl. Hist.^ 168).

^ The UriangJiit bishe, or "Forest Urianghit''' of Rashiddedin.  He says they lived in the w.oods, had no tents, cattle or ^iheep, only  wild cattle and an animal called /ii/r, which resembled a mountain  sheep. They set up bark shelters wherever they camped. He refers  to the wonderful swiftness with whi>:ii they travelled over the snow,  and caught wild animals by means of their snow-shoes, or chanch.  Dun ng the reign of Chingis, their country was partly occupied by  Mong-ol tribes. Quatremere, in a note to the above passage, remarks  that the name LriangJut is found in Manchu orocho7i^ from oroii^  "reindeer,^' and that this people is the same as the OletDii Tongousi., or  •' Reindeer Tunguses," of the Russians. Duhalde {Description., iv, 44)  speaks of the Orotchon living near the river Chikiri. The Mongols  call these people Uryangshan (Ssanang Setzen, 86, 190), and Abulghazi  refers to them as L/r-majikaits {Not. ei JLxtr.^xm, 27^ -, d'Ohsson, i,  421 ; F. M. Schmidt, 219). ' The Chmesc annals make frequent  mention of these Tungus tribes under a variety of names, and  describe their mode of living in very nearly the same terms as  Rashiddedin.

2 Termifuis anguli aquilonaris ignoi uiur. I am unable to explain  our traveller's notions as to the cartography of northern Asia. He  probably refers to the norlheast angle.

^ Solinus (207, 208) (on the .Vuthority of Megasthcnes) tells of the  dog-headed ^people of India, who were without speech ; of the people

FRIAR WILLIAM OV RUDRUCK. I99

They told me they had never seen such, which astonished  me greatly, if it be true. All of these said nations, no  matter how miserable they may be, must serve (the Moal)  in some manner. For it was a commandment of Chingis,  that no one man should be free from service, until he be  so old that he cannot possibly work any more.

One day a priest from Cathay was seated with me, (328)  ana ne was dressed in a red stuff of the finest hue,^ and I  asked whence came such a colour, and he told me that in the  countries east of Cathay there are high rocks, among which  dwell creatures who have in all respects human forms,  except that their knees do not bend, so that they get along  by some kind of jumping motion ; and they are not over  a cubit in length, and all their little body is* covered with  hair, and they live in inaccessible caverns. And the hunters  (of Cathay) go carrying with them mead, with which they can  bring on great drunkenness, and they make cup-like holes in  the rocks, and fill them with this mead. (For Cathay has  no grape wine, though they have begun planting vines,'^ but  they make a drink of rice.) So the hunters hide the *^iselves,  and these animals come out of their caverns and taste  this liquor, and cry " C7im, cJiin'' so they have been given

with one eye ; of the people who lived on ihe odour of wild apples and  nothing else. Isidorus ipp. cii.^ xi, 421) says: "We hear of the  monstrous faces of people in the remote part of the East ; some  without noses, their whole face flat and unformed. Others have the  upper lip so protrudini< that they go to sleep shaded by it from the  sun's rays. Others, again, are said to be speechless, using signs  instead of language." Herodotus (iii, 9, 20) had already spoken of the  one eyed Arimaspians. PImy (vii, 2, 282) is the authority from  which Solinus and Isidorus derived their information. Pliny» in turn,  derived his facts from the work of Megasthenes (see also supra^ p. 12  and p. 36).

^ This prie.st must have been a Tibetan lama who had visited China.  Chinese priests (w^hether Buddhist or Taoist) have never worn red  gowns, and Friar William has told us that all the Turn among the  Mongols dressed in yellow,

2 Though the Chinese have never made wine from the grape, the  vine has been cultivated in China since the second century B.C., when  it was brought there from Turkestan by the great traveller, Chang-  k'ien.

200 JOUKNEV OF

a name from this cry, and are called Chinchin. Then they  conne in great nannbers, and drink this mead, and get  drunk, and fail asleep. Then come the hunters, who bind  the sleepers' feet and hands. After that they open a vein  in their necks, and take out three or four drops of blood,  and let them go free ; and this blood, he told mc was  most precious for colouring purples.^ They also told  me as a fact (which I do not, however, believe), that there  is a province beyond Cathay, and at whatever age a  man enters it, that age he keeps which he had on  entering/^

Cathay is on the ocean. And master William told me  (329) that he had himself seen the envoys of certain people

^ The story here told is found in a Chinese work, entiiled, Chu  chUuan or " Record of notes " by Wang-kang of T'ai-yuan, in Chu, but  I have been una,ble to ascertain the date at which it was written.  The author says : " Yuan-yen, having been sent on a mission to  Feng-chi (in Tongking), learnt from some of the natives. that the  hsing-hsing (a species of gibbon with yellow hair, sharp ears, and human  face) love wine. As they have regular paths they travel over in the  mountain gorges in bands of hundreds, the country people (set out  wine; to catch them with. When they see the wine they know that it  is some man's trick to catch them ; and as these animals are very  clever and know the men's fathers and grandfathers and their names,  they revile them, saying : ' You want to kill me, but I don't want (your  wine), and Vnx off ! ' Then they go off a little way, but come back,  calling each other, and saying, *Let us all try the wine' ; so they drink,  and finding the flavour agreeable, they keep on drinking till they are  no longer able to escape. Then the people shut them up in a pen to  fatten them for food, and Avhen they want a fat one to cook (these  hsinz-hsing) pick it out themselves, and with tears push it out."  The other details of Friar William's story are supplied by another  Chinese work, entitled Hua-yang kuo chih^ or " Topographical  description of the state of Hua-yang.'^ Hua-yang included f>art of  the' present province of Ssu-ch'uan. This work says : "The hsing-  hsing is found in the Shan {Ai-lao) country, in the province of  Yung-chan. It can speak. A red dye can be made with its blood."  The above quotations are taken from Ma Tuan-lin, bk. 329, 8. Yule  {Glossary oj References, 154) says that *' the story as told by Rubruck  is related with singular closeness of correspondence out ' of the  Chinese books of geography' by Francesco Carletti in 1600, in his  Ragionamenti " (sec also Cathay , cxxvi).

2 I have no doubt that this refers to the popular Chinese fables con-  cerning the fabulous Kun-lun moui. tains, where lives the fairy queen,  Hsi-wang mu, and where grows the peach which insures immortality  to the fortunate mortal who eats it.

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 20r

called Caule and Manse, who live on islands the sea  around which freezes in winter, so that at that time the  Tartars can make raids thither ; and they had offered (them^  thirty-two thousand tumen of tascot a year, if they would  only leave them in peace. A tuinen is a number containing  ten thousand.^

The common money of Cathay is a paper of cotton, in  length anfi breadth a palm, and on it thf^ stamp lines  like those on the seal of Mangu.^ They {i.e., the  Cathayans) write with a brush such as painters paint

^ Caule is Kao-li, the name of the dynasty which reigned in Korea  till the middle of the fifteenth century, when the present dynasty,  which styles itself Chao-hsien, came to the throne. The name of the  dynasty is applied always to the kingdom. T\\<t Manse nmsi be the  Manze of ?vlarco Polo, the empire of the Sung. It is quite out of the  question to accept Peschel's view {Erdkundey 169), that the Manse were  Manchus. That name was not used in the thirteenth century ; the  Manchus were then confounded with the Longa and Solanga. It is  possible that the person who told William Buchier of this people, and  of the islands on which they lived, had in nana .the island of Kang-hua  off the Korean coast, which was a place of refuge for the Korean kings  when pressc 1 by their enemies. In fact, we learn, that when in 1231  Korea revolted against the Mongols, the king took up his residence  on this island. In 1241 the King of Korea made his submission to  Ogodai. and sent one of his relatives to the Mongol coast (d'Obsson,  ii, 74, 75,). This may have been the Korean mission seen by Buchier.  The .Sung (Rubvuck's Manse) had allied themselves \vith the Mongols  against the Kin, and probablv sent from about 1230 to 1234 numerous  missions to. the court of Ogodai. As to the extraordinary tribute  which our traveller says Buchier told him had been offered by the  Caule and Manse, in our money it would be nearly ^/"16,600 milhons ;  this can only be treated as a wild statement raad*:^ by someone who  knew nothing about the subject.

Our traveller says the paper was niade of fiomdux, but neaik all  other contemporary writers. Oriental as v^cll as Western, say the notes  of the Mongols were made of mulberry fibre paper (Yule, Marco  Polo^ i, 409, and Jordanus^ 46 ; Cordier, Odoric. 380 , Mesalek al-  ubsnr^ 223). Palladius {op. cit.^ 50), says that up to his time (1876) there  was kept at Hsi-an Fu a block used for printing the bank notes of the  Kin dynasty, from whom the Mongols borrowed the system ; and that he  had seen a print of these notes» No prints of these bank notes, nor even  Mongol ones, are known to me to be now in existence. Those of the  Ming dynasty are well known (see Yule, Marco Polo^ i, 112). As  early as B.C. 118, w^e find the Chinese using ''leather money '" (fi pi>).  These were pieces of white deeJ^-skin, a foot square, with a oloured  border. Each had a value of 40,000 cash (Ma Tuan-iin, bk 8, 5). See  also Vissering., Chinese Currency, 38, 160, et seq. ; and Lacouperis^  Numis. Chron,^ ii, 3rd series, pp. 334-341.

202 JOURNEY OF

with, and they .make in one figure the several letters  containing a whole word.^ The Tebet write as we do,  and have characters quite like ours. The Tangiits write  from right to left like the Arabs, but they repeat the lines  running upwards ; the lugur, as previously said (write)  up and down. The ordinary money of the Ruthenians arc  skins of vaire and nivnever.'^

HEN we came (to live) with the monk, he advised  us. ki all kindliness, to abstain from meat; that  our servant would get meat with his servants ;  and that he would provide us with flour and oil or butter :  this we did, though it greatly incommoded my companion  on account of his weakness. Consequently, our diet con-  sisted of millet with butter (330), or dough cooked in  water with butter, or sour mtik and unleavened bread,  cooked in a fire of cattle- or horse-dung.

When came Ouinquagesima (23rd February), which is  the Carnival of all Eastern (Christians),^ the great lady

^ This is the earhest reference to Chinese writing found in western  works. Yule (Jincy. Bri/.j xxxi, 4), justly remarks: " This is a remark-  able utterance, showing an approximate apprehension of the nature of  Chinese writing."

* Already, in the thirteenth century, the Russian princes levied the  taxes on their people in honey and in furs. The price of objects wi\s  fixed in ^um\ or "skins." A certain number of /•«;?/ formed a. ^rhma,  the equivalent of half a pound of silver. Instead of using the whole  skm of the marten or squirrel (Rubruck's "Vaire and Miniver," see  supra^ p. 44, note i), the head alone was sometimes used : thus we read  oi capitata inartatorum (or kuni mordki in Russian). Pieces of the  skins of martens and squirrels, probably bearing the Government  stamp, were also current. In the middle of the thirteenth century,  a marten (or sable) skin was worth about ten squirrel skins  (Kararnsin, i, 308, iii, 371, 372, 376). Ibn Dasta says that the  Bulgars of the Volga also used among themselves sable skins for  money (Roesler, Romanisehe Siudien^ 362). The name poluskka in  Russian, given to a smaM coin worth a quarter of a kopeck, means  literally "half a skin."

3 " Vsnit autem guinquagesimay que esi carnis primum omnium  orientaliumy

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 203

Cotata^ and her company fasted that week ; and she came  every day to our oratory, and gave food to the priests and  to the other Christians, of whom a great multitude gathered  there that first week to hear the services ; and she gave  me and my companion each of us a tunic and trousers  of grey samite,^ Uned with silk wadding, for my companion  had complained greatly of the weight of his fur gown.  These I received for the sake of my companion, though  I excused myself for not wearing such clothes. I gave  what belonged to me to my interpreter.

The gate-keepers of the court seeing such a crowd  pressing toward the church, which was just beyond the  bounds of the court, the warders of the court sent one  of their number to. the monk, to tell him they would not  have such a great multitude congregating there j«st  beyond the court limits. Then the monk replied roughly  that he wanted to know if they gave this as the order  of Mangu, adding also some threats, as if he would make  complaint of them, to Mangu. So they forestalled him  and accused him to Mangu, saying that he talked too  much, and that too great a multitude met together at  his talks.

AitQr that, on Quadragesima Sunday (ist March) we  were called to court, and when the monk had been so  shamefully searched to see whether he had a knife that  he of his own accord took off his shoes (331), we entered  into the Chan's presence, and he had a charred sheep's  shoulder-blade in his hand, and was inspecting it ; and  then, as if reading on it, he began to reprimand the monk,  asking why, since he was a man who ought to pray to

1 Kutuktai Khatun, the first wife of Mangu (see supra, p. 184). •  '-* Samico grisio. Samite was a heavy silk stuff, with gold or silver  threads woven in it. It was first manufactured in the islands of  Greece, where it was known as cxmniton {i^afivrov), but later on at  Acre, Beyrut, Laodieea, Damas and Alexandria (Heyd» ii, C60,/. I  fancy tluit the samite here referred to was a Chinese brocaded silk.

204 JOURNEY OF

God, he talked so much to men. I was standing behind  with uncovered head, arid the Chan said to him : " Why  do you not uncover your head, when you come into my  presence, as this Frank does?" Then the monk in great  confusion took off his hat, against the custom oi' the Greeks  and Hermenians ; and when the Chan had said many  harsh things to him, we went out. And then the monk  handed me the Cross to carry to the oratory, for such  was his confusion that he did not want to carry it.

After a few days he made his peace with the Chan,  promising that he would go to the Pope, and that he  would bring all the nations of the west to owe him  obedience. When he came back to the oratory after this  conversation with the Chan, he began inquiring about the  Pope, whether I believed he would see him, if he came  to him on the part of Mangu, and if he would furnish him  with horses as far as Saint james.^ He inquired also  concerning you, if I believed that you would send your  son to Mangu. Then I warned him to be careful not  to make lying promi.ses to Mangu, for he would be making  a new mistake more serious than the first, and that God  did not want lies from us, or that we should speak  deceitfully.

At this time there arose a controversy between the  monk and a certain priest called Jonas, a well-read man,  whose father had been archdeacon, and whom the other  priests looked upon as a teacher and archdeacon. For the  monk said that man had been made before paradise, and  that the Gospel said so. Then I was called upon to decide  this (332) question. I, without knowing that they were  arguing on the subject, replied that the paradise had been  made the third day, when also all the trees were ; and  that man had been made on the sixth day. Then the

* St. Janvcs of Composiella, in Galicia in Spain, \\: meant, 1 suppose.

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 205

monk began to say : " Did not the devil on the first day  bring earth from the four parts of the world, and having  made mud of it, did he not make the human body, and  did not God breathe a soul into it?"^ Hearing the  Manichean heresy, and he thus publicly and impudently  proclaiming it, I upbraided him sharply, telling him to put  his finger on his mouth, since he did not know the Scrip-  tures, and to be careful not to tell the reason of his fault.  But he began to scoff at me, because I did not know the  language. So I left him and went to our dwelling.

After that it happened that he and the priests went  in procession to the court, without telling me, for the  monk was not speaking to me on account of this scolding,  ^nd he did not want to take me with him as he used to  do. So when they came into the presence of Mangu, and  he did not see me among them, he inquired where I was,  and why I had not come with them. But the priests were  afraid, and excused themselves. When they came back  they told me what Mangu had said, and complained of the  monk. After that the monk made his peace with me, and  I with him, begging him to help me with the language,  and that I would help him with the Sacred Scriptures.  For "the brother who is aided by the brother is like a  strong city."^

^ The Manichaeans say that Adam was engendered by Satan, in  conjunction with sin, cupidity and desire ; but the spirit of darkness  drove into him all the portions of light he had stolen, in order to be  able to dominate them the more surely. Hence, Adam is a discordant  being, created ^in the image of Satan, but caTrying within him the  stronger spark of light. Eve was given him by Satan as a companion,  and Cain and Abel were her sons by 'Satan (Harnack, Ency. Brit.,  XV, 483). On this Jonas and his death, see infra, p. 216.

2 Proverbs, xviii, 19, in the Vulgate.

2o6 JOURNEY OF

S^^^'^'TER the first week of the fast, the lady ceased  g^j^ tu come to the oratory and to give the food and  mead we were accustomed to get. The monk  did not allow (any food) to be bought, saying that (333)  mutton tallow was used in preparing it. He only very  rarely gave us oil Consequently, we had nothing save  bread cooked on the ashes, and dough boiled in water, so  that we could have soup to drink, as the only water we  had was melted snow or ice, and was very bad. Then my  companion began to complain greatly ; so I told our  necessity to that David, who was the teacher of the eldest  son of the Chan, and he reported my words to the Chan,  who had us given wine and flour and oil. The Nestorians  will not eat fish during Lent, neither will the Her-  menians ;^ so they gave us a skin of wine. The monk  said he only ate on Sunday, when this lady sent him  a meal of cooked dough with vinegar to drink ^ But  he had besiSe him, under the altar 'a box with almonds  and raisins and prunes, and many other fruits, which he  ate all through the day whenever he was alone. We ate  once a day, and then in great misery ; for it was known  that Mangu Chan had given us wine, so they pushed their  way in on us like dogs in the most impudent manner, both

* Toumefort {Voyages^ ii, 164) says: "The Lent of the Greeks  is a high festival compared to that of the Armenians ; besides its  extraordinary length, it is not allowed them during that time to eat  anything but roots : and it is even forbidden them to eat as mueh of  these as will satisfy their appetite. The use of shell-fish, oil, wine, is  forbidden, except" on Holy Saturday ; they take on that day biltler,  cheese, and eggs. Easter they eat meat, but only such as has  been killed that day. . . . Besides the great Fast, thcy have four  others of eight days each during the year. . . . These Fasts are as  severe as the great one : there is no question at such times of either  eggs, fish, or even oil or butter ; some persons there are who take r.o  food whatever for three or four days consecutively.''

■' This dish, railed viien by the Chinese, is the most common article  of diet in northern China and Mongolia. The vinegar, or soy, is used  to season the watef in which the paste has been cooked, aiKl is drunl:  as soup

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBKUCK. 207

the Nestorian priests, who were getting drunk all day  at court, and the Moal, and the servants of the monk.  Even the monk himself, when someone came to him to whom  he wished to give ufink, would send to us for wine. So it  was that that wine brought us (334) more vexation than  comfort, for we could not refu.se to give of it without  causing scandal ; if w.e should give it, we would want  it ; nor would we dare ask for more from the court, when  that was done.

^OWARD the middle of Lent, the son of master  William arrived bringing a beautiful cnjcifix,  made in French style, with a silver image of  the Christ fixed on it. Seeing it, the monks and priests  stole it, though he was to have presented it from his  master to Bulgai, the grand secretary of the court ; when  ! heard of this I was greatly scandalized.

This young man also informed Mangu Chan that the  work he had ordered to be done was finished ; and this work

shall here describe to you. Mangu had at Caracarum  a great palace, situated next to the city walls, enclosed  within a high wall like those which enclose monks' priories  among us. Here is a great palace, where he has iiis  drinkings twice a year : once about Easter, when he passes  there, and once in summer, when he goes back (westward).  And the latter is the greater (feast), for then come to his  court all the nobles, even though distant two months  journey; and then he makes them largess of robes and pre-  sents, and shows his great glory There are there many  buildings as long as barns, in which are stored his  provisions and his treasures.^ In the entry o( this great

^ The i\Iong-ol palace at Peking was similarly arranged (Marco  ^olo, i, 356 ; Bretschneider, Archceological Researches^ 32 ; see also  on ihe palace of Karakoruin, infra).

208 JOURNEY OF

palace, it being unseemly to bring in there -skins of milk  and other drinks, master William the Parisian had made  for him a great silver tree, and at fts roots are four lions  of silver, each with a conduit through it, and all belching  forth white milk of mares.* (335) And four conduits are  led inside the tree to its tops, whicli are bent downward,  and on each of these is also a gilded serpent, whose tail  twines round the tree. And from one of these pipes flows  wine, from another caracosnios, or clarified mare's milk,  from another bal, a drink made with honey, and from  another rice mead, which is called terracina ; and for each  liquor there is a special silver bowl at the foot of the tree  to receive it. Between these four conduits in the top, he  made an angel holding a trumpet, and underneath the tree  he made a vault in which a man can be hid. And pipes  go up through the heart of the tree to the angel. ^x\ the  first place he made bellows, but they did not give enougL  wind. Outside the palace is a cellar in which the liquors  are stored, and there are servants all ready to pour them  out when they hear the angel trumpeting. And there are  branches of silver on the tree, and leaves and fruit. When  then drink is wanted, the head butler cries to the angel to  blow his trumpet. Then he who is concealed in the vault,  hearing this blows with all his might in the pipe leading  to the angel, and the angel places the trumpet to (336) his  mouth, and blows the trumpet right loudly. Then the  servants who are in the cellar, hearing this, pour the  different liquors into the proper conduits, and the conduits  lead them down into the bowls prepared for that, and then  the butlers draw it and carry it to the palace to the men  and women.2

' Lac album jumentiy by which is meant the dregs left over from the  preparation of caracosmos^ and which, we are told, was given to the  slaves as a drink.

^ Similar works of art and mechanical contrivances were often seen  n eastem courts. The earliest I know of ii the golden plane tree and

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 209

And the palace is like a church, with a middle nave, and  two sides beyond two rows of pillars, and with three doors

grape vine with bunches of grapes* in precious stones, which was given  to Darius by Pythius the Lydian, and which shaded the king's couch  (Herodotus, iv, 24). The most celebrated, however, and that which  may have inspired Mangu with the desire to have something like it  at his court, was the famous Throne of Solomon (2o\ofia>vTfos Qpovos) of  the Emperor of Constantinople, Theophilus (a.d. 829-842). Luitprand  of Cremona, who was in Constantinople in 946 as ambassador of  Berengarius II., describes as follows the audience granted him by  Constantine Porphyrogenitus in the Magnaura Palace. " Constantine,  as much on account of the Spanish ambassadors who had then  recently arrived, as for myself and Luitfred, received us with the  following ceremoniaL A gilt bronze tree was before the Emperor,  and Its branches were covered with various kinds of gilt birds, each  one of which sang according to its kind. The throne was so artfully  contrived that while at on^ moment it \vhs on the ground, at the next  it was off it, and anon it was seen high up in the air. The foot of the  throne, which was of great size, and made I know not whether of  bronze or wood, had great gilt lions guarding it. I was brought into  the presence of the Emperor supporting myself on the shoulders of  two eunuchs. As soon as 1 appeared, the lions roared and the birds  sang according to their various kinds. I felt no terror, however, nor  was I moved with astonishment, for I had made inquiry concerning  all these thi. ^3 of one who knew all about them. Having worshipped  (the Emperor) for the third time by a full-length prostration, I raised  my head, and whereas I had seen him in the first place seated a little  higher up than the floor, I now saw him 'Ivessed in other robes, and  seated near the ceiling of the room" (Luitprand, Hisforia^ vi, 26, in  Muratori, Rerinn Italicarum^ ii, 469 ; see also Constantine Porphyro-  genitus, De Ceremon.^'x^ 566-569).

Abulfeda states that in a.d. 917 the envoys of Constantine Por-  phyrogenitus to the Caliph el Moktader saw in the palace at Bagdad  a tree with eighteen branches, some of gold, some of silver, and on  them were gold and silver birds, and the leaves of the tree were of  gold and silver. By means of machinery, the leaves were made to  rustle and the birds to sing.

Mirkhond speaks also of a tree of gold and precious stones in the  city of Sultanieh, in the interior of which were conduits through which  flowed drinks of different kinds. Clavijo (161) describes a somewhat  similar tree at the court of Timur,

Kublai Khan had in his palace at Peking "a large and very beautiful  piece of workmanship," from which various liquors were drawn  (Marco Polo, i, 369) ; and Friar Odoric (Yule, Cathay, 130) describes  K wonderfully richly ornamented jar in the same palace, into which  drmk was conveyed by conduits from the Court of the palace.  Href Schneider {A''cka'olog. Researches, 28) describes an organ in the  Mongol palace at Peking which was connected in some way with  two peacocks seated on a cross-barj and when the instrumeiU .was  played, the birds danced.

2IO JOURNEY OF

to the south/ and beyond the middle door on the inside  stands the tree, and the Chan sits in a high place to the  north, so that he can be seen by all ; and two rows of steps  go up to him : by one he who carries his cup i^oes up, and  by the other he comes down. The space which is in the  middle between the tree and these steps by which they go  up to him is empty ; for here stands his cup-bearer, and  also envoys bearing presents ; and he himself sits up there  like a divinity. On (his) right side, that is to the west, are  the men, to the left the women. The palace extends from  the north (southward). To the south, beside the pillars  on the right side, are rows of seats raised like a platform,  on which his son and brothers sit. On the left side it  is arranged in like fashion, and there sit his wives and  daughters. Only one woman sits up there beside him,  though not so high as he."

When then he heard that the work was finished, he  ordered the master to put it in place and fix it well, and  then toward Passion Sunday (29th March) he started out  with his light tents,^ leaving the big ones behind him.  And the monk and we followed him, and he sent us (337)  another skin of wine. And on the way we passed between  rnountains where there was excessive wind and cold and  much snow fell. So toward the middle of the night he

^ This palace was evidently built in purely Chinese style, and must  have resembled the halls or audience pavilions {Hen and fing) of  modern Chinese palaces.

2 Marco Polo (i, 368) says : "The Great Khan sits facing the south,  and his chief wife sits beside him on the left. On his right sit his  son and his nephews, and other kinsmen of the Blood Imperial, but  lower, so that their heads are on a level with the Emperor's feet.  And then the other Barons sit at other tables lower still. So also  with the women ; for all the wives of the Lord's sons and of his  nephews and other kinsmen, sit at the lower table to his right ; and  below them again tlie ladies of other Barons and Kniglus, each  in the place assigned by the Lord's orders (conf. also Oiloric's account,  Cathay^ 141 ; see also sitpru^ p. 24 and p. 38).

^ Parvis dominibus, that is to say. the tents which could be taken  down and loaded on camels and horses.

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 211

sent to the monk and us, asking us to pray God to temper  this cold and wind, for all the animals in the caravan^ were  in danger, particularly as they were then heavy with young  and bringing forth. Then the monk sent him incense,  telling him that he himself should put it on coals and offer  it to God. I know not whether he did this, but the  tempest, which had already lasted two days, abated when  the third day of it was already beginning.

|N Palm Sunday (5th April) we were near Caracarum.  At early dawn we blessed some boughs, on which  no signs of budding had yet appeared. And  toward the ninth hour we entered the city, with raised  Cross and banner, and passed through the Saracen quarter,  where there is a square and a market, to the church. And  the Nestorians came to meet us in a procession. Going  into the church, we found them ready to celebrate mass ;  and when it was celebrated they all communicated and in-  quired of me whether I wished to communicate. I replied  that I had already drunk, and could not receive the  sacrament except fasting. When the mass had been  said it was already after noon, so master William took  us with great rejoicing to his house to dine with him ; and  he had a wife who was a daughter of Lorraine, but born  in Hungary, and she spoke French and Coman well. We  found there also another person, Basil by name, the son of  an Englishman, and who (338) was born ii) Hungary, and  who also knew these languages. We dined with great

* Friar William uses the word comitatu. The term " caravan " was,  however, known in Europe in his time. Matth. Paris, for example,  says : " oinnein illain catervam^ quam vulgares karavanam appel-  lant . . . ."

P 2

212 JOURNEY OF

rejoicing, and then they led us to our hut, wl\ich fhe^  Tartars had set up in an open space near the church, with  the oratory of the monk.^

The next da}' the Chan entered his palace, and the  monk and I and the priests went to him, but they did not  allow my companion to go because he had trod upon the  threshold. I had pondered much within myself what I  should do, whether I should go or not ; but 1 feared the  scandal if I withdrew from the other Christians, and it  pleased the Chan, and I fbarcd it might interfere with the  good I hoped -to do ; so I decided to go, though 1 saw that  their sect was full of sorceries and idolateries. But I did  nothing else while there but pray with a loud voice for the  whole church, and also for the Chan, that God might guide  him in the way of everlasting salvation.

So we entered the court, which is right well arrangca ,  and in summer little streams are led all through it by  which it is watered. After that we entered a palace all  full of men and women, and we stood in the Chan's  presence, with the tree of which I have spoken behind  us,, and it aiid the bowls (at its base) took up a large part  of the palace. The priests had brought two little loaves  of blessed bread, and fruit in a platter, which they pre-  sented to him, after saying grace. And a butler took  it to him where he was seated on a right high and raised  place ; and he t'orthwith began to eat one of the loaves,  and the other he sent to his son and to one of his younger  brothers, who was being brought up by a certain Nestorian,

^ The suiTie small tent the travellers had occupied since arriving in  Mangu's camp. The oratory of the monk was evidently also a tent. The  Mongols when at Karakorum probably lived in tents, just as many of  them do at the present day when in l*eking. The only houses in  Karakorum were, I think, those of the Mohammedan and Chinese  quarters ; besides these, there were, I suppose, a number of buildings  iised by Chinese and othct foreign officials attached to the .Mongol  court, and njtnt public offices (see also infra^ p. 220, and on Basd,  i)ifra, p. 22},).

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 213

and he knows the Gospels, and had also sent for my Bible  to look at it.

After the priests (339), the monk spoke his oraison, and  I mine after the monk. Then he (Mangu) promised that he  would come the next day to the church, which is rather large  and fine, and the whole ceiling is covered with a silken stuff  interwoven with gold. The next day, however, he went  his way, telling the ptiests in excuse that he did not dare  come to the church, for he understood that they carried  the dead there.^ We remained, however, with the monk  at Caracarum, together with the other priests of the court,  to celebrate Easter there.

Holy Thursday and Easter were nigh, and I did not  have our vestments, and I was considering the manner  of doing of the Nestorians, and was greatly worried about  what I should do, whether I should receive the sacrament  from them, whether I should say mass in their vestments,  with their chalice and on their altar, or whether I should  wholly abstain from the sacrament. Then came a great  number of Christians, Hungarians, Alans, Ruthenians,  Georgians, Hermenians, all of whofn had not seen the  sacrament since their capture, for the Nestorians would not  admit them into their church, .so they said, unless they were  rebaptized by them. However (the Nestorians) had not  told us anything of all this ; on the contrary, they confessed  that the Roman Church was the head of all churches, and  that taey should receive their patriarch from the Pope, if  the roads '.ere open.^ And they/ offered us freely their  sacrament, and made us stand in the entry of the choir to

1 This is explained by referring to what the traveller has stated  previously {supra, p. 80).

■^ When in Rome m »288, the Nestorlan envoy of Argji'^^n, Rabban  Sauma, was allowed by Pope Nicolas IV to celebrate niass, and on  Palm Sunday the Pope gave him communion. To the Nestonan  patriarch Mar Jabalaba III the Pope sent his tiara, his ring, .md church  vestments of price Xbabot, of). ■ S6, 87, 92).

214 JOURNEY OF

sec their way of doing, and, on Easter eve (i ith April), be-  side the font to see their mode of baptizing. They said that  they had some of the ointment with which Mary Magdalen  anointed the feet of the Lord, and they always pour in oil  to the (340) amount they take out, and they knead it into  their bread. For all the Eastern (Christians) put grease into  their bread instead of yeast, or else butter or sheep's tail  fat or oil.^ They also say that they have some of the flour  with which was made the bread that the Lord consecrated,  and they put back in it as much as they take out ; and  they have a room beside the choir, and an oven where they  bake the bread, which they must consecrate with great  devotion.

So they make a loaf of bread a palm broad with this oil  and then they divide it first into xii pieces according to  the number of the Apostles, and after that they divide  these portions according to the number of the people, and  a priest gives to each the body of Christ in his hand, and  the person takes it from his hand devoutly, and touches  the top of his head with his hand.

Then I made them confess through the interpreter as  well as I could, stating the x commandments and the vii  mortal sins, and the others which* one should shun and  publicly confess. They excused themselves for theft,  saying that without thieving they could not live, for their  masters did not provide them with either clothing or  victuals. So, considering that they and their belongings

^ Mar Abd Yeshma, the Nestorian Metropolitan of Nisibis at the  end of the thirteenth century, in his work entitled ** The Jewel," says :  "The holy and blessed Apostles Thomas' and Bartholomew of the  twelve, and Adi and Mari of the seventy, who disci pled the East,  committed to all the Eastern churches a Holy Leaven, to keep for the  perfecting of the adniinistration of the sacrament of the Lord's Body until  His comln>( again" (liadger, ii, 4091 On the origin of the custom, sec  Asscmani (ii, 182). The Greeks used leavened bread, but not so the  Armenians. The latter make their wafers the day lieforc they are to  be con<?ccrated. They are like thoi»c used irf the Romai) Chureh, but  three or four times thicker (1 ournefort, ii, 165).

FRIAR >VILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 21 5

had been carried ofif without just cause, I said that it was  permissible for them to take of their master's things what  was necessary for them, and I was ready to say so to  (341) Mangu Chan's face. Furthermore, certain among  them were sotdiers, who excused themselves for being  obh^gcd to go to wars, for otherwise they would be put to  death. I strongly forbad them to go against Christians,  or tc injure them ; they should rather let themselves be  kir , for therhthey would becom.e martyrs ; and I said that  if anyone wished to charge me to Mangu Chan with this  teaching, I was ready to preach this in his hearing. The  Nestorians from the court had approached while I was  teaching, and 1 suspected that they might inform against us.  Then master William had made for us an iron to  make wafers, and he had some vestments which he had  made for himself; for he had some little scholarship, and  conducted himself like a clerk. He had made after the  French fashion a sculptured image of the Blessed Virgin,  and on the windows surrounding it ^ he had sculptured the  Gospel history right beautifully, and he made also a silver  box to put the body of Christ in, with relics in little  cavities made in the sides of the box. He had also made  an oratory on a cart, finely decorated with sacred scenes.  I accepted his vestments and blessed them, and we made  right fine wafers after our fashion, and the Nestorians gave  me the use of their baptistery, in which was an altar. Their  patriarch had sent them from Baldach a quadrangular skin  for an antimensium,^ and it had been anointed with chrism ;

^ Fenestris claudentibus. The image of the Virgin was placed in a  recess, with hinged doors {jenestni) closing in front of it.

'^ baldach or Baudas is the usual way employed by western writers  of the period to transcribe the name of Bagdad. It is used by the  Chinese mediaeval writers, in the form Paota^ though Pai-ko-ta is  also met with. Consecrated aitar-covcrs, to be used when the altar  could not be properly consecrated, were used both in the Latin and the  Eastern Church ; they were called atUimensium (from ante and mensa\  .in Greek avrnxicnov^ also written afcri/AtVcriov. The Greek antimensia

2l6 JOURNEY OF

and this they used instead of a consecrated stone. So I  celebrated mass on Holy Thursday (9th April) with their  silver chalice and patene, and these vases were very large ;  and likev/ise on Easter day. And we made the people  comniunicatc, with the blessing of God (342), as I hope.  As for them they baptized on Easter eve (nth April) more  than sixty persons in very good order, and there was  cjreat rejoicing gerierally among all the Christians.

^HEN it happened that master William fell griev-  ously ill ; and, as he was convalescing, the monk,  while visiting him, gave him rhubarb to drink, so  that he nearly killed him. So when I called on him I found  him in this distressing condition, and I asked him what he  had eaten or drunk. And he told me how the monk had  given him'this drink, and how he had drunk two bowls full  thinking it was holy water. Then I went to the monk and  said to him : " Either go as an apostle doing real miracles  by the grace of the Word and the Holy Ghost, or do as a  physician in accordance with medical art. You give to  drink to m_en not in a condition for it, a strong medicinal  potion, a.s if it were something holy ; and in so doing you  would incur g'reat shame, should it become known among  men." From this he began fearing me, and warding him-  self from me.

It happened also at this time that the priest who was a  sort of archdeacon^ of the others fell ill, and his friends  sent .for a certain Saracen diviner, who said to them : "A  certain lean man, who neither eats, nor drinks, nor sleeps

were made of pieces of the altar-cloth which had been used at the  consecration of a church, and were sent by the bishops to the various  prjesbyters to use in tlie absence of a consecrated altar. Sec Oucangc,  s. V. Antimensium. 1 See supra, p. 205.

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 217

in a bed, is angereci v/ith him. If he can get his blessitig,  he may get well." So they understood that this referred to  the monk, and tov/ard the middle of the night the wife of  the priest and the sister and the son came to the (343)  monk, begging him to come and giwc him his blessing.  They aroused us also to ask the monk. And as we asked  him he said : "Let him alone, for he and -three others who  go also in evil ways, have formed the project to go to  court, to obtain of Mangu Chan that you and 1 be driven  out of these parts."

Now there had been a dispute among them, for Mangu  and his wives had sent on Easter eve four tascot and pieces  of silk to the monk and the priests to be distributed among  them, and the monk had kept one mscoz as his share, and  of the remaining three one was counterfeit, for it m as of  copper ; so it seemed to the priests that the monk had  kept too large a share, for himself; and it may therefore  -well have been that they had had some talk among them-  selves, which had been repeated to the monk.

When it was daylight i went to the priest, who had a  very sharp pain in his side and was spitting blood, whei'K:c  I imagined that it was an abscess. I advised him to  recognize the Pope as the father of all Christians, whicn he  at once did, vowing that if God should give him health he  would go throw himself at the Pope's feet, and would ask in  all good faith that the Pope should send his blessilig to  Mangu Chan. I advised him also to make restitution, if he  had anything belonging to another. He said he had  nothing. I spoke to him also of the sacrament o( extreme  unction. He replied : " We have not that custom, nor do  our priests know how to do it ; ^ I beg that whatever (344)  you do for me, you do it according as you know how to  do." I told him also of confession, which they do not

' Extreme unction is unknown to the Nestorians ; but the Chaldeans  Kave adopted it from the teaching of Rome (Badger, ii, 161).

2l8 rOURNEY OB'

make, lie spoke a few words in the car of a priest, one of  his associates ; after that he began to grow better, and he  asked nic to «;o to the monk. I went. At first tlic monk  would not come ; finally, on hearing that he was better, he  went with his cross ; and 1 went cariyirig the body of  Christ in the box of master William, having kept it from  Easter day at his request. Then the monk began to stamf)  upon him with his feet, and the other kissed his feet in all  humility. Then I said to him : *' It is a custom of the  Roman Church that sick persons partake of the body of  Christ, as a viatic and protection against all the toils of  the enemy. Here is the body of Christ which I have kept  from Easter day. You must confess and desire it.** Then  he said with great faith : " I desire it with all my heart."  And as I was about to expose it, he said with great  earnestness : " I believe that this is my Creator and  Saviour, who gave me life, and will give ft me again after  death at the general resurrection." And .so he received the  body of Christ. made by me, after the fashion of the Church  of Rome.

The monk remained with him after this, and gave him,  while I was away, I know not what potion. The next day  he began to suffer unto death. So taking some of their  oil, which they say is holy, I anointed him according to the  fashion of the Church, as he had asked me. I had not any of  our oil, for the priests of Sartach had kept everything. And  as we were about to repeat the prayers for the dying, and I  wanted to be present at his death, the monk sent me word  to go away, for if I should be pre.sent 1 could not enter  (345) Mangu Chan's house till the year was up. When I  mentioned this to his friends, they told m.e it wa3 true,  and they besought me to leave, .so as not to interfere  with the good I could promote.^

' Sec su^ra, p. So.

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 219

When he was dead, the monk said to me : ^* Care not  about it ; I have killed him with my prayers. He was the  only scholar, and was opposed to us. The others know  nothing. Howevex, ail of them, Mangu Chan included,  will come to our feet." Then he told me the above related  answer of the diviner, which I did not believe, so I asked  priests, friends of the deceased, if it were true. They said  that it was ; but whether he had been told beforehand, or  not, they did not know.

After this I discovered that the monk had called this  said Saracen diviner into his chapel with his wife, and had  had dust sifted and had them divine for him by it.^ He  had aTso a Ruthenian deacon with *him who divined for  him. When I had learned this, I was horrified at his  ignorance, and I told him : " Brother, a man who is full  of the Holy Ghost, who teaches all things, should not seek  answers or advice from diviners ; all such things are for-  bidden, and those who are given to them are excom-  municated." Then he began to excuse himself, saying  that it was not true that he sought such things. I was not,  hov/^ver, able to leave him, for I had been lodged there by

^ Crtdrari pulvereiiu This, apparently, is the well-known method of  detecting spirits or levils by strewing ashes around, when their  presence is ascertained by the appearance on the ashes of their  footprints. Tylor {Prim. Cult., ii, 197) mentions the prevalence of  ihi- belief in many countries, among others in England. " On St.  Mark's eve, he says (quoting Brand, Pop. Antiq.^ i, 193), ashes are to  be sifted over the hearth and the fooiprints will be seen of anyone  who is to die within the year." This form of divination is practised  among the Koreaws to discover the fate of a person who j'i dying.  T^hey place over the bow) in which they i<.eep the brine used with  their food a disli on which is strewn nnc ashes., and over this they  pJace a sieve. As soon as a person is dead, the siev.e is raised  and the ashes examined. If traces of small human feet are seen, the  deceased has gone 10 inhabit anothe;- hi.rnan form ; if the lines on the  aslies are serpentine or only fine lines, he has become a reptile or some  crawling or creeping beast, etc. The Greeks had a method o^divming  by flour, called (iAfi^po/xa.vrf^-i, but nothing is known about it CBouchC  Leejercq, Divination^ i, 182).

220 JOURNEY OF

order of the Chan, and I could not go elsewhere without his  special ordcr.^

|F the city of Caracarum"^ you must know that,  e elusive of the palace of the Chan, it is not as  big as the village of Saint Denis, and the mon-  astery of Saint Denis is ten times larger than the palace.

^ 'While this monk Sergius was an especially ignorant impostor,  the Armenian priesthood at that time and in later centuries do not  appear to have been much better. Vincent of Beauvais (bk. xxx, ch.  xcviii, 441a), says of them : " Manyof their priests arc given to divining,  by the inspection of grain, and such-like methods." Chardin (ii, 186,  viii, 116) says that the Armenians of his time were taught in their  childhood to say Christus^ to make the sign of the cross, and to  fast, and that this was about all their religious education. They were  very superstitious, and practised various modes of fortune-telling.  Tournefort (ii, 163, 164) speaks also of the deplorable ignorance of the  Armenian clergy in his time.

^ The name of this famous city is Mongol, Karn^ "black," and"  kuren^ "a camp," or properly "palling." It was founded in 1235 by  Ogodai, who called it Ordu Balik, or " the City of the Ordu,'* other-  wise "the Royal-City." Mohammedan authors says it took its name  of Karakorum from the mountains to the south of it, in which the  Orkhon had its source (d'Ohsson, ii, 64). The Chinese mention a  range of mountains from which the Orkhon flows, called Wu-te kien  shmi ( T'ang shii^ bk. 43b). Probably these are the same. Rashideddin  speaks of a tribe of Utikien Uigurs living in this country (Bretschneider,  Med. Geog.^ 191 ; d'Ohsson, i, 437). It would seem more probable  that the name of Karakorum, as applied by the Persian mediaeval  writers to these mountains, was taken from that'-of the city. The  Chinese transcribed the name Ha-la ho-iin, which in time was  abbreviated to Ho-iin., in which form the name is usually written in  Chinese works. The determination of the exact site of this city was for  many years a much-disputed question, but it appears to have been finally  settled in 1S89, by the "Russian traveller, N. Yadrintzef. The city,  according to him, stood on the left bank of the Orkhon river, about  thirty miles south of its confluence with the Urtu-Tamir, in 47° 15 N.  lat., and 102° 20' \^' E. long. The ruins cover an area of six miles in  circumference {Proc. Roy. Ceo. Soc.j xii, 424). The city within the  walls was not, however, large, Juvaini says the wall was half <i league  long, while Polo says it " was a city of some three miles in compass,  surrounded by a strong earthen wall. And beside it was a great  citadel, wherein is a fme palace in which the Governor resided"  (d'Ohsson, ii, 65; Yule, Marco Polo, i, 227, ii, 539^ In 1256 Mang^a  removed the capii^J of his empire 10 Shang-tu.or Kai-ping Fu, near the  present Dolon nor, m S.E. Mongolia, the Kcmenfu of Marco Polo (i, 26\

As Slated in a previous noic, the onlv houses inside the city

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RURRUCK. 221

There are two quarters in it ; one (346) of the Saracens in  which are the markets, and where a great many Tartars  gather , on account of the court, which is always near  this (city), and on account of the great ritimber of ambassa-  dors ; the other is the quarter of the Cathayans, all of  whom are artisans. Besides these quarters there are great  palaces, which are for the secretaries of the court. There  are there twelve idol temples of different rsations, two  mahummeries in which is cried the law of Machomet,^  and one church of Christians in the extreme end of the  city. The city is surrounded by a mud wall and has  iiii gates. At the eastern is sold millet and other kinds of  grain, which, however, is rarely brought there ; at the  western one, sheep and goats are sold ; at the southern,  oxen and carts are sold ; at the northern, horses are sold.  We arrived there following the court on the Sunday before  Ascension (7th May). The next day we, the monk and  all his household, were summoned by Bulgai, who is  the grand secretary and judge, and all the Envoys and  foreigners who were in the habit of frequenting the monk's  house; and we were separately called into Bulgai's presence,  first the monk, and we after him ; and they inquired most

were probably those of the Mohammedan and Chinese quarters,  and the yamens. The four principal marl-ets were, in all likeii-  hood, outside the gates, as is the present custom in all Chinese towns.  It was quite natural that grain, oxen and carts should be sold outside  the eastcin nnd southern gates, as they were brought from China and  the cultivated districts of Manchuria. Horses and sheep were brought  from the Kirghiz and Mongol pasture lands to the north and west,  juvaini says there arrived daily at Karakoram, for the use of the court  and ])Cople, 500 cart-loads of food and drink brought from different  parts of the empire (d'Ohsson, ii, 6$ ; see also Cordier, Sur In  position ik Ho-Iiii ; Ho worth, Hvitory^ i, pt. i, 182 ; Pailadius,  op. ciL, 1 J).

' Due inahiintiiicrie in quibus chDnatur lex Machomeii. The word  niahiiinmery^ or niahomcrie^ was in common use by writers of the time  of the Crusades to designate a UKisque. See Joinville (259), where  occurs the expression 'Me maistre mahomerie." in another passage  (389) our author speaks of the " s^ynagogues of the Saracen^.'*  Clamattir refers, of course, to the callmg to prayer of the uiuezzitis.

222 JOURNEY OF

minutely \vf\ence we were, why we had come, what was  our business. And this inquiry was made because it had been  reported to Mangu Chan that forty Hacsasins had entered  the city under various disguises to kill him. About this  time the lady of whom I have spoken ' had a relapse, and  sent for the monk, but he was unwilling to go and said :  '• She has called back the idolaters around her ; let them  cure her if they can. 1 shall go there no more."

On the eve of the Lord's Ascension (20th May) we went  into all the houses of Mangu Chan ; and I noticed that  when he was about to drink, they sprinkled (347) cosmos on  his felt idoii Then I said to the monk : " What is there  in common between Christ and Belial ? What share has  our Cross with these idol-s ? "

Furthermore, Mangu Chan has eight brothers; three uter-  ine, and five by the father. One of the uterine ones he sent  to the country of the Hacsasins, whom they call Mulidet,  and he ordered him to put them all to death. Another  came toward Persia and has already entered, it is believed,  the land of Turkie, and will thence send an army against  Baldach and against Vastacius. One of the others he sent  into Cathay, against those who do not yet obey him. His  youngest uterine brother, Arabuccha by name, he keeps  near him, and he holds the ordu of their mother, who was a  Christian, and William is his slave.'^ Few one of his own  l)rpthcrs by the father had captured him in Hungary, in a  city called Belgrade, where was also a Ncrman Bishop  from Jiclevile near Rouen, with the nephew of a bishop,

* See supra^ pp. 190, 192 ; and injra, p. 223.

^ Tului'b sons by Siurkukteni (or Siurkukiti-beighi, as the name is  also written) were Mangu, Kubilai, Hulajfu, and Arik-Boga. By his  other wives and concubines he is said to have had six sons (d'Ohsson,  ii, 6a, and Quatrcinere, op. cit., 85). Hulagu was sent againSt the  Ismaelians in 1253, Kubilai commanded in China. I do not know  who the other brotjier that was sent to Persia can have been. The MSS.  all read Mulibcl or Mulihet. 1 assun>e that these are purely clericiv  fci rors for Mi'liiict.

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 22 3

whom I saw in Caracarum.^ And he gave master  William to Mangu's mother, for she insisted greatly on  having him ; and when she died, master William became  the property of this Arabuccha, together with all the other  things belonging to the ordu of his mother, and through h'nfi  he became known to Mangu Chan, who after (348) the com-  pletion of the work of which 1 have spoken, gave this  master C iascot^ that is a thousand marks.

The day before Ascension (20th May), Mangu Chan said  he wanted to visit his mothei''s ordu, tor it was quite  near;^ and the, monk said he wanted to go with him and  bestow hi5 blessing on the soul of his mother. The Chan  gave his approval. In the evening of Ascension day r2ist  May) the before-mentioned lady {i.e., Cota) grew a great  deal worse, so that the chief of the diviners sent to the monk  ordering him not to beat his board. The next day, when  we left with all the court, the ordu of this lady remained  behind. When we came to the place for pitching camp, the  monk received orders to go farther away from the court  than he was wont, which he did. Then Arabuccha Came  out to meet his brother the Chan, and the monk and we  perceiving that he would have to pass beside us, advance<i  toward him with the cross. He recognized us, for he had  been previously to our oratory, and held out his hand and  made the sign of the cross at us like a bishop. Then

^ Belgrade on the Danube, the present capital of Servia. The  Mongols overran this country during their second expedition to  Europe. William Buchier was probably captured about 1242. There  is a Belleville-sur-mer in the present department of the Seine Inf^rieure,  of which Rouen is the capital. This nephew of the Norman bishop  may be the Englishman called Basil, referred to on p. 212.

'^ There were a number of palaces near Karakorum where the  emperors used to pass much of their time, among others Kerchagan,  a palace built in Persian style under Ogodai's reign, and distant froni  it a day's ride. Ormektua (the Sira Ordu of Pian de Carpine), where  the elections of emperors were held, was also less than a day^s ride  from the capital and the banks of Lake Keushe, another favourite  resort, were only some four days off (d'Ohsson, ii, 84).

224 JOURNEY OF

the monk got on a horse and followed Ivim, carrying some  fruit with him. f Ic (Arabuccha) alighted before the ordu of  his brother, to wait for him until he should return from the  chase. Then the monk got down too, and offered him his  fiuit, which he accepted. And there were seated beside  him two men of high rank at the court of the Chan, and  they were Saracens. Arabuccha, who knew of the enmity  which exists between the Christians and Saracens, asked  the monk if he knew these Saracens. Me replied: "I know  that they are dogs ; why have you got them beside  you?" " Why," the latter asked, ''do you (349) insult us,  when we have saio nothing to you ? " The monk said to  them : " It is true what I say, you and your Machomet  are low hounds." Then they began to blaspheme  against Christ, but Arabuccha stopped them saying  " You must not speak so, for we know that the Messiah  i5 God." In that very same hour there suddenly arose  such a violent wind 'throughout the whole country, that  j1 seemed as if devils were running through it, arid after  a little while there eame reports that that lady (Cota) was  dead.

The next day (22nd May; the Chan went back to his  court (at Caracarum) by another way than that by which  lie had come ; for it is one of their superstitions never to  come back by the same road by which thcV; go. And  furthermore, wherever he sets hfs camp, after his departure  no one hi ay pass through the place vvhtffe he has been,  neither on horseback nor on foot, so long as there are any  traces of the ftre which has been made there.

That day i>ome Sar'accns joined the monk on the roaa,  provoking aod diiJputing with him ; and they, having the  better of him, ajid he not knowing iiow else to def^ixl  his arguments, wanted to Strike them with the whip he  ijad tn his hand, Jde behaved so that his words and  actions were reported to the court, and orders were

FRiAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 225

given us to get dov/11 (to camp) with the other ambassa-  dors, and not in front of tlie court as we were in the habit  of doin»'

(350)

'^^'^B^-^ MAD been constantly hoping that the king of  i'-^jfc^ 11 cTrncnia would come.-^ Moreover, there had  ariivcd about Easter a person from Boiat, where  are those Germans, whom I had nearly gone there to see,'^  and he had told me that a German priest was about  coming to court : for these reasons I did not make any  inquir es of Mangu about our remaining or leaving, though  he had only giver» us perjuission in the first place to stay  tiicre two months- and four months had already gone by,  not to say five. For tliehc things r(;ok place about the end  of May, and v> c had bcci^ there during the whole of  January. Feb^i.'^^■y, March, April, and May. JS'ot hearing,  however ajny ne'>v.s (A the king (oi Hermcuia' or of this  priest, and fearing lest we be obliged to go bad: in winter,  the beveritv ot" which we had experienced, I had inquir\'  made of Mangu Chan what he wanted to do with us. for  we would willingly remain there permanently, if it pleased  him ; if, however, we must go back, it would be less trying  for us to do so in summer than in winter. He at once  sent me word not to absent myself, for he wanted to  speak to me ; he would send for the son of master

^ Heythum L, King of Little Armenia, left his capital, Sis in Cilicia,  for the camp of Mangu in 1254. He travelled by way of Sartach's  and Batu's camps, thence through the Kara-Khitai and Naiman  countries to Mangu's camp, near Karakorum, which he reached on the  13th September, »254. He started on his return journey on the ist  November of the same year, and arrived in Little Armenia in eight  months, />., in July, 1255. The Armenian narrative of his journey has  bcfen translated b^ Klaproth {Journ. Asiat., xii., 463 et scg.), and by  Dulaurier {Journ. Asiat.^ v' serie, xi, 273, et aeq.). A valuable abstract  IS also given by Bretschne/dc {Med. O^Oi^., 297-302).

'^ See supra^ pp. 136 7.

226 JOURNKY OF

William, for my dragoman was not competent. He who  was speaking with me was a Saracen, and had been an  envoy to Vastacius. And he, having been bribed with  presents, had advised Vastacius to send ambassadors to  Mangu Chan, and that in the meanwhile time would pass ;  for Vastacius believed that they {i.e., the Mongols) were  about to invade his country at once. He sent, and  when he had come to know them, he heeded tiiem little,  nor did he make a peace with them, nor have they yet  entered his country ; nor could they do so, «^o long as he  dares defend himself. For they have never conquered arv  country by force of arms, but only by deceit ; and it is  because men make peace with them, that they work their  ruin under cover of this peace. Then (this Saracen) inquired  a great deal (351) about the Pope and the king of the French,  and concerning the roads leading to them. The monk, hear-  ing this, cautioned me, unobserved, not to answer him, lor he  wanted to get himself sent as ambassador ; so I was silent,  and would answer him nothing And he spoke to me I  know not what injurious terms, for which the Nestorian  priests wished to bring a charge against him, and he would  have been put to death or soundly beaten ; but I would nor  have it.

The next day, which was Sunday before Pentecost (24th  May), they took me to court ; and the grand secretaries or  the court came to me, and one was the Moal who handed  the Chan his cup, and the others were Saracens, and they  inquired on the part of the Chan wh\- I had come. Then  i repeated u hat has previously been said ; how I had come  to Sartach, and from Sartach to Baatu, and how Baatu had  sent me thither ; then I said to him : " I Imve nothing to  .sa\' from the part of any man. (This \\e oust have known  from what Baatu had written to him. I have only tu  speak the words of God, if he wishes t(^ hear them." The\  interrupted me, asking what words of God I wished to

FKIAR WILl-tAM OF RUBRUCK. 227

Speak, thinking' that I wanted to foretell some piece of  good fortune to him, as many others do. I replied to them :  " If you want me to speak the words of God to him, pro-  cure for me the interpreter." They said : " We have sent  for him ; but speak (now) through this one as well as you  can ; we understand you very well." And they urged me  greatly that I should speak. So I said : " Of him unto  whom much has been given much shall be required. And  furthermore, of him to whom much (352) has been given  much love is required. By these words of God I teach  Mangu, for Cod hath given him great power, and the riches  which he has were not given him by the idols of the  Tuins, but by Almighty God, who rhade heaven and earth,  in whose hand are all kingdoms, and who removes it {i.e.,  power) from one nation to another on account of the sins  of men. So if he shall love Him, it shall be well with him ;  if otherwise, he must know that God will require all things  of him to the last farthing." Then one of the Saracens  said : " Is there anyone who does not love God ? " I  replied : " God says : * I f one love me, he keepeth my  commandments ; and he who loveth me not keepeth not  my commandments.'^ So he who keepeth not the com-  mandments of God loveth not God." Then he said :  " Have you been to heaven, that you know the command-  ments of God ? " " No," I replied, *' but He has given  them from heaven to holy men, and finally He descended  from heaven to teach us, ^nd we have them in the Scrip-  tures, and we see by men's works when they keep them or  not." Then he ^aid : "Do you wish, then, to say that  Mangu Chan does not keep the commandments of God ? "  I said to him : " Let the dragoman come, as you have said,  and I will, in the presence of .Mangu, if it pleases him,  recite the commandments of God, and he shall judge for

^ Gospel accordiftg (o Jokny XIV. ^ 1^,-2^ (yuXgaXG).

Q2

228 JOURNKY OF

himself whether he keeps them or not." Then they went  away, and told him that I had said that he was an idolater,  or Tuin, and that he did not keep God's commandments.

The next day (25th May) (the Chan) sent his secretaries  to me, who said : " Our lord sends us to you to say that you  are here Christians, Saracens and Tuins. And each of you  says that his doctrine is the best, and his writings — that is,  book.s — the truest So he wishes that you shall all meet  together, and make a comparison, each one writing down  his precepts, so that he himself m^y be able to know the  truth." Then I said : " Blessed be God, (353) who put this  in the Chan's heart. But our Scriptures tell us, the servant  of God should not dispute, but should show mildness to  all ; so 1 am ready, without disputation or contention, to  give reason for the faith and hope of the Christians, to the  best of my ability." They wrote down my words, and  carried them back to him. Then it was told the Nestorians  that they should look to themselves, and write down what  they wished to say, and likewise to the Saracens, and in  the same way to the Tuins.

The next day (26th May) he again sent secretaries, who  said : "Mangu Chan wishes to know why j^ou have come to  these parts." I replied to them : *' He must know it by  Baatu's letters." Then they said : " The letters of Baatu  have been lost, and he has forgotten what Baatu wrote  to him ; so he would know from, you." Then feeling safer  I said : " It is the duty of our faith to preach the Gospel to-  all men. So when 1 heard of the fame of the Moal people, I  was desirous of coming to them ; and while this desire was on  me, we heard that Sartach was a Christian. So I turned  my footsteps toward him. And the Ic^rd king of the French  sent him letters containing kihdly words, and among other  things he bore witness to what kind of men we were, and  requested that he would allow us to remain among the men  of Moal. Then he {i.e., Sartach) sent us to Baatu. and

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 229

Baatu sent us to Mangu Chan ; so we have begged him,  and do again beg him, to permit us to remain."

They wrote all these things down, arid carried it back to  him on the mojrow.

Then he again sent them to me, saying : " The Chan  knows well that you have no mission to him, but that  you have come to pray for him, like other righteous priests ;  but he would know if ever any ambassadors from you have  come to us, or any of ours gone to you." Then I told  them all about David and Friar Andrew, and they, putting  it all down in writing, reported it back to him.

Then he again sent them to me, saying : (354^ " You have  stayed here a long while ; (the Chan) wishes you to go back to  your own country, and he has inquired whether you will take  an ambassador of his with you." I replied to them : " 1 would  not dare take his envoys outside his own dominions, for  there is a hostile country between us and you, and seas and  mountains ; and I am but a poor monk ; so I would not  venture to take them under my leadei-ship."' And they,  having written it a^l down, went back.

Pentecost eve came (30th May). The Nestorians had  writteti a whole chronicle from the creation of the world  to the Passion of Christ ; and passing over the Passion,  they had touched on the Ascension and the resurrection of  the dead and on the coming to judgement, and in it there  were some censurable statements, which I poiiUed out to  them. As for us, we simply wrote out the symbol of the  ma.ss, " Credo in ununi Drum!' Then I asked them how they  wished to proceed. They said they would discuss in the  first place with the Saracens. I showed them that that was  not a good plan, for the Saracens. agreed with us in saying

^ Conf. siipra^ p. 29, the reasons given by Friar John of Pian de  Carpine for not taking Mongol envoys back with him. Rubruck may  probably have thought the same, especially in view of what he had  been told by William iJuchief's adopted son {supra, p. j8o;.

2^0 JOURNEY OF

that there is one God : " So you have (in them) a help  against the Tuins." They agreed with this. Then I a$ked  them if they knew how idolatry had arisen in the world,  and they were in ignorance of it. Then I told them, and  they said : "Tell them these things, then let us speak, for  it is a difficult matter to talk through an interpreter."  I said to them : " Try how you will manage against them ;  I will take the part of the Tuins, and you will, maintain  that of ihe Christians. We will suppose I belong to that  sect, because they say that God is not ; now prove that God  is." For there is a sect there which says that whatever*  spirit (ammo) and whatever virtue is in anything, is the  God of that thing, and that God exists not (355) otherwise.  Then the Nestorians were unable to prove anything, but  only to tell what the Scriptures tell. I said : ** They do not  believe in the Scriptures ; you tell me one thing, and they  tell another." Then I advised them to let me in the first  place meet them, so that, if I should be confounded, they  would still have a chance to speak ; if th .y should be con-  founded, I should not be able to get a hearing after that  They agreed to this.

We were assembled then on Pentecost eve at our oratory,  and Mangu Chan sent three secretaries who were to be  umpires, one a Christian, one a Saracen, and one a Tuin ;  and it was published aloud : " This is the order of Mangu,  and let no one dare say that the commandment of God  differs from it. And he orders that no one shall dare  wrangle or insult any other, or make any noise -by which  this business shall be interfered with, on penalty of his  head." Then all were silent. And there-was a great con-  course of people there ; for each side had called thither  the most learned of its people, and many otners had also  assembled.

Then the Christians put me in the middle, 'telling the  Tuins to speak with me. Then they — and there was .1

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 23 1

great congregation of them— began to murnriur against  Mangu Chan, for no other Chan had ever attempted to pry  into their secrets. Then they opposed to me one who had  come from Cathay, and who had his interpreter ; and I had  the son of master William, who began by (356) saying to  me : " Friend, if you think you are going to be hushedup  {conclusus), look for a more learned one than yourself"  1 remained silent. Then (the Tuin) inquired by what I  wished to begin the discussion, by the subject how the  world was made, or what becomes of the soul after death.  I replied to him : "Friend, this should not be the beginning  of our talk. All things proceed from God ; He is the  fountain-head of all things ; so we must first speak of God,  of whom you think differently from us, and l\Tangu Chan  wishes to know who holds the better belief." The umpires  decided that this was right.

He wished to begin with these questions, as they con-  sider them to be the weightest ; for they all hold this  heresy of the Manichaeans, that one half of things is evil,  and the other half good, and that there are two (elemental)  principles ;^ and, as to souls, they believe that all pass from  one body into another. Thus a most learned priest among  the Nestorians questioned ine (once) concerning the souls  of animals, whether they could escape to any place where,  after death, they woulc^ not be forced to labour. In confir-

^ The whole Manichaean system is one of uncompromismg dualism.  Mani co-ordinates good with light, e\-il with darkness — redemption is  the physical process of freeing the clement ligiit from the darkness. He  distinguishes two elemental l>eings, light (Friar William sa)S ** good ")  and darkness (evil). He did not profess a doctrine of transmigration  (Harnack, Ency. Brit.^ xv, 483, 484). If Friar Wiliiam's adversary  was, as I think he was, an Uigur, this statement of their creed is  additionally interesting, «is the discussion shows it was an extraordinary  jumble of Manichaeism, and of various forms of Buddh'sm, wiih  perhaps a slight infusion of Chinese philosophicid ruAions. Our author  says his adversary came from China, not that he was Chinese.  Infra^ p. 234, he says, however, that the Uigurs ('perhaps only some of  them) l^elieved in one God.

232 JOURNEY OF

mation furthermore of this error", as I was told by master  Wiihain, there had been brought from Cathay a boy who,  from the ^ivie of his body, was not more than twelve years  old, but who was capable of all forms of reasoning;, and  who said of himself that he had been incarnated three  times ; he knew how to read and write/

So I said to the Tuin : "We oeUeve firmly in our  hearts and we confess with our mouths that God is,  and that there is only one Grod, one m perfect unity.  What do you belie Ve ? " He said : " Fools say that  there is oaly one God, but the wise say that there are

^ Friar William iS the first western traveller to mention incarnate  lamas, or, as it is Jiow the custoiu to call them from the Chinese name  (/luo Fo) " Living Buddhas," a peculiar feature of Buddhist develop-  ment only found m the religion of Tibet. The system of reincarnation  of saints, or Bodhisattwas, founded on a perfectly sound Buddhist  theory, assun^ed its peculiar Tibetan form, not earlier, I am inclined  to think, than the eleventh century, with the teaching in Tibet of  Atisha, or nis disciple Bromton, but it never took any very great  extension among the old lamaist school or Nyima sect. It \>as only  after tht great lama reformer Tsonghapa had founded in the early  part of the fourteenth centur>- the Gelug, or ''yellow-capped sect^"  that Living Buddhas became numerous, the two principal oni s being  the FaM lama and the Pan-chen lama. 'Ihe first Tale lama was  bo-n in a.D 1391 the first Pan-chen lama in A.D. 1567. The third  great incarnate lama is the Taranata laiKa, or Jebtsun damba lama  of Urga in Mongolia; the first appearance of this incarnation was in  the sixteenth centur)'. There are at present about 160 incarnate  lamas in Mongolia, Tibet, and China, all of them bearing the, Mongol  title oi khjibi/k/ia77 {^rononnctii /luHf/ian) t Sarat Chandra Das, Indian  Pandits, 62, /6; Sheng-wu chi, v. ig ; Rockhill, yi7//r. Roy. Asiat.  Soc.y 1891, 279, 285, ^^ seg. ; and Land of the Lamas^ 290).

When Rubnick was in Mongolia, Tibetan Buddhism had just made  its appeararce in that country. Saskya Pandiia, the first Tibetan lama  of any prommence to go thither, vijsited Kuyuk Khan in 1247 ; but  it was not until the Emperor Kubilai's reigfi that lamaism was firmly  established among the Mongols. Mangu, it is true, appointed (probably  in 1 247 or 1252) a Tibetan lama named Namo, chief of his religion in the  empire, just as he appointed a Chinese hoshang called K'ai-yuan, head  of ecclesiastical affairs in China ; but it was Kubilai who gave pre-  eminence to the lamas. Our traveller states that ihc Living Buddha  that Master William saw had come from China some years before.  Jt maybe thai he came with Saskya Pandita ; but 1 am rather inclined  to believe that he came from Tangut, the present north-western Kan-su,  where lamaism had been firmly established long before by the Tibrtans.  The remark that he was in his third reincarnation is also very inter-  esting (aee Howorth, History^ 1, Pt. j, 188, 504;.

FRIAR WILITAM OF RUBRUCK. 233

many. Are there not great lords in your country, and is  not this Mangu Chan a greater lord ? So it is of them, for  they are different in different regions."

I said to him : " You choose a poor example, in which  there is no comparison between man and God ; according  to that (357) every mighty man can call himself god in his  own country." And as I was about to destroy the com-  parison, he interrupted me, -asking: "Of what nature is  your God, of whom you say that there is none other ? "  I replied : "Our God, besides whom there ts none other,  is omnipotent, and therefore requires the aid of none  other, while all of us require His aid. It is not thus with  man No man can do everything, and so there must be  several lords in the world, for no one can do all thmg5.  So likewise He knows all things, and therefore requires  no councillor, for all wisdom comes of Him. Likewise, He  is ih'e supreme good, and wants not of our goods. But we  live, move, and are in Him. Such is our God, and one  must net consider Him otherwise."

" It is not so," he replied. " Though there is one (God)  in the sky who 'is above all others, and of whose origin we  arc still ignorant,^ there are ten others under him, and  under these latter is another lower one. On the earth  they are in infinite number." And as he wanted to spin  (texere) some other yarns, I asked him of this highest god.  whether he believed he was omnipotent, or whether (he  believed this) of some other god. Fearing to answer, he  asked : " If your God is as you say, why does he make the  half of things evil ?"2 '* That is not true," I said. " He who  makes evil is not God. All things that are, are good."  At this all the Tuins v^^ere astonished, and they wrote it

^ Cujus generntionem adhuc ignoramus. This is a purely Buddhist  theory, referring. I lake it, to the.iprimordial.br Adhibuddha, and the  evoived Dhyanibuddhas, Bodhisattwas, etc.

' A Manichac-an theory, see supra^ p. 231-;

2 34 JOURNEY OF

down as false or impossible. Then he asked : '" Whence  then comes evil ? " " You put your question badly," I  said. 'You should in the first place inquire what is evil,  before you ask whence it comes. But let us go back to  the first question, whether you believe that any god is  omnipotent ; after that I will answer all you may wish to  ask me."

(358) lie sat for a long time witHjut replying, so that it  became necessary for the secretaries who were listening on  the part of the Chan to tell him to reply. Finally he  answered that no god was omnipotent. With that the  Saracens burst out into a loud laugh. When silence was  restored, I said : " Then no one of your gods can save you  you from every peril, for occasions may ari.se in whioh  he has no power. Furthermore, no one can serve two  masters : how can you serve so many gods in heaven  and eat-th?" The audience told him to answer, but he  remained speechless. And as I wanted to explain the  unity of the divine essence and the Trinity to the whole  audience, the Nestorians of the country said to me that it  sufficed, for they wanted to talk. I gave in to them, but  when they wanted to argue with the Saracens, they  answered them : " We concede your religion is true, and  that everything is true that is in the Gospel : so we do  not want to argue any point with you." And they con-  fessed that in all their prayers they besought God to grant  them to die as Christians die.

There was present there an old priest of the lugurs, who  say there i- one god, though they make idob , they (/>.,  the Xestorians spoke at great length with him, telling him  of all things down to the coming of the Antichrist into the  world, and by comparisons demonstrating the Trinity tc  him ixnd the Saracens. They all listened without making  any contradiction, but no one said : " I believe ; I w^it to  b'iomr a Christian." When this was over (359). the

FRIAR WfLLL^M OF RUBRUCK. 235

Nestorians as well as the Saracens sang with a loud voice  while the Tuins kept silence, and after that they all drank  deeply

|N Pentecost day (jist May) Mangu Chan called me  M/^ before him, and also the Tuin with whom I had  discussed ; but before I went in, the interpreter,  master William's son, said to me that we should have logo  back to our country, and that I must not raise any objec-  tion, for he understood that it was a settled matter. When  I came before the Chan, I had to bend the knees, and  so did the Tuin beside me, with his interpreter. Then  (the Chan) said to me : " Tell me the truth, whether you  said the other day, when J sent my secretaries to you,  that I was a Tuin." I replied : " My lord, I did not  say that ; I will tell you what I said, if it pleases you."  Then I repeated to him what I had said, and he replied :  I thought full well that you did not say it, for you  should not have said it ; but your interpreter translated  badly." And he held out toward me the staff on which  he leaned, saying : " Fear not." And I, smiling, said in  an undertone : "If I had been afraid, I should not have  come liere." He asked the interpreter what I had said,  and he repeated it to him. After that he began confiding  to me his creed : " We Moal," he said, '* believe that  there is only one God, by whom we live and by whom  we die, and for whom we have an upright heart."  Then .1 said : " May it be so, for without His grace this  cannot be." He asked what I had said ; the interpreter  told him. Then he added : " But as God gives us the  different fingers of the hand, so he givts to men divers  ways. God gives you the Scriptures, and you Christians*  keep them not You do not find (in them, for example)  that one should find fauU with another, do vou?" "No,

tjfi JOURNEY OF

w\y lord," I said ; " but I told you from the first that I did  not want to wrangiC (360) with anyone." " I do not intend  to say it." he said, " for you. Likewise you do not find  that a mar should depart from justice for money." ** No,  my lord," I said. " And truly I came not to these parts to  obtain money ; on the contrary I have refused what has  been offered me." And there was a secretary present, who  bore witness that I had refused an iascot and silken cloths.  " I do not say it," he said, " for you. God gave you there-  fore the Scriptures, and you do not keep them ; He gave us  diviners, we do what they tell us, and we live in peace "^

' The Pien weiiu^ a Chinese Buddhist work, puts in the month of  Mangu the following opinion of the various religious sects of his lime : —  ^* The Hsien-sheng (Taoists) say that their teaching is the highest ;  the M5iu-ts\ii (Literati} say that Confucianism is the first of doctrines ;  he lieh'hsieh (here meaning Christians), who honour the Messiah,  believe in celestial life ; and the Damishtnends ( iMoIlahs) pray to  heaven and thank it for its blessmgs. If all these religions are cave-  fully examined, one will see that no one of them can be compared  with Buddhism." Saying this, the Khan held up his hand to make ^  comparison, and said : ** As the five fingers are as regards the palm  of the hand from which they project, so arc all other religions ascom-  pared to Buddhism" (Devena. Notes d^ «epigraphies 46).

The Russian archbishop V-eter, in 1245, stated to the Council of  Lyons regarding the Mongols' leiigion that "every morning they raised  their hands to heaven, adoring the Creator,'' Matth. Paris {op.cit.^'w^  388) and Pian de Carpine (618 ct seq.) lemark : " They believe in one  God, who they say is the maker of all things visible and invisible ;  a lid they believe that He is the author of all blessings in this world as  well as of punishments ; Inu they do not worship Him with prayers or  songs of praise or any ceremony whatever.' Marco Polo (i, 248) says  of them: "They say there is a Most High God of Heaven, whom  they worship daily with thurible and incense, but they pray to him  only for health of body." PaUadius {op, cii.^ 14), commenting on this  passage, says : "The God of Heaven is eviden-tly the Tengri of the  Mongols, the highest objeci of their worship. They used to apply  to it the epitheL of Dere^ 'Supreme,' and Munkc^ 'Eternal.' Ihe  afifinity of the Sliaman idea of heaven with that of tl>e Chinese is  indubitable. It does not appear, however, that Sliainanism admits  the idea of a personified and mtclligent supreme being, similar to that  existing in China, v,here this idea has inspired some thinkers, and  raised their minds to high rspiritital conceptions." Radlofi {Atts  Sibirien, ii, 3), speaking of the faith of the Shamans, says tney teach  that " before the earth and liea\'cn wee made, .ill was vvatcr ; the earth  was not, heaven existed not, the sun and moon were not. Then  Tengerti Kaira Khan, the; highest of gods, the beginning of all crea-

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUKRUCK 237

He drank four times, I believe, before he hnished saying  all this. And I was listening attentively for him to say  something else of his creed, when he be^an talking of my  return journey, saying : " You have stayed here a long  while ; I wish you to go back. You have said that you  would not dare take my ambassadors with you ; will  you take my words, or my letters?" And from that  time I never found the opportunity nor the time when I  could show him the Catholic Faith. For no one can  speak in his presence but so much as he wishes, unless  he be an ambassador; for an ambassador can say what-  ever he chooses, and they always ask if he wishes to  say something more. As for me, it was not allowed  me to speak more ; I had only to listen to him, and  reply to his questic ns. So I answered him that he should  make me understand his words, and have them put down  in writing, for I would willingly take them as best I could.  Then he asked me if I wanted gold or silver or costly  clothing. I said : " We take no such things ; but we have  no travelling money and without your assistance we can-  not get out of your country." He (361) said : " T will have  you given all you require while in my possessions ; do you  want anything more?" I replied: "That suffices us."  Then he asked : " How far do you wish to be taken ? ' I  said : " Our power extends to the country of the king of  Hermenia ; if we were (escorted) that far, it would suffice  me." He answered : " I will have you taken that far : after  that look out for yourself" And he added : " There are  two eyes in the head ; but though they be two, they have

tion, the Father and the iMother of the hun.an race, created in the first  olace a being lesembling himself, and called him Kishi, or Man."

As to the early Mongols' conreptiua of a future life, the only writer  who has referred to the subject is Pian de Carpine (625). He there  says : " As to life eternal and perpetual damnation they know nothing ;  they believe, however, that after this they will live in another world,  and that there" they will increase their flocks, eat and drink, and do  everything else that is done by living beings in this world.''

238 JOURNEY OF

but one sight, and when one turns its glance there goes  the other. You came from Baatu, and so you must go  back by way of him." When he had said this, I asked per-  mission of him to speak. " Speak," he said. Then I said :  " My lord, we are not men of war. We wish that those  should have dominion over the world who rule it most  justly, in accordance with the will of God. Our office is to  teach men to live after the will of God. For that we have  come here, and willingly would we remain here if it pleased  you. Since it pleases you that v.^e go back, that must  then be. I will go back, and 1 will carry your letters as  well as I can, as you have ordered. I would ask of yotr  majesty that since I shall carry your letters, I may also  corne back to you with your consent ; principally because  you have poor slaves at Bolat, who are of our tongue,^ and  who ha/p no priest to teach them and their sons their  religion, and willingly would I remain with them." Then  he replied : " If your masters should send you back to me  (you will be welcome)." I said : " My lord, I know not  the will of my masters j but I have their permission to go  wherever I wish, where it is needful to preach the word of  God ; and it seems to me that it is very needful in these  l>arts ; so (362) whether he sends back envoys by us or not,  if it pleases you I 'will come back."

Then he rem-ained silent and sat for a lon^ time as if  thinking, and the interpreter told me to speak no more.  So I waited anxiously for what he would reply. Finally  he said : "You have a long way to go, comfort yourself  with food, so that you may reach your country in good  health." And he had me given to drink, and then I went

^ Qui sunt lift f^ue nostre. It has been supposed from this remaric  that Rubruck's language was Dutch, Flemish, or German. I fancy he  said what he did to Mangu, knowing that he had not a very clear or  correct knowledge of the different languages spoken in Western  Euiope, and wished him only to understand that he was of the same  race as these slaves. On Uolat, see supra^ p. 138.

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 239

out from before him, and after that I went not back again.  If I had had the power to work by signs and wonders like  Moses, perhaps he Vvould have humbled himself.^

HEIR diviners are, as (Mangu Chan) confessed to  me, their priests ;- and whatever they say must  be done is executed without delay. I will tell  you of their office, as well as I could learn about it  from master William and others who used to speak truth-  fully to me. They are very numerous, and aJways have a  captain, like a pontiff» who always places his dwelling  before the principal tiouse of Mangu Chan, at about a  stone's tl row from it. Under his custody are,, as I havo-  previously said, the carts on which the idols are carried.  The others come after the ordu in positions assigned to  them ; and there come to them from various parts of the  world people who believe in iheir art. Some among them

^ Haiihon {Hist. Orient.^ 38, '39) ijays that Mangu, his whole family,  and a number of the great personages of his court, were actually  baptised by the Armenian bishop who accompanied Heythum I. to  Mangu's court in 1253. The writer's pardonable desire to magnify in  the eyes of posterity the influence of this member of his family with  the Mongol emperor is probably the only ground for this assertion.

- Friar William (259) has given us the native name of these  diviners, chant., whicli he wrongly states is the same as that borne  ijy their sovereigns. The word Kam has always been used by  all peoples of the Turki and Tartar races to designate their doeters,  quacks and magicians, the " medicine-men " of the American Indians.  It occurs in this sense in the Kudatku Bilik^ the earliest monument of  Turkish literature, dating from A.D. 1069. The Beltire Tartars still  have thejr KaJnen^ those of Ivachinzi their Kamnoe^ the Kirghiz their  Kamtscha, and the Manchus their Shatnas, whence we derive our word  Shaman (Pallas, Voyages^ \ 620, iii, 433, iv, 509, 579; Radloff, Aus  Siberien. ii, 67 ; Hyacinthe, Chamanismey 289, et seq.\ Armenian  chronicles of the thirteenth century attribute to the Mongol women  great powers as witches. " Their women, they say, bewitched every-  thing. It is only after the decision of their sorcerers and magicians,  and after they have made their oracles, that they start on their  marches'' (Dulauher, op. cit.^ 250).^ The knowledge of astronomy  which our traveller says. the Shamans at the Mongol court possessed.  was unusual ; it was probably gained from the Chinese.

240 JOURNF.V OF

know something of nstronomy, pariicularly the chief, «ind  they predict to them the ecHpses of the sun and moon ,  and when one is about to take place all the people lay in  their tood, for they must not go out of the door of thcii  dwelling. And while the eclipse is taking place, they sound  drums and instruments, and make a great noise and  clamour. After the eclii)se is over, they give themselves  to drinking and feasting, and make great 'jollity. They  predict lucky and unlucky days for the undertaking of  all affairs ; and so it is that they never assemble an arm)-  nor begin a war without their assent (363), and long since  (the Moal) would have gone b.tck to Hungary, but the  diviners will not allow it ^

All things which are sent to the court they take between  fires, and for this they retain a certain portion of them  They also cleanse all the bedding of deceased persons by  taking them between fires. For when anyone dies, the}-  put aside all that belongs to him. and they are not  allowed to the other people of the ordu until they have  b«en purified by fires. This 1 saw in connection with the  ordu of that lady who died while we were there. Ou  aeeount ^f tiiis (custom) there was a double reason why  Filar Andrew and his companion should have gone between  hres i they bore presents, and they were destined for onr  who was .already dead, Keu Chan. Nothing of the sort  wais^ requifed of me, because 1 brought nothing. If any  animal orany other thing falls to the ground while passing  between the fires, it is theirs ^

^ The belief that eclipses are brongfht about by a dragon or some  oihcr monster attempting' to swallovV the 5un or moon, is pcencrai ovec  mo9t of Asia, find in many other parij of the world. The Mon;^ols,  Chinese, and Tibetans of the present day, believe that the dragon can  ()«• driven away, and iht calamity a\eried, by making a great nois^.

' Th€ earliest mention of this method ot purifying among Asiatics  is found in Mcnanders account of Zemarchus' nnssion to the Turks in  A.D. 569 (see Meuander 227, and \'ule, Cafha/^ clxiii). in the

FRIAK WILLIAM OF KUBRUCK. 24 1

On the ninth day of the month of May, they get together  all the white horses of the herds, and consecrate them>

seventh century we hear of its prevalence in Japan, where it was  customary for a newly-married woman to straddle over {k'uaj fire l)c-  fore entering her husband's house (Ma Tuan-lin, bk. 324, 15). Pian de  Carpine (627) says of the Mongols ; " They believe that everything is  purified by fire ; so when there come to them ambassadors, or princes  or other persons, they and the presents they bear must pass between  fires, so that they shall be purified, lest otherwise they should do  some bewitching or bring some poison or some evil. Likewise, if  fire falls from heaven on the flocks or men, which happens frequently,  or if something of the kind befalls them which they deem unlucky,  they must in like way dispel it by incantations. In fact, nearly all  their hope is in such things." He describes (632) the method of  purifying by fire as follows : " They make two fires, and place two  spears beside the fires, and a cord across the top of the spears, and on  this cord they tie bits of buckeram ; and underneath the cord and the  rags, and between the two fires, men, beasts, and teAts must pass.  And there are two women, one on one side, the other on the other,  who sprinkle water and sing channs ; and if any cart breaks down  while passing through here, or anything falls to the ground, the  sorcerers take it '' (see also V. M, Mikhailov, Journ. Anthrop. hist.y  xxiv, 89 ; E. B. Tylor, Pi-imitive Culture^ i, 85 ; Gombojew, op. ctt.^  661, and siipra^ pp. 9 and 35).

Of the other superstitions of the early Mongols, Pian de Carpine  (624) says : " Tl>ough as to justice and wrong doings they have no law,  nevertheless they'have certain traditions handed down to them from  their forefathers, which establish certain things as wrong domgs. One is,  to put a knife in the fire, or to touch the fire in any way with a knrfe ;  or to take meat out ol the kettle with a knife. Another is to chop  wood v.ith an axe near the fire, for they think the head of the fire  would be taken off by so doing {quod sic auferri debcat caput igni).  Likewise, to lean on a whip used to strike a horse (for they use not spurs).  So likewise tc touch arrows with a whip ; to catch or kill young birds ;  tc strike a horse with a bridle ; to break a bone on another ; to spill  'jn th^ ground milk or any other drink or food ; to urinate in a tent ;  and if this done voluntarily, the person is put to death, but if otherwise  he must pay the diviner a large sum of money for purifying them,  and milking the tent and all of them pass between two fires. Anc  before the tent has thus been purified, no one dares enter it or take  anything out of it. Likewise, if one takes a piece in his mouth and  cannot chew it and spits it out, they make a hole underneath the tent,  take him out by it and at once put him to death" (see Gombojew,  653, and conf. Vambery, Sketches of Central Asia, 292 : and E. B.  Tylor, Early History., 277).

^ Maroo Polo (i, 291) refers to this feast, whicli m his time was cele-  brated on the 28tb of August. See also Yule's remarks m. Marco Polo  (), 300). ?iiUd.s {l^'cyaj^es, iv, 579) sa>'^ : "The most solemn least of  ihe Tariav5 cf KaCbinzi and other idolatrous Tartars is the Ju/i or  spring feast, in the month of June, which they call on that account  UlU'Shilker-cii. . . After the first (partial and private; feasts,

several (Jius meet together for a public sacrifice. ... In the public

242 JOURIsIEY OF

And the Christian priests are obhged to come to this with  their censer. Then they sprinkle new cosjhos on the ground  and hold a great feast on that day, for they consider that  they then first drink new cosmos, just as in some places  among us is done with wine (364) at the feast of Bartholo-  mew or Syxtus, and with fruit at the feast of James and  Christopher.

They (/>., the Kant) are also called in- when a child is  born, to tell its fortune ;^ and when anyone sickens they  are called, and they repeat their incantations, and tell  whetlier it is a natural malady or one resulting from  witchcraft. And in this connexion that wpman of Metz, of  whom I have spoken, told me a most remarkable thing.

Once some valuable furs were presented, which were to  be deposited in the ordti of her mistress, who was a Chris-  tian, as I have previously said ; and the diviners carried  them bet .veen fires, and took of them more than they should  have done. A certain servant-woman who had charge of  the treasure of this lady, accused them of this to her  mistress ; so the lady reproved them. Now it happened

sacrifices they have present one of their Katns, or magicians. It is he  who blesses the horse which is to be used as a holocaust. They caj?  this horse /stk. They choose for this purpose an isabel or iron-grey  one. Jt is, liowever, the magician who makes the choice of colour ;  but they may not take a stallion. This ceremony only takes place  when the Kam orders it, and thinks it necessary for the well-being of  the herds. As soon as a horse has become istk, they renew with him  each spring the same ceremony with the feast of the yi^/i. They wash  him with iniik or a decoction of absinth, and perfume him with this  p>lant. They plait strips of red and white stuff into his mane and tail,  and ieave him in complete liberty. His master may only mount him  aftei snow has failei», ihen he must use him." 'Ra.^Xoii {Aus Siberien^  U 3?^) describes this feast in about the same terms ; he only differs in  hi;^ statement that the ,zstk is always a stallion or a mare. Pian de  Carpine (620^ :-^cms 10 refer to the isik when he says that the Tartars  " offered horses to their deceased emperors, which no one dared  iTwxi'^t AS long as they lived."

* The custom ef having a child's horoscope cast is nearly every-  where observed 5n Asia, and is so well known that no confirmation of  our ittuhor's si.i'emenl !s necessary ; see, however, Ploss, Das Kinti^ i,

FRI^R WILLIAM OF KOBRUCK. 243

after this that this lady fell ill, and had shooting pains  through her limbs. The diviners were called, and they,  while seated at a distance, ordered one of the maids to  put her hand on the painful spot, and to pull out whatever  she should find. So she arose and did this, and she found  in her hand a piece of felt, or some other thing. Then they  told her to put it on the ground ; when it was put there it  began to wriggle like some live animal.^ Then it was put  into water, and it became like a leech, and they said :  " Lady, some sorceress has done you this harm with her  sorceries." And they accused her who had accused them  about the furs. And she was taken outside the camp into  the fields, and for vii davs she was beaten and tried with  other torments, so that she should confess. And in the  meanwhile the lady died. When she heard of this she  said (365) to them : " I know that my mistress is dead ;  kill me, that I may go after her, for I never did her wrong."  And as she would confess nothing, Mangu commanded that  she be allowed to live ; and then those diviners accused the  nurse of the daughter of the lady of whom 1 have spoken ;-  and she was a Christian, and her husband was most  respected among all the Nestorian priests. And she was  taken to the place of execution with one of Ler makls, to  make her confess ; and the maid confessed that her mistress  had sent hei' to speak to a horse, to get an answer from it.*

^ The extraction of diseases in the shape of stones, splinters, worms,  bits of rag, has been practised by Shamans and medicine-mtn in many  parts of the world. The Chinese, Mongols, Tibetans, .md other  peoples of Eastern and Northern Asia shll attribute many diseases  to the presence of worms or some material object in the body (see on  the subject in general, Bartels, Medeciit def Aah^rvolker, 183, et seq.,  and E. B. Tylor, Primitive Culture^ ii, 146, ct scq.)

^ This daughter is Chirina, frequently inentioned in preceding pages.

^ Loqui cum quodajji equo^ ut quereret ah co responsa. The  Armenian chronicles of the thirteenth century spe;?k (jf the Tartar  magicians *-* who cause horses, camels, and felt idols lo speaJ^'  (Dulaurier, op. cit.^ 50). I have no doubt some Shamanistic ceremony  similar, to those still performed in the Altai 'k referred to. Radlori

k 2

244 JOURNEY OF

The woman {i.e., the nurse) also confessed that she had  done something to make herself liked by her master (t.e»^  Mangu ?), so that he should show her favour, but she had  never done anything which could have injured him. She  was asked whether her husband knew what she had done.  She made excuse for him, having burnt characters and  letters she had made herself.^ So she was put to death ;  and Mangu sent her husband, this priest, to the bishop who  was in Cathay, to try him, though he had not been found  guilty.

In the meanwhile it happened that the first wife of  Mangu Chan bore a son ; and the diviners were called in  to tell the child's fortune, and they all foretold it good  luck, saying that it would live long and become a great  lord. But after a few days it happened that the child died.  Then the mother in a rage called the diviners, saying :  " You told me that my son would live, and here he is dead."  Then the)- replied: '* Lady, here we see the witchcraft of the  nurse of Chirina, who the other day (366) was put to death.  She killed yoilr son, and now we see her carrying him off."  Thsre still lived a grown-up son and daughter of this  woman in the camp, and the lady in a fury sent for them, and  caused a man to kill the youth, and a woman the daughter,

(c/f. a'/.yUy 20, etseq.) describes in great detail a. Shaman sacrifice in  which a horse is the offering. Its soul 's supposed to ascend to Bai  tJIgon, an emanation of Tengere Kaira Khan, the highest of gods.  It is accompanied on this journey by the soul of a person who takes  part in the ceremony, and who is called a Bash-ttdkan. These two  bring back from heaven various inforniatior interesting the person  who has paid for the ceremony.

^ 1 presume she had caused Mangu to drink certain channs which,  having been written on paper, had afterwards been burnt and the aslies  mixed with the Chan's drink. This woman was a Nestorian,and Badger  (i, 238-240) says their priests still supply the people with charms. He  gives translations of a number of them ; among them one " to excite  love in a man toward a woman." D'Ohssor. (iv. 54) states that Tut-  shak, wife of Arghun, vvhen tried for the death of that Ukhan, con-  fessed that she had tried to gain liis affection by the use of ccrtaui  writing as a charm, and which 1 presume she also caused him to  swallow in his drink.

FRIAR VVILLtAM OF RUBRUCK. 245

in revenge for her son, vvho the diviners had said had  been killed by their mother. After this the Chan dreamed  of these children, and on the morrow he asked what had  been done with them. His servants were afraid to tell him ;  but he inquired the more solicitously where they were, for  they had appeared to him in a vision of the night. Then  they told him ; and he forthwith sent to his wife, and asked  her where she had found out that a wife could pass a death  sentence, leaving her husband in ignorance (of what she  had done) ; and he had her shut up for vii days, with orders  that no food be given her. As to the man who had killed  the youth, he had him decapitated, and had his head hung  around the neck of the woman who had killed the young  girl, and he caused her to be beaten with burning brands  through the camp, and then put to death. And he would  have put his ovvii wife to death had it not ben for the  children he had had of her ; but he left her ordu^ and did  not go back there for a month.

These same diviners disturb the atmosphere with their  incantations •} and when it is so cold from natural causes  that they can bring no relief, they pick out some persons in  the camps whom they accuse of having brought about the  cold, and they are put to death at once.

A short time before I left there, there was one of the  concubines (367) who was ill, and she had languished for  a long time ; so tl,ey said incantations over a certain  German female slave of hers, who went to sleep for ^hree

^ Rashideddin states that when the Urianghit wanted to bring a  storm to an end, they said injuries to the sky, the lightning and  thunder. (I have seen this done myself by Mongol storm -dispelleis.  See Diary^ 201, 203.) "The other Mongol people," he adds, "do the  contrary. When the i^torm rumbles, they remain shut up in their  huts, full of fear." The subject of storm-making, and the use of stones  for that purpose, is fully discussed by Quatremere, Histoire^ 428-440  (see also itifra^ p. 254, and Yule, Marco PolOy i, 292. 300^ Grenard  (ii, 257^ says the sorcerers called djaduger, in Chinese Turkestan, us<r  a jade stone to m ike rain or fine weather.

246 JOURNEY OF

days. And when she came back to herself they asked her  what she had seen ; (and she said) she had seen a great  many persons, all of whom they declared would soon die ;  but she had not seen her mistress among them, so they  declared that she would not die of her complaint. I 9a\^-  the girl, who had still a good deal of pain in her head from  her sleep/"

Some among them evoke devils, and assemble at night  la their dwelling those who want to have answers from the  devil, and they place cooked meat in the centre of the  dwelling ; and the c/tam who does the invocation begins  repeating his incantations, and strikes violently the ground  with a drum he holds. Finally he enters into a fury, and  causes himself to be bound. Then comes the devil in the  dark, and gives him the meat to eat, and he gives answers.-

Once, as I was told by master William, a certain  Hungarian hid himself among them ; and the devil who was  on top of the dwelling cried that he could not come in, for

* This mode of divining or fortune-telling by hypnotic sleep is so  rorn mcinly used by savage and barbarous tribes the world nvci, that  t\tj confirmation of Friar William's statement seems necessary.

- This is a very accurate description of these well-known sluitnan  Ceremonies. The placing of the sacrificial meat in the centre of the  hilt is common to most of these rites. The devil usually comes in  through the hole in the top of the tent, in America as well as in  Asia and Africa (see Fallas, Voyages^ i, 569 ; Radloflf, Aus Sibirie?i.  ii, 20 ; and on the subject of shaman drums, Bartcls, Mcdecin dt*-  yuiurvolker, 174).

Pian de Carpine (626) says : "They pay great attention to divinations.  ;AUguries, soothsayings, sorceries and incantations. And when tiie  devils answer them they believe that a god has spoken to them ; and  they call that ^od Ito,^a^ but the Comans name it Kam. And th?y  fear and reverence it wonderfully, and offer it many oblations, and the  first-fruits of their food and drink ; an<^ according to its reply hev do  e\'erything. At the new moon vjr at the full moon they begin what-  ever they have to do, so they call it ii.e.^ the moon) the Great  Emperor, and bow the knee to it and pray to it. They say that the  sun is the mother of the moon, for it receives its light from the sun. '  ijoine writers arc dispose<.l to see in this woi'l itoga the Mongol etugCK^  "earth," Mhvco Polos ,\\iitgat\%ee Palladius [5 ; Yule, Marco Poloy  I, 249, ii, 4/0 ; and oi\ the subject of divinaiio 1, \'ambery, Skttcht <,  UQi , S<hus'!ei\ Turkestan, li, 31 ; Castren, Reisen im Nord^n^ 12 \  ttj>fq "anJ Cfet.>ttd, li, 2^4-257).

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 247

there was a Christian among them. Hearing this, he fled  in all haste, for they set about looking for him. This and  inan\- other things they do, which it would take too long

to tell of.

ITH the feast of Pentecost (31st May) they began  preparing the letters which he (the Chan) was to  send you. In the meanwhile he came back to  Caracarum, and held his great ceremony on the octave of  Pentecost (7th June), and he wanted all the ambassadors  to be present the last day of it. He sent also for me ; but  I had gone (368) to the church to baptize three children of  a poor German I had found there. Master William was  the chief butler at this feast, for he it was who had made  the drink-flowing tree ; and everyone poor and rich was  ringing and dancing and clapping hands before the Chan.  Then he spoke to them, saying : " I have sent my brothers  away, and have exposed them to danger among foreign  nations. Now, let it be seen what you will do, when i  shall want to send you to increase our realm." Each day  during these four days, they changed their raiment, which  was given them each day all of one colour from their boots  to their turbans {tyaratii)} At this time I i;aw there ti>e  envoy of the Caliph of Baldach, who used to be brought to  court in a litter between two mules, and some said of \\\v:\  that he would make a peace with them, in view of which he  was to give him X thou.sand hoi'se soldiers for his army.

^ Pian de Carpine (755 and supra^ p. 19), Marco P^olo (i, 374;. <i.r.<i  Odoric (Yule, Cathay^ 141) all speak of this custom of \\ earing different  robes on each day of a feast. Odoric, however, says that the c{?l )u; ?  differed according to the rank. 7'he custom of presenting kk^If^'Tst  still observed in Central Asia and Persia. I cannot learn fi on; an-  other authority that the Mongols ever wore turbans. Odoric. i^c stfi  cit.. says the Mongols at the imperial feasts wore " coronets **('> .nUt-  coroHuii).

248 rOTJRNEY OF

Others said that Mangu had said that he would not make  a peace unless they destroyed all their fortresses, and that  the envoy had reph'ed : " When you bring all the hoofs of  your horses, we will destroy all our fortresses." I saw also  the envoy of a certain Soldan of India, who had brought  Vin leopards and ten greyhounds taught to sit on horses'  backs, as leopards sit.^ When I asked them concerning  India, in what direction it was from that place, they pointed  to the west. And these envoys went back v/ith mc for  nearly three weeks, always going westward. I saw there  also envo}-^ of the Soldan of Turkia, who had brought him  rich presents ;- and he {i.e., Mangu) had answered them, as  I heard, that (369) he did not want gold or silver, but  men ; so he wanted to be given troops. On the feast of  saint John he held a great drinking bout, and I counted an  hundred and five carts and ninety horses loaded with  mare's milk ; and on the feast of the apostles Peter and  Paul likewise.

Finally, the letters he sends you being finished, they  called me and interpreted them to me. I wrote down  their tenor, as well as I could understand through an  interpreter, arid it is as follows :

" The commandment of the eternal God is, in Heaven

^ Marco Polo (i, 290) says the Great Khan frequently carried a  hunting leopard {cheeia) behind him on his horse's croup. I have not  seen mention made of greyhounds being carried about in this  fashion.

2 This sultan was Azzeddin, son of Ghaisheddin Keikhosrcw n.  The Turks made a treaty in 1345 ^^'^1^ ^1^^ Mon.^ols, by which they  bound themselves to pay them an annual tribute of 1,250,000 iperpera  (about ^625,000), 14 camels and 1,000,000 sheej), all of which they  had to deliver in the plain of Mongan (at the mouth of the river Kur,  near the Caspian). Simon of St. Quentin, from whom I derive this  information, adds that, exclusive of this regular tribute, the Turks  had to pay vast amounts to the Mongols as presents to officers  (ravelling officially, for their horses, victuals, etc., etc. The Notary  of the Sultan of Turkey had calculated these expenses incurred for  Tartar missions to Iconium for two years, and found that, exclusive of  bread and wine, they had amounted to 600,000 ipcrpi ru (about  l,\oopo6) (V'incent of Rcauvais, bk. xxx, ch. xxviii, 451/^).

FRIAR WfLL/AM OF RUBRUCK. 249

there is only one eternal God, and on Earth there is only  one lord, Chingis Chan, the Son of God, Demugin, (or;  Chingis 'sound of iron.'" (For they call hini Chingis.  ''sound of iron," because he was a blacksmith ;' and puffed  up in their pride they even say that he is the son of God).  " This is what is told you. Wherever there be a Moal, or  a Naiman, or a Merkit or a Musteleman, wherever cars ean  hear, wherever horses can travel, there let it be heard ^vd  known ; thpse who shall have heard my commandnnents  and understood them, and v/ho shall not believe and  shall make war against us,^ shall hear and see that  they have eyes and see not ; aud when they shall want to  hold anything they shall be without hands, and when  they shall want to walk they shall be without feet ; this is  the eternal command of God.

" This, through the virtue of the eternal God, through  the great world of the Moal, is the word of Mangu Cs7^)  Chan to the lord of the French, King Louis, and to ail the  other lords and priests and to all the great realm of the  PVench, that they may understand our words. For the  word of the eternal God to Chingis Chan has not reached  unto you, either through Chingis Chan or others who have  come after him.

A certain man by the name of David came to you as  the ambassador of the Moal, but he was an impostor ; and  you sent baok with him your envoys to Keu Chan. After  the death of Keu Chan your ambassadors reached this

^ The belief that Chingis Khan was a blacksmith at lin-ies is siiil  universal in Mongolia. I have Seen several hills which derive their  names from legends placing' Chingis's smithy on their summits. The  mistake arises from confounding Chingis's name of Tennichin., which  means " best iron," with Tcmttrji^ in Turkish '' a blacksmith.'' As to  the name Chingis, it means " mighty.'"'" The title '' Son of God ' is  but the old Chinese imperial title of THcn-tzu^ " Son of Heaven "''see  d'Ohsson, i, 36, 99, and Pian de Carpine, 715).

2 The text is certamly incorrect here- ; it reads ' ci voluerinit credere^  et noluerimt facere exercittivi contra n'os.

:50 JOURNEV OK

ourt. And Camus his wife' sent you nasic stuffs and  letters. But as to affairs of war and o^ peace and the

velfare and happiness of a great realm, what eould this  woman, who was viler than a dog, know about them ? "

For Mangu told me with his own lips that Camus was the  >' orst kind of a witch, and that she had dcstro}'cd lici  whole family by her witchcraft.)^

*' These two monks, who have come from you to Sartach,  Sartach sent to Baatu ; but Baatu sent them to us, for  xMangu Chan is the greatest lord of the Moal realm. Now  rhen, to the end that the whole world and the priests and  iTionks may be in peace and rejoice, and that the word of  (Vod be heard among you, we wanted to (371) appoinl:  .\Toal envoys (to go back) with these your priests. But  liiey replied that between us and you there is a hostile  country, and many wicked people, and bad roads ; so they  were afraid that they could not take our envoys in safety  to you ; but that if we would give them our letters con-  taining our commandments, they would carry them to  King Louis himself. So we do not send our envoys with  them ; but we send you in writing the commandments of  the eternal God by these your priests : the commandments  of the eternal God are what we impart to you. And when  you shall have heard and believed, if you will obey us,  send your ambassadors to us ; and so we shall have proof  uhether you want peace or war with us. When, by the  virtue of the eternal God, from the rising of the Sun to the  setting, all the world shall be in universal joy and peace,  then shall be manifested what we are to be. But if you  hear the commandment of the eternal God, and understand  it, and shall not give heed to it, nor believe it, saying to  yourselves : * Our country is far off, our mountains are  strong, our sea is wide/ and in this belief you make war

* On Ogul Gaimish and her death, s>t.k: supra ^ p. 164.

FRIAR WrLLTAM OF RUBRUCK. 251

against us, you shall find out what we can do. He who  makes easy what is difficult, and brings close what is far  off, the eternal God He knows."

They had in the first place called us i?i the letters your  ambassadors. So I told them ; " Call us not ambassadors,  for 1 explained thoroughly to the Chan that we were not  the ambassadors of King Louis." They then went to him  and told him. But they came back to me and said that  (though) he had used it as a great (372) compliment, he had  directed that they should write as I should tell them. I  told them, nevertheless, to strike out the word ' ambassador,'  and to call us monks or priests. While this vvas being  done, my companion, hearing that we would have to go  back to Baatu by way of the desert, and that a Moal would  guide us, ran, without my knowing it, to Bulgai, the grand  secretary, and intimated to him by signs that he would die  if he went that way ; and so when the day arrived on  which we were to take our leave, to wit, a fortnight after  the feast of saint John,^ when we were called to court, the  secretaries said to my companion : " Now Mangu Chan  wants your companion to go back by way of Baatu, and  you say that you arc ill, as is evident you are. So Mangu  says, if you want to go with your companion, go. But it  rests with you ; for perhaps you may be left in some Iain  and you will not be looked after, and you will be a burden  on your companion. If you choose to stay here, he will  provide you with everything necessary, till some other  ambassadors come with whom you can go back leisurely  and along a road on which towns are found." The friar  replied : " God bless the Chan. I will stay." But I said  to the friar: "Brother, see to it what you do. I will not  leave you." " You," he said, " will not be leaving me ; but

^ The feast of the Nativity of St. John the Baptist falls on the 24th  June. Rubruck's visit to court was therefore on or about the 8th July  ra$4, a davortwp before he started on his journey back to Syria.

252 JOITKNF.Y OK

i leave you ; for should 1 l:o with you, 1 can see danger of  <fieath to my soul and body ; for it cannot bear such terrible  hardships."

Now they were holding in their hands three gowns or  tunics, and they said to us: " You will not accept gold or  silver, and you have stayed here a long time praying for the  Chan. He begs that each of you will accept at least a  plain gown, so that you go not away empty-handed " Sc»  we had to accept them through respect for him, for thc\-  hold it (373) very bad that one should scorn their gifts.  At first he used to make inquiries as to what we wanted,  and we always replied in the same way, so that the  Christians u.sed to abuse the Idolaters for wanting nothing  else than gifts. And these made answer that we were  foolish, for if he (t.e., the Chan) wanted to give them his  whole or(^Uy they wottld take it with pleasure and do  wisely. Having taken the gowns, they asked us to say an  oraison for the Chan, and this we did ; and having been  granted leave, we v/ent back to Caracarum.^

It happened, however, on a day (before that) when we  went with the monk and the other ambassadors some  distance fro*Ti the court, that the monk beat the board so  loudly that Mangu Chan heard it, and asked what it was.  And they told him. Then he asked why he was so far  from the court. They told him that it was troublesome  to send him daily horses and oxen (to come) to court, and  they added that it would be better if ;Jie remained in  Caracarum beside the church and there ,^id his praying.  So the Chan sent to him to say that if he wQjuId go to Cara-  carum and remain there by the church, he would give him  all he required. The monk, however, replied : " I came  here from Jerusalem, in the Holy Land, by the command

* Mangu was probably camped i&omewhere in the vicinity of tlrj  city.

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 253

of God, and I left a city in which there were a thousand  churches better than that in Caracarurn. If he wants nne  to remain here and pray for him, as God commanded mc,  I will stay ; otherwise I will go back whence I came." That  very same evening oxen harnessed to carts were brought  him, and the next morning he went back to the place he  had been in the habit of occupying in front of the ordu.

A little while before we left there, a certain Nestorian  monk arrived, and he seemed to be a wise man. Bulgai,  the grand secretary, established him. in front of the ordu ;  and the Chan sent him his books to bless.

^^^^E returned then to (374) Caracoruin ; and .wh'le wc  }^^g^ were in the house of master William, my guide  came, bringing X zascot, five of which he placed  in the hand of master William, telling him to spend them  on the part of the Chan for the wants of the friar ;^ the  other V he put in the hands of Homo Dei, my interpreter,  with directions to spend them on the journey for my  wants. Master William had told them to do this, without  our knowing it. I at once caused one (iascoi) to be sold, and  distributed the change among the poor Christians who were  there, all of them having their eyes fixed upon us ;  another we spent in buying what was necessary for us  in clothing and in other things ; with the third. Homo  Dei bought a few things on which he could make a small  profit, which he did. The balance we also expended,  for from the time we entered Persia they never gave us  enough of what we needed, nor did they ever even among  the Tartars ; but there we rarely found anything to buy.

' Bartholomew of Cremona, who had decided to rcrtnain in Mon-  golia.

254 JOURNEY OV

Master William, once your subject, sends you a girdle  ornamented with a precious stone, such as they wear  against lightning and thunder ;^ and he sends you endless  salutations, praying always for you ; and I cannot suffi-  ciently express to God or to you the thanks I owe him.  In all I baptized Vi persons there.

So we separated with tears, my companion remaining  with master William, and I alone with my interpreter  going back with my guide (375) and one servant, who had  an order by which we were to receive every four days  one sheep for the IIII of us-

;N two months and ten days we came to Baatu, and  (on the way there) we never saw a town, nor the  trace of any building save tombs, with the excep-  tion of one little village,^ in which we did not eat bread ;  neither did we ever take a rest in those two months and

* 1 do not know of any stone worn as a charm to avert lightning.  The Mongols used a stone, called jt'^^/a or mcfa^ to bring on storms, to  draw rain. Rashideddin says the ceremony to bring on a storm by  this means was called yei/a mishi. " Certain stones," he remarks,  *' when they have been soaked in water and dried, have the property  of attracting, even in summer, storms accompanied by flurries of snow  and excessive cold, or torrents of rain " (d'Ohsson, ii, 614) ; Bergmann  (iii, 183) says the Kalmuksuse for this purpose bezoar stones (see also  Baber, Memoires^ i, 86 ; E. B. Ty4or, Prim. Cult.^ ii, 263, and  Early History^ iz'ify 226). The Chinese call " thunderstone " {lei ta  skill) any meteoric stone or stone implement of unknown origin dug  out of the earth.

- His parly travelled, however, in company of the mission of a  Sultan of India for the first three weeks (see supra^ p. 248),

■^ This little village must have been I mil, where Kuyuk Khan had  his ordu. Friar William states {supra^ p. 163) that he passed by this  ordu on his way back. F. M. Schmidt (231, 232) agrees with this  view (conf Pian de Carpine, jz(/!>n;, p. 15). This identification agrees  with the additional fact related by the traveller (281), that in going  west he travelled by the north side of Lake Bulkash. it must be  noted that our traveller only states that he saw this village ; he did  not break bread there. He has, in fact, remarked in a previous  passage (p. 165) that his guide did not dare enter the place

FRIAK WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 255

X days, except for one clay only, when vvc could not get  horses. We came back for the most part of the way  through the same peoples, though generally through dif-  ferent districts ; for we went in winter and came back in  summer by parts farther to the north, fifteen days excepted,  when both in going and in coming back we had t(^ keep  along a river between mountains, where there is no grass  except close to the river.^ We had to go for two days —  sometimes for three days — without taking any other  nourishment than cosmos. Sometimes we were in great  danger, not being able to find any people, at moments when  we were short of food, and with worn-out horses.

When I had ridden XX days I got news of the King of  Hermenia ; he had passed there at the end of August,  going to meet Sartach, who wai? on his way to Mangu  Chan with his flocks and herds,'^ his wives and children ;

^ For reasons previously stated, I take this river to be the Ulurjgur,  though in the lower part of its course it does not flow between  niountainsj but in a tolerably broad valley, with ranges of low hills  on either side (see E. M. Schmidt, 230). Fifteen days is rather a  long time to take to descend the valley of the Ulungur river, which,  from the point where it takes a westerly course till it empties into  the Ulungur lake, is not much more than 37$ versts (259 miles;  long ; still the scarcity of grass along this part of the road may have  obliged them to go slowly ; and I am inclined to think the reference  in tlie next phrase to worn out horses and the total absence of  inhabitants, may apply to this part of the journey in particular. This  would explain the time coj;isumed ; the average distance made daily  would be about 16^ miles.

- This seems to be at variance with the Armenian chronicles  and the statements of Mohammedan contemporary writers. King  Heythum was received in audience by Mangn, at or near Kara-  korum, on the 13th September, 1254. On his way thither, he had  visited both Sartach's and Batu's orcius, which were on either side of  the Volga. This was in the early part of 1254, so this visit cannot be  the one here referred to. The king left Mangu's camp to return to  Armenia on November ist, 1254; and when at Barchin, on the Syr  daria, he turned north to go and again visit Sartach, who was then  on his way to the Great Khan's court. Heythum, we are told, took  eight months oil his return journey to Cilicia ; he cannot, therefore,  have '-n-t Sartach the second Lime before the early spring of T255.  Moh?..urr,-dan writers disagree as to the date of Sartach's journey  to Mangu s court ; some say he started in 1256, before Batu's death ;  while Olivers stale that it was after his death (d'Ohsson, ii, 334, 33^',

2^6 JOURNEV OF

though his big dvvclhngs had been left behind between the  Htilia and the Tanais.

I paid my respects (to Sartach) and told him that I  would right willingly stay in his country, but that Mangu  Chan wished me to go back and carry his letters. He  replied that one must do the bidding of Mangu Chan.  Then I asked Coiac about our servants. He replied that  they were in Baatu's ordi^, carefully looked after. I  reminded (376) him also of our vestments and books : he  replied : " Did you not bring them to Sartach ? " I said :  " I brought them to Sartach, but I did not give them to  him, as you know ; " and I repeated to him what I had  replied when he had asked whether I would give them to  Sartach. Then he answered : " You speak the truth, and  no one can resist the truth. I left your things at my  father's, who stays near Sarai, the new town that Baatu is  making on the Etilia ; but our priests have some of your  vestments here with them." " As to the vestments," I  said, " keep what you want of them, so long as my books  are given back to me." Then he said that he would tell  Sartach what I said. ** I must have," I said, "a letter for  your father, so that he will give me back all my things."  As they were then just on the point of starting, he said :  " One of the ordu of the ladies is following us closely ; stop

and Dulaurier, 401). We will assume, however, that the Armenian  chronicles are correct, and that in 1255 1^^ ^'^'^^ ^" ^^^ ^^y ^^ ^hc  court of the Great Khan. The distance between Batu's camp on  the Volga and Karakorum by the route, followed by Friar William,  and probably by King Heythum on his journey east, is roughly  about 2,600 miles. Friar William made the distance in 70 days ;  this supposes an average speed of 37 miles a day ; the king, on his  side, to )k 123 days, or an average oif 21 miles daily. At the end of  August, 1254, Heythurn must therefore have been about 320 miles  from Karakorum. I appose the twenty days should be counted from  the time our traveller left Karakorum ; he had probably covered  about 400 miles of the jouiney by that time. This passage has  puzzled previous editors of Friar William's narrative. F. M. Schmidt,  '-3O suggests the reading of LX instead of XX. Friar William, in a  subsequent passage {377) refeis to the first visit of the king to Sartach.  and to h?s kindly interest m his man Cossei.

FRIAR WfLLIAW OF RUBRCCK. 257

therc; and I will send you by this man here the answer of  Sartach." I was arv5cious that he should not deceive me ;  but I could not wrangle with him. The man he had  pointed out to me came in the evening, bringing v/ith him  two tunics, which 1 took for a whole piece of uncut silk  stuff, and he said to me : " Here are two tunics : Sartach  sends you one, and the other, if you see fit, you may present  (377) to the .King from him." I replied : " I do not make  use of such clothes ; I will present both to the King for the  honour of your* lord." " No," he said, " do as you choose  with them." Now it pleases me to send them both to you,  and I do so by the bearer of these presents. He gave me  also letters to the father of Coiac, to return to me all that  belonged to me, for he wanted nothing' of mine.

We reached the ordu of Baatu the same day we had left  it a year previously, the second day after the Elevation of  the holy Cross (i6th September), and I found with  pleasure our servants in safety, but suffering from great  poverty, as Gosset told me ; ,ind had it not been for the  King of Hcrmenia, who had comforted them greatly and  recommended them to Sartach, they would )iave been lost,  for they thought that I was dead ; and' the Tartars were  already inquiring of them if they knew how to herd cattle or  milk horses. For had i not come back, they would have  been made their slaves.

After that, Baatu caused me to come into his presence,  and had interpreted to me the letters Mangu Chan .sends  you. For Mangu had written to him that if he wished to  adjd, strike out, or alter anything in them, he was to do so.  Then he said to me : " Take these letters and make them  undierstood." He asked me also which road I wanted to  take, by sea^ or by (378) land. I told him the sea route  was closed, for it was winter, so I would have to go by

^ I suppose he means from the mouth of the Volga, or Sarai, by boat  down the Caspian to Derbend.

258 JOURNEY OK

land. I still thought at that time that you were in Syria,  and I took the road toward Persia. If I had imagined  that you had crossed over into France, 1 should have gone  to Hungary arvd should have come sooner to France ; and  by that road I should have travelled with less trouble than  in Syria.

We drove about for a month with him (i.e.^ Baatu) before  we could get a guide. Finally they appointed an lugur,  who, understanding that I would not give him anything,  though I told him that I wanted to go straight to  Hernienia, had letters given him to take me to the Soldan  of Turkic, hoping to receive a present from the Soldan and  inake more along that road.^

O we started XV days before the feast of All Saints  {i.e., 1 6th October) in the direction of Sarai, going  due south, and descending along the Etilia, which  divides below there into three great branches, each of  which is nearly twice as large as the river of Damietta  The rest (of the river) forms four minor branches, so that  we crossed that river in VII places by boat. On the  middle branch is a town called Summerkeur, which is  without walls ; but when the river is in flood it is sur-  rounded by water For VIII years the Tartars were around  it before they got it And there were Alans in it, and  Saracens.2 We found there a German with his wife, and

^ The guide's method of making money is explained in two other  passages (3S9, 391).

-■ Yule {Cathay^ 287) thinks the name Suuimct 'scur (or Summerkent  95 some of* the MSS. gix'e it) is a clerical i^iTor for Sittarkent.  PegoUjtti^i Gtyitnrchan or Gitfarch/m, that is, old Astraknn. Fiirchas  had already m^de the same identification Tii.- position assigned  by the early Mahommedan geographers to the town of itil. or Atel, the  capital of the KhazKr^, and the description they have left us of it, avjree  so well with our travellers statement, that I am disposed to think the

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUB RUCK. 259

he was a right worthy man, with whom Gosset (379) had  stopped ;^ for Sartach had sent him there to rid his ordi.  of him. Round about these parts Baatu is on one side of  the river and Sartach on the other about Christmas time ;  and they go not down any farther. And it happens that  the whole river freezes over, and then they pass across.  About here there is very great plenty of pasturage, and  (the Tartars) live among the reeds till the ice begins to  thaw.

When the father of Coiac received the letters of Sartach,  he gave me back my vestments, excepting three albs, an  amice embroidered 'in silk, a stole, a girdle, a gold-  fringed altar cloth^ and a surplice ; he gave me back also  the silver vases, excepting a censer and a little vase in  which was holy oil, all of which latter things the priests  who were with Sartach had kept. He gave me back the  •books, with the exception of the psalter of my lady the  cueen, which he kept with my consent ; I could not refuse

two places are identical. The name Stimmerkctir may also be a  corrupt form of the name Sacassin^ which the Mahommqdan  geographer of Baku, Abdelrashid, applies to the city of Atel, and  which he says was in his time submerged (d'Ohsson, i, 346 ; see  also Ishtakri, 103 ; Ibn Haukal, 185, 186 ; and F. M. Schmidt, 241-243).  Ishtakri {loc. cit.) says that Atel wasinhabited by Mahommedaiis and  Christians, a detail which our traveller confirms. Friar William  seems to have visited the town on his way to Sarai, so this makes  Yule's identification of it with Old Astrakan quite unacceptable. It  must, however, have been quite near Sarai, for Ibn Haukal (185)  only counts 14 days' travel from Derbend to the town of Atel, while  Ishtakri (106), counts 12 ; but perhaps part of the journey — or the  whole — was made by boat on the Caspian and the Volga. I have been  no more fortunate than previous commentators of Rubruck in finding  any mention of the capture of this city by the Mongols. The text  seems only to imply that they occupied it eight years after their  arrival in the country.

1 One MS. reads hyemaverat^ "had passed the wmter" (of 1253-54,  I suppose).

2 Tualiam ornatam aurifrif^o. Tiialia may be a barbarous form  of the French toile^ though in another passage our traveller uses the  word telle de cotone^ "a cotton cloth." There is an Italian word,  ta^Hxlia^ which means an altar-cloth, ^-uchas translates this by "a  Tualia adorned with golden embroyderie. "

.3 2

260 j^njRNEY OF

it him, for be said it would please Sartach greatly. He also  asked me. m case 1 j^hould come back that way, to bring a  man knowing how to make parchment. He was making  by order of Sartach, a big church and a new village on the  west bank of the river, and (380) wanted, he said, to make  books for SarUch's use. I know, however, that Sartach  cares not for such things.

Sarat and the palace of Baatu are on the eastern shore,  and the valley through which flow these branches of the  river is more than Vll leagues wide, and there is a great  quantity of fish there.' The versified Bible and a book in  Arabic, worth thirty bezants, and several other things, I  did not get back.

S5TJi[EAVING it {t.e.y Sarai) then on the feast of Aij  Saints (ist November), and going constantly  south, we reached by the feast of saint Martin  (i5.th December) the m.ountains of the Alans. Between  Baatu and Sarai, for XV days we found no one save one o^'  his {i:e. Baatu's) sons preceding him (south) with his  hawks and hawkers, who were very numerous. From the  feast of All Saints for xv days we found no one, and there  were two da)^s on which we nearly died of thirst : for a  whole day and a night, and a day following to the third  hqpr, we did not find any water.

^ Mesalek-aLabsar (285, 287) says Sarai, meaning "the Palr.ce, '  was founded by Bereke, brother of Batu. It stood in a sally plai?"*  and was witlioiit walls, though ihe palace had walls flanked by lowers.  The town Avas large, had markets, madrasas ^x^A baths. It is uiually  identified with Selitrennoye viorodok, about 70 miles above Asir.ikan  (see Ibn l^atuta, i, 79, ii, 446 ; YhJe, Marco Polo, i, 5, li, 495, 537i  and Cathay^ 231, 233, 2x^7 ; and Heyd, ii, 227). Pallas {Voyayy^i.w  162) says he crossed the Vo}<;a near Selilrennoy^ in June, 1773, wheu  the waters were hi^h. The main stream and its branches were al>ou:  30 versts (20 p.jiles; broad.

FRIAK WILLIAM OF RUliRUCK. 26j

The Alans in these mountains still holo out against (the  Tartars), so Sartach has had to send two out of every  ten men to hold the mouths of the defiles, lest they come  out and lift their cattle in the plains between them, the  Alans and the Iron Gate, which is two days thence, and  where begins tlic plain of Arcacc.^ Between the sea and  the mountains are Saracens called (381) Lesgi, (who ln=c)  in the mountains and who also withstand fthe Tartars) ;  ejo the Tartars at the foot of the mountains of the Alans  had to cjive us twenty men to escort us beyond the Iron  Gate. And this pleased me much, for I hoped to sec them  under arms ; ff>r I had never been able to see their arms,  thou<^h. most anxious to. When we came to a dangerous  passa^'e, out of the xx i^only) two had haubergeon.s, 1  asked them how they came by them, and they said they  had got them from the Alans, who are good makers of such  things,- and excellent artisans. So it seems to me that  they have few arms except arrows and bows and fur gowns.  I saw given to thei-n iron plates and iron caps from Persia,  and I also saw two who had come to present themselves  before Mangu, armed with jackets of convex pieces of  bard leather, which were most unfit and unv.-ieldy.^

^ Planides Arcacd. As F. ^L Schmidt (246) remarks, the name  Arccuc is absolutely unknown. Our traveller appears to use it 10  designate the extreme south-eastern extremity of the plain held by  the Alans.

^ The Zafer nameh refers to this country of the Alans as " ttie  country of the ?:uirass-makers '' (Quatremere, op. cii,^ 71).

2 All contemporary western writers speak of the leather armour used  by the Mongols (Matth. Paris, op. ciL^ iv, yy^ 115, 388). Mncent  of Beauvais, on the authority, of course, of Simon of St. Quentin (bk.  xxix, ch. Ixxix, 420) says : '* When the archers let fly their ar-rows, they  withdraw entirely their right arm from out their armour, and p^^ it  back when the shaft has left the bow. But only the barons and the  military chiefs, the standard-bearers and the constables wear this  armour, so it is believed that not a tenth part of then! ] e ?t or wear  it. . . . They do not use shields, and very few of them ha\e lances. . . .'  Pian de Carpine (684-689) describes at great length the arrows and  armour of the Mongols. " All of them,'- he says. " must have at least  rtie following arms : two or three bows, ^t least one good one, three

262 JOURNEY OF

Before we reached the Iron Gate, we came to a walled  hamlet {castellujn) of the Alans, which was Mangu Chan's,  he having conquered that (part of the) country. Here wc  found grape-vines for. the first time and drank wine. The  next day we came to the Iron Gate, which Alexander the  Macedonian made ; and it is a town whose eastern end is  on the sea-shore, and there is a siaair-sized plain between  the sea and the mountains across which this town stretches  to the top of the mountain adjoining it on the west ; so it  is that there is no road higher up, on account of the steep-  ness of the (382) mountain, nor any lower down by the  sea, but only straight through the town where is the iron  gate from which the town takes its name.

The town is more than a mile long, and on the top of  the mountain is a strong fort ; its width, however, \s but a  •stone's throw. It has very strong walls without moats,  and towers of great dressed {politts) stones ; but the Tartars  have destroyed the tops of the towers and the parapets of  the walls, making the towers even with the walls. Below  this town the country used to be a real paradise.^

big quivers full of arrows, an axe and ropes {funcs) to pull machines. . . .  Their helmets are of iron or steel on top, but that portion which goes  round the neck and throat is of leather. . . . Some of them have spears,  and at the lower end of the heads is a hook to pull people out of the  saddle. Their arrows are two feet one palm and two fingers long. . . .  The heads of their arrows are very sharp, and they always carry files  to sharpen them. . . . They have shields made of \» ickerwork, but I  do not think they carry any except in camp, and when on guard over  the emperor and the princes, and then only at night" (see also Marco  Polo, i, 252 ; ii, 458;. The arrows which Strabo (vii, 3, 254) says the  Scythians carried were practically the same. He states that they used  raw oxhide helmets and cuirasses, wicker shields, spears, bows and  swords.

1 Derbend is called Demir kapi, or "the Iron Gate," by the Turks.  It is the Carpiae pilae of classical authors, "the Gate o/Zur" of  Procopius (iv, 3), the Djora of the Armenian chronicles (Klapioth,  Jour. Asiai., xii, 277) the Bab-el Abivab^ or " Gate of Gates" of the  early Mohammedan geographers. Ishtakri (86) says the wall and  the gates were built by Kosroes Anushirwan ; and Ibn Haukal (158)  refers to the two walls of Derbend, the one of stone, the other of earth,  besides the walls of stone bound with lead projecting into the sea to

FRIAK WILLIAM OF RUBJ^UCK. 263

Two days thence we found another town called  Samaron,^ in which were many Jews ; and when passing  through it we noticed walls coming down from the moun-  tains to the sea. Leaving the road by the sea at these  walls, for at that point it turned eastward, we went uphill  toward the south.

The next day we crossed a valley, where we saw the  foundations of walls running from one mountain to another,  and along the tops of the mountains there was no road.  These were once the barriers of Alexander,^ shutting out  the wild tribes, that is the desert nomads, so that they  could not get in on the cultivated lands and the towns.

form the port (see also Ibn Kordadbeh, 490-496, and Masudi, ii, 2, 7,  72). Barbaro (86) speaks of it as Derbenth^ and says that the town  from one gate to another is half a mile broad, and that the walls are  of great stones, after the Roman style of building. On the Alexander  legqnd concerning the building of the wall and Iron Gate, see Peschel  ' Erdkunde^ 93) and Yule {Marco Polo ^ i, 55 ; ii, 537). Barbaro (90}  speaks of the country around Derbend as follows : " Of Derbenth  I shall tell yo one marvaiious matter. Going from the one gate  towardes this place, even till ye come under the walles, ye shall  finde grapes and fruictes of all sortes, specially almons. On the  f\ther parte there are neither fruictes nor any trees, except it be certein  jwynces ; and so it endureth x, xv, or xx myies of that side.'

* Samaron is unquestionably, a? pointed out by F. M. Schmidt  (246), Edrisi's Semmur^ but it is not easy to locate it accurately. It  must have been a little to the north of Beshbarmak on the Caspian.  TV^ure is a little bay, some 15 miles south of Derbend, called Samuf  but our traveller's Samaron was probably some 60 to 70 miles from  that town. Pian de Carpine (748) speaks of a people called Druiacki,  *' who are said to be Jews and who shave their heads," as living some-  where in this region (see d'Avezac, 496, and supra, p. 12). Ijenjamin  of Tudela (36) refers to the great number of Jews living in his time  (Icttier part of twelfth century) among the Alans in the Caucasus. On  the Jews in Transcaucasia, see Haxtbausen, Transcaucasiay 136 et seg.^  and conf. Maundevile, 265.

2 Claustra Alexa?tdr(, the Sedd-Iskender of Persian writers. Vin-  cent of Beauvais (bk. xxix, ch. Ixxxix, 422^), says (quoting Friar  Simon, of course) "As our scholastic histories say that Alexander the  Great, King of the Macedonians, besought God to shut up the Jews  within t;ie Caspian mountains, our Friars of the Holy Order of  P/eachers, who have for the last seven years been in Triphilis Tl iflis),  in Georgia, near the Caspian mountains, have diligently inquired of  Georgians, Persians, as well as of Jews, concerning thisshuiiing up. and  they have all said, even the Jews, that they knew nothirg certain of  it, except vvhat they have found in their histories."

264 fOUKNEY OF

There are other barriers within which are jews, but I could  learn notning precise concerning them ; however, there 4i:e  many Jews in all the towns of Persia.^

The next day we came to a big city called Samag ;^ and  the day after that we entered a vast plain called (383)  Moan,^ through which flows the Cur, from which the  Curges, whom we call Georgians, take their name.* It  flows through the middle of Tefilis, which is the capital  city of the Curges, coming straight from the west and  flowing eastward into that sea, and it has most excellent  salmon. In that plain we again found Tartars. The  Araxes also flows through this plain, coming out of  Greater Hermenia from due south-west, out of what is  called the Ararat country, which is Hermenia ; thus it is  that in the book of Kings it is said of the sons of  Senacherib, that their father having been killed they fied  into the country of the Hernienians ; while in Isaiah it is  said that they fled into the country of Ararat.^

To the west of this beautiful plain is Curgia, and the

' Benjamin of Tudela (48) estimated the nun''ber of Jews in Persia  when he was there at over 70,000.

2 The town of Shamakhi or Shamaka. Barbaro (86) says it had  between four and five thousand houses in his time, and that it manu-  factured silks, fustians and other things. It was at one time the  capital of Shirwan. Anthony Jenkinson (98, 131) speaks of "Shamakye  in Media."

^ Jordanus correctly transcribes the name Mojjan, which is still the  name of the plain between the Aras and the Kura. The Armenian  ciironiclers sometimes refer to it under ihe name of Tanin or Tahin.

^ Conf. stipra, p. 39, where Friar Benedict gives another explanation  of the name Georgian. The MSS. of Kubruck write the name  Gur^i and Curgi. In view of the etymology stated by the author, I  have written Curgi tl\roughout. The kingdom of Georgia was first  attacked by the Mongols in !22i. Pian de Carpiiie (709; speaks of  the Ohesi sive Georgiuni^ thus identifying them, as d'Avezac (479)  notes, with the Abazes on the coast of the Black Soa. As used by  Friar William, however, the name has a much wider applicat^oii  Persian writers called Georgia Gurgestan, Clavijo (80) calls the  Kura Corras^ and Jenkinson (98) speaks of the Cyrus and the Arash.

-^ 4 (2) Kings, xix, 37 ; Isaiah, xxxvii, 38. Chardin, i^oyagds^'n, 15S,  makes the same remark as our author.

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 265

Crosminians^ Used to be itt this plain ; and there at the  base of the mountains is a great city called Ganges,^ which  used to be their capital, and which prevented the Curges  from coming down into the plain.

So we came to a bridge of boats held by great iron  chains stretched across the river, there where the Cur and  the Araxes fall into each other.^ Here the Araxes loses  its name. From this point we ascended continually along  the Araxes, of which it is said —

pontem dedignaiur Araxes^

(384) leaving Persia on our left to the south, and the  Caspian mountains and Greater Curgia on our right to the  north, and going toward Africa to the south-west.

We passed through the camp of Baachu, who is the chief of  the army there on the Araxes, and who has conquered the  Curges, the Turks and the Persians. There is another  (chief) at Tauris in Persia, who superintends the tribute, and  whose name is Argun ; and Mangu has recalled both of  them to give their places to his brother who is coming to  these countries.^ This country I am describing to you is

^ The Khorazmians conquered Georgia in 1225. The name occurs  in Arrian, Expedition vii, 185, in the form X«pd(r/ju«t, In western  mediaeval works it js usually written Corasmini, Chorosmim. Coremins  or Corvins.

2 F. M. Schmidt (248) has identified Rubruck's Ganges with Gaush  or Gendje, the present Elisabethpol.

^ The point of junction of the Araxes with the Kura seems to  have shifted considerably. Ibn Haukal (162) says it was on the  border of the plain of Mugan, near Mahmudabad. Le Bruyn  ( Voyage^ iv, 4) says it was about half a league from the village of  Sgavad. Modern maps make the confluence near the town of  Kalakoiny.

•^ Virgil, AUneid^ viii, 728.

^ Friar Simon of St, Qucntin calls this Mongol General Bajotknoy.  noy representing the Mongol word 7toin or noian^ "lord;" a title first  given to chiefs of a ttiman^ and later to all persons of distinction.  Guillaume of Nangis (364) calls him Bachou, while Mahommedan  writers transcribe his name Baiju^ and Armenian chronicles call him  Bachti Ghurck:. This general was placed at the head of the Mongo.  army in Georgia and Aimenia in 1242, to succeed Charmaghan (or

^66 JDURNEV Ol

not Persia proper, but that which used to be calletl

I v/as in the house of Baachu, and he gave me wine to  drink , he himself drank cosmos, which I should have  preferred to drink if he had given it to me. Though tlie  wine was new and good, cosmos satis^es better a famished  man.

So we ascended along the Araxes from the feast of  saint Clement (23rd November) to the second Sunday oi  Quadragesima (15th February) till we reached the head of  the river. And beyond the mountain in which it rises is  a goodly city called Aavserum,^ which is the Soldan of  Turkie's, and near these to the north, at the foot of the  mountains of the Curges, rises tljc Eufrates. I would have

Djurmagun), who had commanded *l since i2j2 ''Klaproth, Jour.  Asiat.^\'\\^ 205, d'Ohsson. ii, 221, 229). He it was who in 1247 received  Friar Ascelin and Simon of St. Quentin. Arghun aka, according to  Mahommedan historiajis, set out from Persia for the court of Mangu  in 1256, leaving his son as his substitute during his absence with  Hulagu, the brother of Mangu referred to in the text, who arrived  in Samarkand in September, 1255. In 1258, Arghun took up agnin  his post in Persia (d'Ohsson, ii, 141, 267). According to Armenian  writers, Arghun made a census of the wester^ portion of the  Mongol empire in 1255. Pie Is described by these writers as a very  harsh, cruel man (Klaproth, op. cit.., 208, 213 ; and Dulaurier, 460).

^ Isidorus {pp. cit.^ xiv, 501), our author's usual geographical  authority, limits Hircania on the east by the Caspian, on the south  by Armenia, on the north by Albania, and on the west by Iberia.  This Mas practically identical with the Hircania of Pomponius Mela  (603, 650). Ptolemy (vi, 7) applies the name tp a much larger area.

2 Erzerum. Guillaume of Nangis (34 0 writes the name Ars^ron^^x  Arsciron). He says it was the land of Hus where Saint Job Hved  ain'j reigned. Vincent of Beauvais (bk. xxx, ch. cxlvii) repeats the  same story, and adds that the town was captured by the Tartars in  1243, after a siege of twenty days. Pascalis of Victoria, who was  martyred in Almalik in 134 1, says that Urganth was Us, and that the  body of Job was there {Analecia Francis.., iii, $^3;. In Urganth we  have no difficulty in recogi.>/ing Uyfah, which is believed by  Mahommedans to be the Ur of the Chaldees (Badger, i, 331). Marco  Polo (i, 47) writes the name of Erzerum, Arziron, a form which  Tournefort also uses, though he remarks (ii, 1 11) that Arzerum is the  correct form. Clavijo (78) uses the fonn Aseron, and Maundevile  (147) Artyromi. The Armenians called it Gatin^ and the. Greeks  Theodosiopolis.

FRIAR WILLIAM uC RiiBFaCf-. it']

gone to its source, but there Wcis so iruicii sno'/- that no one  couid go outside the beaten path. On. the other ?".irle, to the  south of the mountains of the Caucasus-, the Tigris lakes  its rise.

is

"<^HEN wc left Baachu, my guide went to Tauris^ to  ,(l\A^ speak with Argun, taking my interpreter with  him. But Baachu had me taken to a certain city  called Naxua,'"^ which used to be (385^ the capital of a great  kingdom, and was a large and beautiful city ; but the  Tartars have reduced it to nearly a desert. And there  used to be in it eighty Hermenian churche.? ; but there are  only two small ones now, for the Saracens have destroyed  them. In one of these I kept the Christmas feast as well  as I could, with our clerk. The next day the priest of the  church died, and a bishop and Xll monks from the moun-  tains came to his funeral. All the bishops of the Her-  menians are monks, as are those of the Greeks ior the  most part" This bishop told me that near there was the

^ Taurimuii,. According to Persian historians, the lown of Tauris,  or Tabriz, was founded A.D. 792 (see Chardin, Voyagei>^ ii, 320 ct seq.).  MaundevHe (149) refers to the '' Cytie of Thauriso cr Taxis." •

'^ Or Nadjivan. The name is also written Nakhdjevan^ Ncshetvy^  and Neksh-djehan. Clavijo (80) writes the name I\aujua. It is said  to be Armenian nakhid-shevan^ "the first landing-place," and was  thus called because Noah got out of the ark near where it stands.  Armenians say it is the oldest town in the world. Persian writers  state that it once had 40,000 houses, and was one of the largest and  finest cities of Armenia (Chardin, ii, 297 et seq.). A resident of  Erzerum writes to me that one is shown in the monastery of Nadjivan  the tomb of Noah and his wife. Chardin, however, states (ii,  318) that these are at a place called Maraut. See James Bryce,  Transcaucasia^ 222.

^ This is q'lite correct. Chardin (ii, 185) states that the Veriabied  or Armenian bishops were usually taken from among the monks,  though sometimes a secular priest was appointed, " for it must be noted  that this dignity is only obtained with money." Among the Greeks  the prelates are taken from among the monks or KaXoycpot. The  Papas 01 secular priests can only attain the dignity oi Protopapa.

268 JOURNEY or

church in which blessed Bartholomew and niso blessed  Judas Thadeus were martyred ;^ but the road was impas-  sable on account of the snow.

He told me also that they have two prophets : the first \z  Methodius the martyr,- who was of their race, and he pro-  phesied concernin^:^ the Ysmaelites, which prophecy has been  fulfilled in the Saracens. The other prophet is called  Acatron, who on his death-bed prophesied concerning the  race of Archers to come from the north,^ saying that they  would acquire possession of all the countries of the Orient,  and that (God) would spare the Eastern kingdom so as to  deliver unto them the kingdom of the West ; but our  brethren, like the Catholic Franks, would not believe in them,  and they (/.^., the Archers) would occupy the earth from  the north even unto the south, and would come to Con-  stantinople, and would occupy (386) the port of Constanti-  nople ; and one of them, who would be called a sage, would  enter the city, and seeing the churches and the ceremonies

^ Friar Jordanus (4), describing Armenia the Greater, states tiiat three  of the apostles suffered martyrdom there — Bartholomew, Simon, and  Judas. "1 saw a prison in which the two latter apostles were kept ;  and likewise springs of water which they produced from the living  rock, smiting it with a rod, . . . and hard by there was a churc'ii  built, beauteous and of wonderful bigness.*' St. Judas Thadeus was  martyred, it is believed, at a place called Maku^ on Persian territory  west of Nadjivan. There is a monastery of St. Thadeus about twenty  miles from Maku (see also AcM Sd/n/onn/iy 27 Octc')cr, 440). As  to the place "of the martyrdom of the apostle Bartholomew, great  uncertainty reigns. Some writers have placed it in India, others in  Persia ; the weight of testimony seems to favour the town of Albana  or Albanopolis in Albania, on the shore of the Caspian {Acta Sane-  tortun, 27 August, 30). Some writers, among others de Morgan  {op. cit.^ i, 13), identify Albana with Derbend. No work I have been  able to consult places the scene of the martyrdom of the two saints in  or even near the same place.

- The works of Saint Methodius are well known to Armenian  scholars. A complete edition of them is noA being published b) the  Fathers of .St. Lazarus, at X'enice.

•' The prophecy here attributed to Acatron (or one of identical  tenor) is slated b\' .ome Armenjan historians to be due to the patriarch  Narses, who was Catholicos of the Aghuanks from A.D. I2j6 to 1263  (Duiaurier, 210). The Armenian historians of the thirteenth century  liabitually refer to ihe Mongols as "' the Archers."

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 269

of the PVanks would be baptised, and he would tell the  Franks how to kill the lord of the Tartars, and how to  confound them. On learning this the Franks of the centre  of the world, that is [erusalem, would fall upon the Tartars  in their borders, aiu! with the help of our people, that is  the Hermenians, would pursue them, so that the King of  the Franks would piace his royal throne in Tauris in  Persia, and then all the Orientals and all the infidels would  be converted to the faith of Christ, and there would be  such peace on earth that the living v/ould say to the dead :  " Woe is you, unfortunate ones, why lived ye not to these  times ?"

I had read this prophecy in Constantinople, brought there  by the Hermenians who live there, but had paid no particular  attention to it ; when I had had this conversation, however,  with the bishop, it came back vividly to my memory ; and  throughout Hermenia they hold this prophecy as sure as  the Gospel. They used also lo say to me : " As the souls in  timbo expect the coming of Christ for their liberation, so  we look to your coming to deliver us from this bondage in  which we have so long been."

Near this city are mountains in which they say that  {SS;^) NoiUi's ark rests ; and there are two mountains, the  one greater than the other ; and the Araxes flows at their  base ; and there is a town there called Cemanum, which  interpreted means " eight," and they say that it was thus  called from the eight persons who came out of the ark,  and who built it on the greater mountain.^ Many have

' Vincent of Reauvais (bk. xxx, ch. xcvii, 440*^) says that near the  city of Ain (Ani) is Mount Arach. " Here rests Noah's ark, and at  the foot of this mountain is the first (of all) cities, which Noah built  there, and he called the city Latidumie^ and around it flows the river  Arathosi (Araxes), which flows through (the plain of) Mongan, where  the Tartars winter, and into the Mare Servanicwn (Caspian Sea).''  Maundevile (148) speaks of "the cytee of Dayne, that Noe founded."  Dayne may be the Laudumie of Vincent. Clavijo (80) says the city  of Calmarin (Etchmiadzin .'') was Lhe first built in the world, " and it

270 JOURNEY OF

tried to climb it, but none has been able. This bishop  toki mo that there had been a monk who was most  desirous (of climbing it), but that an angel appeared to  him bearing a piece of the wood of the ark, and told him  to try no more. They had this piece of wood in his church,  they told me. This mountain did not seem to me so very  high, that men could not ascend it. An old man gave me  quite a good reason why one ought not to try to climb it.  They call the mountain Massis, and it is of the feminine  gender in their language. *' No one," he said, " ought to  climb up Massis ; it is the mother of the world."^

was bnilt by the lineage of Noah." In another passage (82) he  describes the ruins he saw at the foot of Ararat, and which were a  league in length, and were the remains of a city founded by Xoali and  his sons. The MSS. write this name in different wa^s — Ccnuiniiun^  Cemaurum, and Cemaman. I have adopted the last form, as it  approximates more closely the Arabic Temanin, the n:i»nc given by  early Mohammedan writers to the town built hero by Nonli, Il^n  Haukal (60) says that at the foot of the mountain on which Noah's nrk  rested is a village called Themabim^ " and they say that the eoinpanions  of Noah descended here from the ark and built this village." Masudi  (i,' 75) has it that Noah and his family, in all eighty persons, on CDming  out of the ark built a town which they called Teinaiiiu (eighty), a nainc  which it retained to Masudi's time.

Jordanus (4) describing Ararat, speaks of a dwcUijig on it which  Noah is said to have l^uilt on leaving the ark ; anc' *' there, too, is  said to be that original vine which Noah planted, and whereby he got  drunk.'" Yule identifies it with the village of Arguri, the only one <in  Ararat, which name means "He planted the vine' inri^l' i/rri).  Chardin ( Voyages, ii, 193) says that at the foot of Ararat, in a Christian  village, is a monastery called Arokilvanc^ or '• the Monastery of the  Apostles," which the Armenians revere v-specially, believing that  Nodh made there his first residence and ais first sacrifices after the  deluge. (See also Chabot, op, a't.^ 52, note.)

^ Isidorus (op. cit., xiv, 521) says that pieces of the timbers of the  ark are still seen on ^[oxixxi Ararat /t. Vincent of Bcauvais (bk. \.\x, ( h.  xcvii, 44o/>) tells this legend differently. Ho says Arach has never  been scaled Ijut once by a certain monk, who had previously tiied  many times. An angel of the Lord appeared to him and told him to  try again. He did so, reached the summit, .and broui;ht back with  him a piece of the ark. He then buiit a monastery at the foot of the  mountain, in which the piece of wood was jjlaced and worshipped  like a holy rdic. Chardin {op. dt.y ii, 191) ♦uMs the legend exactly as  our traveller does. He adds that the monl was called James, that  he was from the great monastery of Etchmiad/in, near Envan, and

^"'RIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUGK. 27 I

In that city (of Naxua) Friar Bernard of Catalo^na, of  t'ne Order of Preaeliing Friars, found me ; he liad remained  in Georgia with a certain prior of the Hoiy Sepulehre,  wlio had hirge holdings in land there ; and h^ had learned  a little Tartar, aisd had been witli a certain friar from  Hungary to Argun at Tauris, to ask leave to go throu<4h  to Sartaeh. When they came there they were refused entry,  and the Hung-arian friar went back by way of Tcfilis with  a servant ; but Friar Bernard had remained at Tauris with  a German lay brother, whose language he did not under-  stand.

(388) We only left this city (of Naxua) on the Octave of  the Epiphany (13th January), for we were kept there a  long while on account of the snow. In liii days we came  to the country of vSahensa, once the most pov.-erful Curgian  prince, but now tributary to the Tartars, who have de-  stroyed all its fortified places. His father, Zacharias by  name, had got this country of the Hermenians, for  delivering them from the hands of the Saracens.^ And  there are ver}^ fine villages there, all of Christians and

that he became llishop of Nizib^ and was canonised. I am told  that a pic e of the ark is still ^hown in the monastery of Nadjivan.  liryce {o/f. 7'/., 321) says it is in the treasury of Etchmiadzin.

Afassis is the Armenian name of Ararat, and the monl's on the  mountains still tell travellers that the mountain cannot t)e scaled  because it is the cradle of the human race, so a man can ho more  reach its top than re-enter his mothers womb- Maundevile (148)  speaks tjf *' Ararathe which the Jewes clepen Tanuz." Rubruck was  misinformed about the gender of this word, as inanimate objects  have no gender in Armenian (see also Chardin, <?/. a/., ii, 189; and  Klaproth, Jour. Asiat.^ ii, 301-304 ; conf. also Marco Polo, i, 47).  The first recorded ascent of Ararat was made in 1829 by Prof.  Parrot ; he gives its altitude as 17.325 ft., while Chodzko made it.  16,916 (Bryce, op. cit.y 225).

^ Sahensa is the Shahenshah prince of Ani of Georgian and Armenian  chroniclers. He was son of Zacharias (or Zakhare) and neplicw of  nhn (or Ivane), Constable of (jeorgia. The family was of Armcninr  Orpelian) descent. He was a favourite of the Queen of Georgia,  Rusudan. After the capture and destruction of Ani in 1239, he had to  serve with the Mongol troops. He and the other Georgian princes,  were present at the siege and capture of Erzerum in 1242 or 1243  (Klaproth, op. at.., 196, 202 ; and Dulaurier, 2^6, 231, 241, (/ sfq.).

272 JOURNEY OF

liaving churches, just like the French ; and every  Hermenian has in his home, in the most hononred spot, a  hand of wood holding a cross, and he places a burning  lamp before it ; and what we do with holy water to drive  away the evil spirit, they do with incense. For everv  evening they burn incense, carrying it to every corner of the  house to drive out every kind of evil.^

I took a meal with this Sahensa ; and he showed me  great politeness, as did his wife and his son called  Zacharias, i very fine and prudent young man, who asked  me, whether if he should come to you, you would keep him  with you ; for so heavily does he bear the domination of  the Tartars, that though he has abundance of all things, he  would prefer to wander in foreign lands to bearing their  domination." Moreover, they told me that they were sons  of the Roman Church ; and if the lord Pope would send  them (389) some assistance, they would themselves  subject all the neighbouring countries to the Church.

In fifteen days from that city (of Naxua ?) we entered the  country of the Soldan of Turkic on the (second) Sunday of

^ Armenian scholars whom I have consulted have not been able to  give me any information concerning the hand holding the cross men  tioned by our author. Father Alishan thinks Friar William was  misinformed. As to the custom of burning incense throughout the  house, it is still observed by Armenians on Saturday nights, to  drive away evil spirits. The same custom obtains in Greece. The  Armenians, on Saturday night also, keep a lanjp burning in a holy  place. Perhaps the cross seen by our traveller was some kind of  ickon^ before which the Greeks keep a lamp burning.

2 The Armenian chronicles speak at length of this young Zakhare,  son of Shahenshah. They say that in T249 or 1250, when Avak  Sarkis, son of Ivane (uncle of Shahenshah) died, his principality was  given to Zakhare, but after a little while the Tartars took it away from  kim to give it to Vartoish-Kontsa, widow of Avak. Zakhare served  at the head of the Georgian contingent in the Tartar army. He was  present in 1258 at the <?apture of Bagdad, and rose high in Hulagus  favour on account of his courage. Somewhere about 1260 he was,  however, accused of conspiring against the Mongols, and Hulagu  had him quartered and his body thrown to the dogs. His father died  of grief shortly after. (Klaproih, op. cit., m \ Dulaurier, 456, 4S8,  S02.)

ERIAR WILLIAM OF kUBRUCK. 2/3

Quadragesima (15th February), and the first tov/n we  found was called Marsengen.^ All the people in the burg  were Christians : Mermen ians, Curges and Greeks. The  Saracens had only the lordship. The castellan said that  he had received orders not to give provisions to any Frank,  or to ambassadors of the king of Hermenia or of Vastacius ;  so from this place, which we reached on the (second) Sunday  of Quadragesima, all the way to Cyprus, which I entered  eight days before the feast of saint John the Baptist (i6th  June) we had to buy our provisions. He who was guiding  me procured us horses ; he received also money for our  provisions, but he put it in his purse. When we came to  some field and saw a flock, he would carry off a sheep by  force, and give it to his followers to eat, and was great'y  astonished because I would not eat of his theft.

IN the (feast of they Purification ^2nd February)

I was in a town called Aim, belonging to

Sahensa, the position of which is very strong .

and there are in it a thousand churches of Hermenians

and two synagogues ot Saracens.- The Tartars have

^ The traveller &ays he left Na)tua on the 13th of January, 1255, and  that he was in Sahensa's country (/.^., Ani) after four days, or on the  i6th of January. Here he remained until after February 2nd, leaving  there on the 3rd or 4th o{ February. In eleven days {t'.c, fifteen days  in all from Naxua) he reached Marsengen, on the second Sunday of  Quadragesima (i5ih of February). F. M. Schmidt (251) says he  arrived in Marsengen on March 7th; this, 1 suppose, is simply a  slip of the pen. Marsengen is the modern MedshingerL, between  Kars and Erzerum.

- Ani was situated in the ancient Armenian canton of Shirag, a  little aboA-e the confluence of the Akhurean or Arpachai, and the  Rhah or Magazbert, an affluent of the Araxes. The town already  existed in the fifth century, a.d. From A.D. 961 to 1045 it was the  capital of Armenia. In 1064 it was captured by the Seldji'k Turks,  who lost it in 1124. It was entirely destroyed by an earthquake in  1319 (Klaprot'h, 6>/>. ^/A, 194). Vincent of Beauvais (bk. xxx, ch. xcvii,  440^) says : " In Armenia there js a noble city called Ain (Ani),  where there are a thousand churches, and an hundred thousand families

274 jourmkv of

placed a bailiff^ in il. Five preaching, friars found me  there. Four of them had come from the Province of  France, and the fifth had joined them (390) in Syria ;  and they had only one infirm servant, who knew Turkish  and a little French ; and thev had letters from the lord  P'^pe to Sartach,'^ to Mangu Chan and to Buri, like those  y ^u iG^ave mc, requesting that they be allowed to stay  in his country, and to preach the word of God, etc  When I had told them what I had seen, and how they  had received me, they took the road to Tefilis, where are  -omc of their friars, to hold council with them as to what  they should do. I told them that, thanks to those letters,  they could get through if they chose, but that they must  provide themselves well with patience and with reasons for  their coming, for having no other mission than preaching,  they would show them scant courte.sy, especially as they  had no interpreter What they did after thii^ I know not.

dwell therein, and the Tartars took it after a twelve days' si:.ge." It  was captured by the Mongols in 1239 (Dulaurier, 237). The Armenian  princes had built so many churches and chapels in it that it became the  custom to swear by the thousand and one churches of Ani (Dulaurie»,  237). Ciavijo (79) speaks of " the strong city called Auniqui."

^ Ballivum. Probably a daruga^ as the Mongols called such officers.  They were under the orders of a Mingatan or commander of a thousand  (Hammer, Gold. Horde, 238, and Deveria, Journ. Asiat., ix" sorie,  viii, 104);

'^ We learn from Raynaldus {Annates^ li, 492-494), that on the 14th  March, 1254, Pope Innocent IV wrote letters to the Sultan of Turkey  by certain Dominican friars, exhortj ng him to become a Christian^  and that on the 4th September of the same year he wrote to Sar-  tach, whom he called Sattachi illustrt Regi' Tartarorujii^ congratu-  lating him> on his conversion to Christianity, of which he had learnt  from "our beloved son John, a presbyter, and you? chaplain, whon.  you sent to us bearing presents" (see also Remusat, i1^/wi?/>i', 61).  It is just possible that the Dominicans whom our traveller met at Ani  were the bearers of these letters. 1 have found no record of any  letters of the Pope to Mangu and to Buri. Buri, by the way, had  been put to death by Batu in 1252 {supra., p. 137) ; possibly we  should read Batu instead. In 1253 Innocent IV had foundetl  additional missions among the Comans, Iberians, Alans, the  Ungarians of greater Hungary, etc. (Raynaldus, op. a'/., ii, 489).  The Dominicans had been established at Tiflis since 1240, when  the Pope sent eight members of the order thithei (Raynaldus, i'  246, 248)

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRCCK. 2,-:

So on the second Sunday after Quadragesima ''15th Feb-  ruary) we came to the head of the Araxes, and after cross! r;^:  a mountain, wc came to the Eufrates, along which we de-  scended for eight days, going always westward till we carne  to a certain fort called Camath.^ Here the Eufrates turr:>  southward toward Halapia.^ We crossed the river, co!!-  tinuing westward through very high m.ountains and deer  snow. That same year there was such an earthquake there  that in one city called Arsengen^ X thousand persons knov. r  by name were lost (391), exclusive of the poor, of whom  there was no record. During three days' ride we sav/ a  rent in the ground as if split in the commotion, and mas>c-  of earth which had slid down from the mountains and  filled the valleys : had the earth been shaken a little more,  what Isaiah said would have been fulfilled to the letter :  "Every valley shall be filled up, and every mountain and  hill shall be made low."*

We crossed the valley in which the Soldan of Turkic  had been defeated by the Tartars. It would take too long  to write how he had been defeated, but a servant of my  guide, who had been with the Tartars (in the battle;, said  that there were not over x thousand Tartars in all ; and  a Curgian slave of the Soldan's said that there were with  the Soldan two hundred thousand, all on horses. In that

^ The Kdfiaxa of Constantine Porphyrogetiitus (/)e Adminis., 226;.  the Kamkh of Edrisi, the Caumg of CUvijo 'l},), the Kemakh o*-  Gemash of modern maps (F. M. Schmidt. 251 . Schiitberger (43;  •spells the name Kamach. He says it was situated on a high mountain,  at the base of which flowed the Euphrates. This is the Kara Su,  or western branch of the Euphrates.

'^ The Haleh of Mohammedan writers, our Aleppo. Some MSS.  read Alapia, but Halapia is the usual form found in western medifeval  works.

'■'' The Arsinga of Clavijo (67). The modern Erzing-hian, about  thirty miles east of Gema;5h (Camath), on the Kara Su.

■* Isaiah, xl, 4 Here agair our traveller does not quote the text  correctly.- He has " Omnis vallis impiebitm\'' The Vulgate has,  ho\\e\'er, "^ Oiiuiis vallis cxnH>ibit7tr'''

27^ JOURNEV OF

plain in which that fight and that rout occurred, a large  lake burst out in the caPthquake ; and I said to myself  that that whole country had opened its mouth to drink in  the blood of the Saracens.^

We were in Sebaste in Lesser Hermenia in the Greater  Week,- and we visited there the sepulchre of the Forty  Martyrs. There is at that place a church of saint Blaise,  but I could not go there, for it was up in the citadel. On  the Octave of Easter (4th April) we came to Cesarea of  Capadocia, where there is a church of saint Ba.sil the Great.  After that in XV days {i.e., 19th April), we can;e to  Yconium,^ travelling by short stages and resting in many  places, for we could not get horses very quickly. And my  guide used to do this trick : he would sell (392) in every

^ \"i ^.cent qC Beauvais (bk. xxx, ch. cl, 447^) says this battle was  fought in the ^jains of Achsar, and that the Sultan had 50,000 njen  with him. Armenian historians say it was fought near a village called  Acetshnian-C^jadug (Vincent's Achsar\ in the plain between Erzerum  and Ervinghian (Dulaurier, 429). The Sultan here referred to is  Ghaiatheduin Keikosrew II. The battle was fought in 1243 or 1244.  Baidju (Rubruck's Baachu) commanded the Mongol forces. Rashi-  deddin calls the place of this celebrated battle, which put an end to the  independence of the Kingdom of Rum, Kuseh-dag^ evidently the same  as Consedrack^ the name given it by the historian Haithon (Quatre-  mere, 225 ; and Haithon, Hist. Orient., 33). This latter writer says  that Baidju had a force of 30,000 men (see also d'Ohsson, iii, 80).

^ In 1255 Talm Sunday fell on March 21st, and Easter on the 28th.  Sebaste is the modern Sivas. Guillaume of Nangis (342) writes the  n?i\ne Sains/rr, In 1281 Friar Marcus of Montefeltro built a house"  at Sivas for tlie Franciscans ''remaining among the Tartars"  {Ana/ecid Francis.^ ii, 96). Sivas was pillaged in 1 244 by the Mongols,  after the defeat 'of Ghaiatheddin. The Forty Martyrs of Sebaste  suffered death in \.v>. 320, in a pond outside the city. Their bodies  were burnt and the ashes thrown in the river. I cannot find a  record of any of these martyrs having been buried. The pool where  tV 'y were martyred is still visited by pilgrims, and the Forty Martyrs  are adored alike in the Circek, Armenian and Latu". Churches {Ac/a  S^ni-L, 10 March, 12-29 ; and Bedjan, Acta Marty, ct Sanct., ii, 325).  Si. Blaise was belieaded at Sivas, in A.D, 315. His feast is celebrated  on February 3rd {Acta Sand., 3 February, 342 ; see also Marc0  Polo, i, 46).

^ Ciuillaume of Nangis ,343) writes the name Ycoine, Joinvillc  Coyne, which is the more usual for.m in works of the period. It is the  modern Konieh.

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBKUCK.

-V7

town his requisition on it for three days.^ [ vva? much  worried over this ; but I dared not speak, fui he could  have sold or killed me or our servants ; there wouM have  been no one to say him na>'. I found severa] Fraiik? in  Vconium, and a Genoese trader from Aeon, Nich':>la5 bv  name, from Santo-Siro/ who v, itii his partner, a Vcnetia?!  called Benefatius de Molendino, had monopoiised -.11 the  alum in Turkic, so that the Soldan coula ^eil rionc of it to  any save these two ; and they resold it so dear that what  used to be sold for xv^ besants is sold for L.-

My guide presented me to the .Soldan. The Soldan said  he would be pleased to have me taken to the sea of Ider-  menia.orof Silicia.-''' But this trader ''Nicholas) knowin,^  that the Saracens would take little care of me, and that !  was wearied beyond measure with my guide's cc^mpany,  who pestered me daih' for presents, had me taken to Curta,  a port of the king of Hermenia.^ Here 1 arrived the '}ijiy

^ Suniendo in qicalibct villa procurationem sucan iribiis dichus. He  ]3robabIy had an order from Baidju lo supply P'riar Wiiliam with  horses, food and lodgings. Chinese officia;i of the present day,  travelhng in iMongolia, arc supplied witl'. like orders, called ula piao :  they frequently get paid in money, instead of taking die ]>orst.s and  supplies due to them (conf. supra^ p. 258, 273). Purchas (57) trans-  la es this plnase : '' And my guide did tliis of purpose ; taking upon  h -m to sollicite his owne business three days, in ^\^\y '['owne."

- Heyd {op. cil., i, 302) says of this Molendino that he probably  belonged to the Venetian family of Molino. and this Bonifacius de  Molendino niu-^t be the same as the " lionifaciu?. de Molinis de,  'Venetiis,'' Condottiere in the service of the Sultan of iconium at die  time of the invasion of Asia Minor by the Tartars in 1242-43, of  \vhom Sanuto «;peaks. Joinville (44) says that in his time, 'de soudanc  du Coyne estoit le plus riche roy de toute la paennime." J"rdanus ('5;  describes in detail the process of making alum as he saw it done in  a camp on the coast of Turkey, held by a noble (Genoese called  Andrcolo Cathani.

•' One MS. reads Ecilie, which Vivien de St. Martin {Asic Miiieiirfu  1, 494) thinks is the better reading, as it reproduces the nAmQ Ilck-illi,  Dy which the Turks called Cilicia. "Writing to St. Loui:-; it seems  liardly probable, ho\ve\er, that our traveller would iiave used i:ie  Turkish form.

^ Curta is the Coryrus of classical writers, and wd.^ situated a little  to the north of the Gok Su, on the coast of Cilicia. Writer."? oi the

278 lOURNKV OF

before the Ascension (5th May), and rcinained to the day  after Pentecost (17th May\ Then 1 heard that messen^^ers  had come from the king (of Hermenia) t<j his father,^ so I  put our things in a ship to be carried to Aeon, and I  myself went at once to the king's father, to learn whether he  had received any news from his son. I found him at Assis-^  with all (393) his sons, save one called Barunusin,"* who  was having" a castle built ; and he had receiveci messengers  from his son (saying) he was coming back, and that Mangu  Chan had greatly reduced the tribute for him, and that he  had granted him the privilege that no ambassadors should  enter his country / on account of this the old man with all  his sons and all his people were holding a great feast. He  had me taken to the sea, to a port called Auax f and from  there I passed over into Cyprus,^' and at Nicosia I found  vour Provincial," who the same day took me with him to

time of the Crusiidcs called this place Curm. ISarbaro calls it Curco.  He visited it al)OUt the middle of the fifteenth ceiUur)-, and says (44) :  '* It is a castell both stronge and faire and well wrought, though at  this present it be greatly decaied."

' When Heythum left in 1254 for MangiTs court, he committed the  regency of Little Armenia to his father Constantine, and to his two  sons. Levan (Lewis) and Thoros (Theodore) (Klaproth, t*p. cii.^ 214).

- .Sis in Cilicia, the capital of Little Armenia.

^ Baron Oschin was the son of Heythunu according to niost writers  (Duiaurier, 433). Father Alishan tells me, Jiowever, that he was his  b /other.

^ This was a valuable concession (see supra, p. 24S, note 2). We  may note that no mention is made of the king having induced Mangu  and his famil)- to l)e baptised : a story which Haithon gives in his  HisL Orient., 37, 39 (see supra, p. 239 ; also d'Ohsson, ii, 313}.  Maundevile (229) «quoting possibly Haiihon, says of Mangu that he  "was a gode Christene man, and baptized.'"

''' The Polos, when c04ning b.ick from iheif first journey tc^ the  court of Kubilai, came to this port on the C^ulf of Aiexandretta.  Marco Polo calls it Layas, and says that " whatsoe^er person would  travel to the interior (of the East), merchants or others, they take  their way by this city of Layas." Ayas is now an invij^nificant villagf  (Yule, Marco Polo, i, 16, 43, 45).

• He reached Cyprus on the f6th June \supra. p. 273\

^ Mtntstruui Tcstrufu. Franciscans in (.'ypriis and tiiose parts oi  Palestine which had been held by St. Louis, belonged prob.-^bly 10 the  Province of France.

FRIAR ^VILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 279

Antioch, which is in a most dilapidated condition. We  were there for the feast of the Apostles Peter and Paul  (29th June), Thence we came to Tripoli, where we held  our chapter on the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin  (15th August); and the Provincial ordered me to remain  at Aeon, not allowing me to come to you, directing me to  write you whatever I had to say by the bearer of these  presents. Not daring to disregard my vow of obedience..  I did as best I could and have written ; and I beg grace  from your great kindness for what is said either too much  or too little, or injudiciously or foolishly, as it comes from  a man with little ability, and not accustomed to compose^  such long stories.

May the peace of God, which passeth all understanding,  keep your heart and mind.

I would gladly see you and those particular friends- i  have in your kingdom ; so if it displeases not Your (394;  Majesty, I would beg you to write to the Provincial that  he allow me to come to you, to return after a little while  to the Holy Land.

^ Dktare. Though in mediiisval Latin (Hcfare rarely or never  means " to dictate," it may be that Friar William used it in that  sense. The work as we have it shows that it was hastily written and  l^adly revised. The frequent error of eum for mmm seems to point  to the report having been dictated. F. M. Schmidt (166) is of opinion  that it was. Yule {Marco Polo^ i, Z']) calls attention to the fact that  many of the most notable narratives of the' Middle Ages have been  dictated instead of being written by their authors, and that in cases  where it is impossible to ascribe this to ignorance of writing. He  cites Joinville, Marco Polo, Odoric, Nicolo Conti, Ibn Batuta, and the  monk Haithon. Perhaps to this number we must add William, of  Rubruck.

^ Anticos spe dales. Some of the MSS. read j'/i/r//w^/<Vjf. Purchas  (51) has " spirituall friends."

CcX:) JOURNEY OF .

^i^T^OU iiuisf kiunv of the Turk.^ that not one man cmt  ^^^ of ten .inioni;- them) is a Saracen ; nearly all arc  Hermenians and Greeks, and (the country) ib  Liinerned by cliildrcn. For the Soidan who was defeated  by the Tartars as I have related) had as a legitimate wife  an Iberian woman, by whom he had one son, a weakling,  u'Ik; he ordered should be Soidan (after him).^ By a  (ireek r^^iicubine, whom he gave (later on) to a certain  povverful emir, he had another; and he had /et another  by a link ; and a lot of Turks and Turkemans conspired  with thii one to kill the sons of the Christian (women).  They arranged, as 1 was told, that when they had gained  the victqjy they would destroy all the churches, and put  to death all those vv'ho would not become Saracens. He  was, however, defeated, and many of his followers were

, ^ Ghaiaibed^in's favourite wife was his second ; her naiiie was  Thamar ; she was daughter of Rusiidan, Queen of Georgia, and, if  we are to believe the statements of Armenian historians about  Rusudan, it is quite impossible o say who was Thamar's father  (Dulaurier, 216, 427). Viiicent of Beauvais (bk. xxxi, ch. xxvi, 45 ur)  says that in October, 124; Gaias.adin, Soklan of Turquie, died ; arKt  his son, whose name was Raconadius (Rokneddin), succeeded him.  This child was the son of the daughter of a Greek priest. He left  another son called Azadin (Azzeddin Kaikawus), born, it is said, of the  dau'ghtei of acertainb-urgher or captain of Iconium ; and a third called  Aladm (Alaeddin Kaikobad), by the daughter of the Queen of Georgia,  who had been his wife. Raconadius was (at the time of his fathers  death) eleven yeais old. Azadin seven. Vincent then goes on to tell,  at considerable length, of ihe rise to power of a certain Persian called  Losyr vprobably the Perwane of Mohammedan historians), who had  been the deceased sultan's chancellor, and who, on Cihaiatheddin's  death took as his wife the dead sultan's wife, the mother of Rokneddin,  whom he placed on the throne, though A/adin (^Aladin ?) had been  designated b) his father as his successor, and all the emirs had sworn  htm allegiance. This narraiise agrees clearly with that of our tra\ eller.  the Losyr of \'incent i^eing "' the powerful emir ' of wix. n friar William  speaks. Rubiuck's Paraster is Rokneddin.

Deguignes [Histoi/W ii, pt. II, 67, <7 seo.) gixes another account,  and Hammer {Histoire, i, 44) still anv)ther. I will not attempt to  unravel the discrepancies in all theSt narrn fives. It suffices that  Alaeddin dying in 1254 while on his way to Mangu's court, A,2eddin  drove his brothei Rokneddin out cf the part ()t the kingdt.m which  had been assigned him by the i\; '\gol em))eror, and for a whik?  r*?igned Alone in Tmkey.

FKIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK. 28 1

killed. A second time he got together an army, ana that  time he was made prisoner, and is still kept in chains.  Pacaster, the son of the Greek woman, has arranged with  his half-brother that he shall be Soldan, for the latter is  delicate, and they have sent him to the Tartars ; and this  has angered his relatives on the side of his mother, the  Iberian or Georgian woman. So it is that a child governs  in Turkic without a treasure, with few soldiers and many  enemies. The son of Vastacius (395 j is delicate, and is at  war with the son of Assan, who likewise is a youth, and  under the yoke of the Tartars ;^ so if the army of tb.e  Church were to come to the Holy Land, it would be very  easy to conquer or to pass through all these countries.  The King of Hungary has not at most XXX thousand  soldiers. From Cologne to Constantinople is not over  XL days in a cart. From Constantinople it is not so far as  that to the country of the King of Herraenia. In times  past valiant men passed thrc^ugh these countries, and  succeeded, though they had most powerful adversaries,  whom God has since removed from the earth.^ Nor should  we (if we followed this n^ad; be exposed to the dangers

^ Pacaster^ fiUus Grect\ procuravit de filiastro siio quod soldanus sit.  I'urchas (52) renders this " l-*acaster the vSonne of the (}reeke Concu-  bine procured of Filiast^r, that he might be Soldnn."

- Theodore Lascaris II could hardly be called a youth in 1255, for  he was then thirty-four. He succeeded his father, John V'ataces, in  1254. He was a man of considerable ability and of a cultivated mind,  but his health was ruined and his intellect affected by repeated attacks  of epilepsy. He died in 1258 or 1259 ( Finlay, History., iii, 303, 321 ;  (iibbon, vii, 360). Michel, the reigning sovereign of Bulgaria, ascended  the throne in I245 or 1246, when an infant. There was war between  John V^ataces and Bulgaria from 1245 5 '^ terminated in 1255 by thfe  utter defeat of the Bulgarians (Finlay, iii, 309, tt scg.).

'^ \\b refers to the march of Peter the Hermit and the Crusaders  through Germany, Hungary, Bulgaria and Turkey in 1096. The  " powerful adversaries" may either be the Bulgarians who, provoked  by the massacres of their people b)' the Crusaders, defeated them a<  Nissa (Nisch) ; or the Turks who, in 1097, under Kitidjarslan, Sultan  of Xicea, opposed so vigorously the advance ':>f Godfrey of Ikmilion  and his armv.

iSi

foTkWN or FRIAK WIl.LJAM Of Kl'liRUCK

"i che <ca ->r t(> tb.c mercies of the sailor men, and the  pr'ce 'vhich \\^'ii](l have to be ^c^iven for a fle(,'t would be  er'-u^h for the expenses of the i whole' land journey.^ 1  .^t.tie it uith et-nfidence. that if your [)easai"itb — 1 speak not  ■'f the princes and ncjl^lemen — would but travel like the  Tartar princes, and be content w itli like provisions, they  vouid C'-aifiuer the whole world.

It seems to me inexpedient t(^ send another friar to the  Tartars, as I went, or as the prraching friars go ; but if the  Lv»rd Pope, who is the head of all Christians, wishes to  send with proper state a bishcp, and reply to the fooh'sh-  ness the\- have alreadv written three times t(; the Franks  "Mice to Pope Innocent the Fourth of blessed memor),- and  :vvicc to \-ou : once by David, who 396) deceived >'0u, and  nou b\' mc , he would be able to tell them whatever he  pleased, and also make them repl)- in writing. They h'sten  to what( \'er a^ ambassador has to sav, and alwav;? ask \i  \\t has niore tq say ; but he must ha\e a good interpreter —  n.i\ , .-^everai interpreters — abundant travelling funds, etc.

• Rnbruck probably jiad in mind the contract made by the (.'ouncil  '.i the founii Crusade m 1201 with the Doge nf Wnico. to cavr\-  thr aimy to the Holy Land, Tlic sum agreed upon \\a£ about  '/tc'oooG Pear?. F<}U of Constoiilim-pit. 234 .

- This i> the letter of Kuyuk Khan, brouglu t(^ LytiUs by Fruir \kA\w  uf P'an de Carpine. the text of which is m d Avczac. op. cit.. 594.

r^

^fCl^

I N D E X

Aarserum, ilic cily oi, 266. Sec a'w

Arseion and Erzerun-.  Aas. Sec Alans.  Abazes or Abkhases. 12. .S"^; a 'so

(.)l)esi.  Ablutions, (<r Neslorians, 158  Acatron, the I'lophel, his prophccN-

Concerning ihe Mongols, 268  Aeon, r-ity of, 178 ; William sends his

luggaj^e 10, 278 : ordered lo retnaiii

at, 279  Adultery, punishment of, 79  Advocates, not allowed amonjr the

Mongols, 28  Aini, lown ftf, 273 ; William meets

D')niinicans there, 274  Altai/, or sour milk. 61, 85  Aladin, son ol Sultan of Turkic. 280  Ala Kul, lake, visited by J-riar John.

16 ; reached by William. 159 :

valley opening on, 160 ; rcjuie near,

161  Alania, limits of according to Isi-

dorus, 93  Alans, an officer f)f that naiion, 4 ;

the people of the, 12 ; the cart> of

the, ,^4 ; were a tribe of the '1 "ieh-

Ir, 54 ; rhey fio not drink ros/iios,

87 : also called Aas, 88 ; are not  • Ijisnialics, 89; ihuir hi^iory, 8»S.

89 ; kindness to Friar William. 89 ;

position of their country. 100; the\

pass through Sarlach".^ camp, 116;

lirigandage by Alan slaves. 1 17:

I heir method of divinaiion, [96 ;

in Summerkeur, 258 ; the mountains

o( the, 260: good armourers, 261 ;

\Nalled vill-.ige of. 262  Alayeddin Mohammed, Sultan. 15  Albania, its limits. 120  Albericus Trium Fontium, des(rilie>

ihe Mongol-, xiii : ()uoic(!, 13 1  Albert of Bollstaedt, hi-> xiew^- 01,

ihe (..^ispi.ui, wwii  Alexander, son of \'aro:-i;i\s. r.dled  10 Monj^ol court. 2'.

Alexander the Great, iiuild- wulK

in the Caucasus. \"sii 263; build-  die Jru» C.ne, joj. ihi : i,';c Ilu.i-  cn)>»s !hi^ barrier, [30

Aloha, Duke, mc» l>y l-riar jrjhn. :f

Altai mountains, lOJ

Alti Soldan, iho. 14. 15. S, aiu»  Khora/.n.i Shah.

Alum, trade ui, monopolized ii  \'(onium by two Italians. 27';

Ambassadors, to Ab.ngols «hotdf!  have rich ])resents,. 2; at Mong 1  court, 20 ; Mongol's never m,d<e  peace with nation killing ihe'r .  30 : number of at election ofKuyuk.  38 ; AmV>as>adors <»nly may lra\e;  in Tartar country, 48 ; badly ;»-eaie.'i  by Mongols, 95 ; who receive-  them, loi ; Hcythum of LitCi':  .\rmenia exempted from .Vf(»ngoi.  278 : William's advkre a> t<^ 2S2

Ammoric, iastruments frotn, ij^i.

Andrew, hriar, acts as interpreter t'oi  St. Loui.s, xxvii ; his fust vi>,it to  Mongols, xxviii : mission lo Kuyuk's  court,, ^xix ; remrns lo i'/, 'jsarea,  x\x ; report on Mon^^ftls b, wxi :  routefollowed by,xxxii ; no mention  of in Franciscans' works, xii ; \isit-  Keu Khan. I lO^ mentions Teut<<n  sip v'es at 'i'alas, I36 ; >.,4\ > Keu  Chan die<l poisotied. 163 ; Mangii  emperor at time of his arrival. \.(^y.  nn)>oslor who acc^Mnpanied hmi  trom Cyprus, 178; William tell^  Mangu'.s .secretaries ab«»ui, 229:  why he should have passed l)elueei^  fires, 240

Andronikos Ghidos, 47

Angels, build lemj^le near Kersona.

Ani, (own i^i^^ 273. Stt also .\ini.  Antichriilt» the M(jngol> his soldiers.

\\ i  Antimensium, used in Nestf)rians,

Antioch, Iriar .Vndrevv' starts !rom.  \N\ii ; captuie of by Franks, 108 :  in dilaindatefl (-.(^ndiiion, 279

An-ts'ai. See Alans.

Appeals. l)ow made. 70

Arabic, book in. i>'.;lon{,;in'; i;,i vVilli.un  26:'

284

INDEX.

Arabuccha, l>n>lher ol Mangu, 222 }  own.s his niolher's ordu, 223 ; makes  sign ol the cross, 223 ; stops quarrel  heiween Sergius and Saracens,  224

Aral, laUc. not known to Friar Jolin  and ccuUtMnporaries, 37, 131

Ararat, couniry of, 264; Mount,  269 ; no one able to climb il, 270 ;  called Massis by Armenians, 270

Araxes, liu* river, 264 ; empliesinlo  the Cur, 265 ; Virj^il quoted con-  cerninjj, 265 ; William ascends it to  source, 266 ; flows by foot of . 'Ararat,  269; William reaches source, 275

Ari'dy iwo-vv heeled Tartar can, 49

Arcacc. pUiin of, 261

Arc all, or Ovis Poli, 69

Archdeacon, of Nestorians, 185

Archers, the nation of, 26S

Arghun aka, 191 ; superintended  tribute in Asia Minor, 265 ; Domi-  nicans visit him, 271

Arik Bug:a, 184

Ark, No;ih's^ rested on Ararat, 269 ;  piece of, preserved in church, 270

Armaloch, a place m Persia, xxvii

Armenia, the Greater, 166 ; also  called Ararat country, 264

Armenians, the, 12 ; their crosses,  104 ; as interpreters, 105 ; use of  holy od, 105 ; hate the Saracens,  166 ; monks at Mangu's court.  168; their fast of St. Serkis, 1,86;  l)ishi)ps are monks, 267 ; expelling  evil s|)irits with hcdy water. 272

Armour, on horses and mules, 24 ;  of Mongols, 261

Arms of Mongols, wi ; manufactured  b}' Teuton slaves, 137 ; few arms,  261 ; description of, 261, 262

Army, of Mongols on border of  Russia, 34

Arrows, blunt ones shot at intruders,  19 ; with siher whistles as heaiis,  180 ; Mongols carry files to sharpen,  262

Arsengen, town of, 275

Arseron, city of, 181. St^c a/so  Aarserum.

Asc^r, son of Vastacius, 47

Ascelin, Friar, sent on mission 1(5  Mongols, xxiv ; his treatment at  Ilchikadai's caiup, xxv, 6 ; return  to Europe, xxv

Aspareh, town of, 139

Assan, land of, 47 ; origin of name,  47 ; is occupied by the Blacs, 130 ;  conilition of ctnmtry, 281. See also  H'akia.

Assassins, ihc, Ji8. Sec also  I lai sa.>.in.s.

Asses, wild, Otj

Assis, luwu of, 278

Astronomy, diviners knowledge of,

240  Atel, town of, 258, 259  Auax, port of Little Armenia, 278  Audience, of Friar John wilh Kuyuk

Khan, 23 ; of Friar William with

>;utach, I03;with Batu, 123-12^;

with Mangu, 171-175  Austria, invaded by Mongols, xx  Avars, Khan of the, his letter to

Maurice, 174  Axasins, the, position of country,

118. Sec also Hacsasins.  Axes demanded as tribute by

Mongols, 47  Azzeddin, Sultan of the Turks, 248,

280

B, the letter, Tartars cannot pro-  j nounce, 130  Baachu, Mongol General in Armenia,  265 ; his conquests, 265 ; William  received by him, 266 ; sends  ^Vi]llam to Naxua, 267  i Baatu, the Mongol prince, 15; cap-  j tains of Sudak on mission to, 48 ;  revenue derived by, from salt works,  52 ; his village on the Tanais, 96 ;  orders Berka to beyond the Etilia,  117; camps east of the Etilia,  121 ; his movements, 121, 259;  audience of, 123 ; description of  him, 123, 124; orders Friar  W^illiam to go to Mangu. 126 ;  Friar accompanies Baatu for five  weeks, 126 ; informed by Coman  about Franciscans, 128; size of his  horde, 12S ; n.K^re powerful than  Mangu. 138 ; ( ailed by Ken Chan  to do lunnage, 163 : his fear of Keu  Chan, 1C3 ; conlent.^ ()f his letter to  Mangu, 166 ; William reaches his  camp on return journey, 254,. 257;  builds Sarai, 2 $6 ; audience with,

257 ; remains with him a month,

258 : gives Wdliam a guide, 25^.  Scf also Bali and Batu.

Babylon, Sultan of. Friar John  travel.^ in company wilh his en\oy,

39  Badger-skins, given lo Batu, 35  Bag:dad. 6Vf Baldach.  Bairam, fea:>t of, 143  Hajothnoy, the Mongol General,

.•.65. -Si't- also Baachu.  /i'a/, \>r honey mead, 173, JOi>

INDEX.

28

Bala> llic |jioll):>H(>ta)y, 27; iFunslalcs  IcUcf of l'!m[)cr()r to llu' l^opc, 28

Baldach, cily of, 15 ; (.'aliph ol, 20;  Nestoriaii patriarch of, 215; brother  (if Mangu sent against, 222 ; his  en\(>ys ride in.nuile litters, 247

Baldaicins, costumes of, 19, 37 ;  lining of lent, 22 ; presented to  Kinperor, 23 ; worn by PViar John  at Kuyuk's court, 38 ; tunics of, 71

Baldwin II, the Emperor, his )nis-  sion lo the Comans, xxxiii

Baldwin of Hainaut, xxxiii, 102 ;  married to a Coman princess,  Xxxiii ; his mission t6 Mongol  court, xxxiv ; gives information to  Friar William, xxxiv ; his remarks  on rivers of Central Asia, 196

Balkash, lake, 140, plain south of  it well watered, 140 ; head of,  reached, 159

Baltu, son of iMangu, 184 ; visit to,  189 : his wives, 189 ; worships the  cross, 189 ; has a Neslorian master,  189 ; drinks with priests, I90

Barbaro, quoted on Golhs of Crimea,  51 ; on Tartar vsorship, 59

Barbel, dried, sold at mouth of  Tanais, 45 ; given traveller, 97

Barchin, city of, 14

Bare feet of Friars astonish Mongols,  168

Barhus, the, iheir deities, 60

Barkhalikend, town of, 14. See  also Barchin.

Bartholomew, Saint, j^lace of  martyrdom, 26S

Bartholomew of Cremona, Friar,  accompanies Friar William, 50 ;  insists on accompanyini:^ him to  Mangu's camp, 126; sutlers from  hunger, 127 ; recognized by Greek  knight, 170 ; enfeebled condition  of, 174 ; hits threshold of Emperor's  lent, 189 ; forl)idden to enter Chan's  dwelling, 192 ; i^uffers from scanty  Jood, 206 ; asks to remain in Mon-  ''golia, 251 '; money given him by  Mangu, 253 ; takes leave of  William, 254

Barunusin,*"son of King of Little  Armenia, 278

Bascarts, the, 12 ; are ihe ancient  Ungari, 36. See also Bashkirds  and Great Hungary.

Bashkirds, their customs, 61 ; then-  country, 129 See also Fascatir.

Bashkurt, the. 12. See also Bascarts.  Basil the Great, Saint, church of, at  Cacsarea, 276

Basil, son of an Kngli-.hn):vn. 21 (. 22^

Batharcan, the Mongol Frincc, 15.  See Batu.

Batho. See Batu.

Bati, a safe-conduct from, for Daniel  of (jalilch, 2 ; i<>iars sent to him by  Corenza, 8 ; his country, 8 ; arrival  of Friar John at his camp, 9 ;  audience of, 10 ; has I'opeV. letters  translated, lO ; description of In-  court, 10; his character, li ; I'riar  John returns to his camp, 31 ; his  camp on the Volga, 34; the presents  given him, 35 ; sends mission to  Kuyuk. See also Baatu and Batu.

Batoth. See Batu.

Batu, invades Hungary, xviii ; returns  to Mongolia, xx ; senl against ilie  Alti Soldan, 14

Beads, used by priests, 146

Beaver-skins, given Friar John, 3 ;  given to Bat^u, 35

Beibars, Sultan, audience granted  his envoys by Berka, 125

Bela IV, King, his defeat at Feslh b\  Mt)ngols, xix ; Pope encourages him.  xix ; second letter from Pope, xx

Belar, the. ^^Bilers.

Belevile, near Kouen, 222

Belgrade, iii Hungary, 222

Bells, iitile Used by Nestorians, 166 :  in idolaters' temples, 144 ; not used  by Eastern Christians, 144

Benedict, Friar, xxiii ; his death,  xj^vii ; his narrative of Friar John's  mission, 33-39 ; joins the mission  in Poland, 33

Benefatius de Molendino, living in  \ conium, 277

Berdagj, country of, 12. .^ee also  Brutaches.

Berka, a brother of Batu, his country.  117 ; his religion, 117 ; his recep-  tion of Sultan Beibars' envoys, 125 ;  founds Sarai, 260

Bernard of Catalogna, meets  William a' " ixua, 271

Bernardino o! Hscaianta, quoted on  missions to China, 165

Bezant. Sec Vperpera.

Bible, misquoted by Friar William, 40,  275 ; examined by Mangu, 185, 189

Bi^ni or Biguin. S c Rice Wiue.

Bilers, the, a people living near the  Volga, 12, 121 ; are Pagans, 36 ;  their religion, 121. .SV^aAc? Bulgars.

Bisermins, country of ifhe, 13 ;  language of people, 14 ; their reli-  gion, 14 ; ruined cities, 14 ; i^reat  river, 14 ; term how used, 49

286

INDEX.

Bishop, of Sudak.had \isiic(l Sitrirtch,

49 I

Bits, made by the men. 76  Black Catay, explanali<^n of name,

109. St'e also K.ara-Khitai.  Black Kitayans, 15 ; they built Imil,

16; meiiticMied b)- Benedict, ],"] ;

origin of, 109. SV^iji/jv Ivara-Khilai. !  Black Sea, earliest use of name, 41.

See also .Mare Magnum and P(jnUib.  Blacs, the, 47 ; pass through Sar-

lach's camp, il6 ; appear vviih the

liuns, 130. See also IWdiC.  Blaise, St., church of, at Sebaste, 276  Blakia, the countr)- of, 47. See ahi>

A.-isan. land of.  Blessings, sung before .Sariach, 104 ;

oNcrKmperors cup, [82, 188  Board, l)eating a, by Nestorians, 116,

184 ;

Boats, of ox -hide u.sed by Mongols,  XV ; on Tanais, 96 ; bridi;e of, 265

Aa ta, head-dress of Mongol women, |  73 ; Cotata Caten removes lier, 184

Hoatak. See H>cra.

Bohemia, King of, his advice to Frinr  John, I ; gives him letters to rela-  tives in Poland, 2 ; Franci.scans in,  128

Bohemians, their language, 130

Bolar, city of, 12. .S'c.? a/jv Bulgar.

Bolat, town of, 137 ; Friar William  ;.a»«ics near it, 138 ; person from,  iells William of (jerman pri-'st, 225

Soleslas, Duke of Sele.sia, 2

Bombay, cloth of. See Cotton.  00k of Kings, quoted, 264

Borakchin, wifeofBatu, 123

Borassyts, the, 12. Sec alsj Parro-  sil>.

BoAVS, nianufactiired by the men, 76 ;  Mf^ngu sends bow and arrows to  King of Franks, 180 ; used by  Mongols, 261

Brands, wives of Keu Cban whipped  with buriiip)}, 164 ; \^oulan whipped  with. 245

Bread, offered m iem[)les, 143 ;  offered to Finpcror by Nestorians.  -ii2 ; holy bread of Nestorians, 214

Breslau, Friar Benedict joins mission

Brother of Mangu, knew the

Gospels. 213  Brutaches, the, 12  /hiicaran. S^e Bukeram.  Buchier, Laurent, father (>f William,

177  Buchier, Koger, livnl on (ir.uKl

Pont in Paris, 177

Buchier, William, g(jldsmith at Kii  korum, 177 ; his adopted son, 1;  work he was doing for Empei  178; William writes to h.m, i;  his friend Bulgai, 187 ; sends rri  foe to Bulgai, 207 ; fountain bi  by, in palace al Caracarum, 2(  VVilliam dines with, 211 ;  wife, 211 ; gives William iron  wafers, vestments, etc.. 215 ;  scholarship, 215: his orato  215 ; his illness, 216 ; was a si;  of Arabuccha, 222 ; how captur

222 ; first belonged to Manj.  mother, 223 ; Mangu's present

223 ; acts as chief butler at fe;  247 ; William stops in house  253 ; 1^1'' i^resenls to Kine L •»  254

Buddhism, at Cailac, 142 ; i;^ M

golia, 145, 233  Ihikerain^ tunics t)>, 71, 74 ; hats

153 ; Cotata Caten gives a piece

185 ; its value, 186  Bulgai, the secretary, quest!

William, 168 ; fasts on Frid?

187 ; cf)ndemns persons to de?

189 ; inquires mto Bartholome

offence, 192 ; examines all foicigr

in Caracarum, 221 ; searches

Assassins, 222 ; Friar Barthoioiv

asks him for leave to remain

Mongolia, 2£i  Bulgar, of the ^'olga, 12 ; pe<;

are Mahommedans, 122. ^t"* i

Bilers.  Bulgar, town of, 121  Bulgaria, Creator, 12, 100, 129 : 1

from. 70; Etilia conies from, i:

cities of, 121 ; Pascaiir lies to •.

of it, 129 ; Bulgars come from, i

rules over Pascal ir. 131. Se^ <

Bilers.  Bulgaria, Minor, 47 ; people

pass by Sarlach's camp, 1 16  Bulgars, invade l!uropc with

lluns, 130  Bull, gold, badge of author

181  Buri, .son of Chagalai, si(.ny ol

death, 136 ; his quarrel with Hi  137 ; Dominicans iH-aring let

to, 274  Buriats, their worship, 59  Burin, .1 Mongol rhiet, 15  Burithabet, C'uatry of, 151  Burning of dead by I'iguvs, 147  Bussuiman, ilu countiy v>! the,

.SVi a/s(> I'lsormirjs.  Butter, "l^ pnparatioM, OS

INDEX.

287

Cachs, iho, 12. See. also Kakhelhi,

1 X' ij'/ie of.  Cadan, a Mongol chief, 15  Caesarea, in Cappadocia, xxx, xxxii ;

W' Ilia 111 arrives at, 276  Cailac, town of, 139, 140 ; temples

in, 142 ; ileparture ' from, 159 ;

secretary of Baatu wailed for at, 166  Cairo. See Babylon.  Camath, the fort of, 275  CamelSj richl\ caparisonedj presented

10 Emperor, 24 ; drawing carls, 57 ;

looked after by the men, 76  Camps, how pitched, 56 ; positions

in, assigned to each one, 239  Camus, wife of Keu Chan, 230. See

also Ogul Gaimish.  Cangle, the, 13; position of country,

I r8 ; origin of name and history of,

T 19 ; extent of their country, 129 ;

are a 1)ranch of the Comans, 129 ;

length' of journey through their

counirx. 131. See also Comans,^

Ivangitae, a7id Kankali.  Cannibalism, charge of, against

Monro's, 64 ; against Tibetans and

Chinese, 152  Canov, town of; arrival at, 4  Capchat. See Comans and Kipchak.  Capital punishment, when imposed,

79  Captargac^ or pouch, 65, 66  Captives, terrible condition ,)f, 176,

177  Caracarum, where siluaied, iii,  149 ; the Mongols' royal city, 116 ;  great idol at, 144; many Cathayans  at, 156; snow at, 170; Friar  William allowed to \isil, 175 ;  ^[angu goes toward, 196 ; palace  at, 207 ; buildings in, 207 ; great  lountain in palace at, 208 ; arrival  at, 211; marker, church, 211 ;  Europeans found in, 211 ; size of  city, 220 ; Saracelh and Cathayan  (]uarters, 221 ; Chan returns to, 247 ;  learned Nestorian monk arrives at,  253 : William returns to, 253  Caracatayans. 6V^ Kara-Khitai.  Caiaiosnu's^ by whom drunk, 67 ;

is clarified mare's milk, 173, 208  Carnival of Eastern Christians, 202  C'"rp eaien at Nestorian feast, 186  Carpenter work, done by the men-, 76  Carrion, earen by Mongols, 63, 64  Carts, used by Friar William, 49 ;  by Russian traders, 49 ; carrying  tents, 54, 55 ; number of. in Mon-  gol camp, 56, 57 ; sacred images  carried in, 59

Caspian mountains, 118

Caspian Sea, the, Friar Andrew  skirts, xxxii ; early notions con-  cerning, xxxvii ; 36, 129 ; Etilia  empties into, 100, 118 ; mountain»^  around it, 119 ; has no outlei 119,  120; river Jagac emjuies into it,  129. See also Sirsan, Sea of.

Cassaria. See ( lazaria.

Cataia, stuffs front, brought to the  Mongols, 70

Catan, a Mongol chief, 8

Calen, a Mongol title, 184

Cathay, gigantic idol in, 144 ; identi-  fied with country of Seres, 155 ;  provinces of, 155 ; distance of from  Mangu's camp, 196 ; priests from.  196, 198; their stories, 199, 200 :  its position, 200 ; money of, 201 ;  writing of, 201 ; description of  writing, 202 ; Mangu sends hi^  brother against, 222 ; priest l"rom.  discusses with William, 231 ; rein-  carnate lama from, 231 ; bishop of  Nestorians in, 244

Cathayans, li\e in the east, log ; ar..-  small, 155 ; their speech, 156 ; are  good artisans, 156 ; sons follow  father's business, 156; their tribute  (o the Mongols, 1 56 ; their medical  knowledge, 1 56 ; their quarter in  Caracarum, 221

Cattle, of the Tanguts, 151 ;" of the  Mu<\ 154 ; die from cold, 170

Caucasus mountains, 135 ; nations  bving in, 157

Caule, the, tribute they paid-M^Mi-  gols, 201

Cemanum, the town of, 269, 270

Ceremonial at Mongol prince's  court, 7 ; nl Bati's court, 9, 10 ;  at election of Emperor, 19, 21 ; at  audience of Friar John with Em-  }3eror, 23 ; Emperor listened to  kneeling, 28 ; as regards steps lead-  ing to throne, 38 ; horses left at dis-  tance from tent, 167 ; followed by  William at audience with Mangu.  171, 172 ef seq.

Cervoise, different varietie:^ of, 62, 166

Cham, or diviner, loS, 109, 239

Chapels, Christian, on carts, xxxi ;  at Mangu's camp, 168

Charmagan, the Mongol General.  265

Charms, to keep off devils, 162 ; to  make one love, 244

Chase, Mongol mode, 71

Chaur Bigui, daughter of Unc rl.<tr>,

'•15

288

INDEX.

Cherkesses, iheir couniry, oo. .S><'

alu) Kerkis.  Cherneglove, Duke of, met

Jtihn, 31

Dy

Friar

Chestb, of wickerwork, 55 ; used by  Mongols to carry bedding and  valuables, 56

Chichegan, daughtei of Chingis  Khan, 149

Childbirth, position of Mongol women  in, 75

Chimkent, town of, xxxii, 14. See  also lanckint.

Chinchin, the, story of, 199, 200 ;  origin of story, 200 .

Chingay, the prothonotary, 23, 27 ;  translates letter of Emperor to the  Pope, 28

Ching^is Khan, conrounded with  King David, xiii ; Friar Andrew's  report on, xxxi ; his ordinances,  79 ; his title of First father, 82 ;  first to use title of Khan, 108 ; his  history, 1 14; defeats Unc chan,  115; his wife, 115; his sons and  descendants, 133 ; marries his  daughter to King of Uigurs, 149 ;  captured by the TanguLs, 150 ; his  ordu in Onankerule, 196 ; all  must serve him while able, 199 ;  explanation of his name, 249

Chirenen. Sec Siremon.

Choir, in idolaters' temples, 144^

Choranza. .SVt- Corenza.

Christians, among the Mongols,  xxvii; ai Kuyuk's Court, 29 : in the^  Crimea. 36 ; do not drink cosm/'s,  87 : amcmg the Mongols, 89 : Nes-  Lorians' exaggeration al^oul, 110:  how treated by Sartach, 116; at  Cailac, 142 ; Uigurs are, 147 : at  Mangii's camp, i68 : at Caracarum,  213, 2I4 ; hold service on Easier  eve, 216

Chu, river, xxxii, 138, 139

C^ft eh'uan, quoted in story of the  Chinchin. 200

Chuguchak, town of, 16

Church, Christian, in Caracarum,  -221, 252

Churches, the, 152

Circasses, the. 12 ; are Christians, 36

Cirina, daughter of Mangu, 172 ;  gives \cst( Brians drink, 186, 19 1 ;  visit to, 190 ; she worships the  (T(jss, 191

Clapping^ of hands, when guest  drinks, 1 6, 63 ; as sign of amuse-  ment, 124; as mark of respeci,  138; at- En\[>eror's feast, 247

Clement, Saint, where martyred, 42,

Climate, of Mongolia, 170, 183, 210

Clothing, of Mongols, Jo, 71 ; worn  by Friar William on journey, 128 ;  of priests at Cailac, 143, 145 ; of  lugur priests, 146 ; of Longa and  Solanga envoys, 153; of priests,  158; of Armenian monk, 168;  sent the travellers, 171 ; worn by  Mangu Khan, 172 ; changed each  day at feast, 247

Coiac, a Nestorian secretary of Sar-  tach, loi ; receive?; travellers, loi ;  asks them to leave their vestments  and books with him, 105, 106 ;  William asks him to return vest-  ments, books, etc. , 256 ; gives  William letter to his father, 256,  257 ; his father restores property of  William, 259

Cologne, distance from, to Constanti-  nople, 281

Coleman, Prince, Gregory IX. en-  courages him, XX

Comama, its boundaries, 12 ; Tartar  camp near border of, 34 ; Friar  John's mission leaves it, 35 ; identi-  fied with Pontus, 35 ; countries con-  terminous with, 36 ; Friar William  traverses it, 92

Comans, conquered by the Mongols  xix ; Friar John crosses country of,  8 : rivers in their country, 8 ; killed  or driven away by Tartars, 13 ; the  Cangle Comans, 13 ; escort Friar  John, 31 ; used to live in the Crimea,  51 ; dispersed by the Tartars, 52 ;  mortuary customs, 82; great number  of tombs, 85, 94 ; called Capchai,  92 i identified with the \'alans, 93 ;  origin of name, 93 ; Comans Cap-  chac, roi ; -Baldwin of Ilainaut  marries princess of, t02 ; met at  Batu's camp, 127 ; conversion by  Dominicans, 127

Communion, administered In William  to lonas. 218

Con cham, 108 ; he assists Turks  against Franks, 109 ; his successor,  no

Concubines, of Mangu. 190 : one of  ihcin ill, 245 : how result of illness  was ascertained, 245, 246

Confessuon necessary before tieaih  penalty can he carried out, 79

Conies, eaten'by Mongols. 69

Conrad, Duke of Lencty, 2 ; his  presents to Friar John, 3 ; he assists  missidh, 33

INDEX.

289

Constantinople, 12 { traders from  met at Kiew,' 32 ; dismncc from to  (iazaria, 42 ; traders (unn at Sudak,  48 ; called 7ji//a, 83 ; distance to  Cologne, 281

Corenza, a Mongol chief, 5 ; Fiiar  John starts for his camp, 6 ; his  forces, 6 ; his demands f(;r presents,  7 ; letters of Pope given him, 7 ;  sends friars to Bati, 8 } Friar John  reaches his camp oh teturn journey,  31. Sf£ a/.w Cnroniza..

Cosmas, a Russian goldsmith, 26

C0S//10S, or Kuniiz, 62, 186, 266 ;  much used in summer, 63 ; its  manufacture, 66 ; made by the men,  76 ; Friar William fust tastes it,  85 ; not dfunk by Christians, 87 :  valued by Mongols, 91 ; where  placed in Batu's tent, 123 ; offered  by Hatu to honoured guests, 125 ;  on bench in Mangu's tent, 172 ;

■ sprinkled on" felt idols, 222 ; feast  when new cosmos is drunk, 242 ;  tiu;u"!lity drunk in feast, 248

Cosmos, a weight of silver, 156. See  also /ascot.

Costumes of Mongol chiefs, 19 ; of  Mangu, 172

Cota, second wife of Mangu, 190 ;  . visit to, 190 J her illness, 190, 192,  193 ; gives Sergius presents, 194 ;  teaches William Mexigol, 194 ; her  recovery, 195 ; has a relapse, 222.  223

Cotata Caten, w ife gf Mangu, sends  William clothing, 171 ; visits Nes-  torian chapel, 184 ; distributes  presents, 185, 203 ; ceremony when  drinking, 186 : gets tipsy, l§6 ;  fasts, 203 : sends William presents  during fast, 206 ; causes a Nes-  lorian and his wife to be put to  death, 244 ; Mangu punishes her,

245

Cotton, cloths of, 44 i sold at Sudak,  44 ; brought from Cataia and  Persia, 70 ; wadding of, 7 1

Council of Lyons, approves of send-  ing missions to Mongols, xxii ;  object of council, xxii : its action  concerning Mongol invasion, xxiii

Council, of chiefs at election of  Emperor, xxi, 20

Court, Friar William's first visit to  Mangu's, 167

Cracovir, Duchess of, makes presents  10 Friar John, 3 ; bishop of, gets  Vassilko to aid Friar John, 3

Crit, the people of, in. See also  Kefait.

Crosminians, the, 265. See also  Kh(}razmians.

Cross, Neslcjrians and . Armenians  make it without image of Christ,  104, 191 ; Baltu worships if, 189 ;  Cota worships il, "^90 ; brought from  Jerusalem, 191 ; used for divina-  tion, 193

Culan, or Wild Ass, 69, T34

Cups, of wood useti by the Mongols,  60, 64 ; of gold .in Baatu's tent,  123 ; presenting, as act c^f homage,  163 ; blessing Emperor's, 1S2

Cur, the river, 264 ; bridge of boats  over, 265

Curd, dry, how used, 68

Curges, the, 264. Set^'aho Georgians.

Cu^gia, the country of, 264 ; (Weaier,  . 265, See aho Georgia.

Cnna^ explanation of the word, 57

Curoniza, a Mongol chief, 34 : ll;i•^ es  Friar John liorses and supj)lies for  journey, 34. See aho Corenza.

Curta, port of, William reaches it.  277

Cynocephalae, the, 12, 36. See aho  Dog-faced people.

Cyprus, 102; date of William's arri-  val in. 273 : arrives in, 27S

Dahurs, the, their deities, 60  Dalmatia, invaded by Mongols, xx  Damascus, Christian Ironi, 178  Damietta, capivulaiion of, xxx; Volga

wider than Mile at, 258  Dancing, when guest drinks, 63 :  before Coiac, loi ; at Emperors  feast, 247  Daniel, Duke of Galitch, receives a  safe-conduct to the Mongol camp,  2 ; goes to Tartars, 3 ; greets Friai  John on return, 32 : ha sends mes-  sage and "envoy to Pope, J2  Dauilov, Friar John iil at, 4  Danube, border of Tartars' dominions,

47 ; border of Alania, 93  Daruga, a Mongol prefect, 5, 274  David, envoy to St Louis, xxvii-ix,  xxxii, 102 ; tells of the early home  of the Tartars, 114; William tells  Mangu's secretaries about, ^229 ;  Mangu calls hmi .m impostor. 249.  See also SabeddfU ^'•lorrilat i'>avid.  David, Ki«g, confounded N^iip

Chingi» Khan, xiii  David, a Nestorian leaeher o\ Baku,  189 ; gets Chan 10 ^evid Willmm  wine and food, 206

290

INDEX.

Dead, l»urnt by Uigurs, 147 ; eaten  in Tibet, 151 ; Manga does not  visit chapel because dead were put  ill it, 213; property of dead puri  fied by fire, 240

Demugin, a name of Chingis Khan,  249

Derbend, town of, 120, 121, 262. See  also Iron Gate.

Desht-Kipchak. See Comans.

Devils, attack travellers, 161 ; ex-  pelling, 193 ; evoked by diviner.s,  246 ; how exorcised by Armenians,  272

Diseases, extraction of in shape of  worm, 243

Divin&tion, by scapulomancy, 187,  188 ; by sifting dust, 219 ; by a  horse, 243 ; by hypnotic sleep,  245, 246

Diviners, tell Emperor of holy days,  182 ; location of their tents, 184 ;  of Saracens, 216, 219 ; of Ruthen-  ians, 219 ; Mongols trust in, 236 ;  their chief, his duties, 239 ; know-  ledge of astronomy, 240 ; pre-  dictions, 240 ; accuse ,a woman of  witchcraft, 243 ; storm-making by,  245 : cAoke devils, 246

Dnieper, river. See Neper.

Dog^s, kingdom of, mentioned in  Chinese annals, 36 ; of Albania,  120 ; drag carts, 120

Dog^-faced people, 12, 36 ; dog-  headed people mentioned by Soli-  nus, ;^6, 198. .Vi?;' rt /f<7 Cynocephalo;.

Dokuz Khatun, married to Tului  and to Hulagu, 115 ; a Kerait  Christian, 116

Dominicans, when first in Hungary,  127 ; in Pascatir. 13 1 ; at Tauris,  271 ; at Aini, 274 ; William's  advice to, 274 ; their missions,  274

Don, the river, first called by this  name by Friar John, 8 ; mentioned  by Itenedict, 34 ; its sources, 97.  S^e also Tanais.

Dragons, attack travellers, 161

Dre^s left after making kumiss, by  whom used, 67, 208

Drinking^, excessive, at election of  Emperor, 20, 22 ; drunkenness  common, 63 ; among Nesiorians,  158, 192,207 ; of Mongol Emperors,  175; ceremony when Colala Caten  drank, 186 ; bout, 248

Drinks, used by Mongols, 20, 62, 64,

Drum, magic, 246

Drunken persons, offences condoned,

137  Dubarlaus, a Russian clerk, 27  Dung, ihy, used as fuel, 172  Dye, rrd, procured from blood of the

Chinchni, 199

Earthquake at Arsengen, 275  East side, teiu of Em[)eror entered!

by, 23

Easter, of the Saracens, 143 ; of the  Armenians, 187 ; great feast of  Etnperor at, 207

Ebi nor, reference to, 160

Ecclesiastus, quoted by Friar  Willi.: in, 40

Eclipses, predicted by diviners, 240 ;  custonis when they occur, 240

Egypt, river t)f, 96

Eldegai, procurator of Bati, questions  Friar John, 9 ; tells him he must  go to Emperor's court, il

Election of Emperor, 18, 19; where  made, 21 ; dress of nobles at, 37

Elisabethpol, the town of, 265

Embroidery, on felt by Mongols.  54 ; seen in Christian chapel, 168

Emperor of Mongols, speaks through  secretary, never divectly to strangers  at court, 28, i74 ; his throne, 210 ;  never travels twice over same road.  223

Envoys, false, how punished, 80.  181 ; mark of honour shown, 138 ;  from I^onga and Solanga, 153 :  how cared for by the Muc, 154 ;  envoys dying in China, how^ treated,  165, 166; of Vastacius, 169:  slighted at audience, 173 ; how  treated at Mangu's court, 178 :  sent by Soldaii of Mont Real and  Crac, 178 ; false envoy, 178, 179 ;  must pass between fires, 241 ; of  Caliph ol Bagdad, 247 ; object of  their mission, 247 ; their answer to  Mangu, 24S ; of Soldan of India,  248 ; William objects to name  being applied to him, 251

Epiphany, Nestorian feast on octave  of, 1 84

Equius, town of, 139

Emac, town of, 15

Erzerum, visited by Friar Andrew,  xxxii ; reached by William, 266.  See also Aarserum.

Erzinghian. See Arsengen.

Ethil, the river, mentioned by Bene  did, 34. See also Eiilia ana \'»)lga.

Etiha, the river, distance from io the  Tanais, 93 ; its source, lOO ; course

!NDi:X.

291

of, ^00; I'riiir Wil!i;u(i reaches il,

107; its si/.i; ;iii(l course, \ iH; rises

like iheNflc, 119; vilhij^e on, 120;

liuri WiiiUs 10 piisUire al'mj^ it,

137?^*^^'"' "f Sarai on the, 2-56;

!/)wcr course of, 258  Etreu, (leserl of, the early home of

ihe 'J'arlars, 1 14  Eudes de Chateau-Roux, 179. See

a/,o Olo.  Eufrates, ihe river, its scyurce, 266 ;

Wiiliain unal)!e to visit source, 267 ;

W'ilh'am fiillovvs its course to

C^aiiiath. 275  Europe, fear of Moni^ols in, xiv ;

di-^re^ards Emperor Frederic's

letter, \ix  Execution, mode of, of Mongol

princes, 137  Extreme unction, 217 ; received by

the Nestorian Jonas, 218

Falcons, peregrine, 69 ; Mangu has

Some during audience, 173  Farfar, the river, xvii  Fast, of Jonah, 186 ; of Saint Serkis,

186 ; severity of, among Nestorians,

206  Feast, at Emperor's election, 22 ;

drinking at, 63; c>f Nestorians, 158;

dates of, settled by diviners, 182 ;

given in Nestorian chaiK-l, 186;

t^njperor's annual ones at Cara-

carum, 207 ; on 9th May, 241 ; on

7th June, '247; clothing changed

each day of, 247  Feet, of traveller, frozen, 170  Felt, covers Mongol tents, 54 ; idols

"^ 58, 59, 149 5 various uses of,

71 ; stockings, 128 ; images under

care of soothsayers, 149  Ferry*boats over Tanais, 96  Fires, passage between, >xxi ;

reasons given h^ Mongols for, 9,

76, 240 ; l^'riars and presents pass

between, 35 ; why Friar Andrew

should have complied with custom,

240  First day of month, religious festival

on, 143 ; felt images worshipped

on; 149  Fish, sold at mouth of Tanais, 45 ;

in river Tanais, 97 ; eaten at

Nestorian feast, t86  Flagons, long-necked, 166  Flour, whence procured, 68  Fonts, Ijaptismal, consecrated by

Nestorians, 185  Food, scant supply given Friar John

at Bati's camp, lO ; at the

Emperr)r's court, 26; of' Mongols,  65, 68, 69, r32 ; d:iily allowance to  WiJHam, 183; vvhilc living wi'h  Sergius, 202 ; poor qualil;/ of, 206

Forests, of (ja/.atia, 51 ; of Rus:»ia,  98, 99

Fortune-telling, 242

Forty Martyrs, sepulchre of the, 276

Fountain, in palace at Caracarijln.  208

Fox-skin gowns, given I'Viar John,

30  Franciscans, in Hungary, 127  Frederic II, the Emperor, his letter

to King of England, xviii, xix  Frost, date of earliest, 135  Fruit, offered in temples, 143  Fuel, of dry dung or briars, 133, IJ^  Furs, trade in, at Sudak, 44 ; frrmt

Russia, brought the Mongols, 70 ;

like seal-skin worn by Mangu, 172;

used as currency in Russia, 202

Gaiatheddin, Sultan of Turkey, 280

Ganges, the city of, 265

Gates, to great tents, 19

Gazaria, its position, 42, 45 ; de-  scription of coast, 50, 51 ; ditch at  end of, 91

Gazars, the, 12 ; are Christians, 36 ;  city in their country. 36. See also  Khazars.

Gazelles, plentiful in Mongolia, 69

Gemash. See Camath.

Genuflexions, three before door of  Mongol prince's lent, 6, lo ; made  to the south, 22 ; Chinese envoy to  Uigurs refuses to make, 22 ; four  niade at audience with Emperor,  23 ; before Sartac't, 104 ; before  Baatu, 123, 124 ; priests exempted,  171 ; before Mangu, 173

Georgians, the, 12 ; princes of the,  at Mongol court, 20 ; are Chris-  tians, 36 ; befriend the Friars, 39;  use Greek language in church ser-  vices, 39 ; origin of their name,  39, 264 ; do not eat Mongol food or  drink kumis:^, S7 ; their mountains,  1 1 9. See also Curges.

Germans, prisoners at Talas, xxxi,  xxxii ; esteemed by Moxel, 99 ; a  female slave, 245 ; baptized by  William at Karakorum, 247 ; at  Sarai, 258. See also Teutons.

Ghuzz Turks, 36, 42, 54. See als^  Khazars.

Girls, how dressed among the Mon-  gols, 72 ; how they wear their hair,  72

U2

20'

INDEX.

Glass, used at Bolat, 13;^

Goats, kept in tent, 59; by whom

itfmied, 70  God. Uiguia' btlief in, 148, 234 ;

Til ins* t-hcory cunce/ning, 233 ;

Mongols' idea of, explained by

Mi'.ngu, 235 ; Mangu's references

to, in letter, 248. 249, 250, 251  Gofieriche, John, a-jcompanies hriar

Andrew, xxix  Gojd; chan, 21, 108. S<e also Kha-

khaii.  Go^ Ma^;og, .\':.xi, 108, 109  Golcl, TeuLvi'i Slaves employed digging

for, 137 ' found in Tibet, 152  Golden bturt», from Catai'aand Persia,

70  Gosset, brarer of presents, acconv-

panies P>iar William, 50 ; ordered

back lo 3i-itach's camp, 126 ; haril-

shipij endured, 257 ; stops ^Yilh a

Gcrinan ai Sarai, 259  Got and Marg-oth, people of, xxxi  Goths, in the Crimea, Tfi ; their

language, 51  Gowns, of far. worn !)y Mongols,

70; wadqled, 71 ; lied on right

side, 73  Grapes, at Kinchat, 13^: in Caucasus.

262  Grate, for .6re in >eni, 172  Great Hungary, 12. See also Bas-

carts.  Great Soldan, 15. See also AUi

Soldan:  Greece, 12. See also Va.stacuis,

country of.  Greek, Ciuistian, ai Kuyuk's court,

29 ; do not tirink costiios, 87 ; uf

Gaoaria, use bells, 145 ; knighi

recognises Bartholomew, 170 ;

bishops are r^onks, 267  Gregory IX, Pope', his action on

Monrol ii:v.>'v n, xix, xx  Greyhounds, laught to sii on horf^es.

248  Grirnisiawa, Oiiohess of Cracow,

3  Gi'itii, .:ry cr.rd, i'.S varitnis names, 68;

vnadv by the women, 75  Guardian deity, 58  Guchluk Khan, 110. Sec il>o ]<ihny

Kin;:  Cu"htl, .vr;n of Ogoda', 164  GuJCiC, of l^riar William to viangu't-

cour!, 12'-; gets drunk, 169; has

leave -taking ot rhc Friar, 176 ;

«.niide's cciuiuci on return jo''.rney,

j^73, 276  Guido, lord t>f T rapcsund, 40

Guitar, 62, 87, roi ; playing, when  drinlcing, 11,62, 63; specially (»f  people of Organum, 141

Gur Khan, io8. 110. S^e also Con  cham.

Hacsasins, try to kill Mangu, 222.  Sfe also M ukdet and Assassins.

Hair, how worn by Mongols, 72

Hair-cloth garment, 168

Hakluyt, Richard, first publishrs  i^'riar William's work, xxxix

Halapia, the t(nvn >.)\^ 275

Hands, joined in worship I )yido!a.ifrs.  143 ; shaking of, 176, 1S4

Hardships, on return journe\ o'  Friar John, 30. 31 ; of Friar Wifli^jm  on journey, 127, 132, 133 ; a'  Mangu's camp, 166, 169 ; on his  return journey, 255

Hares, ni Mongolia. 69

Hat, removing, contrary to Armenian  and Greek custom, 204

Hawks, manner of flying tliem. 69 :  from the Moxel's country, 99

Head-dress, of Mongol women, 73 :  of Longa and Solanga e-ivoys, 153

Henry of Lorraine, his letter :>.  Duke of Brabant, xviii

Heythum, Kmg of Little Armenia.  225 ; William gets news of, 255 ;  his journey, 255 : kindnes? 10  William's .servants, 257 : new?  icceived from by father, 27S

Himatala, head-dreis of women of. 74

Hircania, 266

Holy oil, asked of Friar William. 105

Holy Sepulchre, Order of. owned  land ai Naxua, 271 .

Homo Dei, the dragoman, 50. 126:  gets drunk at court, 173 : sells in  Cyprur a piece of bukerani, 186 ;  money given him for return jonrney,  253 ; gi\es lo Tauris, 267

Honey, used in drinks. 72 ; grea.  (juaniities among the Moxel, 99

Korns from Armenia, 179

Horses, relays in Comania, 12, 131 :  m Mongolia, t8 : where kepi .luring  elecLion o'i Emiien-r. 19 ; richness  of harness, 20 : supj)lied mission by  Tartars, 34 ; sacrificed at funerais,  81 ; on v'isitiiig court people alighi  from, 167 r consecr.it-ion of whit»,  horses, 241 : divination b>, 243

Hsi-an Fu, eliy of, 157

Hsi Liao, the dynasty (.^i the, 109.  Sf! also Kaia-Khitai.

Hua-yiin^j^ Khc chth, quotetl on stor/  of the Chinchin, 200

y.-j^;-,

INDEX.

293

Hugh of Santocaro, ihe Lcj^aiC; 30

Httittrs. Sf£ Incurs and Uigur?;.

Hungarians, ai Mongol cuurl, 27,  246 ; brigandage by Hungarian  slaves, 117 ; met with at Batu's  camp, T27 ; their language same as  that of Pascalir, 1 29 ; at M angu's  camp, 168

Hungary, King of, his 1 U. used by  Batu, 105 the kingc««m of, "12;  cause of retreat of Mongols from,  25 ; ravaged by Batu, 34 ; Ruscia  reaches to, 94 ; Dominicans in,  127 ; Franciscans in, 127 ; army of  King, 281 '

Huns, came from Pascatir, 133

Hyberia, 42. See also Georgia.

Hypnotic sleep, German slave [Kit  into, 245, 246

lam, post station, 10 1, 160, 161, 165;  also an official, his duties, 178

lanckint, city of, 14, 37

/aacot, its value, 156, 185, 191 ;  connrerfeit one, 217 ; Maiigu gives  Dufiucr an hundiPd. 223 ; rotuscd  by William, 236 ; \Viliir-tm tfivcs  t>ne to poor at Caracarum, 253

ibers, the, 12, 46. .S"^*' also Georgians.

Ibn Alathir, quoted, 43

Ice, dale when first seen. 135

Idolaters, first met with, 141 ; their  temples, 142. 143, 144; their fables,

Idols, position of, in temples, 144 ;  size of, 144 ; under care of the  diviners, 239

Ilchikadai, sends mission to St.  Louis, xxvii, 102 ; niission un-  authorised, xxviii

Hi river, xxxii, 139

Jlkhan, a title, 108

Iliac, the, same as Blacs, 130

Image of Emperor, worshipped by  Mongols, 35, 59; of felt in tent,  58, 59 ; how made, 59 ; winged,  142 ; of deceased, made by Uigurs,  148

Imil, town of, 16, 254 ; Friar Andrew  received by Ogul Gaimish at, xxix :  the river, 161, 162. See aho Omyl.

Immortals, land of, beyond Cathay,  200

Incense, burnt in temples, 143 ; used  by Nestorians, 184

India, presents from a Soldan of, 248 ;  William travels with envoys from,  24C_

Inheritance, rules of, among the  Mongols, 78

Irmocent iV, Pope, elected, xxi ;

proclaims cmsade against Mongols,  xxi ; organises nu5sions to Mo igols,  XX i ; reasons for, xxi ; his first  envoys, xxiii, xxiv , Sei^ds; new mis-  sion in 1247, xxiv

Interpreter, of Friar Wijliam. 50 ;  not fluent", 88 : unreliable, 90 ; *ho  acted as, for translating King Louis'  letter, 105 ; gets orunk, 173 ; new  one promised hmi bv WilU»m  Buchier, 17^

Iron exacted as tijbtite by Mongols,

47

Iron gate, the,- ioo, 119, 120, 261 ;  distance to Bulgar. 122 ; made by  Alexander, 262

Irrigated plair /•..uhed, 134

Isaiah, (n'.oled, 264. 275

Isidorus of Seville quoted, 93, 118;  his -inew* on ihe ('aspian wrong,  1 20 ; On dogs of Albania, 1 20 :  concerning the Huns, 130; on the  fortress of Seres, 155 ; hi.? stories ot  monsters, 198

Ismaelians, their mission to England  and France, \iv ; reason for mission.  xvi ; opimioM of, on origin ot Tart?.fS,  xvii

Israel, losr iribes of, Tartars said \o  belong to. 114

I toga, the^god, 246

lugurs, their country, 141 ; their re-  ligion. 143 ; dress of their priesis,  146 ; Tartars use their script, 147 ;  burn their dead., 147 ; religious  belief. 148, 149; their early country,  150; people small-sized, 152 . their  language, 152 ; mode of wriiing.  202. See also \}'\gViX?>.

lurl. or tent, 55

Jabkam, river, 161

Jaec, Jagac, or Jaiac. the river, 8,  129 ; forms border ot the Kangitae  country, 36.

Jamiam^ officer thus called receives  envoys. loi

Jews, of the Caucasus, 12: Khazars  mostly Jews, 36 ; believed Tartars  were of their race, 114: in Samaron,  263 ; m Fersiao. 264  i«7ani quoted, 17

John of Beaumont, 123  ohn Ducas Vataces. See Vastacius.  ohn, Friar, of Pian de Carpine, sent  on mission to Mongols, xxii ; his  name, xxi ; date of departure on  mission, xxiii ; sent to Paris by  Pope, xxvi : probably iiret 'F riai

294

INDEX.

William '>[' Kobiiick, \xvi ; his dress |  av audience ol HaaUi, 123 ; his I  iv.uc joins Friar William's, 134

John, King, of the Naiman, no; his |  hisLory, uo r^/ •yc/. ^ his heir, 114 I

John of Piano, suffers martyrdom,  xw ii

John, ihe PitsbyLer, his mission from  Sartach, 48, 274

Joinville, Sire de, quoted al.>out Ogul  Gaimish's aetion on receipt ol pre-  sents ['iom St. Louis, xxix ; letter  of Empress Ogul (iaimish, xxx ;  about Trebizonde. 46 ; about Mon-  gol habits, 64

Jonah, bis fast, 186

Joiias, i!ie Nestonan priest, his con-  troversy with Sergius, ?'"'4, 205 ;  ialls iilj 216 ; a diviner lells cause  of illness, 216, '217 ; receives com-  niunion and extreme unction, 218 ;  his death, 219

Juchi, eldcs', son of Chingis Khan. 15

Juda.s ThadeuSj Saint, place of  mi'-rtVidum, 268

Justice, among tlie Mongols, 79

Kadac, the procurator of the Emperor

Kiiyuk, 27, 28  Kakhethi, people of, 12. Set also

Cachs.  Kam, the iTodj 246  Kangitae. counliy of the, 36, its

swamps, salt marshes and desen.->,

36, 37. See also Cangle.  Kaniew. See Canov.  Kankali, the, 36 ; origin ot name,

55; also called Turcman, 141. See

also Cangle and Karfuks.  Kao-chang, Chinese mission to,

Kao-ch'e, 'he, or '^ High carts,' 54,  ^141

Kao-li. See (Jaule.

Kara-Khitai, 15; build Tmil, 16; their  habiis, 18 ; m.eaning of na^ne, 37 :  are pagans; 37 ; were once masters  of the .Tartars, 37 ; founder of  dynast}, loS ; origin of name, 109 ;  their country, 138 ; river in their  country, 138

Kara iftislv river, :6): ; m Naiman  country, 163

karftkhodjo, 113

Ka.-aticba. SVc Corenza.  • Ka.ca tan mountains, 134

Kariuks, rhe, 54. .SVc* also Cangle  aKd Kit:;kali.

Kem, too river, jgS

KeraitSv the, .hi

Kerkis, fuis from the counlr}' of ih.e,  70; used for Cherkess {^.t^. i. lOO ;  pass through Sarinch's camp, iiC ;  Kerkis of the north, their early his-  tory, 197. See also KirgWa.

Kersona, the ciiy of, 42, 45 ; i.^la».!':  near it, 43 ; its trade, 42 ; coasL  from, to mouth of the Tanais, 51

Keu Chan, Nestorians' sK^ry auout.  no; St. Louis sends envoys y<-.  123 ; arrival in plain where h<.  lived, 162; his death, and faie of his  family, 163 ; elder son killed.  younger son succeeds him, 164 :  already dead, when Friar Andrew  arrived in Mongolia, 240 ; Mangu  refers in letter to St. Louis to, 249.  See also Kuyuk Khan.

Khakan^ or Emperor, 21, 108. ..Str  also (iog chan.

Khan^ a title, 108

Khatun^ a title, 108. Sec also Caiej^

Khazars, early mentions of, 3t'>. 41 :  the name Ga/aria derivcfl ir- -:■'",  theirs, 41 ; Sea tjf the, 95. Stt ai:.'  Ghuzz,

Khilat^ presentation o!, 247

KhojaOgul, sonof Kuvuk. pwi- Hj. .

163  Khorazm Shah, 14. St- ai,o -viii

Soldan.  Khorazmian Empire, ilie. 14. 265

See also CrosViiinians.  Kiew, city of, Friar John ^ifirls fur.

3 ; captured by Tartars, 3 ; aniMi;

at, 4 ; leaves it, 4 ; date of leaving,

8; return of Friar John to, ji :

under Mongol rule, 33  Kinchat, towns of, 135 ; vines si.cn

at. 135  King, of the French, rejoice.-, ai

Sartach being a Christian, 48  Kipchaks, their trade at Sudak, 43 :

slaves from among, 50 ; customs .ii

court of chief of, 61 ; "iilenlified

with Comans, 92  Kirghiz, the, v.'ere a tribe of the

Tieh-le, 54 ; the Kipchak Kirgtii?.

93 : early history of, 197 ; origii-.*'

name, 198. See also Kerkis.  Kischk, discloses Siremon's r.-n-

spiniry, 164  Kissing hand aftei louelnng lol)

images, 184  Kitan, tribes near l.,j\ke Baikal, 55  KitayanJi, Trinte of the, at M<>mu'1

court, 20; prrseni tent ti> l'!njpen>r.

24  Kneeling, belori- the Fui|)eii'r, -'2 ;

before Uaatu, MT,

INDEX.

29 s

K'o-ian, ii lr)l)i: ofwllfl men, 16

Konieh. See Ya^nium.

Korea. Stc Cuuk.

Kumandin 1 ariars, ibcir dcilics, 60

Kurban Bairam, fe.isi of, 143

A'ityillai^ or parlian>enl </ Moiifrols,

18  Kutan, br(Hhcr of Kuyuk, poiscjne*'.

Kuyuk Khan, ihe Emperor, Jriar  John scni to, ii ; hisappanaj^c, «6;  J'riar John. arrives al bis camp, 18 ;  dale (J eleclitjn, 18 ; auf Hence of,  19 ; \\}ien elected. 21 ; his en-  thronement, 22 ; his falh<ir killed  by his auni, her tri?! anddealh, 25 ;  he prtjposes declarmg war on  Christendom, 26 ; his age and  character, 29 ; favours Christians,  29 ; \vi,hes to send hisaml)assadors  to Europe, 29 ; Friar John's reasons  for not wanting this, 29, 30; gives  a letter to Pofie to Friar John, 30,  39 } F.iar Andrew's mission to,  no: his quarrel with Batu, 137.  Sec also Keu chan.

Kutuktai Khatun. Set Cotata Caten.

Larna, a Tibetan, 199; reincarnate,  from Cathay, 232

Lamps, in temples, 142, 143, 144;  with eight lights in chapel, 168

Language, diversity of, along coast  of Gazaria, 51 ; used in Organum,  140, 141 ; of Uigurs root of Turkie-  Coman, 152 ; of the Calhayans,  156

Larceny, punishment of, 79» 80

Largess, at Emperor's election, 24

Lascaris, Theodore. See Ascar.

Laudlimie, town of, 269

Lawrence of Portugal, Friar, his  mission to the Mongols, xxiv ;  Pope's Legate in Asia Minor, xxiv

Layas. See Auax.

Left, side assigned to women, lO, 57 ;  and to ambassadors not yet received  at court. II ; last wife's tent on  extreme left, 57

Legate, in Germany, servants mal-  treated, 30 ; in Holy Land, 179

^-^egs, I'undaged by Friars to resist  faii^;'e(jf riding, 35

Lemfinc, town of, 14, 31

Leopards, hunting, 248

Lesgi, po>i I ion of their country, 100,  119. 261

Lesko, son of Duke of Cracow, 3

Letters, to Pope, m what language  written, 27 ; how translated, 28 ;

(<f Emperor lo Sc;i.tJi\-. 84. 87 : of  King Louis given Sariiif.li. i03 :  translated, 103 ; frriiw Muti^n 10  King Louis, 248

Libations, 60, 6i

Lightfiing, .Mongols' supcrs'ition;  about, 241

LignitZ, battle of, xvii}

Lithuanians, brigandage of, on road  to Kiew, 3

Litter, mule, 247

Longa, country of, 152 ; erivoys  from, 153 ; carry a tablet befcue:  face at court, 154

Losyr, Emir of Turkic, 280

Louis, King, lakes the cn^ss, xxv ;  sees Friar John of Han de Car[jinc.  xxvi ; lands in Cyprus, xxvii ; re-  ceives Mongol mission, xxvii ; -er.ds  mission to Ilchikadai and lo Kuyvik  Khan, xxviii., xxix ,* goes lo Eg) pt,  XXX ; Mangu's letter to, 248 ; e(  scq.

Lyons, Friar John leaves, 1 ; Pope  at, 33

Machomet, religion oi^ professed in  Turkya, 37

Maeotide fens, source of Tanais in.  97 ; Albania reaches to, 120

Magic, formulas. 147 ; drums, 246

Mahummeries (mosques), in Car?-  carum, 221

Mallachias, a Saracen bishop vsho  convi-ried the Great Khan, xxvii

Mangu Khan, the Nestorian str ry  of his Christianity, no; his parents.  115 ; fViar William enters hi-  country, 1 38 ; his letters written in  Uigur writing, 147 ; elected tJai-  peror by will of Baalu, 166 ; def^ai-  Siremons conspiracy, 164 : ht.^  appearance and dress, 172 ; his  speech to Friar William, 174 ; v as  drunk, 175; allows the Friar-, to  remain two months, 174 ; permits  Friars to visit Caracarum, 175 :  questions the impostor Theoduius.  179, 180; his feasts, 182 j his  reli^./ on, 182 : Nesiorians say he  was baptized, 1S3 j visits Nestorian  chapel, 185 ; fasts, 187 ; given t<  divination by scapulomancy, 187,  188 ; receiyes WOliam and Nes-  iorians, i8S ; gives an Annenian  money to rebuild church, 191 ; his  third wife, 191 ; receives William,  194 : grants Sergies permission to  carry cross on end of pole, 194 ;

2Q<J

IWDE.X

.starts for CarHCo.rum, .2fo; airivcS  at, 212 ; receives William nixl Nfs-  tonans, 212. 213 ; pr(:iuj,(>s 'o visit  Nestorian chapel. 213; liis hrolhcr';,  222 ; visits his mother's i^rave, 223 ;  returns to Caiacarum. 224 ; William  asks his intentions alK>ul hi?; staying,  22$ ; asks William to discuss with  other priests, 228 ; asks William  why he harl eoinc to Mongoli;»,  228; orders William harV, wishes  to send an envoy with him, 229 ;  tells William of the MonLiol faith,  235 ; hiii belief in diviners, 236 :  t<*lls W'illiam he Avill sond letters by  txim, 237 ; Sen<^s hinwo Ratu, 238 ;  William asl<s h'^n\ to ailcnv him to  eome b'cK. 238 ; reported baptism  0( 230 : «-ebukes and punishes his  wife, 245; returns to Kanikoruni,  247 : speech 10 people on feast day,  247 ; the Caliph of Baldachs envoys  and, 248 ; tells envoys he does not  want presents but soldier?, 248 ;  his letters to St. Jxvuis, 248, 249,  250, 251 : he abuse< Camus, widow  of Kou Chan, 250 ; allows Friar  Bartholomew to defer return. 251 :  send.*; monc)- to Friais, 253 ; recallji  Baachu and Argun, 265 ; Doniini-  cnns bearing letters to. 274

Manichasism, among thtr Uigvu?,  150 ; a doctrine of, 205 ; adoctriop  of, professed by all idolaters, 23?

Mankates, tribe of, 55

Manse, the, tribute they pa'id the  Mongols, 20i

Mansurah, battle of, xr.\. Sec a/so  Mensura.

Marcus, a companion of the envoy  David, xxviii^ 102 : acts as inter-  preter, 105

Mare Magnum/ 8 ; Friar John's  notions about extent of, 9. See also  Black Sea a>r{f Pontus.

Mares» milked by men, 59 ; quantity  of milk of, used by Baatu, 67. Sfc  also Cosmos.

Mark of honour, 138

Market, in Batu's camp, 127 : in-  Caracaruni, 221

Maronots, eaten by Mongols, 69

Marriag^e, cusioms of Mongols, 77,  78 ; of Nestorian priests, 158

Marrow, always ea:en, 66 *

Marsengen, the city of, 273

Massis, Mount, legend concerning,  270. Seg also Ararat.

Matrica (Matrig-a), city of, 44 : its  position. 45 ; trade of, 45

Matthew Paris, his description oP

tVic Mojinols, xiv, ctscq.  Mamchy. Scr Mauci.  Mauci, a Mongol chief, S ; FriiM

John's servants detained by, 11 .

lie reaches the camp of, on return

journey, 31  Mead, dnmk in Mongol camp, 20,

02 ; offered to travellers, 135  Meals, of Mongols, 65 ; customs as

to, 65, 76  Meat, jevked by Mongols, 64 ; how

eaten, 65  Mechanical contrivance of William

Buohier, 208 ; other similar ones.

209  Mecrit, the. 112

Medicine, among the Cathayans, /5b  Mekrit, the, in. See also Merkii  Men, Mongol, their occu pallors. 76 :

dress of Russian, 98 : .<it civ wesi

.side of tent or audience-hail, 210  Mensura, battle of, xxx, i8o  Mercator, Ceri»»d, did not know

Fnar Wi;Jia;n s »rork. xxxix :  Merdas, the 99 ,00  Merdinis. Sd: Merdas.  Merkit. ihe p-^oj.ls of, iii, 112, 249:

^hei^ pnnae tn^rries Chingis Khan's

d^ugfrtef, 149  Methodius, Saint, prophecy concern-  ing ;he Saracens, 268  Micheas, an Alan prefect, exact>

wv.\.\^y presents from Friar John, 5,

34  Milk, quantity supplied to Baatu, 67  Millenarius, of Kiew, Friar John

consults with him as to route, gives

him presents for pack-horses and

escort, 4  Millet, gij^n Friar John, io ; whence

procured by Mongols, t)8 ; much

grown in Russia, 98 ; gruel, 132 ;

mead, 183; parched, 186  Mingatau., a Mongol commander of a

thousand, 5, 128  Miniver furs, sold at Sudak, 44 :

meaning of word as used by Friar

William, 44 ; used as currency iM

Russia, 202  Mirza Haidar, quoted about yaks.

Mitre, worn by idolater priesis, 146;  by envoys from I'-onga and Solan(>;a,

Moal. See Mongols.

Moan, plain of, 264. Seaekho Mugan.

plain of.  Moles, King, 179  Mo-ho tribes, 1 13

INDEX.

297

Money, amouni taken by. Friar  William, 126; paper money of  Cathay i 201 ; Ruthenians use skins  as, 202 ; used on return journey,

253  Mong^ols, invade Russia, xiii ; de-  scribed by Albericus, xiii ; second  invasion of Europe by, xiv ; de-  scription of the, by Matthew Paris,  xiv, XV, xvi, xvii ; charged with  f anilmlism, xv ; theiV customs, xv;  arms, xvi ; descent from the Jews,  xvj, xvii ; wolf-like speech of,  xviii ; mission from, to St. Louis,  xxvii ; P>iar Andrew on the, xxxi ;  called also Tartars, 18 ; their first  invasion of the Crimea, 52 ; their  nomadic habits, 53 ; their tents,  53, 54 ; their guardian deities, 58 ;  their worship, 59, 60 ; their drinks,  62 ; drinking customs, 63 ; their  food, 63 ; eat carrion, 64 ; physical  traits of, 72 ; mortuary customs,

81 ; fear evil spirits, 83 ; inquisi-  tiveness of, 83, 84 ; their conceit,  85 ; archery among the, 76 ; mar-  riage customs of, 77 ; pride of  Mongols in their name, 107 ; early  liome of, III, 112; Rashideddin  fpioted as to early history of, I15 ;  adopt the writing of the Uigurs,  150; their conceit, 165; super-

. «tiljons, 224 ; only conquer by  deceit, 226 ; their belief in God,  235 ; their religion, 236 ; customs  as regards eclipses, .240 ; their  ssiperslitions about lightning, 241 ;  belief in diviners, 246 ; notions  about sun and iriooTJ, 246 ; their  worship of Itoga, 246/ See also  Tartars.  Monk, Armenian, at Mangu's court,

168, 169. See also ^txgiw^.  Mont Real and Crac, envoy from

Soldan of, 178  Monsters, legends concerning, 198  Moon, notion concerning, 246  Morduins, a people cf Russia, 12 5  are pagans, 36 ; shave back of head»  36. See also Moxel.  Mortuary customs, xxxiii, 80, 81,

82 ; monuments, 82

Moxel, furs from, 70 ; their country  and customs, 99. See also Mor-  duins.

Muc, their country and customs, 154

Miigan, plain of, xxxii. See also  Moan, plain of ;

Mulidet, the, 222. See also Hac- j  sa.-iins.

Mulihec mountains, 118  Muscadel wine, presented to Coiar,

102  Music, j)layed when drinking, 62  Musical instruments of iMongt>ls, 62  Mus tau mountains, 161  Musteleman, 249

Nadjivan, the city of, 267. See al>o  Naxua.

Naiman, country of the, 17, 109;  their religion, 17, 110 ; habits, 18 ;  they become rulers of Kara-Khitai,  1 10 ; name still borne, 1 10 ; Kcu  Chan lived in their country, 162 ;  were subjects of Prester John, 162 ;  mentioned by Mangu in letter, 249

Nasic^ a gold brocade, 70, 185, 250

Natigay^ image so called, 59

Nax?ia, the city of, William's visit  to, 267 ; meets a Dominican there,  271 ; remains there on account of  snow, 271

Neper, the river, first called by this  name by Friar John, 8 ; mentioned  by Benedict, 34

Nestorianism, among the Uigurs,  150

^festorians, their crosses, 104 ; h(jly  oil, 105 ; the Naiman Nestorians,  no ; 'their story of King John, no;  the Crit and Merkit, ni ; at Sar-  tach's camp, n6 ; of Organum,  141 ; in the Uigur countr}', 141 ;  do not join hands in prayer, 143 ;  are Mongol scribes, 150 ; live  among the idolaters, 157 ; bishop  resides in Segin, 157 ; are pure  idolaters, 158; are s?moniacs, 159;  their evil influence over Mongol  youth, 159 ; village of, 159 ; secre-  tary of Mangu a. Nesi^riah, 168 ;  interpreter, 17^ select feast days  for Emperor, 182; customs, 184;  their fasts, 186, 206 ; do not con-  demn sorcery, 195 ; divination by  twigs, 195 ; teacher of Mangu'3  brother, 212 ; their relations with  Church of Rome, 213 ; offer  William sacrament, 213 ; their holy  bread and holy oil, 214 ; William  uses their chapel, 215; their anti-  mensium sent from Bagdad, 215 ;  baptism on Easter eve by, 2x6 ;  their disputation with Saracens and  Tuins, 229, 230 ; their bishop in  Cathay tries them for offences, 244 ;  use of charms by, 244 ; a learned  monk of, arrives at Caracarum,  253

2g8

INDEX.

Nicholas (ii Genoa, ia Yconiiim,

i77 ; sends William \o Curta, 277  Nicholas, (he s!aVe-l>()y of Kriar

William, 50 ; ordered back U) Sar-

tach's cam^), 126  Nicosia, Mongol mis.sit)n visils,

xxvii ; VVilliaui arrives at, 278  Nile, ihtf river, 96 ; the Elilia rises

like it, I IQ  Nitoch, Sea of. See PontuSi  Noah, town built bv, 267, 269 ;

mouhiain on which the ark rested,

269  North, Idolaters all face north in

worship, 143  Nu-chen Tartars, 109, 113, 153, 154

Oath, mode of taking among the  Coman5, xxxiii

Obesi, the, 12. 5«?«' a/j ' Georgians.

Ocean, the, 12; Mongols' ignorance  euncerning, 133 ; the eastern j 157

Ochigin, brother of Chihgis, size of  hi camp, 56

Octorar, town of, 15. Sre aLo Ornas.

Offerings, in temples, 142, 143, 144

Officers, of Batu's court, 10; of  Emperor's court, 28

Og^odai, death of, stops invasion of  Kurope, xx ; rebuilds Iniil, 16,  162 ? date of death of, t8, 35 ;  established post stations, loi

Ogul Gaimish, receives Friar An-  drew, xxix ; her letter to St. Louis,  XXX ; her camp on the Iniil, xxxii ;  instigatof of Siremon's conspiracy,  164 ; accused by MangU of being  a witch, 250. See also Caniusi

Oguz Turks, 113. 141

Oil, h»:>ly of Nesiorians, 214

Ont niani padnie hum^ the fonnula,  146

Omen, evil, 125

Omyl, the city of, 15, 162 ; Friar  J^)hn's route after leaving it, 16.  See aLu) Imil.

On niani buiiain^ the formula, 146

Onankerule, .country of. 116; the  crdn of Chingis Khan in, 165 ;  distance of. from Mangu's camp,  196

Oraa (or ordu), or tent, 7 ; court of  Bati, 9 ; ruled by chiefs wife, 17 ;  first oraa of Kuyuk,' 17 ; arrival at,  ( 7 : the C« olden Orda, 22 ; size of an  ordn^ 57 ; explanation of word, 57,  122; of Chingis Khan, 115; of  Batu, 122 ; of Mangu reached, 165.  5te also Ormektua.

Ordu, a Mongol chief, 17

Oreng-ai, th^-, 198, 245  Orenguias, son of Mangu, 184  Organum, ountry of, i40 ; origin oi

name, 141  Onentation, of terns, 56 ; of tbmples,

143 ; in praying, 171  Ormektua, or Sira Orda, 21, 37, 38,

223  Ornachi, town of, 15  Ornarum, town of, 15 ; how cJaptured

by Tartars, 36. See also Ornas.  Ornas, city of, 14, 15, 36  Ossetes, descehdants of Alans, 89  Oto, the Bishops 179  Otrar, town of, 14  Otter-skins, 172  Qvid, quoted by Benedict, 35  Ox-carts, used by Friar Willian^, 49 ;

how loaded, 50 ; number driven by

one woman, 57 ; how taken on

bbals, 96  Ox-hide, boats, xv ; jars, 65

Pa-erh-chen, town of, 14

Paiza^ golden biill or badgt 01

authority, 181  Palace, of Caracannn, 207, 209, 310,

212, 231 ; in neighbourhood" of

Caracarum, 223  Palus Maeotis, f)oundary of Alania,

93 ; called Sea of Tanais, 94 ; its

various names» 94, 95  Pannonia, identical with Hungary,

131  Papion-skin gowns, 70, 183  Paquette, of Metz, 176 ; tells William  of William Buchier, i Tj ; her hus-  band, 177 ; tells William of talk  about his poor interpreter, 178 ; a  story she tells William, 242, 243,

244, 245

Parchment, request for, 360

Parrosits, the, 12, 36

Pascatir, country of, 12 ; furs from,  70; the Jagac rises in, 129; lan-  guage of, 129 ; Huns came from,  130; Dominicans inform Friar  William concerning, 13 1 ; tribes  east of, 198. See also Bascarts.

Passion, the Neiiorians' idea about  the, 104

Pasture lands of Mongols, 53

Perekop, ditch of, 51, 91

Permiaks, the, 1 2. See also Parrosits.

Persia, stuffs brought the Mongols  from, 70 ; rivers from, tK>« into  Caspian, 100; Nestorians in, 141 :  Jews in. 264

Peter, the Russian Archbishop,  quoted, 15, 64, 114

INDEX.

299

Philip of Toucy, his mission to St.  Louis, xxxiii ; Friar William accom-  panies mission -on return, xxxiv

Poland, Friar John's route through, j  I ; its position, 94 i

Pole, over temple, 146

Poles, their language, 130 i

Polo^'tseS. Stt Comans.

Pontus, identified with Comania, 35 ; i  Friar William enters it, 41 ; its size,  41 ; promontories in it, 41, 42 ; its  other names, 41 ; Tanais empties ;  into, 100. See also Black Sea and :  Mare Magnum. j

Pope, letters of, to Grand Duke of |  Russia, 3 ; his instructions to Friar  lohn, 5, 6 ; at Lyons when mission  starts, 33 ; Mongols' questions con-  cerning his age, 133 ; Sergius pro-  mises Mangu to go as envoy to, 204;  sends presents to Nestorian patri-  arch, 213

Prayers, of Friar Wilham, for rich  Mongols, 133; to drive away devils,  161 ; for Mangu Khan, 173 ; for  moderating the cold, 211 ; on re  ceiving presents, 252

Precedence, at Mongol court, 24

Presents, asked for, by Corenza, 7 ;  \yj Bati, 9, 10 ; made I.0 Emperor  on election, 23 ; made to Friar John  by Empress, 30 ; brought from Con-  stantinople by Friar William, 49;  •necessary among Tartars, 49, 95 ;  for Sartach, asked for, lOl ; of food  arfd drink to envoys, 135 ; made to  nobic-': by Emperor at Easter feast,  207 ; offered to Emperor by Nes-  torians, 212 ; sent to Mangu by  Soldan of India, 248 ; brought from  Soldan of 1 urkia, 248 ; made the  Friars by the Chan, 252  Prester John, 37 ; influence of belief  in, xxi ; confounded with John  Baptist, xxii ; Chinghis Khan's war  MTitn, xxxi ; his kingdom, 150 ;  Naiman were his subjects, 162  Priests, of idolaters, 145 ; look like  Franks, 146; of the lugiirs, 146;  their dress, their lives, 158; of  Nestorians, 158; of Christians at  Mongol feasts, 182 ; highest of  Nestorians hands Emperor his cup,  189 ; firom Cathay, 196 ; German,  from Bolat, 225  Prostrations, of idolaters in worship,

143 ; of Nestorians, 184  Pruscia, conquered by Teutonic

(^der, 94  PtQ^emais, St. Louis lands at, xxx

Purchas, Samuel, published full lexi  of Friar William's work, xxxix : his  opinion of the Friar's style, xlii : ot  value of wor« , xlii

Purple, 19, 23 ; a piece of, given  Friar John, 30 ; tunica of, 71, 74

P'u-su-man Kuo, 13. See Also  Bisermins.

Pyramids, built over dead, 147

Quinquagesima Sunday, 202

Rabban Sau^uia, the Nestorian, 213

Raconadius, Sultan of Turkie, 280

Rainfall in Mongolia, 170

Rats, eaten as food, 68, 69

Raymond of Aeon, an impostor, 178,  179 ; sent by Mangu as guide to  his envoy, 180 ; imprisoned by  Vastacius, 181

Religion, of idolaters, 143 : of Kita-  yans, 455 ; of Nestorians, 158 ; 01  Mongols, 235, 236

Rhubarb, how used by Sergius, 192,  216

Rice, drink niadd of, 62, 166, 173,  186 ; rtsembled Auxerre wine in  taste, 166 ; drunk by Nu-chen  Tartars, 167

Right side assigned to ambassadors  who have l>een recetved by Emperor,  1 1 ; tent ^i first wife on, 57 ; right  side of tents for men, 58

Rivers, Mongol method of crossing,  xvi

Roman, Duke 01 Russia, met by  Friar John, 31

Ropes, how made by Mongols, 71 ;  of tent represent threshold of door,  123

Rum, the Seldjuk empire of Asia  Minor, yj, 41

Ruscia, Friar John's route through.  I ; situation of 12, 93; merchants  from, vkit Sudak, 44 \ gets salt ai  ^'erekop, 52 ; lies noith covered  with forests, 94 ; ravaged by Mon-  gols, 94

Ruscians, killed or carried intd cap-  tivity by Tartars, 3, 94 ; taxes V!s\-  posed on, by Mongols, 94. Ser also  Ruthenians.

Rutheaians, 4 ; at Mongol court,  26, 27, 177 ; do not drink cosmos y  87 ; dress of, 98 ; Inigandage of,  117; have ferry over Etilia, I20t  their language, 130 ; use bells in  iheir churches. 143 ; their mooey.  202

Rye, 98

;c)0

INDEX.

Sabeddm Morrifat David. See  David.

Sable-skins, 42

Sacassin, town of, 259

Sacrifices', lo imajjes, 59 ; at funerals,  Si 82

Saddles, inade by ihe men, 76

Saffron -coloured clothes, 145, 146,  158

Sahensa, prince of Curgia, 271 ;  receives William, 272

Sain Khan, " the Good Prince," 125.  Sec also Batu.

St. George, arm of, 8

St. Sophia, Friar William preaches  in, 48

Saksaul, in Cbmanja, 35, 133 ; in  Mongolia, 172

Salt, rivers of Kangitae country, 36 ;  springs of Perekop, 52 ; hoNy used  by Mongols, 65 : Ircvenae from, 52,  92 ■ ■

Samag;, city ol, 264

Samaron, town of, 263

Samite, 23 ; dresses of, 37, 74, j  203

Samoyeds, the, 12.

Samshii. See Rice Wine.

Sangor, a Russ^ian knight, 9

Santo Siro, tracer from, in. Vconium,  277

Saracens, country of the, 15 ; ambas-  sadors of*, at Mongol court, 20 ;  origin anc^ , early use of ftame, 48 ;  among the Mongols drirH cosmos^  91 ; 'preferred to Russians by Mon-  gols, 94 ; the Merdas 'are Saracens,  too ; well treated by Sartach, 116 ;  speaking Persian in Equius, 139;  in the Uigur country, 141 ; shxin  idolaters, 143; live among idolaters,  157 J their priests bless Emperor's  cup, i'^2* their quarter ill Cara-  carum, 2-1 1, 321} divil^rs, 216;  quarrel wtth SCrgius, 223, 224 ; at  Mangu's court, 226 ; misrepres«nt  William's words to Mauigu, M7,  228 ; admit Christian religion true,

234

Sarai, toVvti of, built by Baatu, 256 ;  William reaches it, "258 ; palace of  Baatu, 460

Sartach, Batu's son, 48 ; Friar  Andrew on, xxjci ; varioius modes of  transcribing name, 48 ; supposed to^  be a ChristiaiT^ 48, 173 ; Bishop of  Siv^ak' J opinion of, 49 ; his revenue  from salt of Perekop, 52 ; his vil-  hjgt on t^ Tanais, 96 ; arrival at  his cafnp, 98 ; imc of camp, 10 1 ;

audience of, 103 ; accepts presents,  105; not a (Jhristian, lo/, 116;  has Nestorian priests, 116; gives  scant supplies to traveller, 117;  St. Louis believes him a (.'hristian,  123; visits Mangu, 255; William  viisit^ hi\ii on return journey, 256 ;  gives William presents and letter to  Coiac's father, 257 ; building village  and church on west bank of Volga,  260 : Dominican bearing letters to,  271, 274

Sarti, the. See Saracens.

Sausages, of horse-flesh, 65

Savages, in desert south of Imil,  162

Saxi, the, thought to4:)e Goths, 36

Scatai, possibl}- the same as Catan,  8 ; a relative of Batu, 84 ; letter of  Emperor to, 84 ; his camp, 86 ; his  wife, 87 ; interview of Friar William  with, 87 ; who expounds to him the  faith, 88 ; gives travellef guides, 91

Schiban. ^r-^ Sitan.

Sclavons, their language, 130

Scla,vonia, 47

Scum, never taken off pot, 64

Sc3rthia, its limits, 53, 157

Seal of Kuyuk Khan, 26

Searching persons of those recei\etl  by Emperor, 23, 172, 185

Seats, assigned different tanks, at  Batu's court, 10, 123 : at Kuyuk's  court, 24 ; given Emperor in Nes-  torian chapel, 185

Sebaste, the city of, xxxi, 276

Segin, city of, 157

Seine, the Etilia larger than, uS

SeniantroH^ use of the, 116

Sempad, Constable of Little Ar-  menia, his letter to King of Cyprus,  xxviii, xxxi

Seres, country of, identical with  Cathay, 155 ; nannj of a town, 155

Serg^us, the Armenian monk, 168,  169 ; Friar W'illiam decides to stay  with, 176: says he wiU baptize  Man^u, i8i ; William Uves with  him, 183 ; makes Mangu fast, 187 ;  his ireatjMent of Cota, wife of  Mangu, when ill, 190 ; gels many  presents, 191 ; gives Cota rhubarb,  192 ; was a weaver, 193 : uses  bishop's chair, glove» af*id cap, 195 ;  hispresumpluousnc^s, 196: charged  with disturbing order, 203 : Mangu  reprinumds him, J03 ; makes his  peace with the Chan, 204 r his con-  troversy with the Nestorian Jcniu,  204, 205 ; helps William lo learn

INDEX.

301

Moncjol, 205 ; deceives William as  to his fasting; 2o5 ,* i^ives William  Buchicr rhuharh, 21O ; charged  with bewitching, 216; his (juarrel '  with Nestorians, 217 ; l)rulaiity U> ■  dyiii!^ Nestoiiaii. 218 ;. explains his  conduct, 219; calls in Saracen  diviner, 219; accomp^nifes Mangu  oi) visit to his mother' ;> Jit'ive, 223 ;  tjuarrels with Saracens, 224 ; gets  permi'>sion to live near Chan's

- palace, 252, 253

Serkis, Saint, 186

Sevastopol. .S'^<? Kersona.

Sharir, a Buddhist relic, 195

Sheep, hy whom tended, 76

Shih-wei, the country of, 112

Shoes, of hoirsc-hide, 65

Shoulder-blades, divination hy, 187,  188, 194, 203

Sick people, not visited by Mongols,  82,83

Silk, 23 ; spld at SucSik, 44 ; from  Cathay ancl Persia, 70 ; wadding of,  71 ; called ^erichy Cathayans, 155

Simon of St. Quentin, his narrative  of Ascelin*s mission, xxiv, xxv

Singing when Mongol prince drinks,  II, 186 ; when Emperor comes out  of tent, 21 ; as mark of respect,  138 ; at F2mperor's feast, 247

Sinopolis, the town of, 41 ; distance  from to Gazaria and to Constanti-  nople, 42

Sira-Orda. See Orm^ktua.

Siremon, brother of Keu Chan, 163 ;  his conspiracy against Mangti, 163,  164

Sirsan, Sea of, 118. ^V^ a/j^ Caspian  Sea.

Sis, city of, 278

Sitan, brother of Batu, 15

Sittarkent, town of, 25^

Sivas, Set Sebaste.

Skulls, human, scattered in desert,  xxxi, 13 ; ma^ into bowls in  Tibet, 151

Slaves, of Mongols, 8 ; Comans  made, 1 3 ; sold at Sudak, 42, 43 ;  from the Kipchak, 50 ; tlieir food,  68 ; from Russia, 94 ; brigandage  by slaves in Russia, 117

Snow, falls in June, 17 ; Friar John  camps in, 30, 3 1 ; late, at Kara-  korum, 170

Snow-shoes, of the Orengai, 198

Sogiir, or marmots, 69

Solanga, country of, 152

Soianges, Prince of the, at Mongol  court, 20

Soldaia, town of, 43 ; its early nauvjs,

its ir.'uie, 43, 44 ; its joosilion, 45 ;

I'riav William arrives at, 47 ; -leaves

it, 49 ; pctipL: of, pass through

Sartacli's camp, 1 16. See «/.fc? Sudak.  Soldan, at Mongol court, 20  Solinus, his stories of. monsters, 3/),

198  Son, adopted, of William Bwchier,

178, 231  Soothsayers. Se». Diviners.  Sorcerers, how punished, 80 ; of

Crit and Merkit, in  Sorcery, 195

Soul, theory crtncerhing, 231  South, tents face, 56, 57 ;. eouch of

host faces, 57  Spices, sold at Sudak, 44  Spies, of Mongols, 29, 180  Spirits, evil, fear of, 83, 272  Stephen of Bohemia, Friar, 5 ;

joins Friar John's mission, 33 ; left

behind, 34  Stican, kills Keu chah, 163 ; visit to

his widow, 163  Stirrups, made by the men, 76  Stone, magic, 195, 245, 254  Storm, making of, 245  Sturg-eon, dry, sold, 45  Sii, *' water./' in Mongol, 196  Suanians, the. See Suevi.  Sudak, 43; sea of, 94. See also Pal us

MaeOtis.  Suevi, the, 46 .  Sulangka, country of, 153  SU'Moal or Su-Mong'al, the, 112,

196 ; their mode of living, 197  Summerkeur, town of, 258 ; inhaU-

tants of, 258  Sun, is mother of the moon, 246  Superstitions, of Mongols, 241  Susdal, Russian fron^., acts as Friar

John's interpreter, 9 ; Duke of, 20  Swine, among the Moxel, 99  Swords, used to ward off evil, 195  Syban. See Stican.  Synagogues of Saracens, 273  Syr daria, the river, 14  Syrian, language used by Nestorians.  158

Tabaristan, sea of, 36

Tablet, beaten by Christians accord-  ing to Greek custom, 29 ; carried  by Longa envoys at court, 154

Tabooed words, 81

Tabriz. See Tauris.

Tachari or Tochari. Ste Tartars.

Talas, river, 134, 135; town of,  •xxxii, 136 ; its position. 137

102

INDEX.

r»na, town of, 14 ; ulcMUifipri with

Tanais, town .r, 14; ihc river,  iilciuifw"! hy liene(iict with the  \ uigii, 34 ; town al niouth of river,  44 ; form of river near mouth, 45 ;  trade at mouth of river, 45 ; sea  of, 47, 94 ; l)ounclar) of Alania,  93 ; Friar William reaches the  river, 96 ; .se[>arates Asia frpm  Knrope, 96 ; ferry over, 96; breadth  of, 97 ; its source, 97, 120 ; foresu  ivion^, 98 ; its course and mcAilh,  100, See also Don.

Tangut, position of couaiiy, 150;  cattle of, 151 ; large and swarthy,  152 ; mode of writing, 202

Tanning, process of, 76, 77

Tar, I he river, 1 14

Taraconta, island of, 1 [4

Tarbagatai mountains, i6i

T^ykhan, a Mongol title, 164

TarassiDi. See Terracina.

Tixrsa, or Christian, 17

Tartars, name given the Mongols,  xiii ; origin of jiame, xv, xvii, xviii,  112, 113 ; pun on name, xix ; Kriar  Andrew's report on, xxxi : Friar  John first hears accurately of them,  2 ; they importune travellers for  presents, 2 ; he hrst meets them, 5 ;  explains to them object of mission,  5, 6 : also called Mongols. f8 : thex-  rob Kriar John, 30; fust camp of, 34;  once under rule of Kura-Khuai, 37 ;  extent of their emi)ircin Europe*, 47;  Friar William's first meeting \\ ith,  52 ; their impudence, S3 ; inquisitive-  ness, 84 : arrogance. S5 . lying, 85 ;  suspect Byzantint^ coin, 90; i!;cy  rob Friar William, 91 ; horrible  aspect of, 92 ; Ruscia rava^^ed by.

. 94 ; their fear of the Pope. 94 : Hlthy  habits of, 95, 96; pndo k^[, 107 ;  united under Chingis Kh;in, 1 14 ;  why their name was applied to the  Mongols, 115 ; Rashideddin quoted  on early history of, US; their  victory over Soldan of Turkic, 275.  See also Mongols.

Ta-ta, tril)es of. See Tartars.

Tattooing, 142 ; aniong Kirghiz, 197

Tauris, xxxii, 265, 267, 271

Taxes levied by Mongols, 47, 94 ;  ferrymen exenipted from, 97

Tebet, country of, T51 ; customs of,  151 : gold in, 152 ; people n\is  shapen, 152 ; mt)de of writmg, 202

Tefilis, city of, 264, 274

Temcr, a Russian knight, 27

Temples, of i(lc)lalers in Cailac, 142 ;  description of, 143, 144 ; orjenia  tion of, 143, 144 ; services in, 145 ;  gates of, 146 ; poles over, 146 ; in  Caracarum, 221

Tench, dried, 45

Tengere Kaira Khan, the highest

of Shamans' go(h, 236  Jeui^ri, Heaven, object of Mong<»|  worship, 236

Tent, of linen used Ih' Halu, io ;  arrangement of liatu's, 1 1 ; of while  purple, 19 ; gates of great tent, 19 ;  the golden tent [orda), 22 : lent Mi  red purple, 24 ; iloors of SiraOrda,  38 ; Mongc^l tents, 53", 54, 55 ;  on carts, 54, 55 ; faci)ig south,  56 ; order in which placed, 56; of  servant women, 56 ; east side for  women, 57 ; right side for men,  58 ; guardian deity oL_ 58 ; of  Mangu, covered inside with cloth of  gold, 172 ; Nestorians do not cele-  brate mas.>in, 184 ; used by William  l\^ Caracarum, 212

7\'rr(;<:ina^ or beer, 62, 166, 173, 208

Teutonic order. 94

Teutons, slaves at Talas, 136 ; trans-  ferred to Bolat, 137 ; their ocsupa-  tion, 137 ; William asks Mangu to  let him come back to teach them,  238. See also Germans.

Tharsi, country of, 114

Theodulus. See Raymond of Aeon.

Thomas, P>iar, Provincial of Order,  170

Thread, made of tendons, 75

Threshold, must not be trodden on,  7, 10, 23, 104, 188 ; Bartholomew  strikes threshold, 189

Throne, of Batu, 10 ; of Kujruk, 24,  26, 38 : of Solomon, 209

Thunder, caused by washing clothe^  /5; great fear of, by Mo^ds, 75,

76  Tibet. See Tebet.  T ieh-le, the, a Turkish tribe, 54  Tigris, the river, its source, «67  Togrui Khan, no. See Unc chan.  Torture, to produce confession, 79 ;

inflicted on woman, 243  Tossuc-can. ^V^-Juchi.  Touching holy images, 184  Trade, of Kerst>na, 42 : of Sudak,

43, 44 ; at mouth of Tanais (Don),

45 ; of Perekop in salt. 52  Transtnigration, 231, 232  Trapesund, See Trebizonde.  Travel, raie of, among the Mixnjols

85, 127 ; Friar William's rate, 131

IxMDEX.

303

Tfebizonde, Friar William's error as  to reig»iing Emperor, 46 ; history  of, 46

Tree, pJanitid over tomb, 81

Tribute, paid .Vlongols, 47 ; by  Cathayans, 156 ; by Turks, 248

Tripoli, William arrives at, 279

Tu^h^ insignia of tnoyalty, 20

7/«;/, priest of idols, 159 ; pray facing  north, 171 ; discussion with, 230-5

Tului, his soniH 222

Tungus, ih6, t97

Turakina, the Empress, receives  Fnar John, 19 ; leaves Emperor's  cout-l: after election, 25 ; suspected  of poisoning Varoslaw of Su.vial,  25 \ rtiakes presents to Friar John,  30 ; receives the Friars, 39

Turbans, 247

Turcomans, occupycountry of Orga-  num, 140 ; early mention of, 140 ;  origin of name, 141

Turkhan Khan, his speech to Valen-  tius, 174 I

Turks, the, 12 ; tie their gowns on  left side, 73 5 early mention of,. 109,  141 ; ask Con cham's ai<l against  Franks, 109 ; Seldjuks lake name  of, 141

Turkie, tk»e country of, 37 ; towns  in» 37 ; Soldan of, 41 ; merchants 1  from visi* Sudak, 44 ; mentioned  by Friar John, 109 ; Mangu sends  army against, 222 ; presents brought  by envoys froitl, 248 ; William  reaches» 272 j battle of Soldan of,  with Mongols» 275 ; Soldan receives  WilliAm, 277 ; political co.ulition  of, i8o I

T^wigs, divination by, 195

Uduyilt, the, 1 1 1 . See also Merkit.

Ujugen, his conspirac} , 25

Ultts^ or appanage, 16

Uigurs, their creed, 17 ; were a tribe  .,of the T'ieh-le, 54 ; war with the  Tartars, 113. See also lugurs.

Ukek, village of, 120

Ulag Yassak, or Great Ordinances of  Chingis Khan, 79

U lunger, lake and river, 161 ; in '  Nairaan country, 163 J jFriar William '  follows river's course, 165, 255 i

Umbrella carried over Mongol \  princes, IX, 23

Unc chan, 37 ; brother and heir of j  King John, no, 114; origin of  name, no, 11 1; his country, in, '  150 ; defeated by Chingis Khan, 115 I

Unguents, use of. 87, 195 i

Ural, the river, _j6, 129; salt springs

near, 37. See Jaec.  Urda. .SV.- Ordu.  Urfah, head-dress of women, 74  Ur^endj, 14. See aho Oruas.  Urianghit bishe. See (;rciigai.  Urine, 156  Urmukhtin, 22

Vaire furs, siold at Sudak, 44 ; ujcaii-  ing of word, 44 ; worn by Armenian  monk, 169 ; used as currency in  Russia, 202

Valania, 93. .S'<?<fC(>inania.

Valans, 93. Sec Comans.

Valentius, envoy of Tiberius Con-  stantinus, 174

Vassiiko, Dttkc of Ruscia, his ad-  vice lo Krlar John, 2 ; he helps  him on his journey, 3 ; Friar John  reads him letters of I'ope, iuging  him to return to Roman Church, 3 ;  greets Friar John on return, 32 ;  sends envoy and message to F(jjye,  32

Vastacius, country of, 47 * his envoys  ai Mangu's camp, 169 ; meet  William, 170 ; imprisons false  envo)- Theodulus, iSi ; Mangu  sends army against, 222 ; Mongol  envoys advice to, 22O ; his am-  bassadors, how treated in Turkie,  273 ; his son, 281

Vines, 135, 199

Virgil, quoted, 265

Vlachs, origin of name, 47

Volga, the river, first cailed by this  name by Friar John, 8 ; he thinks  it empties ini\) Black Sea,- 9;  mentioned by Benedict, 34 ; classi-  cal geographers" views on, 34, 107.  - See also Etilia and Ethil.

Votiak, head-dress of women, 74

Wall of China, the Great, xxxi  V^^andals, invade Europe with the

Huns, 130 ; their language, 130  Wang Yen-te, Chinese envoy to the

Uigurs, -22  Washing, not allowed l)y Mongols,

75, 76'; mode' of washing hand»

and face, 77  Water, never drunk by Mongols, 68  Wax, much obtained in Moxtls"

country, 99  Wenceslaw I, King of Bohemia, i  West side, tent of Emperor or chiet

entered by Emperor or chief alone

on, 23  Wives, of Mangu, 172, 173

304

INDEX.

Wheat, does not thrive in Russia, 9S

Widows, do not re nrtarry, 77 ; he-  long to son of deceased father, 78

Wild, men, their habits, various men-  tions of, 16 ; asses, 6q

William, clerk of Odon the Lci^ate,  1 79

William, Friar, of Rubruck, meets  Friar John 6f Plan de Carpine in  I'aris, xxvi ; his early hisrory, xxvi,  xxvii ; goes to Egypt, xxx ; gets in-  formation from Baldwin of Mainaut,  xxxiv ; choice of routes, xxxiv ;  preparations for journey, xxxiv ; his  birthplace, xxxv ; name, xxJcv ;  character, xxxvi ; studies and pre-  paration for journey, xx^vi, xxxvil ;  discoveries made by, xxxvii, xxxviii,  returiis to France, xxxix ; meets  Roger Bacon, xxxix ; Franciscan  writers on Friar William, xl, xli ;  titles given his work, xl.; editions  of, xxxix, xlii, xliii ; opinions con-  cerning his work, xliii, xliv

Winchester, Bishop of, xiv

Wind, tempest of, through Ala tau.  Friar John's reference Jo. 16 ; Friar  William's reference to, 160 ; little

, wind in Mongolia in winter, 170

Wine, nluscadel, 49 : libations before  drinking, 60, 61 ; whence brought  to Mongols, 62 ; drunk at Kin-  chat, 135 ; of rice, 166 ; red wine,  186; no wine in Cathay, 199; in  Caucasus, 262 ■.

Witchcraft, princesses put to d^ath  for, 164 ; practised by women, 239 ;  maid of Mangu's wife accused of,  243 ; woman put to death for, 244 ;  Mangu accuses Camus of, 250

Wives, seals assigned to, of iiatu,  10 ; tents of Emperor's, 25 ; num-  ber of Batu'a, 50 ; size of their  camps, 56 ; which has precedence,  61 ; plurality of, among Tartars  and Nestorians, 158 ; of Keu Chan  put la death} 164  Women, position assigned them in  terns, 10, 210 J their tents, 56 ;  dress of, 72, 73, 74 ; use unguents,  74, 75 ; duties of, 57, 59, 75 ; ,->re  chaste, 79  Wood, for fuel, scarce, 133  Wormwood, in Comania, 35 ; used

for f'Kl in Manigu's tent, 172  Worship, of image of F'mpcror, 35  Writing, of Nestorians of Organum,  141 ; of Tartars, borrowed from  Uigurs, 147 ; at what time, 149 ;  of Tibet, 202; of Tanguts and  Uigurs, 202 ; of Gathayans, 202

Yaks, in Tangut, 151  Yanikent. See Yenguikhend.  Yaroslaw, son -of Duke, at Bati's  camp, 9 ; Duke's men die of ^thirsi  in Cangitae desert, 13; Duke at  Kuyuk's court, 2a j his deatl), 25  Yconium,' 276 ; foreigners in, 277'  Ych-lii Ch'u-ts'ai, Minister of

Chingis, 193  Yeh-lu Ta-shih, loS  Yenguikend, town of, 14  Yen-ta women, head-dress of, 74  Yperpera^ a Byzantine coin, 90, 126

Zacharias, father of Sahensa, 271  Zacharias, son of Sahensa, 272  Zicci, tiie, 12  Zikuia, the country of, 45, 46

LONDON :  PKINTKU A J THE HEBFORU PRESS, 20 WD 21, BEUFORDBURV , W.<
