A Commentary on the Apostles' Creed (Rufinus) (Rufinus of Aquileia)
Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Series 2, 1892. Public domain.
Source: Christian Classics Ethereal Library.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

======================================================================

 A Commentary on the Apostles' Creed.

 ------------------------

 This exposition of the Creed was made at the request of Laurentius, a
 Bishop whose see is unknown, but is conjectured by Fontanini, in his
 life of Rufinus, to have been Concordia, Rufinus' birthplace.

 Its exact date cannot be fixed; but from the fact that he says nothing
 of his difficulty in writing Latin after being so long in the East, as
 he does in several of his books, and from the comparative ease of the
 style, it is most probable that it was written in the later years of
 his sojourn at Aquileia, that is, about 307-309.

 Its value is considerable (1) as bearing witness to the state of the
 Creed in local churches at the beginning of the 5th century, especially
 their variations. (In the church of Aquileia, in Jesu Christo. Patrem
 invisibilem et impassibilem. Resurrectio hujus carnis); (2) as showing
 the adaptation of Eastern ideas to the formation of Western theology;
 (3) as giving the Canon of the books of Scripture, and the Apocrypha of
 both the Old and New dispensations.

 The exposition is clear and reasonable; and, with the exception of a
 very few passages, such as the argument from the Phoenix for the Virgin
 Birth of our Lord, is still of use to us.

 We prefix the words of the creed on which Rufinus makes his commentary.

 It seems desirable to give the original Latin, as well as the English
 version of the Creed of Aquileia. The words or letters which are
 peculiar to this creed are put in italics.

 1. Credo in Deo Patre omnipotenti invisibili et impassibili

 1. I believe in God the Father Almighty, invisible and impassible.

 2. Et in Jesu Christo, unico Filio ejus, Domino nostro;

 2. And in Jesus Christ, His only Son, our Lord;

 3. Qui natus est de Spiritu Sancto ex Maria Virgine;

 3. Who was born from the Holy Ghost, of the Virgin Mary;

 4. Crucifixus sub Pontio Pilato, et sepultus;

 4. Was crucified under Pontius Pilate, and buried;

 5. Descendit ad inferna; tertia die resurrexit a mortuis;

 5. He descended to hell; on the third day he rose again from the dead.

 6. Ascendit in coelos; sedet ad dexteram Patris;

 6. He ascended to the heavens; he sitteth at the right hand of the
 Father;

 7. Inde venturus est judicare vivos et mortuos;

 7. Thence he is to come to judge the quick and the dead.

 8. Et in Spiritu Sancto;

 8. And in the Holy Ghost;

 9. Sanctam Ecclesiam;

 9. The Holy Church.

 10. Remissionem peccatorum;

 10. The remission of sins.

 11. Hujus carnis resurrectionem.

 11. The resurrection of this flesh.

 My mind has as little inclination for writing as sufficiency, most
 faithful Bishop(Papa) Laurentius, [3255] for I well know that it is a
 matter of no little peril to submit a slender ability to general
 criticism. But, since in your letter you rashly (forgive my saying so)
 require me, by Christ's sacraments, which I hold in the greatest
 reverence, to compose something for you concerning the Faith, in
 accordance with the traditional and natural meaning of the Creed,
 although in so doing you impose a burthen upon me beyond my strength to
 bear (for I do not forget the opinion of the wise, which so justly
 says, that "to speak of God even what is true is perilous"); still, if
 you will aid with your prayers the necessity which your requisition has
 laid upon me, I will try to say something, moved rather by a
 reverential regard for your injunction than by presumptuous confidence
 in my ability. What I write, however, will hardly seem worthy of the
 consideration of persons of mature understanding, but suited rather to
 the capacity of children and young beginners in Christ.

 I find, indeed, that some eminent writers have published treatises on
 these matters piously and briefly written. Moreover, I know that the
 heretic Photinus has written on the same; but with the object, not of
 explaining the meaning of the text to his readers, but of wresting
 things simply and truthfully said in support of his own dogma, while
 yet the Holy Spirit has taken care that in these words nothing should
 be set down which is ambiguous or obscure, or inconsistent with other
 truths: for therein is that prophecy verified, "Finishing and cutting
 short the word in equity: because a short word will the Lord make upon
 the earth." [3256] It shall be our endeavour, then, first to restore
 and emphasize the words of the Apostles in their native simplicity;
 and, secondly, to supply such things as seem to have been omitted by
 former expositors. But that the scope of this "short word," as we have
 called it, may be made more plain, we will enquire from the beginning
 how it came to be given to the Churches.

 [3255] Nothing is known of this Pope Laurentius. The title "Papa," at
 first given to Bishops promiscuously, was not yet restricted to the
 Bishop of Rome. Gregory VII., in a Council held at Rome in 1073,
 forbade it to be given to any other.

 [3256] Isaiah x. 22, 23, Septuag., and so cited Rom. ix. 28

 2. Our forefathers have handed down to us the tradition, that, after
 the Lord's ascension, when, through the coming of the Holy Ghost,
 tongues of flame had settled upon each of the Apostles, that they might
 speak diverse languages, so that no race however foreign, no tongue
 however barbarous, might be inaccessible to them and beyond their
 reach, they were commanded by the Lord to go severally to the several
 nations to preach the word of God. Being on the eve therefore of
 departing from one another, they first mutually agreed upon a standard
 of their future preaching, lest haply, when separated, they might in
 any instance vary in the statements which they should make to those
 whom they should invite to believe in Christ. Being all therefore met
 together, and being filled with the Holy Ghost, they composed, as we
 have said, this brief formulary of their future preaching, each
 contributing his several sentence to one common summary: and they
 ordained that the rule thus framed should be given to those who
 believe.

 To this formulary, for many and most sufficient reasons, they gave the
 name or Symbol. For Symbol (kumbolon) in Greek answers to both
 "Indicium" (a sign or token) and "Collatio" (a joint contribution made
 by several) in Latin. For this the Apostles did in these words, each
 contributing his several sentence. It is called "Indicium" or "Signum,"
 a sign or token, because, at that time, as the Apostle Paul says, and
 as is related in the Acts of the Apostles, many of the vagabond Jews,
 pretending to be apostles of Christ, went about preaching for gain's
 sake or their belly's sake, naming the name of Christ indeed, but not
 delivering their message according to the exact traditional lines. The
 Apostles therefore prescribed this formulary as a sign or token by
 which he who preached Christ truly, according to Apostolic rule, might
 be recognised. Finally, they say that in civil wars, since the armour
 of both sides is alike, and the language the same, and the custom and
 mode of warfare the same, each general, to guard against treachery, is
 wont to deliver to his soldiers a distinct symbol or watchword--in
 Latin "signum" or "indicium"--so that if one is met with, of whom it is
 doubtful to which side he belongs, being asked the symbol (watchword),
 he discloses whether he is friend or foe. And for this reason, the
 tradition continues, the Creed is not written on paper or parchment,
 but is retained in the hearts of the faithful, that it may be certain
 that no one has learnt it by reading, as is sometimes the case with
 unbelievers, but by tradition from the Apostles.

 The Apostles therefore, as we have said, being about to separate in
 order to preach the Gospel, settled upon this sign or token of their
 agreement in the faith; and, unlike the sons of Noah, who, when they
 were about to separate from one another, builded a tower of baked
 bricks and pitch, whose top might reach to heaven, they raised a
 monument of faith, which might withstand the enemy, composed of living
 stones and pearls of the Lord, such that neither winds might overthrow
 it, nor floods undermine it, nor the force of storms and tempests shake
 it. Right justly, then, were the former, when, on the eve of
 separation, they builded a tower of pride, condemned to the confusion
 of tongues, so that no one might understand his neighbour's speech;
 while the latter, who were building a tower of faith, were endowed with
 the knowledge and understanding of all languages; so that the one might
 prove a sign and token of sin, the other of faith.

 But it is time now that we should say something about these same
 pearls, among which is placed first the fountain and source of all,
 when it is said,--

 3. I Believe in God the Father Almighty.

 But before I begin to discuss the meaning of the words, I think it well
 to mention that in different Churches some additions are found in this
 article. This is not the case, however, in the Church of the city of
 Rome; the reason being, as I suppose, that, on the one hand, no heresy
 has had its origin there, and, on the other, that the ancient custom is
 there kept up, that those who are going to be baptized should rehearse
 the Creed publicly, that is, in the audience of the people; the
 consequence of which is that the ears of those who are already
 believers will not admit the addition of a single word. But in other
 places, as I understand, additions appear to have been made, on account
 of certain heretics, by means of which it was hoped that novelty in
 doctrine would be excluded. We, however, follow that order which we
 received when we were baptized in the Church of Aquileia.

 I Believe, therefore, is placed in the forefront, as the Apostle Paul,
 writing to the Hebrews, says, "He that cometh to God must first of all
 believe that He is, and that He is a rewarder of those who believe on
 Him." [3257] The Prophet also says, "Except ye believe, [3258] ye shall
 not understand." That the way to understand, therefore, may be open to
 you, you do rightly first of all, in professing that you believe; for
 no one embarks upon the sea, and trusts himself to the deep and liquid
 element, unless he first believes it possible that he will have a safe
 voyage; neither does the husbandman commit his seed to the furrows and
 scatter his grain on the earth, but in the belief that the showers will
 come, together with the sun's warmth, through whose fostering
 influence, aided by favouring winds, the earth will produce and
 multiply and ripen its fruits. In fine, nothing in life can be
 transacted if there be not first a readiness to believe. What wonder
 then, if, coming to God, we first of all profess that we believe,
 seeing that, without this, not even common life can be lived. We have
 premised these remarks at the outset, since the Pagans are wont to
 object to us that our religion, because it lacks reasons, rests solely
 on belief. We have shewn, therefore, that nothing can possibly be done
 or remain stable unless belief precede. Finally, marriages are
 contracted in the belief that children will be born; and children are
 committed to the care of masters in the belief that the teaching of the
 masters will be transferred to the pupils; and one man assumes the
 ensigns of empire, believing that peoples and cities and a
 well-equipped army also will obey him. But if no one enters upon any
 one of these several undertakings except in the belief that the results
 spoken of will follow, must not belief be much more requisite if one
 would come to the knowledge of God? But let us see what this "short
 word" of the Creed sets forth.

 [3257] Heb. xi. 10

 [3258] Dan. xii. 10, or Is. vii. 9

 4. "I Believe in God the Father Almighty."

 The Eastern Churches almost universally deliver the article thus, "I
 believe in One God the Father Almighty;" and again in the next article,
 where we say, "And in Christ Jesus, His only Son, our Lord," they
 deliver it., "And in One (Lord) our Lord Jesus Christ, His only Son;"
 confessing, that is, "one God," and "one Lord," in accordance with the
 authority of the Apostle Paul. But we shall return to this by-and-by.
 For the present, let us turn our attention to the words, "In God the
 Father Almighty."

 "God," so far as the human mind can form an idea, is the name of that
 nature or substance which is above all things. "Father" is a word
 expressive of a secret and ineffable mystery. When you hear the word
 "God," you must understand thereby a substance without beginning,
 without end, simple, uncompounded, invisible, incorporeal, ineffable,
 inappreciable, which has in it nothing which has been either added or
 created. For He is without cause who is absolutely the cause of all
 things. When you hear the word "Father," you must understand by this
 the Father of a Son, which Son is the image of the aforesaid substance.
 For as no one is called "Lord" unless he have a possession or a servant
 whose lord he is, and as no one is called "master" unless he have a
 disciple, so no one can possibly be called "father" unless he have a
 son. This very name of "Father," therefore, shews plainly that,
 together with the Father there subsists a Son also.

 But I would not have you discuss how God the Father begat the Son, nor
 intrude too curiously into the profound mystery, lest haply, by prying
 too eagerly into the brightness of light inaccessible, you should lose
 the faint glimpse which, by the gift of God, has been vouchsafed to
 mortals. Or, if you suppose that this is a subject to be investigated
 with all possible scrutiny, first propose to yourself questions which
 concern ourselves, and then, if you are able to deal satisfactorily
 with them, speed on from earthly things to heavenly, from visible to
 invisible. Determine first, if you can, how the mind, which is within
 you, generates a word, and what is the spirit of the memory which is in
 it; and how these, though diverse in reality and in operation, are yet
 one in substance or nature; and though they proceed from the mind, yet
 are never separated from it. And if these, though they are in us and in
 the substance of our own soul, yet seem to be hidden from us in
 proportion as they are invisible to our bodily sight, let us take for
 our enquiry things which are more open to view. How does a spring
 generate a river from itself? By what spirit is it borne into a rapidly
 flowing stream? How happens it that, while the river and the spring are
 one and inseparable, yet neither can the river be understood to be, or
 can be called, the spring, nor the spring the river, and yet he who has
 seen the river has seen the spring also? Exercise yourself first in
 explaining these, and explain, if you are able, things which you have
 under your hands; and then you may come to loftier matters. Do not
 think, however, that I would have you ascend all at once from the earth
 above the heavens: I would first, with your leave, draw your attention
 to this firmament which our eyes behold, and ask you to explain, if you
 can, the nature of this visible luminary,--how that celestial fire
 generates from itself the brightness of light, how it also produces
 heat; and though these are three in reality, how they are yet one in
 substance. And if you are capable of investigating each of these, even
 then you must acknowledge that the mystery of the Divine generation is
 by so much the more diverse and the more transcendent as the Creator is
 more powerful than the creatures, as the artificer is more excellent
 than his work, as He who ever is more noble than that which had its
 beginning out of nothing.

 That God then is the Father of His only Son our Lord is to be believed,
 not discussed; for it is not lawful for a servant to dispute about the
 nativity of his lord. The Father hath borne witness from heaven,
 saying, [3259] "This is My beloved Son, in Whom I am well pleased: hear
 Him." The Father saith that He is His Son and bids us hear Him. The Son
 saith, "He who seeth Me seeth the Father also," [3260] and "I and the
 Father are one," [3261] and "I came forth from God and am come into the
 world." [3262] Where is the man who can thrust himself as a disputant
 between these words of Father and Son, who can divide the Godhead,
 separate its volition, break asunder the substance, cut the spirit in
 parts, and deny that what the Truth speaks is true? God then is a true
 Father as the Father of the Truth, not begetting extrinsically, but
 generating the Son from that which Himself is; that is, as the All-wise
 He generates Wisdom, as the Just Justice, as the Everlasting the
 Everlasting, as the Immortal Immortality, as the Invisible the
 Invisible; because He is Light, He generates Brightness, because He is
 Mind, He generates the Word.

 [3259] Matt. xvii. 5

 [3260] John xiv. 9

 [3261] John x. 30

 [3262] John xvi. 28

 5. Now whereas we said that the Eastern Churches, in their delivery of
 the Creed, say, "In one God [3263] the Father Almighty," and "in one
 Lord," the "one" is not to be understood numerically but absolutely.
 For example, if one should say, "one man" or "one horse," here "one" is
 used numerically. For there may be a second man and a third, or a
 second horse and a third. But where a second or a third cannot be
 added, if we say "one" we mean one not numerically but absolutely. For
 example, if we say, "one Sun," here the meaning is that a second or a
 third cannot be added, for there is but one Sun. Much more then is God,
 when He is said to be "one," called "one," not numerically but
 absolutely, that is, He is therefore said to be one because there is no
 other. In like manner, also, it is to be understood of the Lord, that
 He is one Lord, Jesus Christ, by or through Whom God the Father
 possesses dominion over all, whence also, in the next clause, God is
 called "Almighty."

 God is called Almighty because He possesses rule and dominion over all
 things. [3264] But the Father possesses all things by His Son, as the
 Apostle says, "By Him were created all things, visible and invisible,
 whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers."
 [3265] And again, writing to the Hebrews, he says, "By Him also He made
 the worlds," and "He appointed Him heir of all things." [3266] By
 "appointed" we are to understand "generated." Now if the Father made
 the worlds by Him, and all things were created by Him, and He is heir
 of all things, then by Him He possesses rule also over all things.
 Because, as light is born of light, and truth of truth, so Almighty is
 born of Almighty. As it is written of the Seraphim in the Revelation of
 John, "And they have no rest day and night, crying Holy, Holy, Holy,
 Lord God of Sabaoth, which was and which is and which is to come, the
 Almighty." [3267] He then who "is to come" is called "Almighty." And
 what other is there who "is to come" but Christ, the Son of God?

 To the foregoing is added "Invisible and Impassible." I should mention
 that these two words are not in the Creed of the Roman Church. They
 were added in our Church, as is well known, on account of the Sabellian
 heresy, called by us "the Patripassian," that, namely, which says that
 the Father Himself was born of the Virgin and became visible, or
 affirms that He suffered in the flesh. To exclude such impiety,
 therefore, concerning the Father, our forefathers seem to have added
 these words, calling the Father "invisible and impassible." For it is
 evident that the Son, not the Father, became incarnate and was born in
 the flesh, and that from that nativity in the flesh the Son became
 "visible and passible." Yet so far as regards that immortal substance
 of the Godhead, which He possesses, and which is one and the same with
 that of the Father, we must believe that neither the Father, nor the
 Son, nor the Holy Ghost is "visible or passible." But the Son, in that
 He condescended to assume flesh, was both seen and also suffered in the
 flesh. Which also the Prophet foretold when he said, "This is our God:
 no other shall be accounted of in comparison of Him. He hath found out
 all the way of knowledge, and hath given it unto Jacob His servant and
 to Israel His beloved. Afterward He shewed Himself upon the earth, and
 conversed with men." [3268]

 [3263] Deum,not, as before, Deo.

 [3264] Compare Cyril's words, Quod omnium teneat potentatum--Lordship
 over all; ho pantokrator, ho panton kraton, ho panton exousiazon.
 (Catech., 8, §3). Rufinus evidently had St. Cyril's exposition in view
 here as repeatedly elsewhere.

 [3265] Col. i. 16

 [3266] Heb. i. 2

 [3267] Heb. iv. 8

 [3268] Baruch iii. 35-37. Baruch is not specified by name in Rufinus's
 list of the Canonical books, but it is in Cyril's, as though a part of
 Jeremiah, "Jeremiah, with Baruch, and the Lamentations and the
 Epistle." (Catech. 4, §36.)

 6. Next there follows, "And in Christ Jesus, His Only Son, Our Lord."
 "Jesus" is a Hebrew word meaning "Saviour." "Christ" is so called from
 "Chrism," i.e. unction. For we read in the Books of Moses, that Auses,
 the son of Nave, [3269] when he was chosen to lead the people, had his
 name changed from "Auses" to "Jesus," to shew that this was a name
 proper for princes and generals, for those, namely, who should "save"
 the people who followed them. Therefore, both were called "Jesus," both
 the one who conducted the people, who had been brought forth out of the
 land of Egypt, and freed from the wanderings of the wilderness, into
 the land of promise, and the other, who conducted the people, who had
 been brought forth from the darkness of ignorance, and recalled from
 the errors of the world, into the kingdom of heaven.

 "Christ" is a name proper either to High Priests or Kings. For formerly
 both high priests and kings were consecrated with the ointment of
 chrism: but these, as mortal and corruptible, with material and
 corruptible ointment. Jesus is made Christ, being anointed with the
 Holy Spirit, as the Scripture saith of Him "Whom the Father hath
 anointed with the Holy Spirit sent down from heaven." [3270] And Isaiah
 had prefigured the same, saying in the person of the Son, "The Spirit
 of the Lord is upon Me, because He hath anointed Me, He hath sent Me to
 preach good tidings to the poor." [3271]

 Having shewn them what "Jesus" is, Who saves His people, and what
 "Christ" is, Who is made a High Priest for ever, let us now see in what
 follows, of Whom these things are said, "His only Son, our Lord." Here
 we are taught that this Jesus, of whom we have spoken, and this Christ,
 the meaning of whose name we have expounded, is "the only Son of God"
 and "our Lord." Lest, perchance, you should think that these human
 names have an earthly significance, therefore it is added that He is
 "the only Son of God, our Lord." For He is born One of One, because
 there is one brightness of light, and there is one word of the
 understanding. Neither does an incorporeal generation degenerate into
 the plural number, or suffer division, where He Who is born is in no
 wise separated from Him Who begets. He is "only" (unique), as thought
 is to the mind, as wisdom is to the wise, as a word is to the
 understanding, as valour is to the brave. For as the Father is said by
 the Apostle to be "alone wise," [3272] so likewise the Son alone is
 called wisdom. He is then the "only Son." And, although in glory,
 everlastingness, virtue, dominion, power, He is what the Father is, yet
 all these He hath not unoriginately as the Father, but from the Father,
 as the Son, without beginning and equal; and although He is the Head of
 all things, yet the Father is the Head of Him. For so it is written,
 "The Head of Christ is God." [3273]

 [3269] That is Joshua the son of Nun. It does not appear what passage
 is referred to.

 [3270] Acts x. 38

 [3271] Isa. lxi. 1. Comp. Luke iv. 18

 [3272] 1 Tim. i. 17

 [3273] 1 Cor. xi. 3

 7. When you hear the word "Son," you must not think of a nativity after
 the flesh; but remember that it is spoken of an incorporeal substance,
 and a simple and uncompounded nature. For if, as we said above, whether
 when the understanding generates a word, or the mind sense, or light
 brings forth brightness from itself, nothing of this sort is sought
 for, or any manner of weakness and imperfection imagined in this kind
 of generation, how much purer and more sacred ought to be our
 conception of the Creator of all these!

 But perhaps you say, "The generation of which you speak is an
 unsubstantial generation. For light does not produce substantial
 brightness, nor the understanding generate a substantial word, but the
 Son of God, it is affirmed, was generated substantially." To this we
 reply, first, When in other things examples or illustrations are used,
 the resemblance cannot hold in every particular, but only in some one
 point for which the illustration is employed. For instance, When it is
 said in the Gospel, "The kingdom of heaven is like leaven, which a
 woman hid in three measures of meal," [3274] are we to imagine that the
 kingdom of heaven is in all respects like leaven, so that like leaven
 it is palpable and perishable so as to become sour and unfit for use?
 Obviously the illustration was employed simply for this object--to shew
 how, through the preaching of God's word which seems so small a thing,
 men's minds could be imbued with the leaven of faith. So likewise, when
 it is said, "The kingdom of heaven is like unto a net cast into the
 sea, which draws in fishes of every kind," [3275] are we to suppose
 that the substance of the kingdom of heaven is likened in all respects
 to the nature of twine of which a net is made, and to the knots with
 which the meshes are tied? No; the sole object of the comparison is to
 shew that, as a net brings fishes to the shore from the depths of the
 sea, so by the preaching of the kingdom of heaven men's souls are
 liberated from the depth of the error of this world. From whence it is
 evident that examples or illustrations do not answer in every
 particular to the things which they are brought to exemplify or
 illustrate. Otherwise, if they were the same in all respects, they
 would no longer be called examples or illustrations, but rather would
 be the things themselves.

 [3274] Matt. xiii. 33

 [3275] Matt. xiii. 47

 8. Then further it is to be observed that no creature can be such as
 its Creator. And therefore, as the divine substance or essence admits
 of no comparison, so neither does the Divinity. Moreover, every
 creature is of nothing. If therefore a spark which is so unsubstantial
 but yet is fire, begets of itself a creature which is of nothing, and
 maintains in it the essential nature of that from which it springs,
 (i.e. the fire of the parent spark), why could not the substance of
 that eternal Light which ever has been because it has in itself nothing
 which is not substantial, produce from itself substantial brightness?
 Rightly, therefore, is the Son called "only," "unique." For He who hath
 been so born is "only" and "unique." That which is unique can admit of
 no comparison. Nor can He who made all things be like in substance to
 the things which He has made. This then is Christ Jesus, the only Son
 of God, who is also our Lord. "Only" may be referred both to Son and to
 Lord. For Jesus Christ is "only" both as truly Son and as one Lord. For
 all other sons, though they are called sons, are so called by the grace
 of adoption, not by verity of nature; and if there be others who are
 called lords, they are called so from an authority bestowed not
 inherent. But Christ alone is the only Son and the only Lord, as the
 Apostle saith, "One Lord Jesus Christ, by Whom are all things." [3276]
 Therefore, after the Creed has in due order set forth the ineffable
 mystery of the nativity of the Son from the Father, it now descends to
 the dispensation which He vouchsafed to enter upon for man's salvation.
 And of Him whom just now it called the "only Son of God" and "our
 Lord," it now says.

 [3276] 1 Cor. viii. 6

 9. "Who Was Born by (de) The Holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary." This
 nativity among men is in the way of dispensation, [3277] whereas the
 former nativity is of the divine substance; the one results from his
 condescension, the other from his essential nature. He is born by the
 Holy Ghost of the Virgin. Here a chaste ear and a pure mind is
 required. For you must understand that now a temple hath been built
 within the secret recesses of a Virgin's womb for Him of Whom erewhile
 you learnt that He was born ineffably of the Father. And just as in the
 sanctification of the Holy Ghost no thought of imperfection is to be
 admitted, so in the Virgin-birth no defilement is to be imagined. For
 this birth was a new birth given to this world, and rightly new. For He
 Who is the only Son in heaven is by consequence the only Son on earth,
 and was uniquely born, born as no other ever was or can be.

 The words of the Prophets concerning Him, "A Virgin shall conceive and
 bring forth a Son," [3278] are known to all, and are cited in the
 Gospels again and again. The Prophet Ezekiel too had predicted the
 miraculous manner of that birth, calling Mary figuratively "the Gate of
 the Lord," the gate, namely, through which the Lord entered the world.
 For he saith, "The gate which looks towards the East shall be closed,
 and shall not be opened, and no one shall pass through it, because the
 Lord God of Israel shall pass through it, and it shall be closed."
 [3279] What could be said with such evident reference to the inviolate
 preservation of the Virgin's condition? That Gate of Virginity was
 closed; through it the Lord God of Israel entered; through it He came
 forth from the Virgin's womb into this world; and the Virgin-state
 being preserved inviolate, the gate of the Virgin remained closed for
 ever. Therefore the Holy Ghost is spoken of as the Creator of the
 Lord's flesh and of His temple.

 [3277] Corresponding to the Greek word Economy--the "arrangement" or
 "plan" by which the Word became incarnate.

 [3278] Isa. vii. 14

 [3279] Ezek. xliv. 2, LXX.

 10. Starting from this point you may understand the majesty of the Holy
 Ghost also. For the Gospel witnesses of Him that when the angel said to
 the Virgin, "Thou shalt bring forth a Son and shalt call His name
 Jesus, for He shall save His people from their sins," [3280] she
 replied, "How shall this be, seeing I know not a man?" on which the
 angel said to her, "The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power
 of the Highest shall overshadow thee. Wherefore that holy Thing which
 shall be born of Thee shall be called the Son of God." [3281] See here
 the Trinity mutually cooperating with each other. The Holy Ghost is
 spoken of as coming upon the Virgin, and the Power of the Highest as
 overshadowing her. What is the Power of the Highest but Christ Himself,
 Who is the Power of God and the Wisdom of God? Whose is this Power? The
 Power of the Highest. There is here then the Highest, there is also the
 Power of the Highest, there is also the Holy Ghost. This is the
 Trinity, everywhere latent, and everywhere apparent, distinct in names
 and persons, but inseparable in the substance of the Godhead. And
 although the Son alone is born of the Virgin, yet there is present also
 the Highest, there is present also the Holy Ghost, that both the
 conception and the bringing forth of the Virgin may be sanctified.

 [3280] Matt. i. 21

 [3281] Luke i. 31, 34, 35

 11. These things, since they are asserted upon the warrant of the
 Prophetical Scriptures, may possibly silence the Jews, infidel and
 incredulous though they be. But the Pagans are wont to ridicule us when
 they hear us speak of a Virgin-birth. We must, therefore, say a few
 words in reply to their cavils. Every birth, I suppose, depends upon
 three conditions. There must be a woman of mature age, she must have
 intercourse with a man, her womb must not be barren. Of these three
 conditions, in the birth of which we are speaking, one was wanting, the
 man. And this, forasmuch as He of Whose birth we speak was not an
 earthly but a heavenly man, was supplied by the Heavenly Spirit, the
 virginity of the mother being preserved inviolate. And yet why should
 it be thought marvellous for a virgin to conceive, when it is well
 known that the Eastern bird, which they call the Phoenix, is in such
 wise born, or born again, without the intervention of a mate, that it
 remains continually one, and continually by being born or born again
 succeeds itself? [3282] That bees know no wedlock, and no bringing
 forth of young, is notorious. There are also other things which are
 found to be subject to some such law of birth. Shall it be thought
 incredible, then, that was done by divine power, for the renewal and
 restoration of the whole world, of which instances are observed in the
 nativity of animals? And yet it is strange that the Gentiles should
 think this impossible, who believe their own Minerva to have been born
 from the brain of Jupiter. What is more difficult to believe, or what
 more contrary to nature? Here, there is a woman, the order of nature is
 kept, there is conception, and in due time birth; there, there is no
 female, but a man alone, and--birth! Why does he who believes the one
 marvel at the other? Again, they say that Father Bacchus was born from
 Jupiter's thigh. Here is another portent, yet it is believed. Venus
 also, whom they call Aphrodite, was born, they believe, of the foam of
 the sea, as her compounded name shews. They affirm that Castor and
 Pollux were born of an egg, the Myrmidons of ants. There are a thousand
 other things which, though contrary to nature, find credit with them,
 such as the stones thrown by Deucalion and Pyrrha, and the crop of men
 sprung from thence. And when they believe such myths and so many of
 them, does one thing seem impossible to them, that a woman of mature
 age, not defiled by man but impregnated by the Holy Ghost, should
 conceive a divine progeny? who, forsooth, if they are hard of belief,
 ought in no wise to have given credence to those prodigies, being, as
 they are, so many and so degrading; but if they do believe them, they
 ought much more readily to receive these beliefs of ours, so honourable
 and so holy, than theirs so discreditable and so vile.

 [3282] The fable of the Phoenix was very generally believed in the
 ancient Church, and was used as an illustration both of the
 Virgin-birth, as here, and of the Resurrection. Cyril of Jerusalem
 (xviii. 8), whom Rufinus evidently had in view, refers to it as a
 providentially designed confirmation of the latter. Possibly the
 Septuagint translation of Ps. xcii. 12, "The righteous shall flourish
 as a palm tree," hos phoinix may have been thought to sanction the
 fable. On the Literature connected with the Phoenix, see Bp. Jacobson's
 edition or the Apostolical Fathers, Clemens Romanus, Ep. i. §25, note,
 p. 104.

 12. But they say, perhaps, If it was possible to God that a virgin
 should conceive, it was possible also that she should bring forth, but
 they think it unmeet that a being of so great majesty should enter the
 world in such wise, that even though there had been no defilement from
 intercourse with man, there should yet be the unseemliness attendant
 upon the act of delivery. To which let us reply briefly, meeting them
 on their own level. If a person should see a little child in the act of
 being suffocated in a quagmire, and himself, a great man and powerful,
 should go into the mire, just at its verge, so to say, to rescue the
 dying child; would you blame this man as defiled for having stepped
 into a little mire, or would you praise him as merciful, for having
 preserved the life of one that was perishing? But the case supposed is
 that of an ordinary man. Let us return to the nature of Him Who was
 born. How much, think you, is the nature of the Sun inferior to him?
 How much beyond doubt, the Creature to the Creator? Consider now if a
 ray of the sun alights upon a quagmire, does it receive any pollution
 from it? or is the sun the worse for shedding his light upon foul
 objects? Fire, too, how far inferior is its nature to the things of
 which we are speaking? Yet no substance, whether foul or vile, is
 believed to pollute fire if applied to it. When the case is plainly
 thus with regard to material things, do you suppose that aught of
 pollution and defilement can befall that supereminent and incorporeal
 nature, which is above all fire and all light? Then, lastly, note this
 also: we say that man was created by God out of the clay of the earth.
 But if God is thought to be defiled in seeking to recover His own work,
 much more must He be thought so in making that work originally. And it
 is idle to ask why He passed through what is repugnant to our sense of
 modesty, when you cannot tell why He made what is so repugnant. And
 therefore it is not nature but general estimation that has made us
 think these things to be such. Otherwise, all things that are in the
 body, being formed from one and the same clay, are distinguished from
 one another only in their uses and natural offices.

 13. But there is another consideration which we must not leave out in
 the solution of this question, namely, that the substance of God, which
 is wholly incorporeal, cannot be introduced into bodies or be received
 by them in the first instance, unless there be some spiritual substance
 as a medium, which is capable of receiving the divine Spirit. For
 instance, if we say that light is able to irradiate all the members of
 the body, yet by none of them can it be received except by the eye. For
 it is the eye alone which is receptive of light. So the Son of God is
 born of a virgin, not associated with the flesh alone in the first
 instance, but begotten with a soul as a medium between the flesh and
 God. With the soul, then, serving as a medium, and receiving the Word
 of God in the secret citadel of the rational spirit, God was born of
 the Virgin without any such disparagement as you imagine. And therefore
 nothing is to be esteemed base or unseemly wherein was the
 sanctification of the Spirit, and where the soul which was capable of
 God became also a partaker of flesh. Account nothing impossible where
 the power of the Most High was present. Have no thought of human
 weakness where there was the plenitude of Divinity.

 14. He Was Crucified Under Pontius Pilate and Was Buried: He Descended
 into Hell. The Apostle Paul teaches us that we ought to have "the eyes
 of our understanding enlightened" [3283] "that we may understand what
 is the height and breadth and depth." [3284] "The height and breadth
 and depth" is a description of the Cross, of which that part which is
 fixed in the earth he calls the depth, the height that which is erected
 upon the earth and reaches upward, the breadth that which is spread out
 to the right hand and to the left. Since, therefore, there are so many
 kinds of death by which it is given to men to depart this life, why
 does the Apostle wish us to have our understanding enlightened so as to
 know the reason why, of all of them, the Cross was chosen in preference
 for the death of the Saviour. We must know, then, that that Cross was a
 triumph. It was a signal trophy. A triumph is a token of victory over
 an enemy. Since then Christ, when He came, brought three kingdoms at
 once into subjection under His sway (for this He signifies when he
 says, "That in the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in
 heaven, and things on earth, and things under the earth"), [3285] and
 conquered all of these by His death, a death was sought answerable to
 the mystery, so that being lifted up in the air, and subduing the
 powers of the air, He might make a display of His victory over these
 supernatural and celestial powers. Moreover the holy Prophet says that
 "all the day long He stretched out His hands" [3286] to the people on
 the earth, that He might both make protestation to unbelievers and
 invite believers: finally, by that part which is sunk under the earth,
 He signified His bringing into subjection to Himself the kingdoms of
 the nether world.

 [3283] Eph. i. 18

 [3284] Eph. iii. 18

 [3285] Phil. ii. 10

 [3286] Isa. lxv. 2

 15. Moreover,--to touch briefly some of the more recondite
 topics,--when God made the world in the beginning, He set over it and
 appointed certain powers of celestial virtues by whom the race of
 mortal men might be governed and directed. That this was so done Moses
 signifies in the Song in Deuteronomy, "When the Most High divided the
 nations, He appointed the bounds of the nations according to the number
 of the angels of God." [3287] But some of these, as he who is called
 the Prince of this world, did not exercise the power which God had
 committed to them according to the laws by which they had received it,
 nor did they teach mankind to obey God's commandments, but taught them
 rather to follow their own perverse guidance. Thus we were brought
 under the bonds of sin, because, as the Prophet saith, "We were sold
 under our sins." [3288] For every man, when he yields to lust, is
 receiving the purchase-money of his soul. Under that bond then every
 man was held by those most wicked rulers, which same bond Christ, when
 He came, tore down and stripped them of this their power. This Paul
 signifies under a great mystery, when he says of Him, "He destroyed the
 hand-writing which was against us, nailing it to His cross, and led
 away principalities and powers, triumphing over them in Himself."
 [3289] Those rulers, then, whom God had set over mankind, having become
 contumacious and tyrannical, took in hand to assail the men who had
 been committed to their charge and to rout them utterly in the
 conflicts of sin, as the Prophet Ezekiel mystically intimates when he
 says, "In that day angels [3290] shall come forth hastening to
 exterminate Ethiopia, and there shall be perturbation among them in the
 day of Egypt; for behold He comes." [3291] Having stript them then of
 their almighty power, Christ is said to have triumphed, and to have
 delivered to men the power which was taken from them, as also Himself
 saith to His disciples in the Gospel, "Behold I have given you power to
 tread upon serpents and scorpions, and upon all the might of the
 enemy." [3292] The Cross of Christ, then, brought those who had
 wrongfully abused the authority which they had received into subjection
 to those who had before been in subjection to them. But us, that is,
 mankind, it teaches first of all to resist sin even unto death, and
 willingly to die for the sake of religion. Next, this same Cross sets
 before us an example of obedience, in like manner as it hath punished
 the contumacy of those who were once our rulers. Hear, therefore, how
 the Apostle would teach us obedience by the Cross of Christ: "Let this
 mind be in you, which was in Christ Jesus, Who, being in the form of
 God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God, but made Himself of
 no reputation, taking upon Him the form of a servant, being made in the
 likeness of men; and, being found in fashion as a man, He became
 obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross." [3293] As, then, a
 consummate master teaches both by example and precept, so Christ taught
 the obedience, which good men are to render even at the cost of death,
 by Himself first dying in rendering it.

 [3287] Deut. xxxii. 8, LXX.

 [3288] Rom. vii. 14

 [3289] Col. ii. 14, 15

 [3290] 'lngeloiLXX, Nuntii, Vulg.

 [3291] Ezek. xxx. 9

 [3292] Luke x. 19

 [3293] Phil. ii. 5-8

 16. But perhaps some one is alarmed at hearing us discourse of the
 death of Him of Whom, a short while since, we said that He is
 everlasting with God the Father, and that He was begotten of the
 Father's substance, and is one with God the Father, in dominion,
 majesty, and eternity. But be not alarmed, O faithful hearer. Presently
 thou wilt see Him of Whose death thou hearest once more immortal; for
 the death to which He submits is about to spoil death. For the object
 of that mystery of the Incarnation which we expounded just now was that
 the divine virtue of the Son of God, as though it were a hook concealed
 beneath the form and fashion of human flesh (He being, as the Apostle
 Paul says, "found in fashion as a man"), [3294] might lure on the
 Prince of this world to a conflict, to whom offering His flesh as a
 bait, His divinity underneath might catch him and hold him fast with
 its hook, through the shedding of His immaculate blood. For He alone
 Who knows no stain of sin hath destroyed the sins of all, of those, at
 least, who have marked the door-posts of their faith with His blood.
 As, therefore, if a fish seizes a baited hook, it not only does not
 take the bait off the hook, but is drawn out of the water to be itself
 food for others, so He Who had the power of death seized the body of
 Jesus in death, not being aware of the hook of Divinity inclosed within
 it, but having swallowed it he was caught forthwith, and the bars of
 hell being burst asunder, he was drawn forth as it were from the abyss
 to become food for others. Which result the Prophet Ezekiel long ago
 foretold under this same figure, saying, "I will draw thee out with My
 hook, and stretch thee out upon the earth: the plains shall be filled
 with thee, and I will set all the fowls of the air over thee, and I
 will satiate all the beasts of the earth with thee." [3295] The Prophet
 David also says, "Thou hast broken the heads of the great dragon, Thou
 hast given him to be meat to the people of Ethiopia." [3296] And Job in
 like manner witnesses of the same mystery, for he says in the person of
 the Lord speaking to him, "Wilt thou draw forth the dragon with a hook,
 and wilt thou put thy bit in his nostrils?" [3297]

 [3294] Phil. ii. 8

 [3295] Ezek. xxix. 4, 5

 [3296] Ps. lxxiv. 14, LXX.

 [3297] Job xli. 1

 17. It is with no loss or disparagement therefore of His Divine nature
 that Christ suffers in the flesh, but His Divine nature through the
 flesh descended into death, that by the infirmity of the flesh He might
 effect salvation; not that He might be detained by death according to
 the law of mortality, but that He might by Himself in his resurrection
 open the gates of death. It is as if a king were to proceed to a
 prison, and to go in and open the doors, undo the fetters, break in
 pieces the chains, the bars, and the bolts, and bring forth and set at
 liberty the prisoners, and restore those who are sitting in darkness
 and in the shadow of death to light and life. The king, therefore, is
 said indeed to have been in prison, but not under the same condition as
 the prisoners who were detained there. They were in prison to be
 punished, He to free them from punishment.

 18. They who have handed down the Creed to us have with much
 forethought specified the time when these things were done--"under
 Pontius Pilate,"--lest in any respect the tradition should falter, as
 though vague and uncertain. But it should be known that the clause, "He
 descended into Hell," is not added in the Creed of the Roman Church,
 neither is it in that of the Oriental Churches. It seems to be implied,
 however, when it is said that "He was buried." But in the love and zeal
 for the Divine Scriptures which possess you, you say to me, I doubt
 not, "These things ought to be proved by more evident testimonies from
 the Divine Scriptures. For the more important the things are which are
 to be believed, so much the more do they need apt and undoubted
 witness." True. But we, as speaking to those who know the law, have
 left unnoticed, for the sake of brevity, a whole forest of testimonies.
 But if this also be required, let us cite a few out of many, knowing,
 as we do, that to those who are acquainted with the Scriptures, a very
 ample sea of testimonies lies open.

 19. First of all, then, we must know that the doctrine of the Cross is
 not regarded by all in the same light. It is one thing to the Gentiles,
 to the Jews another, to Christians another; as also the Apostle says,
 "We preach Christ crucified,--to the Jews a stumbling-block, to the
 Gentiles foolishness, but to those who are called, both Jews and
 Greeks, Christ, the power of God and the wisdom of God;" [3298] and, in
 the same place, "For the preaching of the Cross is to those who perish
 foolishness, but to those who are saved," that is, to us, it is "the
 Power of God." [3299] The Jews, to whom it had been delivered out of
 the Law, that Christ should abide for ever, were offended by His Cross,
 because they were unwilling to believe His resurrection. To the
 Gentiles it seemed foolishness that God should have submitted to death,
 because they were ignorant of the mystery of the Incarnation. But
 Christians, who had accepted His birth and passion in the flesh and His
 resurrection from the dead, of course believed that it was the power of
 God which had overcome death.

 First, therefore, hear how this very thing is prophetically declared by
 Isaiah, that the Jews, to whom the Prophets had foretold these things,
 would not believe, but that they who had never heard them from the
 Prophets, would believe them. "To whom He was not spoken of they shall
 see, and they that have not heard shall understand." [3300] Moreover,
 this same Isaiah foretells that, while those who were engaged in the
 study of the Law from childhood to old age believed not, to the
 Gentiles every mystery should be transferred. His words are: "And the
 Lord of Hosts shall make a feast on this mountain unto all nations:
 they shall drink joy, they shall drink wine, they shall be anointed
 with ointment on this mountain. Deliver all these things to the
 nations." [3301] This was the counsel of the Almighty respecting all
 the nations. But they who boast themselves of their knowledge of the
 Law will, perhaps, say to us, "You blaspheme in saying that the Lord
 was subjected to the corruption of death and to the suffering of the
 Cross." Read, therefore, what you find written in the Lamentations of
 Jeremiah: "The Spirit of our countenance, Christ the Lord, was taken in
 our [3302] corruptions, of whom we said, we shall live under His shadow
 among the nations." [3303] Thou hearest how the Prophet says that
 Christ the Lord was taken, and for us, that is, for our sins, delivered
 to corruption. Under whose shadow, since the people of the Jews have
 continued in unbelief, he says the Gentiles lie, because we live not in
 Israel, but among the Gentiles.

 [3298] 1 Cor. i. 23, 24

 [3299] 1 Cor. i. 18

 [3300] Isa. lii. 15. Comp. Rom. xv. 21

 [3301] Isa. xxv. 6

 [3302] Their corruptions, LXX.

 [3303] Lamentations iv. 20

 20. But, if it does not weary you, let the point out as briefly as
 possible, specific references to prophecy in the Gospels, that those
 who are being instructed in the first elements of the faith may have
 these testimonies written on their hearts, lest any doubt concerning
 the things which they believe should at any time take them by surprise.
 We are told in the Gospel that Judas, one of Christ's friends and
 associates at table, betrayed Him. Let the show you how this is
 foretold in the Psalms: "He who hath eaten My bread hath lifted up his
 heel against Me:" [3304] and in another place; "My friends and My
 neighbours drew near and set themselves against Me:" [3305] and again;
 "His words were made softer than oil and yet be they very darts."
 [3306] What then is meant by his words were made soft? "Judas came to
 Jesus and said unto Him, Hail, Master, and kissed Him." [3307] Thus
 through the soft blandishment of a kiss he implanted the execrable dart
 of betrayal. On which the Lord said to him, "Judas, betrayest thou the
 Son of Man with a kiss?" [3308] You observe that He was appraised by
 the traitor's covetousness at thirty pieces of silver. Of this also the
 Prophet speaks, "And I said unto them, If ye think good, give me my
 price, or if not, forbear;" and presently, "I received from them," he
 says, "thirty pieces of silver, and I cast them into the house of the
 Lord, into the foundry." [3309] Is not this what is written in the
 Gospels, that Judas, "repenting of what he had done, brought back the
 money, and threw it down in the temple and departed?" [3310] Well did
 He call it His price, as though blaming and upbraiding. For He had done
 so many good works among them, He had given sight to the blind, feet to
 the lame, the power of walking to the palsied, life also to the dead;
 for all these good works they paid Him death as His price, appraised at
 thirty pieces of silver. It is related also in the Gospels that He was
 bound. This also the word of prophecy had foretold by Isaiah, saying,
 "Woe unto their soul, who have devised a most evil device against
 themselves, saying, Let us bind the just One, seeing that He is
 unprofitable to us." [3311]

 [3304] Ps. xli. 9

 [3305] Ps. xxxv. 15

 [3306] Ps. lv. 21

 [3307] Matt. xxvi. 49

 [3308] Luke xxii. 48

 [3309] Zech. xi. 12, 13, LXX.

 [3310] Matt. xxvii. 3, 5

 [3311] Isa. iii. 9, LXX.

 21. But, says some one, "Are these things to be understood of the Lord?
 Could the Lord be held prisoner by men and dragged to judgment?" Of
 this also the same Prophet shall convince you. For he says, "The Lord
 Himself shall come into judgment with the elders and princes of the
 people." [3312] The Lord is judged then according to the Prophet's
 testimony, and not only judged, but scourged, and smitten on the face
 with the palms (of men's hands), and spitted on, and suffers every
 insult and indignity for our sake. And because all who should hear
 these things preached by the Apostles would be perfectly amazed,
 therefore also the Prophet speaking in their person exclaims, "Lord,
 who hath believed our report?" [3313] For it is incredible that God,
 the Son of God, should be spoken of and preached as having suffered
 these things. For this reason they are foretold by the Prophets, lest
 any doubt should spring up in those who are about to believe. Christ
 the Lord Himself therefore in His own person, says, "I gave My back to
 the scourges, and My cheeks to the palms, [3314] I turned not away My
 face from shame and spitting." [3315] This also is written among His
 other sufferings, that they bound Him, and led Him away to Pilate. This
 also the Prophet foretold, saying, "And they bound him and conducted
 Him as a pledge of friendship (xenium) to King Jarim." [3316] But some
 one objects, "But Pilate was not a king." Hear then what the Gospel
 relates next, "Pilate hearing that He was from Galilee, sent Him to
 Herod, who was king in Israel at that time." [3317] And rightly does
 the Prophet add the name "Jarim," which means "a wild-vine, for Herod
 was not of the house of Israel, nor of that Israelitish vine which the
 Lord had brought out of Egypt, and "planted in a very fruitful hill,"
 [3318] but was a wild vine, i.e. of an alien stock. Rightly, therefore,
 was he called "a wild-vine," because he in nowise sprung from the
 shoots of the vine of Israel. And whereas the Prophet used the phrase
 "xenium," "A pledge of friendship," this also corresponds, "For Herod
 and Pilate," as the Gospel witnesses, "from being enemies were made
 friends," [3319] and, as though in token of their reconciliation, each
 sent Jesus bound to the other. What matter, so long as Jesus, as
 Saviour, reconciles those who were at variance, and restores peace, and
 also brings back concord! Wherefore of this also it is written in Job,
 "May the Lord reconcile the hearts of the princes of the earth." [3320]

 [3312] Isa. iii. 14

 [3313] Isa. liii. 1

 [3314] Rapismata, LXX.

 [3315] Isa. l. 6

 [3316] Hos. x. 6

 [3317] Luke xxiii. 6, 7

 [3318] Isa. v. 1

 [3319] Luke xxiii. 12

 [3320] Job xii. 24 Diallasson, LXX.

 22. It is related that when Pilate would fain have released Him all the
 people cried out, "Crucify Him, Crucify Him!" [3321] This also the
 Prophet Jeremiah foretells, saying, in the person of the Lord Himself,
 "My inheritance is become to Me as a lion in the forest. He hath
 uttered his voice against Me, wherefore I have hated it. And therefore
 (saith He) I have forsaken and left My house." [3322] And again in
 another place, "Against whom have ye opened your mouth, and against
 whom have ye let loose your tongues?" [3323] When He stood before His
 judge, it is written that "He held His peace." [3324] Many Scriptures
 testify of this. In the Psalms it is written, "I became as a man that
 heareth not, and in whose mouth are no reproofs." [3325] And again, "I
 was as a deaf man, and heard not, and as one that is dumb and openeth
 not his mouth." And again another Prophet saith, "As a lamb before her
 shearer, so He opened not His mouth. In His humiliation His judgment
 was taken away." [3326] It is written that there was put on Him a crown
 of thorns. Of this hear in the Canticles the voice of God the Father
 marvelling at the iniquity of Jerusalem in the insult done to His Son:
 "Go forth and see, ye daughters of Jerusalem, the crown wherewith His
 mother hath crowned Him." [3327] Moreover, of the thorns another
 Prophet makes mention: "I looked that she should bring forth grapes,
 and she brought forth thorns, and instead of righteousness a cry."
 [3328] But that thou mayest know the secrets of the mystery, it behoved
 Him, Who came to take away the sins of the world, to free the earth
 also from the curse, which it had received through the sin of the first
 man, when the Lord said "Cursed be the earth in thy labours: thorns:
 and thistles shall it bring forth to thee." [3329] For this cause,
 therefore, is Jesus crowned with thorns, that first sentence of
 condemnation might be remitted. He is led to the cross, and the life of
 the whole word is suspended on the wood of which it is made. I would
 point out how this also is confirmed by testimony from the Prophets.
 You find Jeremiah speaking of it thus, "Come and let us cast wood into
 His bread, and crush Him out of the land of the living." [3330] And
 again, Moses, mourning over them, says, "Thy life shall be suspended
 before thine eyes, and thou shalt fear day and night, and shalt not
 believe thy life." [3331] But we must pass on, for already we are
 exceeding our proposed measure of brevity, and are lengthening out our
 "short word" by a long dissertation. Yet we will add a few words more,
 lest we should seem altogether to have passed over what we undertook.

 [3321] Luke xxiii. 21

 [3322] Jer. xii. 7, 8

 [3323] Isa. lvii. 4

 [3324] Matt. xxvi. 63

 [3325] Ps. xxxviii. 13, 14

 [3326] Isa. liii. 7, 8

 [3327] Cant. iii. 11

 [3328] Isa. v. 4, 7

 [3329] Gen. iii. 17, 18

 [3330] Jer. xi. 19

 [3331] Deut. xxviii. 66

 23. It is written that when the side of Jesus was pierced "He shed
 thereout blood and water." [3332] This has a mystical meaning. For
 Himself had said, "Out of His belly shall flow rivers of living water."
 [3333] But He shed forth blood also, of which the Jews sought that it
 might be upon themselves and upon their children. He shed forth water,
 therefore, which might wash believers; He shed forth blood also which
 might condemn unbelievers. Yet it might be understood also as
 prefiguring the twofold grace of baptism, one that which is given by
 the baptism of water, the other that which is sought through martyrdom
 in the outpouring of blood, for both are called baptism. But if you ask
 further why our Lord is said to have poured forth blood and water from
 His side rather than from any other member, I imagine that by the rib
 in the side the woman is signified. Since the fountain of sin and death
 proceeded from the first woman, who was the rib of the first Adam, the
 fountain of redemption and life is drawn from the rib of the second
 Adam.

 [3332] John xix. 34

 [3333] John vii. 38

 24. It is written that in our Lord's passion there was darkness over
 the earth from the sixth hour until the ninth. To this also you will
 find the Prophet witnessing, "Thy Sun shall go down at mid-day." [3334]
 And again, the Prophet Zechariah, "In that day there shall be no more
 light. There shall be cold and frost in one day, and that day known to
 the Lord; and it shall be neither day nor night, but at evening time
 there shall be light." [3335] What plainer language could the Prophet
 have used for his words to seem not so much a prophecy of the future as
 a narrative of the past? He foretold both the cold and the frost. For
 Peter was warming himself at the fire because it was cold: and he was
 suffering cold not only in respect of the time (the early hour), but
 also of his faith. There is added, [3336] "and that day shall be known
 to the Lord; and it shall be neither day nor night." What is "neither
 day nor night?" Did he not plainly speak of the darkness interposed in
 the day, and then the light afterwards restored? That was not day, for
 it did not begin with sun-rise, neither was it complete night, for it
 did not, when the day was ended, receive its due space from the
 beginning or prolong it to the end; but the light which had been driven
 away by the crime of wicked men is restored at evening time. For after
 the ninth hour, the darkness is driven away, and the sun is restored to
 the world. Again, another Prophet witnesses of the same, "The light
 shall be darkened upon the earth in the day-time." [3337]

 [3334] Amos viii. 9

 [3335] Zech. xiv. 6, 7, LXX.

 [3336] Zech. xiv. 6, 7, LXX.

 [3337] Amos viii. 9

 25. The Gospel further relates that the soldiers parted the garments of
 Jesus among themselves, and cast lots upon His vesture. The Holy Spirit
 provided that this also should be witnessed beforehand by the Prophets,
 for David says, "They parted my garments among them, and upon my
 vesture they did cast lots." [3338] Nor were the Prophets silent even
 as to the robe, the scarlet robe, which the soldiers are said to have
 put upon Him in mockery. Listen to Isaiah, "Who is this that cometh
 from Edom, red in his garments from Bozrah? Wherefore are thy garments
 red, and thy raiment as though thou hadst trodden in the wine-press?"
 To which Himself replies, "I have trodden the wine-press alone, O
 daughter of Sion." [3339] For He alone it is Who hath not sinned, and
 hath taken away the sins of the world. For if by one man death could
 enter into the world, how much more by one man, Who was God also, could
 life be restored!

 [3338] Ps. xxii. 18

 [3339] Isa. lxiii. 1-3

 26. It is related also that vinegar was given Him to drink, or wine
 mingled with myrrh which is bitterer than gall. Hear what the Prophet
 has foretold of this: "They gave Me gall to eat, and when I was thirsty
 they gave Me vinegar to drink." [3340] Agreeably with which Moses, even
 in his day, said to the people, "Their vine is of the vineyards of
 Sodom, and their branch of Gomorrah; their grape is a grape of gall,
 and their cluster a cluster of bitterness." [3341] And again, the
 Prophet upbraiding them says, "Oh foolish people and unwise, have ye
 thus requited the Lord?" [3342] Moreover, in the Canticles the same
 things are foretold, where even the garden in which the Lord was
 crucified is indicated: "I have come into my garden, my sister, my
 spouse, and have gathered in my myrrh." [3343] Here the Prophet has
 plainly set forth the wine mingled with myrrh which the Lord has given
 Him to drink.

 [3340] Ps. lxix. 21

 [3341] Deut. xxxii. 32

 [3342] Deut. xxxii. 6

 [3343] Cant. v. 1

 27. Next it is written that "He gave up the ghost." [3344] This also
 had been foretold, by the Prophet, who says, addressing the Father in
 the Person of the Son, "Into Thy hands I commend My Spirit." [3345] He
 is related also to have been buried, and a great stone laid at the door
 of the sepulchre. Hear what the word of prophecy foretold by Jeremiah
 concerning this also, "They have cut off my life in the pit, and have
 laid a stone upon Me." [3346] These words of the Prophet point most
 plainly to His burial. Here are yet others, "The righteous hath been
 taken away from beholding iniquity, and his place is in peace." [3347]
 And in another place, "I will give the malignant for his burial;"
 [3348] and yet once more, "He hath lain down and slept as a lion, and
 as a lion's whelp; who shall rouse Him up?" [3349]

 [3344] Mark xv. 37

 [3345] Ps. xxxi. 5

 [3346] Lam. iii. 53

 [3347] Isa. lvii. 1, 2

 [3348] Isa. liii. 9, LXX.

 [3349] Gen. xlix. 9

 28. That He descended into hell is also evidently foretold in the
 Psalms, where it is said, "Thou hast brought Me also into the dust of
 the death." [3350] And again, "What profit is there in my blood, when I
 shall have descended into corruption?" [3351] And again, "I descended
 into the deep mire, where there is no bottom." [3352] Moreover, John
 says, "Art Thou He that shall come (into hell, without doubt), or do we
 look for another?" [3353] Whence also Peter says that "Christ being put
 to death in the flesh, but quickened in the Spirit which dwells in Him,
 descended to the spirits who were shut up in prison, who in the days of
 Noah believed not, to preach unto them;" [3354] where also what He did
 in hell is declared. Moreover, the Lord says by the Prophet, as though
 speaking of the future, "Thou wilt not leave my soul in hell, neither
 wilt Thou suffer Thy Holy One to see corruption." [3355] Which again,
 in prophetic language he speaks of as actually fulfilled, "O Lord, Thou
 hast brought my soul out of hell: Thou hast saved me from them that go
 down into the pit." [3356] There follows next,--

 [3350] Ps. xxii. 15

 [3351] Ps. xxx. 9

 [3352] Ps. lxix. 2

 [3353] Luke vii. 20

 [3354] 1 Pet. iii. 10-20

 [3355] Ps. xvi. 10

 [3356] Ps. xxx. 3

 29. The Third Day He Rose Again from the Dead. The glory of Christ's
 resurrection threw a lustre upon everything which before had the
 appearance of weakness and frailty. If a while since it seemed to you
 impossible that an immortal Being could die, you see now that He who
 has overcome death and is risen again cannot be mortal. But understand
 herein the goodness of the Creator, that so far as you by sinning have
 cast yourself down, so far has He descended in following you. And do
 not impute lack of power to God, the Creator of all things, by
 imagining his work to have ended in the fall into an abyss which He in
 His redemptive purpose was unable to reach. We speak of infernal and
 supernal, because we are bounded by the definite circumference of the
 body, and are confined within the limits of the region prescribed to
 us. But to God, Who is present everywhere and absent nowhere, what is
 infernal and what supernal? Notwithstanding, through the assumption of
 a body there is room for these also. The flesh which had been deposited
 in the sepulchre, is raised, that that might be fulfilled which was
 spoken by the Prophet, "Thou wilt not suffer Thy Holy One to see
 corruption." [3357] He returned, therefore, a victor from the dead,
 leading with Him the spoils of hell. For He led forth those who were
 held in captivity by death, as He Himself had foretold, when He said,
 "When I shall be lifted up from the earth I shall draw all unto Me."
 [3358] To this the Gospel bears witness, when it says, "The graves were
 opened, and many bodies of saints which slept arose, and appeared unto
 many, and entered into the holy City," [3359] that city, doubtless, of
 which the Apostle says, "Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the
 Mother of us all." [3360] As also he says again to the Hebrews, "It
 became Him, for Whom are all things, and by Whom are all things, Who
 had brought many sons into glory, to make the Author of their salvation
 perfect through suffering." [3361] Sitting, therefore, on the right
 hand of God in the highest heavens, He placed there that human flesh,
 made perfect through sufferings, which had fallen to death by the lapse
 of the first man, but was now restored by the virtue of the
 resurrection. Whence also the Apostle says, "Who hath raised us up
 together and made us sit together in the heavenly places." [3362] For
 He was the potter, Who, as the Prophet Jeremiah teaches, "took up again
 with His hands, and formed anew, as it seemed good to Him, the vessel
 which had fallen from His hands and was broken in pieces." [3363] And
 it seemed good to Him that the mortal and corruptible body which He had
 assumed, this body raised from the rocky sepulchre and rendered
 immortal and incorruptible, He should now place not on the earth but in
 heaven, and at His Father's right hand. The Scriptures of the Old
 Testament are full of these mysteries. No Prophet, no Lawgiver, no
 Psalmist is silent, but almost every one of the sacred pages speaks of
 them. It seems superfluous, therefore, to linger in collecting
 testimonies; yet we will cite some few, remitting those who desire to
 drink more largely to the well-springs of the divine volumes
 themselves.

 [3357] Ps. xvi. 10

 [3358] John xii. 32

 [3359] Matt. xxvii. 52, 53

 [3360] Gal. iv. 23

 [3361] Heb. ii. 10

 [3362] Eph. ii. 6

 [3363] Jerem. xviii. 4

 30. It is said then in the Psalms, "I laid me down and slept, and rose
 up again, because the Lord sustained me." [3364] Again, in another
 place, "Because of the wretchedness of the needy and the groaning of
 the poor, now will I arise, saith the Lord." [3365] And elsewhere, as
 we have said above, "O Lord, thou hast brought my soul out of hell;
 Thou hast saved me from them that go down into the pit." [3366] And in
 another place, "Because Thou hast turned and quickened me, and brought
 me out of the deep of the earth again." [3367] In the 87th Psalm He is
 most evidently spoken of: "He became as a man without help, free among
 the dead." [3368] It is not said "a man," but "as a man." For in that
 He descended into hell, He was "as a man:" but He was "free among the
 dead," because He could not be detained by death. And therefore in the
 one nature the power of human weakness, in the other the power of
 divine majesty is exhibited. The Prophet Hosea also speaks most
 manifestly of the third day in this wise, "After two days He will heal
 us; but on the third day we shall rise and shall live in His presence."
 [3369] This he says in the person of those who, rising with Him on the
 third day, are recalled from death to life. And they are the same
 persons who say, "On the third day we shall rise again, and shall live
 in His presence." But Isaiah says plainly, "Who brought forth from the
 earth the great Shepherd of the sheep." [3370] Then, that the women
 were to see His resurrection, while the Scribes and Pharisees and the
 people disbelieved, this also Isaiah foretold in these words, "Ye
 women, who come from beholding, come: for it is a people that hath no
 understanding." [3371] But as to the women who are related to have gone
 to the sepulchre after the resurrection, and to have sought Him without
 finding, as Mary Magdalene, who is related to have come to the
 sepulchre before it was light, and not finding Him, to have said,
 weeping, to the angels who were there, "They have taken away the Lord,
 and I know not where they have laid Him" [3372] --even this is foretold
 in the Canticles: "On my bed I sought Him Whom my soul loveth; I sought
 Him in the night, and found Him not." [3373] Of those also who found
 Him, and held Him by the feet, it is foretold, in the same book, "I
 will hold Him Whom my soul loveth, and will not let Him go." [3374]
 Take these passages, a few of many; for being intent on brevity we
 cannot heap together more.

 [3364] Ps. iii. 5

 [3365] Ps. xii. 5

 [3366] Ps. xxx. 3

 [3367] Ps. lxxi. 10

 [3368] Ps. lxxxviii. 4, 5

 [3369] Hosea vi. 2

 [3370] Heb. xiii. 20

 [3371] Isa. xxvii. 11, LXX.

 [3372] John xx. 13

 [3373] Cant. iii. 1

 [3374] Cant. iii. 4

 31. He Ascended into Heaven, and Sitteth on the Right Hand of the
 Father: from Thence He Shall Come to Judge the Quick and the Dead.
 These clauses follow with suitable brevity at the end of this part of
 the Creed which treats of the Son. What is said is plain, but the
 question is how and in what sense it is to be understood. For to
 "ascend," and to "sit," and to "come," unless you understand the words
 in accordance with the dignity of the divine nature, appear to point to
 something of human weakness. For having consummated what was to be done
 on earth, and having recalled souls from the captivity of hell, He is
 spoken of as ascending up to heaven, as the Prophet had foretold,
 "Ascending up on high He led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto
 men," [3375] those gifts, namely, which Peter, in the Acts of the
 Apostles, spoke of concerning the Holy Ghost, "Being therefore by the
 right hand of God exalted, He hath shed forth this gift which ye do see
 and hear." [3376] He gave the gift of the Holy Ghost to men, because
 the captives, whom the devil had before carried into hell through sin,
 Christ by His resurrection from death recalled to heaven. He ascended
 therefore into heaven, not where God the Word had not been before, for
 He was always in heaven, and abode in the Father, but where the Word
 made flesh had not been seated before. Lastly, since this entrance
 within the gates of heaven seemed new to its ministers and princes,
 they say to one another, on seeing the nature of flesh penetrating into
 the secret recesses of heaven, as David full of the Holy Ghost,
 declares, "Lift up your gates, ye princes, and be ye lift up ye
 everlasting gates, and the King of glory shall enter in. Who is the
 King of glory? The Lord strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in battle."
 [3377] Which words are spoken not with reference to the power of the
 divine nature, but with reference to the novelty of flesh ascending to
 the right hand of God. The same David says elsewhere, "God hath
 ascended jubilantly, and the Lord with the sound of the trumpet."
 [3378] For conquerors are wont to return from battle with the sound of
 the trumpet. Of Him also it is said, "Who buildeth up His ascent in
 heaven." [3379] And again, "Who hath ascended above the cherubims,
 flying upon the wings of the winds." [3380]

 [3375] Ps. lxviii. 18

 [3376] Acts ii. 33

 [3377] Ps. xxiv. 7, LXX.

 [3378] Ps. xlviii. 5

 [3379] Ps. lxxxix. 2

 [3380] Ps. xviii. 10

 32. To sit at the right hand of the Father is a mystery belonging to
 the Incarnation. For it does not befit that incorporeal nature without
 the assumption of flesh; neither is the excellency of a heavenly seat
 sought for the divine nature, but for the human. Whence it is said of
 Him, "Thy seat, O God, is prepared from thence forward; Thou art from
 everlasting." [3381] The seat, then, whereon the Lord Jesus was to sit,
 was prepared from everlasting, "in whose name every knee should bow, of
 things in heaven and things on earth, and things under the earth; and
 every tongue shall confess to Him that Jesus is Lord in the glory of
 God the Father;" [3382] of Whom also David thus speaks, "The Lord said
 unto my Lord, Sit Thou on my right hand until I make Thine enemies Thy
 footstool." [3383] Referring to which words the Lord in the Gospel said
 to the Pharisees, "If therefore David in spirit calleth Him Lord, how
 is He his Son?" [3384] By which He shewed that according to the Spirit
 He was the Lord, according to the flesh He was the Son, of David.
 Whence also the Lord Himself says in another place, "Verily I say unto
 you, henceforth ye shall see the Son of Man sitting at the right hand
 of the power of God." [3385] And the Apostle Peter says of Christ, "Who
 is on the right hand of God, seated in the heavens." [3386] And Paul
 also, writing to the Ephesians, "According to the working of the might
 of His power, which He wrought in Christ, when He raised Him from the
 dead, and seated Him on His right hand." [3387]

 [3381] Ps. xciii. 2

 [3382] Phil. ii. 10, 11

 [3383] Ps. cx. 1

 [3384] Matt. xxii. 43-45

 [3385] Matt. xxvi. 64; Luke xxii. 69

 [3386] 1 Pet. iii. 22

 [3387] Eph. i. 19, 20

 33. That He shall come to judge the quick and the dead we are taught by
 many testimonies of the divine Scriptures. But before we cite what the
 Prophets say on this point, we think it necessary to remind you that
 this doctrine of the faith would have us daily solicitous concerning
 the coming of the Judge, that we may so frame our conduct as having to
 give account to the Judge who is at hand. For this is what the Prophet
 said of the man who is blessed, that, "He ordereth his words in
 judgment." [3388] When, however, He is said to judge the quick and the
 dead, this does not mean that some will come to judgment who are still
 living, others who are already dead; but that He will judge both souls
 and bodies, where, by souls are meant "the quick," and the bodies "the
 dead;" as also the Lord Himself saith in the Gospel, "Fear not them who
 are able to kill the body, but are not able to hurt the soul; but
 rather fear Him who is able to destroy both soul and body in Gehenna."
 [3389]

 [3388] Ps. cxii. 5

 [3389] Matt. x. 28

 34. Now let us shew briefly, if you will, that these things were
 foretold by the Prophets. You will yourself, since you are so minded,
 gather together more from the ample range of the Scriptures. The
 Prophet Malachi says, "Behold the Lord Almighty shall come, and who
 shall abide the day of His coming, or who shall abide the sight of Him?
 For He doth come as the fire of a furnace and as fuller's soap: and He
 shall sit, refining and purifying as it were gold and silver." [3390]
 But that thou mayest know more certainly Who this Lord is of Whom these
 things are said, hear what the Prophet Daniel also foretells: "I saw,"
 saith he, "in the vision of the night, and, behold, One like the Son of
 Man coming with the clouds of heaven, and He came nigh to the Ancient
 of days, and was brought near before Him; and there was given to Him
 dominion, and honour, and a kingdom. And all peoples, tribes, and
 languages shall serve Him. And His dominion is an eternal dominion
 which shall not pass away, and His kingdom shall not be destroyed."
 [3391] By these words we are taught not only of His coming and
 judgment, but of His dominion and kingdom, that His dominion is
 eternal, and His kingdom indestructible, without end; as it is said in
 the Creed, [3392] "and of His kingdom there shall be no end." So that
 one who says that Christ's kingdom shall one day have an end is very
 far from the faith. Yet it behoves us to know that the enemy is wont to
 counterfeit this salutary advent of Christ with cunning fraud in order
 to deceive the faithful, and in the place of the Son of Man, Who is
 looked for as coming in the majesty of His Father, to prepare the Son
 of Perdition with prodigies and lying signs, that instead of Christ he
 may introduce Antichrist into the world; of whom the Lord Himself
 warned the Jews beforehand in the Gospels, "Because I am come in My
 Father's Name, and ye received Me not, another will come in his own
 name, and him ye will receive." [3393] And again, "When ye shall see
 the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the Prophet,
 standing in the holy place, let him that readeth understand." [3394]
 Daniel, therefore, in his visions speaks very fully and amply of the
 coming of that delusion: but it is not worth while to cite instances,
 for we have enlarged enough already; we therefore refer any one who may
 wish to know more concerning these matters to the visions themselves.
 The Apostle also himself says, "Let no than deceive you by any means,
 for that day shall not come except there come a falling away first, and
 that man of sin be revealed, the Son of Perdition, who opposeth and
 exalteth himself above everything that is called God, or that is
 worshipped, so that he sitteth in the temple of God, shewing himself as
 though himself were God." [3395] And soon afterwards, "Then shall that
 wicked one be revealed, whom the Lord Jesus shall slay with the breath
 of His mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of His coming:
 whose coming is after the working of Satan with all power and signs and
 lying wonders." [3396] And again, shortly afterwards, "And therefore
 the Lord shall send unto them strong delusion, that they may believe a
 lie, that all may be judged who have not believed the truth." [3397]
 For this reason, therefore, is this "delusion" foretold unto us by the
 words of Prophets, Evangelists, and Apostles, lest any one should
 mistake the coming of Antichrist for the coming of Christ. But as the
 Lord Himself says, "When they shall say unto you, lo, here is Christ,
 or lo, He is there, believe it not. For many false Christs and false
 prophets shall come and shall seduce many." [3398] But let us see how
 He hath pointed out the judgment of the true Christ: "As the lightning
 shineth from the east unto the west, so shall the coming of the Son of
 Man be." [3399] When, therefore, the true Lord Jesus Christ shall come,
 He will sit and set up his throne of judgment. As also He says in the
 Gospel, "He shall separate the sheep from the goats," [3400] that is,
 the righteous from the unrighteous; as the Apostle writes, "We must all
 stand before the judgment-seat of Christ, that every man may receive
 the awards due to the body, according as he hath done, whether they be
 good or evil." [3401] Moreover, the judgment will be not only for
 deeds, but for thoughts also, as the same Apostle saith, "Their
 thoughts mutually accusing or else excusing one another, in the day
 when God shall judge the secrets of men." [3402] But on these points
 let this suffice. Next follows in the order of the faith,--

 [3390] Matt. iii. 1-3

 [3391] Dan. vii. 13, 14

 [3392] "The Creed" is either the Constantinopolitan, or, more probably,
 that of Jerusalem, with which Rufinus, as a Presbyter of that church,
 must have been familiar. There is no reason to suppose that the clause
 was in the Creed of Aquileia.

 [3393] John v. 43

 [3394] Matt. xxiv. 15

 [3395] 2 Thess. ii. 3, 4

 [3396] 2 Thess. ii. 8, 9

 [3397] Ibid. 11, 12

 [3398] Matt. xxiv. 23, 24

 [3399] Ibid. 27

 [3400] Matt. xxv. 32

 [3401] 2 Cor. v. 10

 [3402] Rom. ii. 15, 16

 35. And in the Holy Ghost. What has been delivered above somewhat at
 large concerning Christ relates to the mystery of His Incarnation and
 of His Passion, and, by thus intervening, as belonging to His Person,
 has somewhat delayed the mention of the Holy Spirit. Otherwise, if the
 divine nature alone be taken into account, as in the beginning of the
 Creed we say "I believe in God the Father Almighty," and afterwards,
 "In Jesus Christ His only Son our Lord," so in like manner we add, "And
 in the Holy Ghost." But all of these particulars which are spoken of
 above concerning Christ relate, as we have said, to the dispensation of
 the flesh (to His Incarnation). By the mention of the Holy Spirit, the
 mystery of the Trinity is completed. For as one Father is mentioned,
 and there is no other Father, and one only-begotten Son is mentioned,
 and there is no other only-begotten Son, so also there is one Holy
 Ghost, and there cannot be another Holy Ghost. In order, therefore,
 that the Persons may be distinguished, the terms expressing
 relationship (the properties) are varied, whereby the first is
 understood to be the Father, of Whom are all things, Who Himself also
 hath no Father, the second the Son, as born of the Father, and the
 third the Holy Ghost, as proceeding from both, [3403] and sanctifying
 all things. But that in the Trinity one and the same Godhead may be set
 forth, since, prefixing the preposition "in" we say that we believe "in
 God the Father," so also we say, "in Christ His Son," so also "in the
 Holy Ghost." But our meaning will be made more plain in what follows.
 For the Creed proceeds,--

 [3403] Or, according to another reading, "from the mouth of God."

 36. "The Holy Church; The Forgiveness of Sin, the Resurrection of This
 Flesh." It is not said, "In the holy Church," nor "In the forgiveness
 of sins," nor "In the resurrection of the flesh." For if the
 preposition "in" had been added, it would have had the same force as in
 the preceding articles. But now in those clauses in which the faith
 concerning the Godhead is declared, we say "In God the Father," and "In
 Jesus Christ His Son," and "In the Holy Ghost," but in the rest, where
 we speak not of the Godhead but of creatures and mysteries, the
 preposition "in " is not added. We do not say "We believe in the holy
 Church," but "We believe the holy Church," not as God, but as the
 Church gathered together to God: and we believe that there is
 "forgiveness of sins;" we do not say "We believe in the forgiveness of
 sins;" and we believe that there will be a "Resurrection of the flesh;"
 we do not say "We believe in the resurrection of the flesh." By this
 monosyllabic preposition, therefore, the Creator is distinguished from
 the creatures, and things divine are separated from things human.

 This then is the Holy Ghost, who in the Old Testament inspired the Law
 and the Prophets, in the New the Gospels and the Epistles. Whence also
 the Apostle says, "All Scripture given by inspiration of God is
 profitable for instruction." [3404] And therefore it seems proper in
 this place to enumerate, as we have learnt from the tradition of the
 Fathers, the books of the New and of the Old Testament, which,
 according to the tradition of our forefathers, are believed to have
 been inspired by the Holy Ghost, and have been handed down to the
 Churches of Christ.

 [3404] 2 Tim. iii. 16

 37. Of the Old Testament, therefore, first of all there have been
 handed down five books of Moses, Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers,
 Deuteronomy; Then Jesus Nave, (Joshua the son of Nun), The Book of
 Judges together with Ruth; then four books of Kings (Reigns), which the
 Hebrews reckon two; the Book of Omissions, which is entitled the Book
 of Days (Chronicles), and two books of Ezra (Ezra and Nehemiah), which
 the Hebrews reckon one, and Esther; of the Prophets, Isaiah, Jeremiah,
 Ezekiel, and Daniel; moreover of the twelve (minor) Prophets, one book;
 Job also and the Psalms of David, each one book. Solomon gave three
 books to the Churches, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Canticles. These
 comprise the books of the Old Testament.

 Of the New there are four Gospels, Matthew, Mark, Luke, John; the Acts
 of the Apostles, written by Luke; fourteen Epistles of the Apostle
 Paul, two of the Apostle Peter, one of James, brother of the Lord and
 Apostle, one of Jude, three of John, the Revelation of John. These are
 the books which the Fathers have comprised within the Canon, and from
 which they would have us deduce the proofs of our faith.

 38. But it should be known that there are also other books which our
 fathers call not "Canonical" but "Ecclesiastical:" that is to say,
 Wisdom, called the Wisdom of Solomon, and another Wisdom, called the
 Wisdom of the Son of Syrach, which last-mentioned the Latins called by
 the general title Ecclesiasticus, designating not the author of the
 book, but the character of the writing. To the same class belong the
 Book of Tobit, and the Book of Judith, and the Books of the Maccabees.
 In the New Testament the little book which is called the Book of the
 Pastor of Hermas, [and that] which is called The Two Ways, [3405] or
 the Judgment of Peter; all of which they would have read in the
 Churches, but not appealed to for the confirmation of doctrine. The
 other writings they have named "Apocrypha." These they would not have
 read in the Churches.

 These are the traditions which the Fathers have handed down to us,
 which, as I said, I have thought it opportune to set forth in this
 place, for the instruction of those who are being taught the first
 elements of the Church and of the Faith, that they may know from what
 fountains of the Word of God their draughts must be taken.

 [3405] It is believed that this book forms part of "The Teaching of the
 Twelve Apostles" lately discovered and Constantinople.

 39. We come next in the order of belief to the Holy Church. We have
 mentioned above why the Creed does not say here, as in the preceding
 article, "In the Holy Church." They, therefore, who were taught above
 to believe in one God, under the mystery of the Trinity, must believe
 this also, that there is one holy Church in which there is one faith
 and one baptism, in which is believed one God the Father, and one Lord
 Jesus Christ, His Son, and one Holy Ghost. This is that holy Church
 which is without spot or wrinkle. For many others have gathered
 together Churches, as Marcion, and Valentinus, and Ebion, and
 Manichæus, and Arius, and all the other heretics. But those Churches
 are not without spot or wrinkle of unfaithfulness. And therefore the
 Prophet said of them, "I hate the Church of the malignants, and I will
 not sit with the ungodly." [3406] But of this Church which keeps the
 faith of Christ entire, hear what the Holy Spirit says in the
 Canticles, "My dove is one; the perfect one of her mother is one."
 [3407] He then who receives this faith in the Church let him not turn
 aside in the Council of vanity, and let him not enter in with those who
 practise iniquity.

 For Marcion's assembly is a Council of vanity in that he denies that
 the Father of Christ is God, the Creator, who by His Son made the
 world. Ebion's is a Council of vanity since he teaches that, while we
 believe in Christ, we are withal to observe the circumcision of the
 flesh, the keeping of the Sabbath, the accustomed sacrifices, and all
 the other ordinances according to the letter of the Law. Manichæus' is
 a Council of vanity in regard of his teaching; first in that he calls
 himself the Paraclete, then that he says that the world was made by an
 evil God, denies God the Creator, rejects the Old Testament, asserts
 two natures, one good the other evil, mutually opposing one another,
 affirms that men's souls are co-eternal with God, that, according to
 the Pythagoreans, they return through divers circles of nativity into
 cattle and animals and beasts, denies the resurrection of our flesh,
 maintains that the passion and nativity of the Lord were not in the
 verity of flesh, but only in appearance. It was the Council of vanity
 when Paul of Samosata and his successor Photinus afterwards taught,
 that Christ was not born of the Father before the world, but had His
 beginning from Mary, and believed not that being God He was born man,
 but that of man He was made God. It was the Council of vanity when
 Arius and Eunomius taught as their determinate opinion that the Son of
 God was not born of the very substance of the Father, but was created
 out of nothing, and that the Son of God had a beginning, and is
 inferior to the Father: moreover they affirm that the Holy Ghost is not
 only inferior to the Son, but is also a ministering Spirit. [3408]
 Theirs also is a Council of vanity who confess indeed that the Son is
 of the substance of the Father, but distinguish and separate the Holy
 Spirit, while yet the Saviour shews in the Gospel that the power and
 Godhead of the Trinity are one and the same, saying, "Baptize all
 nations in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
 Ghost," [3409] and it is plainly impious for man to put asunder what
 God hath joined together. That also is the Council of vanity which a
 pertinacious and wicked contention formerly gathered together,
 affirming that Christ assumed human flesh indeed, but not a rational
 soul withal, since Christ conferred one and the same salvation on the
 flesh, and the animal soul, and the reason and mind of man. That also
 is the Council of vanity which Donatus drew together throughout Africa,
 by charging the Church with traditorship (delivering up the sacred
 books), and with which Novatus disturbed men's minds by denying the
 grant of repentance to the lapsed, and condemning second marriages,
 though contracted possibly of necessity. All of these then avoid as
 congregations of malignants. Those also, if such there be, who are said
 to assert that the Son of God does not see or know the Father, as
 Himself is known and seen by the Father; or that the kingdom of Christ
 will have an end; or that the flesh will not be raised in the complete
 restoration of its substance; these also who deny that there will be a
 just judgment of God in respect of all, and affirm that the devil will
 be absolved from the punishment of damnation due to him. To all these,
 I say, let the believer turn a deaf ear. But hold fast by the holy
 Church, which confesses God the Father Almighty, and His only Son,
 Jesus Christ our Lord, and the Holy Ghost, of one concordant and
 harmonious substance, believes that the Son of God was born of the
 Virgin, suffered for man's salvation, rose again from the dead in the
 same flesh in which he was born; and, lastly, hopes that He will come
 the Judge of all, through Whom also both the Forgiveness of Sins and
 the Resurrection of the Flesh are preached.

 [3406] Ps. xxvi. 5

 [3407] Cant. vi. 9

 [3408] Mittendarium, "Mittendarii, Palatini qui in sacro Palatio
 militabant, et in provincias extraordinarie mittebantur, a Principe, ut
 eorum mandata perferrent." Officers attached to the Palace, who were
 sent into the provinces by the Emperor on extraordinary occasions, as
 bearers of his orders--Glossarium Manuale ex Magnis Glossariis Du
 Fresne, etc.

 [3409] Matt. xxviii. 19

 40. As to the Forgiveness of Sins, it ought to be enough simple to
 believe. For who would ask the cause or the reason when a Prince grants
 indulgence? When the liberality of an earthly sovereign is no fit
 subject for discussion, shall man's temerity discuss God's largess? For
 the Pagans are wont to ridicule us, saying that we deceive ourselves,
 fancying that crimes committed in deed can be purged by words. And they
 say, "Can he who has committed murder be no murderer, and he who has
 committed adultery be accounted no adulterer? How then shall one guilty
 of crimes of this sort all of a sudden be made holy?" But to this, as I
 said, we answer better by faith than by reason. For he is King of all
 who hath promised it: He is Lord of heaven and earth who assures us of
 it. Would you have me refuse to believe that He who made me a man of
 the dust of the earth can of a guilty person make me innocent? And that
 He who when I was blind made me see, or when I was deaf made me hear,
 or lame walk, can recover for me my lost innocence? And to come to the
 witness of Nature--to kill a man is not always criminal, but to kill of
 malice, not by law, is criminal. It is not the deed then, in such
 matters, that condemns me, because sometimes it is rightly done, but
 the evil intention of the mind. If then my mind which had been rendered
 criminal, and in which the sin originated, is corrected, why should I
 seem to you incapable of being made innocent, who before was criminal?
 For if it is plain, as I have shewn, that crime consists not in the
 deed but in the will, as an evil will, prompted by an evil demon, has
 made me obnoxious to sin and death, so the will prompted by the good
 God, being changed to good, hath restored me to innocence and life. It
 is the same also in all other crimes. In this way there is found to be
 no opposition between our faith and natural reason, while forgiveness
 of sins is imputed not to deeds, which when once done cannot be
 changed, but to the mind, which it is certain can be converted from bad
 to good.

 41. This last article, which affirms the Resurrection of the Flesh,
 concludes the sum of all perfection with succinct brevity. Although on
 this point also the faith of the Church is impugned, not only by
 Gentiles, but by heretics likewise. For Valentinus altogether denies
 the resurrection of the flesh, so do the Manicheans, as we shewed
 above. But they refuse to listen to the Prophet Isaiah when he says,
 "The dead shall rise, and they who are in the graves shall be raised,"
 [3410] or to most wise Daniel, when he declares, "Then they who are in
 the dust of the earth shall arise, these to eternal life, but those to
 shame and confusion." [3411] Yet even in the Gospels, which they appear
 to receive, they ought to learn from our Lord and Saviour, Who says,
 when instructing the Sadducees, "As touching the resurrection of the
 dead: have ye not read how He saith to Moses in the Bush, I am the God
 of Abraham, the God of Isaac, the God of Jacob? Now God is not the God
 of the dead but of the living." [3412] Where in what goes before He
 declares what and how great is the glory of the resurrection, saying,
 "But in the resurrection of the dead they will neither marry or be
 given in marriage, but will be as the angels of God." [3413] But the
 virtue of the resurrection confers on men an angelical state, so that
 they who have risen from the earth shall not live again on the earth
 with the brute animals but with angels in heaven--yet those only whose
 purer life has fitted them for this--those, namely, who even now
 preserving the flesh of their soul in chastity, have brought it into
 subjection to the Holy Spirit, and thus with every stain of sins done
 away and changed into spiritual glory by the virtue of sanctification,
 have been counted worthy to have it admitted into the society of
 angels.

 [3410] Is. xxvi. 19

 [3411] Dan. xii. 2

 [3412] Mark xii. 26, 27

 [3413] Matt. xxii. 30

 42. But unbelievers cry, "How can the flesh, which has been putrified
 and dissolved, or changed into dust, sometimes also swallowed up by the
 sea, and dispersed by the waves, be gathered up again, and again made
 one, and a man's body formed anew out of it?" To whom our first answer
 is in Paul's words: "Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not
 quickened, except it die. And that which thou sowest, thou sowest not
 the body, which shall be, but bare grain of wheat or of some other
 seed: but God giveth it a body as seemeth good to Him." [3414] Did you
 not believe that that which you see taking place every year in the
 seeds which you cast into the ground will come to pass in your flesh
 which by the law of God is sown in the earth? Why, pray, have you so
 mean an opinion of God's power that you do not believe it possible for
 the scattered dust of which each man's flesh was composed to be
 re-collected and restored to its own original fabric? Do you refuse to
 admit the fact when you see mortal ingenuity search for veins of metal
 deeply buried in the ground, and the experienced eye discover gold
 where the inexperienced thinks there is nothing but earth? Why should
 we refuse to grant these things to Him who made man, when he whom He
 made can do so much? And when mortal ingenuity discovers that gold has
 its own proper vein, and silver another, and that a far different vein
 of copper, and diverse and distinct veins of iron and lead lie
 concealed beneath what has the appearance of earth, shall divine power
 be thought unable to discover and distinguish the component particles
 belonging to each man's flesh, even though they seem to be dispersed?

 [3414] 1 Cor. xv. 36-38

 43. But let us endeavour to assist those souls which fail in their
 faith through reasons drawn from nature. If one should mix different
 sorts of seeds together and sow them indiscriminately in the earth,
 will not the grain of each several kind, wherever it may have been
 thrown, shoot forth at the proper time in accordance with its own
 specific nature so as to reproduce the condition of its own form and
 its own body.

 Thus then the substance of each individual flesh, though its particles
 have been variously and diversely scattered, has within it an immortal
 principle, since it is the flesh of an immortal soul, and at the time
 which God in His good pleasure shall appoint, there will be collected
 from the earth and drawn to it, its own component particles, which will
 be restored to that form which death had formerly dissolved. And thus
 it will come to pass that to each soul will be restored, not a confused
 or foreign body but its own which it had when alive, in order that the
 flesh together with its own soul may for the conflicts of the present
 life either be crowned if undefiled, or punished if defiled. And
 accordingly our Church, [3415] in teaching the faith instead of "the
 Resurrection of the flesh," as the Creed is delivered in other
 Churches, guardedly adds the pronoun "this"--"the resurrection of this
 flesh." "Of this," that is, no doubt, of the person who rehearses the
 Creed, making the sign of the cross upon his forehead, while he says
 the word, that each believer may know that his flesh, if he have kept
 it clean from sin, will be a vessel of honour, useful to the Lord,
 prepared for every good work; but, if defiled by sins, that it will be
 a vessel of wrath destined to destruction.

 But now, concerning the glory of the resurrection and the greatness of
 the promise by which God has bound Himself, if any one desires to be
 more fully informed, he will find notices in almost all the divine
 volumes, out of which, simply by way of bringing them to remembrance,
 we will mention a few passages in the present place, and then make an
 end of the work which you have enjoined. The Apostle Paul makes use of
 such arguments as the following in asserting that mortal flesh will
 rise again. "But if there be no resurrection of the dead, then is not
 Christ risen. And if Christ be not risen, our preaching is vain and
 your faith is vain." [3416] And presently afterwards, "But now is
 Christ risen from the dead, the first-fruits of them that sleep. For
 since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead.
 For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive. But
 every man in his own order. Christ the first-fruits, afterwards they
 that are Christ's at His coming, then cometh the end." [3417] And
 afterways he adds, "Behold I shew you a mystery: We shall all rise
 indeed, but we shall not [3418] all be changed;" or as other copies
 read, "We shall all sleep, indeed but we shall not all be changed; in a
 moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump; for the trumpet
 shall sound, and the dead shall rise incorruptible, and we shall be
 changed." [3419] However, whichever be the true text, writing to the
 Thessalonians, he says, "I would not have you ignorant, brethren,
 concerning those who are asleep, that ye sorrow not, as the others who
 have no hope. For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, so
 those also who sleep through Jesus shall God bring with Him. For this
 we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we who are alive and
 remain at the coming of the Lord shall not prevent them that sleep. For
 the Lord Himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice
 of the archangel, with the trump of God, and the dead who are in Christ
 shall rise first: then we who are alive and remain shall be caught up
 together with them in the clouds to meet Christ in the air, and so
 shall we ever be with the Lord." [3420]

 [3415] The Church of Aquileia.

 [3416] 1 Cor. xv. 13, 14

 [3417] Ibid. 20-24

 [3418] A reading current in Rufinus' time.

 [3419] Ibid. 51, 52

 [3420] 1 Thess. iv. 13-17

 44. But that you may not suppose this to be a novel doctrine peculiar
 to Paul, I will adduce also what the Prophet Ezekiel foretold by the
 Holy Ghost. "Behold," saith he, "I will open your graves and bring you
 forth out of your graves." [3421] Let me recall, further, how Job, who
 abounds in mystical language, plainly predicts the resurrection of the
 dead. "There is hope for a tree; for if it be cut down it will sprout
 again, and its shoot shall never fail. But if its root have waxed old
 in the earth, and the stock thereof be dead in the dust, yet through
 the scent of water it will flourish again, and put forth shoots as a
 young plant. But man, if he be dead, is he departed and gone? And
 mortal man, if he have fallen, shall he be no more?" [3422] Dost thou
 not see, that in these words he is appealing to men's sense of shame,
 as it were, and saying, "Is mankind so foolish, that when they see the
 stock of a tree which has been cut down shooting forth again from the
 ground, and dead wood again restored to life, they imagine their own
 case to have no likeness to that of wood or trees?" But to convince you
 that Job's words are to be read as a question, when he says, "But
 mortal man when he hath fallen shall he not rise again?" take this
 proof from what follows; for he adds immediately, "But if a man be
 dead, shall he live?" [3423] And presently afterwards he says, "I will
 wait till I be made again;" [3424] and afterwards he repeats the same:
 "Who shall raise again upon the earth my skin, which is now draining
 this cup of suffering?" [3425]

 [3421] Ezek. xxxvii. 12

 [3422] Job xiv. 7-10

 [3423] Job xiv. 14

 [3424] Ibid

 [3425] Job xxvi. 26, 27

 45. Thus much in proof of the profession which we make in the Creed
 when we say "The resurrection of this flesh." As to the addition "this"
 see how consonant it is with all that we have cited from the divine
 books. What else does Job signify in the place which we explained
 above, "He will raise again my skin, which is now draining this cup of
 suffering," that is, which is undergoing these torments? Does he not
 plainly say that there will be a resurrection of this flesh, this, I
 mean, which is now undergoing the extremity of trials and tribulations?
 Moreover, when the Apostle says, "This corruptible must put on
 incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality," [3426] are not
 his words those of one who in a manner touches his body and places his
 finger upon it? This body then, which is now corruptible, will by the
 grace of the resurrection be incorruptible, and this which is now
 mortal will be clothed with virtues of immortality, that, as "Christ
 rising from the dead dieth no more, death hath no more dominion over
 Him," [3427] so those who shall rise in Christ shall never again feel
 corruption or death, not because the nature of flesh will have been
 cast off, but because its condition and quality will have been changed.
 There will be a body, therefore, which will rise from the dead
 incorruptible and immortal, not only of the righteous, but also of
 sinners; of the righteous that they may be able ever to abide with
 Christ, of sinners that they may undergo without end the punishment due
 to them.

 [3426] 1 Cor. xv. 53

 [3427] Rom. vi. 9

 46. That the righteous shall ever abide with Christ our Lord we have
 proved above, where we have shewn that the Apostle says, "Then we which
 are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them in the
 clouds to meet Christ in the air, and so shall we ever be with the
 Lord." [3428] And do not marvel that the flesh of the saints is to be
 changed into such a glorious condition at the resurrection as to be
 caught up to meet God, suspended in the clouds and borne in the air,
 since the same Apostle, setting forth the great things which God
 bestows on them that love Him, says, "Who shall change our vile body
 that it may be made like unto His glorious body." [3429] It is nowise
 absurd then, if the bodies of the saints are said to be raised up into
 the air, seeing that they are said to be renewed after the image of
 Christ's body, which is seated at God's right hand. But this also the
 holy Apostle adds, speaking either of himself or of others of his own
 place or merit, "He will raise us up together with Christ and make us
 sit together in the heavenly places." [3430] Whence, since God's saints
 have these promises and an infinite number like them respecting the
 resurrection of the righteous, it will now not be difficult to believe
 those also which the Prophets have foretold, namely, that "the
 righteous shall shine as the sun and as the brightness of the firmament
 in the kingdom of God." [3431] For who will think it difficult that
 they should have the brightness of the sun, and be adorned with the
 splendour of the stars and of this firmament, for whom the life and
 conversation of God's angels are being prepared in heaven, or who are
 represented as being hereafter to be conformed to the glory of Christ's
 body? In reference to which glory, promised by the Saviour's mouth, the
 holy Apostle says, "It is sown as an animal body; it will rise a
 spiritual body." [3432] For if it is true, as it certainly is true,
 that God will vouchsafe to associate every one of the righteous and of
 the saints in companionship with the angels, it is certain that He will
 change their bodies also into the glory of a spiritual body.

 [3428] 1 Thess. iv. 17

 [3429] Phil. iii. 21

 [3430] Eph. ii. 6

 [3431] Matt. xiii. 43

 [3432] 1 Cor. xv. 44

 47. Nor let this promise seem to you contrary to the natural structure
 of the body. For if we believe, according to what is written, that God
 took clay of the earth and made man, and that the origin of our body
 was this, that, by the will of God, earth was changed into flesh, why
 does it seem absurd to you or contrary to reason if, on the same
 principles on which earth is said to be advanced to all animal body, an
 animal body in turn should be believed to be advanced to a spiritual
 body? These things and many like these you will find in the divine
 Scriptures concerning the resurrection of the righteous. There will be
 given to sinners also, as we said above, a condition of incorruption
 and immortality at the resurrection, that, as God assigns this state to
 the righteous for perpetuity of glory, so He may assign the same to
 sinners for prolongation of confusion and punishment. For this also the
 Prophet's words, which we referred to above, state clearly: "Many shall
 rise from the dust of the earth, some to life eternal, and others to
 confusion and eternal shame." [3433]

 [3433] Dan. xii. 2

 48. If then we have understood in what august significance God Almighty
 is called Father, and in what mysterious sense our Lord Jesus Christ is
 held to be His only Son, and with what entire perfection of meaning His
 Spirit is called the Holy Spirit, and how the Holy Trinity is one in
 substance but has distinctions of relation and of Persons, what also is
 the birth from a Virgin, what the nativity of the Word in the flesh,
 what the mystery of the Cross, what the purpose of our Lord's descent
 into hell, what the glory of the Resurrection, and the delivery of
 souls from their captivity in the infernal regions, what also His
 ascension into heaven, and the expected advent of the Judge; moreover
 how the holy Church ought to be acknowledged as opposed to the
 congregations of vanity, what is the number of the sacred Volume, what
 conventicles of heretics ought to be avoided, and how in the
 forgiveness of sins there is no opposition whatever between the divine
 freedom and natural reason, and how not only the sacred oracles but
 also the example of Lord and Saviour Himself, and the conclusions of
 natural reason, confirm the truth of the resurrection of our
 flesh;--if, I say, we have intelligently followed these in succession
 in accordance with the rule of the tradition hereinbefore expounded, we
 pray that the Lord will grant to us, and to all who hear these words,
 that having kept the faith which we have received, having finished our
 course, we may await the crown of righteousness laid up for us, and be
 found among those who shall rise again to eternal life, and be
 delivered from confusion and eternal shame, through Christ our Lord,
 through Whom to God the Father Almighty with the Holy Ghost is glory
 and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

 The Preface to the Books of Recognitions of St. Clement.

 Addressed to Bishop Gaudentius.

 (For the occasion and date [3434] of this work see the Prolegomena, p.
 412.)

 ------------------------

 You possess so much vigour of character, my dear Gaudentius, you who
 are so signal an ornament of our teachers, or as I would rather say,
 you have the grace of the Spirit in so large a measure, that even what
 you say in the way of daily conversation, or of addresses that you
 preach in church, [3435] ought to be consigned in writing and handed
 down for the instruction of posterity. But I am far less quick, my
 native talent being but slender, and old age is already making me
 sluggish and slow; and this work is nothing but the payment of a debt
 due to the command laid upon me by the virgin Sylvia whose memory I
 revere. She it was who demanded of me, as you have now done by the
 right of heirship, to translate Clement into our language. The debt is
 paid at last, though after many delays. It is a part of the booty, and
 in my opinion no small one, which I have carried off from the libraries
 of the Greeks, and which I am collecting for the use and advantage of
 our countrymen. I have no food of my own to bring them, and I must
 import their nourishment from abroad. However, foreign goods are apt to
 appear sweeter; and sometimes they are really more useful. Moreover,
 almost anything which brings healing to our bodies or is a defence
 against disease or an antidote to poison comes from abroad. Judæa sends
 us the distillation of the balsam tree, Crete the leaf of the
 dictamnus, Arabia her aromatic flowers, and India the crop of the
 spikenard. These goods come to us, no doubt, in a less perfect
 condition than those which our own fields produce, but they preserve
 intact their pleasant scent and their healing power. Therefore, my
 friend who are as my own soul, I present to you Clement returning to
 Rome. I present him dressed in a Latin garb. Do not think it strange if
 the aspect which his eloquence presents is less bright than it might
 be. It makes no difference if only the meaning is felt to be the same.

 These are foreign wares, then, which I am importing at a great expense
 of labour; and I have still to see whether our countrymen will regard
 with gratitude one who is bringing them the spoils (spolia) of his
 warfare, and who is unlocking with the key of our language a treasure
 house hitherto concealed, though he does it with the utmost good will.
 I only trust that God may look favourably on your good wishes, so that
 my present may not be met in any quarter by evil eyes and envious
 looks; and that we may not witness that extremely monstrous phenomenon,
 expressions of illwill on the part of those on whom the gift is
 conferred, while those from whom it is taken part with it ungrudgingly.
 It is but right that you, who have read this work in the Greek should
 point out to others the design of my translation--unless indeed, you
 feel that in some respects I have not observed the right method of
 rendering the original. You are, I believe well aware that there are
 two Greek editions of this work of Clement, his Recognitions; that
 there are two sets of books, which in some few cases differ from each
 other though the bulk of the narrative is the same. For instance, the
 last part of the work, that which gives an account of the
 transformation of Simon Magus, exists in one of these, while in the
 other it is entirely absent. On the other hand there are some things,
 such as the dissertation on the unbegotten and the begotten God, and a
 few others, which, though they are found in both editions, are, to say
 the least of them, beyond my understanding; and these I have preferred
 to leave others to deal with rather than to present them in an
 inadequate manner. As to the rest, I have taken pains not to swerve,
 even in the slightest degree from either the sense or the diction; and
 this, though it makes the expression less ornate, renders it more
 faithful.

 There is a letter in which this same Clement writing to James the
 Lord's brother, gives an account of the death of Peter, and says that
 he has left him as his successor, as ruler and teacher of the church;
 and further incorporates a whole scheme of ecclesiastical government.
 This I have not prefixed to the work, both because it is later in point
 of time, and because it has been previously translated and published by
 me. Nevertheless, there is a point which would perhaps seem
 inconsistent with facts were I to place the translation of it in this
 work, but which I do not consider to involve an impossibility. It is
 this. Linus and Cletus were Bishops of the city of Rome before Clement.
 How then, some men ask, can Clement in his letter to James say that
 Peter passed over to him his position as a church-teacher. [3436] The
 explanation of this point, as I understand, is as follows. Linus and
 Cletus were, no doubt, Bishops in the city of Rome before Clement, but
 this was in Peter's life-time; that is, they took charge of the
 episcopal work, while he discharged the duties of the apostolate. He is
 known to have done the same thing at Cæsarea; for there, though he was
 himself on the spot, yet he had at his side Zacchæus whom he had
 ordained as Bishop. Thus we may see how both things may be true; namely
 how they stand as predecessors of Clement in the list of Bishops, and
 yet how Clement after the death of Peter became his successor in the
 teacher's chair. But it is time that we should pay attention to the
 beginning of Clement's own narrative, which he addresses to James the
 Lord's brother.

 [3434] The date is after the Peroration to the Epistle to the Romans
 (see p. 568); but it seemed better not to divide the Prefaces, etc., to
 the translations of Origen's Commentaries.

 [3435] Si quid in Ecclesia declamatur.

 [3436] Cathedram docendi.

 Preface to the Translation of the Sayings of Xystus.

 Composed at Aquileia about the year 307 a.d.

 (For the questions relating to Xystus see the Prolegomena, p. 412.)

 ------------------------

 Rufinus to Apronianus, his own friend.

 I know that, just as the sheep come gladly when their own shepherd
 calls them, so in matters of religion men attend most gladly to the
 admonitions of a teacher who speaks their own language: and therefore,
 my very dear Apronianus, when that pious lady who is my daughter but
 now your sister in Christ, had laid her commands on me to compose for
 her a treatise of such a nature that its understanding should not
 require any great effort, I translated into Latin in a very open and
 plain style the work of Xystus, who is said to be the same man who at
 Rome is called Sixtus, and who gained the glory of being both bishop
 and martyr. I think that, when she reads this, she will find it
 expressed with such brevity that a vast meaning is unfolded in each
 several line, with such power that a sentence only a line long would
 suffice for a whole life's training, and yet with such simplicity that
 one who looked over the shoulder of a girl as she read it might
 question whether I were not quite weak in intellect. And the whole work
 is so concise that it would be possible for her never to let go of it.
 The entire book would hardly be bigger than the finger ring of one of
 our ancestors. And indeed it seems but right that one who has learnt
 through the word of God to count as dross the ornaments of the world
 should now receive at my hands by way of ornament a necklace of the
 word and of wisdom. For the present let this little book serve for a
 ring and be kept constantly in the hands: but it will not be long
 before it will penetrate into the treasure house and be wholly laid up
 in the heart, and bring forth from its innermost chamber the germs of
 instruction and of a participation in all good works. I have added
 further a few choice sayings addressed by a pious father to his son,
 but all so succinct that the whole of this little work may rightly be
 called in Greek the Enchiridion [3437] or in Latin the Annulus. [3438]

 [3437] A thing held in the hand.

 [3438] A ring.

 Preface to the Two Books of Ecclesiastical History, Added by Rufinus to
 His Translation of Eusebius.

 Addressed to Chromatius, Bishop of Aquileia, a.d. 401.

 (For the occasion of writing, and the date, see Prolegomena, p. 412.)

 ------------------------

 It is the custom, they say, of skilful physicians, when they perceive
 that some epidemic disease is near at hand in one of our cities, to
 provide some kind of medicine, whether solid or liquid, which men may
 use as a preventative to defend themselves from the destruction which
 is hanging over them. You have imitated this method of the doctors, my
 venerable Father, Chromatius, at the moment when the gates of Italy
 were broken through by Alaric the commander of the Goths, and thus a
 disease and plague poured in upon us, which made havoc of the fields
 and cattle and men throughout the land. You then sought a remedy
 against the cruelty and destruction, so that the minds of men which
 were languishing might be drawn away from the contagion of the
 prevailing malady, and might preserve their balance through an interest
 in better pursuits. This you have done by enjoining on me the task of
 translating into Latin the ecclesiastical history which was written in
 the Greek language by that most learned man, Eusebius of Cæsarea. You
 thought that the mind of those who heard it read to them might be so
 held fast by it that, in its eager desire for the knowledge of past
 events, it might to some extent become oblivious of their actual
 sufferings. I tried to excuse myself from the task, as being, through
 my weakness unequal to it, and as having in the lapse of years lost the
 use of the Latin tongue. But I reflected that your commands were not to
 be divaricated from your position in the Apostolic order. For, at the
 time when the multitude in the desert were hungering, and the Lord said
 to his Apostles, "Give ye them to eat," Philip who was one of them
 instead of bringing out the loaves which were hid in the wallet of the
 Apostles, said that there was a little lad there who had five loaves
 and two fishes. He knew that the exhibition of the divine virtue would
 be none the less brilliant if the ministry of some of the little ones
 were used in its fulfilment. He modestly excused his action by adding,
 "What are these among so many?" So that the divine power might be more
 conspicuous through the difficult and desperate circumstances in which
 it acted. I felt that, since you were a scion of the Apostolic order,
 you had possibly acted in remembrance of Philip's example, and that,
 when you saw that the time was come for the multitudes to be fed, you
 had engaged the services of a little lad who might be able to
 contribute, twice told, the five loaves [3439] which he had received,
 but who further, to fulfil the Gospel type, might add two small fishes
 [3440] which he had captured by his own efforts. I have therefore made
 the attempt to execute what you had ordered, having the assurance that
 the deficiency of my inexperience would be excused on account of the
 authority of him who gave the command.

 I must point out the course I have taken in reference to the tenth book
 of this work. As it stands in the Greek, it has little to do with the
 process of events. All but a small part of it is taken up with
 discussions tending to the praise of particular Bishops, and adds
 nothing to our knowledge of facts. I have therefore left out all this
 superfluous matter; and, whatever in it belonged to genuine history I
 have added to the ninth book, with which I have made his history close.
 The tenth and eleventh books I have myself compiled, partly from the
 traditions of the former generation, partly from facts within my own
 memory; and these I have added to the previous books, like the two
 fishes to the loaves. If you bestow your approval and benediction upon
 them, I shall have a sure confidence that they will suffice for the
 multitude. The work as now completed contains the events from the
 Ascension of the Saviour to the present time; my own two books those
 from the days of Constantine when the persecution came to an end on to
 the death of the Emperor Theodosius.

 ------------------------

 The following note occurs at the end of the ninth book of Rufinus'
 Latin Version of Eusebius.

 Thus far Eusebius has given us the record of the history. As to the
 subsequent events, as they have followed on up to the present time, as
 I have found them recorded in the writings of the last generation, or
 so far as they are covered by my own knowledge, I will add them,
 obeying, as best I may, in this point also the commands of our father
 in God. [3441]

 [3439] That is, the ten books of Eusebius' History.

 [3440] That is, the two books added by Rufinus.

 [3441] Chromatius.

 Rufinus' Preface to the Translation of Origen's Commentary on Psalms
 36, 37, and 38.

 Addressed to Apronianus, [3442] either at Rome or at Aquileia, between
 a.d. 398 and a.d. 407.

 ------------------------

 The whole exposition of the thirty-sixth, thirty-seventh and
 thirty-eighth Psalms is ethical in its character, being designed to
 enforce more correct methods of life; and teaches at one time the way
 of conversion and repentance, at another that of purification and of
 progress. I have therefore thought it well to translate it into Latin
 for you, my dearest son Apronianus, having first arranged it in nine of
 the short sermons which are called in Greek Homilies, and incorporated
 it into one whole; and thus this discourse which in all its parts aims
 at the correction and the advancement of the moral life, is collected
 into a single volume. My translation will at all events be of use so
 far as to put the reader without effort in possession of the meaning of
 the author, which is here fully laid open, and to bring home to him the
 simplicity of life which he enjoins with clearness of thought and in
 simple words; and thus the voice of prophecy may reach not men alone
 but also god-fearing women, and lend subtlety to the minds of the
 simple. Yet I fear that pious lady, who is my daughter but your sister
 in Christ, may think that she owes me no thanks for my work if it
 brings her nothing but puzzling thoughts and thorny questions: for the
 human body could hardly hold together if divine providence had formed
 it of bones and muscles alone without blending with them the ease and
 grace of the softer tissues.

 [3442] A Roman noble converted by Rufinus and Melania, with the latter
 of whom he was connected.

 Rufinus' Preface to the Translation of Origen's Commentary on the
 Epistle to the Romans.

 Addressed to Heraclius at Aquileia about a.d. 407.

 ------------------------

 My intention was to press the shore of the quiet land in the little
 bark in which I was sailing, and to draw out a few little fishes from
 the pools of Greece: but you have compelled me, brother Heraclius, to
 give my sails to the wind and go forth into the deep sea; you persuade
 me to leave the work which lay before me in the translation of the
 homilies written by the Man of Adamant [3443] in his old age, and to
 open to you the fifteen volumes in which he discussed the Epistle of
 Paul to the Romans. In these books, while he aims at representing the
 Apostle's thoughts, he is carried away into a sea of such depth that
 one who follows him into it may well be afraid of being drowned in the
 greatness of his thoughts as in the vastness of the waves. Then also
 you do not consider this, that my breath is but scanty for filling a
 grand trumpet of eloquence like his. And beyond all these difficulties
 is this, that the books themselves have been interpolated. In almost
 all the libraries (I grant that no one can tell how it happened) some
 of the volumes are absent from the body of the work; and to supply
 these, and to restore the continuity of the work in the Latin version
 is beyond my talent, but would be, as you must know when you make your
 demand, a special gift of God. You add, however, so that nothing may be
 wanting to the labour I am undertaking, that I had better abbreviate
 this whole body of fifteen volumes, which in the Greek reaches to the
 length of forty thousand lines or more, and bring it within moderate
 compass. Your injunctions are hard indeed, and might be thought to be
 imposed by one who did not care to consider what the burden of such a
 work must be. I will, however, attempt it, hoping that through your
 prayers, and the favour of the Lord, what seems impossible to man may
 become possible. But we will now, if you please, listen to the Preface
 which Origen himself prefixes to the work on which he was entering.

 [3443] Or man of steel: (it might also be translated, The indomitable);
 a name given to Origen, an account of the greatness of his labours. It
 is said by Westcott (Dict. of Xtn. Biog. "Origen") to have been adopted
 by Origen himself, and to form part of his real name.

 The Peroration of Rufinus Appended to His Translation of Origen's
 Commentary on the Epistle to the Romans.

 Addressed to Heraclius at Aquileia, probably about 407.

 ------------------------

 A satisfactory conclusion has now, I trust, been reached of the
 Commentary on the Epistle to the Romans, the writing of which has been
 a work of very great labour and time. I confess, my most loving brother
 Heraclius, that in the attempt to respond to your request I have almost
 forgotten the precept; "Do not lift a burden above your strength." Even
 in the other translations of Origen's works into Latin, which were made
 because you earnestly requested it, or rather exacted it as a
 journeyman's task, the labour was very great; for I made it my object
 to supplement what Origen spoke extempore in the lecture room of the
 church; for his aim there was the application of the subject for the
 sake of edification rather than the exposition of the text. This I have
 done in the case of the Homilies, and the short lectures on Genesis and
 Exodus, and especially in those on the book of Leviticus, where he
 spoke in a hortatory manner, whereas my translation takes the form of
 an exposition. This duty of supplying what was wanted I took up because
 I thought that the practice of agitating questions and then leaving
 them unsolved, which he frequently adopts in his homiletic mode of
 speaking, might prove distasteful to the Latin reader. The works upon
 Jesus Nave [3444] and the book of Judges and the thirty-sixth,
 thirty-seventh and thirty-eighth Psalms, I translated simply as I found
 them, with no great labour. While then in the other cases which I have
 mentioned above, I employed much labour in supplying what Origen had
 omitted, in this work on the Epistle to the Romans the labour that fell
 on me for the causes described in the Preface was immense and full of
 complexity. But there will have been nothing but pleasure in these
 labours, provided only that my experience in other cases, of
 ill-disposed minds requiting my toils and vigils with contumely, be not
 repeated and that I do not gain for my studies the reward of detraction
 and for my labour a conspiracy to ruin me. For in dealing with these
 men I have to undergo a new form of accusation. They say to me; When
 you write these things, in which are found many pieces the composition
 of which is due to yourself, you should place your own name in the
 title, and let it run thus: The books of Rufinus' commentary on (for
 instance) the Epistle to the Romans;' for so, they say, in the case of
 profane writers, the name in the title is not that of the Greek author
 who is translated but of the Latin author who translates him. But all
 this complaisance, by which the works are ascribed to me, is caused not
 by love to me but by hatred to the author. I am much more observant of
 my conscience than of my reputation; it may be apparent that I have
 added some things to supply what was wanting; and that I have
 abbreviated what was too lengthy; but to steal the title from the man
 who laid the foundations on which the building has been reared is what
 I cannot think right. It must be, I grant, in the discretion of the
 reader, when he has examined the work, to ascribe the work to any one
 he thinks right; but my intention has been not to seek the applause of
 students but the good of those who wish to be edified.

 I shall turn next to the work which was long ago imposed upon me but
 now is demanded with still greater vehemence by the Bishop Gaudentius,
 namely to turn into Latin the books called the Recognition of Clement
 the Bishop of Rome, the successor and companion of the Apostles. In
 this work I well know that, to judge by the ordinary rule, I shall have
 labour upon labour. In this case I will do what my friends desire, I
 will put my own name in the title of the work, though I shall have that
 of the author also. It shall be called Rufinus's Clement. If the Lord
 enable me to fulfil this task, I shall afterwards return to that which
 you desire, and say something, God willing, on the books of Numbers or
 of Deuteronomy (for this alone is wanting to my whole work on the
 Heptateuch): or else I shall write what I can, the Lord being my guide,
 on the remaining epistles of the Apostle Paul.

 [3444] Joshua.

 Preface to Origen's Homilies on Numbers.

 Addressed to Ursacius. [3445] Written in 410. [3446]

 ------------------------

 My dear brother, I might rightly address you in the words of the
 blessed master, "You do well, dearest Donatus, in reminding me of
 this;" for I well remember my promise that I would collect all that
 Adamantius wrote in his old age on the Law of Moses, and translate it
 into Latin for the use of our people. But, as he says, the season was
 not seasonable for the fulfilment of my promise, but was full of storm
 and confusion. How can the pen move freely when a man is in fear of the
 missiles of the enemy, when he has before his eyes the devastation of
 cities and country, when he has to fly from dangers of the sea, and
 there is no safety even in exile? As you yourself saw, the Barbarian
 was within sight of us; he had set fire to the city of Rhegium, and our
 only protection against him was the very narrow sea which separates the
 soil of Italy from Sicily. In such a position, what leisure could there
 be for writing, and especially for translating, a work in which one's
 duty is not to develop one's own opinions but to express those of
 another? However, when there was a quiet night, and our minds were
 relieved from the fear of an attack by the enemy, and we got at least
 some little leisure for thought, I set to work, as a solace from our
 troubles, and to relieve the burden of our pilgrimage, to gather into
 one and arrange all that Origen had written on the book of Numbers,
 whether in the way of homilies or in writings such as are called
 Excerpts, [3447] and to translate them into the Roman tongue. You urged
 me to do this, Ursacius, and aided me with all your might, indeed, so
 eager were you, that you thought the youth who acted as secretary too
 slow in the execution of his office. I wish, however, to point out to
 you, my brother, that the object of this method of studying scripture
 is not to deal with each clause separately, as you find done in
 commentaries, but to open up a path for the understanding, so that the
 reader may not be made negligent, but as it is written [3448] may "stir
 up his own spirit" and draw out the meaning, and, when he has heard the
 good word, may add to it by his own wisdom. In this way I have tried to
 give all the expositions which you desired; and now of all the writings
 that I have found upon the Law the short comments upon Deuteronomy
 alone are wanting; these, if God so will, and if he restores my
 eye-sight, I hope to add to the body of the work. Indeed, my very
 loving son Pinianus, whose truly Christian company I have joined in
 their flight because of my delight in their chaste conversation,
 requires yet other tasks from me. But do you and he join your prayers
 that the Lord may be present with us, and may give peace in our time,
 and shew mercy to those who are in trouble, and make our work fruitful
 for the edification of the reader.

 [3445] Nothing more is known of Ursacius than is to be gathered from
 the mention of him here.

 [3446] The date is fixed by the burning of Rhegium by Alaric, who
 intended to invade Sicily, but his transports were scattered by a storm
 and he himself died soon after. See Gibbon ch. xxxi.

 [3447] Apparently a longer style of note.

 [3448] Possibly from Ps. lxxvii. 7

 Indexes

Index of Scripture References

 Genesis

 [1]1:26 [2]1:27 [3]1:27 [4]2:7 [5]2:7 [6]2:17 [7]2:18
 [8]2:24 [9]2:24 [10]3:1 [11]3:8 [12]3:17-18 [13]3:19
 [14]3:19 [15]3:19 [16]4:7 [17]4:25 [18]5:5 [19]6:2
 [20]6:2 [21]6:3 [22]6:7 [23]8:21 [24]9:6 [25]12:3
 [26]13:15 [27]15 [28]15:5 [29]18 [30]18:20-21 [31]18:21
 [32]19:17 [33]22:12 [34]22:16 [35]22:18 [36]27:1 [37]31:38
 [38]31:39 [39]31:39 [40]31:40 [41]46:20 [42]49 [43]49:2
 [44]49:9 [45]49:10 [46]49:10 [47]49:11 [48]49:11 [49]49:29
 [50]49:29 [51]49:31 [52]49:31

 Exodus

 [53]2:11 [54]2:28 [55]4:22 [56]7:1 [57]7:1 [58]12:30
 [59]12:41 [60]17:13 [61]19:21 [62]23:1 [63]23:1 [64]23:2
 [65]33:11 [66]33:20 [67]33:20 [68]33:20

 Leviticus

 [69]5:1 [70]16 [71]19:15

 Numbers

 [72]9:13 [73]12:8 [74]19 [75]25:7

 Deuteronomy

 [76]1:16 [77]4:24 [78]5:5 [79]8:15 [80]10:6 [81]10:17
 [82]17:6 [83]18:19 [84]19:15 [85]21:23 [86]28:66 [87]32:6
 [88]32:8 [89]32:18 [90]32:32 [91]32:35 [92]32:43 [93]104

 Joshua

 [94]1:5 [95]1:5

 Judges

 [96]9:53 [97]15:16

 1 Samuel

 [98]2:30 [99]7:12 [100]9:18 [101]17 [102]17:26 [103]25:1

 2 Samuel

 [104]11:21

 1 Kings

 [105]19:1 [106]20:42

 2 Kings

 [107]12:9 [108]16:5

 1 Chronicles

 [109]6:44

 2 Chronicles

 [110]24:8

 Job

 [111]1:21 [112]1:21 [113]9:33 [114]10:9-12 [115]10:13
 [116]10:13 [117]12:24 [118]14:7-10 [119]14:14 [120]14:14
 [121]25:5 [122]26:26-27 [123]31:26 [124]31:28 [125]38:28
 [126]40:3 [127]41:1 [128]41:9-12

 Psalms

 [129]1:2 [130]2:1-2 [131]2:6-8 [132]2:7 [133]3:5 [134]3:27
 [135]9:6-7 [136]10 [137]12:5 [138]12:22 [139]14:1 [140]14:3
 [141]16:10 [142]16:10 [143]16:10 [144]16:10 [145]16:10
 [146]16:10 [147]16:10 [148]18:9 [149]18:10 [150]18:11
 [151]18:16-17 [152]19:2 [153]19:4 [154]19:12-13 [155]21:12
 [156]22:1 [157]22:1 [158]22:15 [159]22:18 [160]22:27
 [161]23:1 [162]24 [163]24:3 [164]24:7 [165]26:5 [166]26:9
 [167]27:3-4 [168]30:3 [169]30:3 [170]30:9 [171]31:5
 [172]31:9 [173]35:15 [174]36 [175]36:9 [176]37 [177]37:5-6
 [178]37:20 [179]38:5 [180]38:13-14 [181]38:14 [182]39:1-2
 [183]40:2 [184]40:3 [185]40:7 [186]41:9 [187]42
 [188]42:9-10 [189]44:23 [190]45:6 [191]45:7 [192]45:7
 [193]45:7 [194]45:10 [195]46:7 [196]48:5 [197]49:20
 [198]50:1 [199]50:18 [200]50:20 [201]55:6 [202]55:21
 [203]57:4 [204]58:3-8 [205]58:10-11 [206]60:8 [207]64:8
 [208]65:2 [209]66:20 [210]67:1 [211]68:18 [212]68:23
 [213]69:2 [214]69:21 [215]69:26 [216]71:10 [217]72:18-19
 [218]74:14 [219]75:8 [220]77:3 [221]77:7 [222]78:65
 [223]79:4 [224]80:13 [225]82:6 [226]82:6 [227]82:67 [228]83
 [229]88:4-5 [230]88:4-5 [231]88:8 [232]89:1-2 [233]89:2
 [234]89:3 [235]89:3 [236]89:4 [237]89:4 [238]89:25
 [239]89:26 [240]89:27 [241]89:28-29 [242]89:35-37 [243]90
 [244]90 [245]90:15 [246]92:12 [247]93:2 [248]94:14
 [249]96:5 [250]96:7 [251]96:13 [252]101:28 [253]102:27
 [254]103:22 [255]104:4 [256]104:52 [257]106:2 [258]107:16
 [259]110:1 [260]110:1 [261]110:1 [262]110:1 [263]110:3
 [264]112:4 [265]112:5 [266]115:4 [267]115:8 [268]118:6
 [269]118:15 [270]119 [271]119:25 [272]119:46 [273]119:46
 [274]119:67 [275]119:67 [276]119:73 [277]119:73 [278]120:3-4
 [279]120:5 [280]120:5 [281]120:6 [282]121:4 [283]132:11
 [284]132:11 [285]135:6 [286]137 [287]141:3-4 [288]143:2
 [289]145:21 [290]146:4 [291]146:4 [292]146:9 [293]147:2
 [294]147:11

 Proverbs

 [295]3:29-30 [296]4:24 [297]6:5 [298]6:17 [299]6:18
 [300]6:18 [301]6:30 [302]8:22 [303]8:22 [304]8:22 [305]8:22
 [306]8:22 [307]8:22 [308]8:22 [309]8:22-26 [310]8:30
 [311]9:1 [312]10:14 [313]10:18 [314]12:13 [315]12:15
 [316]12:16 [317]12:22 [318]13:3 [319]13:16 [320]14:3
 [321]14:6 [322]14:14 [323]14:16 [324]14:19 [325]14:31
 [326]15:12 [327]15:18 [328]18:2 [329]18:4 [330]18:4
 [331]18:6-7 [332]19:1 [333]20:3 [334]20:13 [335]20:17
 [336]21:6 [337]23:9 [338]25:18 [339]25:18 [340]26:2
 [341]26:4-5 [342]26:19 [343]26:24-25 [344]27:1 [345]27:3-4
 [346]27:14 [347]27:20 [348]27:21 [349]28:25-26 [350]29:11
 [351]30:14 [352]30:19 [353]518 [354]583

 Ecclesiastes

 [355]2:8 [356]10:4 [357]14:54 [358]15:294 [359]89

 Song of Solomon

 [360]1:4 [361]1:4 [362]2:3 [363]2:16 [364]3:1 [365]3:4
 [366]3:11 [367]5:1 [368]6:9

 Isaiah

 [369]1:2 [370]1:2 [371]1:2 [372]1:2 [373]1:2 [374]1:9
 [375]1:13-14 [376]2:13 [377]3:3 [378]3:9 [379]3:14 [380]5:1
 [381]5:4 [382]5:7 [383]5:20 [384]6 [385]6 [386]6:2
 [387]7:9 [388]7:13 [389]7:14 [390]7:14 [391]8:9 [392]9:6
 [393]9:6 [394]10:22-23 [395]11:1 [396]11:1 [397]11:1-2
 [398]11:1-3 [399]11:2 [400]11:4 [401]11:6 [402]11:7
 [403]11:9 [404]11:10 [405]11:10 [406]19:1 [407]19:1
 [408]24:16 [409]25:6 [410]25:8 [411]26:19 [412]27:6
 [413]27:11 [414]29:1 [415]29:13 [416]32:5 [417]33:15
 [418]37:29 [419]40:5 [420]40:28 [421]40:28-29 [422]40:31
 [423]41:8 [424]42:1 [425]44:16 [426]44:17 [427]44:20
 [428]45:14-15 [429]47:14-15 [430]49:3 [431]49:5 [432]49:6
 [433]49:15 [434]50:6 [435]52:15 [436]53:1 [437]53:2-3
 [438]53:3 [439]53:3 [440]53:3 [441]53:3-4 [442]53:4
 [443]53:4 [444]53:7 [445]53:7-8 [446]53:8 [447]53:8
 [448]53:8 [449]53:8 [450]53:8 [451]53:9 [452]55:3
 [453]55:4-5 [454]57:1-2 [455]57:4 [456]58:1 [457]58:11
 [458]58:14 [459]59:5 [460]59:5 [461]59:6 [462]61:1
 [463]61:1 [464]61:1 [465]62:6 [466]63:1 [467]63:1-3 [468]64
 [469]64:4 [470]65:2 [471]65:5 [472]65:15-16 [473]66:24

 Jeremiah

 [474]1:11 [475]1:13 [476]2:12 [477]2:13 [478]4:19 [479]4:22
 [480]10:11 [481]10:16 [482]11:19 [483]12:7-8 [484]15:10
 [485]18:4 [486]23:24 [487]51:26

 Lamentations

 [488]3:25 [489]3:53 [490]4:20

 Ezekiel

 [491]3:17 [492]3:17-18 [493]3:18 [494]3:19 [495]13:4
 [496]18:4 [497]21:21 [498]23:40 [499]29:4-5 [500]30:9
 [501]33:1 [502]34:2 [503]37:7 [504]37:12 [505]44:2

 Daniel

 [506]6:1 [507]7:10 [508]7:13-14 [509]9:18 [510]9:18
 [511]9:23 [512]10:11 [513]10:11 [514]12:2 [515]12:2
 [516]12:10

 Hosea

 [517]6:2 [518]8:7 [519]10:6 [520]11:1 [521]12:10

 Joel

 [522]1:2 [523]2:17 [524]2:25

 Amos

 [525]5:8 [526]7:12 [527]8:9 [528]8:9

 Jonah

 [529]2:8 [530]4:6

 Micah

 [531]5:2 [532]5:2 [533]5:2 [534]7:5

 Habakkuk

 [535]2:4

 Zechariah

 [536]3:2 [537]6:12 [538]11:12-13 [539]12:10 [540]12:10
 [541]12:10 [542]12:10 [543]14:6-7 [544]14:6-7 [545]14:20

 Malachi

 [546]3:6 [547]3:6 [548]3:6 [549]3:6 [550]4:2

 Matthew

 [551]1:1 [552]1:1 [553]1:1 [554]1:1 [555]1:2 [556]1:17
 [557]1:18 [558]1:20 [559]1:20 [560]1:21 [561]1:21 [562]1:21
 [563]1:21 [564]1:21 [565]1:23 [566]1:23 [567]1:23 [568]1:23
 [569]2:5-6 [570]2:6 [571]2:6 [572]2:12 [573]2:13 [574]2:15
 [575]2:20 [576]3:1-3 [577]3:15 [578]3:15 [579]3:17 [580]4:6
 [581]5:8 [582]5:11-12 [583]5:11-12 [584]5:11-12 [585]5:14
 [586]5:14 [587]5:23-24 [588]5:29 [589]5:29 [590]5:33-34
 [591]5:44 [592]5:45 [593]5:46 [594]7:1-2 [595]7:6 [596]7:6
 [597]7:14 [598]7:16-20 [599]7:17 [600]7:24 [601]7:24
 [602]8:26 [603]8:27 [604]10:23 [605]10:23 [606]10:23
 [607]10:24 [608]10:25 [609]10:25 [610]10:26 [611]10:28
 [612]10:28 [613]10:28 [614]10:28 [615]10:28 [616]10:28
 [617]10:28 [618]10:28 [619]10:32-33 [620]11:19 [621]11:27
 [622]11:27 [623]11:27 [624]11:27 [625]11:29 [626]11:29
 [627]12:28 [628]12:37 [629]12:43 [630]13:25 [631]13:33
 [632]13:43 [633]13:43 [634]13:47 [635]14:15 [636]14:20
 [637]14:31 [638]15:19 [639]15:22 [640]15:37 [641]16:16
 [642]16:18 [643]16:18 [644]16:28 [645]17:5 [646]17:26
 [647]18:6 [648]18:7 [649]18:10 [650]18:10 [651]18:10
 [652]18:15 [653]18:17 [654]18:18 [655]18:18 [656]19:26
 [657]19:26 [658]19:26 [659]20:18-19 [660]20:23 [661]20:31
 [662]21:9 [663]21:27 [664]22 [665]22:21 [666]22:30
 [667]22:36-40 [668]22:42 [669]22:42 [670]22:43 [671]22:43-45
 [672]23:35 [673]23:37 [674]24:15 [675]24:23 [676]24:23-24
 [677]24:27 [678]24:36 [679]24:36 [680]24:45 [681]25
 [682]25:23 [683]25:25 [684]25:26-27 [685]25:31-33 [686]25:32
 [687]25:32 [688]25:34 [689]25:36 [690]25:40 [691]25:40
 [692]25:41 [693]26:28 [694]26:28 [695]26:28 [696]26:28
 [697]26:28 [698]26:28 [699]26:38 [700]26:38 [701]26:38
 [702]26:38 [703]26:38 [704]26:39 [705]26:39 [706]26:39
 [707]26:39 [708]26:39 [709]26:39 [710]26:41 [711]26:41
 [712]26:49 [713]26:63 [714]26:64 [715]26:64 [716]26:64
 [717]27:3 [718]27:5 [719]27:24 [720]27:48 [721]27:50
 [722]27:52-53 [723]27:57-60 [724]28:6 [725]28:6 [726]28:6
 [727]28:6 [728]28:6 [729]28:19 [730]28:19 [731]28:20
 [732]28:53 [733]37:1-2

 Mark

 [734]2:16 [735]4:39 [736]5:43 [737]6:1 [738]6:35 [739]9:8
 [740]9:42 [741]9:43 [742]10:27 [743]10:27 [744]10:40
 [745]12:13 [746]12:25 [747]12:26-27 [748]13:22 [749]14:22
 [750]14:24 [751]14:24 [752]15:37 [753]15:39 [754]15:42-46

 Luke

 [755]1:3 [756]1:28 [757]1:31 [758]1:31 [759]1:34
 [760]1:34-35 [761]1:35 [762]1:35 [763]1:35 [764]1:38
 [765]1:44 [766]1:51 [767]1:52 [768]2:2 [769]2:4 [770]2:11
 [771]2:11 [772]2:11 [773]2:12 [774]2:22 [775]2:24 [776]2:40
 [777]2:51 [778]2:52 [779]2:52 [780]3:1 [781]3:23 [782]3:23
 [783]3:38 [784]4:17 [785]4:18 [786]4:21 [787]4:21 [788]6:30
 [789]6:44 [790]6:45 [791]6:45 [792]7:20 [793]8:52 [794]9:9
 [795]10:19 [796]11:4 [797]11:26 [798]12:4-5 [799]12:42
 [800]12:49 [801]16 [802]16:8 [803]17:5-6 [804]19:40
 [805]22:19 [806]22:19 [807]22:19 [808]22:31 [809]22:31
 [810]22:44 [811]22:44 [812]22:48 [813]22:69 [814]23:6-7
 [815]23:12 [816]23:21 [817]23:34 [818]23:46 [819]23:46
 [820]23:46 [821]23:46 [822]23:46 [823]23:50 [824]24:38-39
 [825]24:39 [826]24:39 [827]24:39 [828]24:39 [829]24:39
 [830]24:39 [831]24:39 [832]24:39 [833]24:39 [834]24:39

 John

 [835]1:1 [836]1:1 [837]1:1 [838]1:1 [839]1:1 [840]1:1
 [841]1:1 [842]1:1 [843]1:1 [844]1:1 [845]1:1-3 [846]1:1-3
 [847]1:2 [848]1:3 [849]1:3 [850]1:3 [851]1:3 [852]1:3
 [853]1:3 [854]1:4 [855]1:5 [856]1:9 [857]1:14 [858]1:14
 [859]1:14 [860]1:14 [861]1:14 [862]1:14 [863]1:14 [864]1:14
 [865]1:14 [866]1:14 [867]1:14 [868]1:14 [869]1:14 [870]1:14
 [871]1:15 [872]1:16 [873]1:18 [874]1:18 [875]1:18 [876]1:18
 [877]1:18 [878]1:29 [879]1:30 [880]1:33 [881]1:36 [882]2:4
 [883]2:9 [884]2:18 [885]2:19 [886]2:19 [887]2:19 [888]2:19
 [889]2:19 [890]2:19 [891]2:19 [892]2:19 [893]2:19 [894]2:19
 [895]2:19 [896]2:21 [897]2:21-22 [898]2:29 [899]3:13
 [900]3:13 [901]3:13 [902]3:13 [903]3:13 [904]3:14-15
 [905]3:16 [906]3:19 [907]3:20 [908]4:6 [909]4:6 [910]4:6
 [911]4:6 [912]4:24 [913]5:17 [914]5:19 [915]5:19 [916]5:19
 [917]5:19 [918]5:19 [919]5:23 [920]5:24 [921]5:26 [922]5:43
 [923]6:5 [924]6:19 [925]6:21 [926]6:46 [927]6:51 [928]6:51
 [929]6:51 [930]6:51 [931]6:51 [932]6:51 [933]6:51 [934]6:53
 [935]6:54 [936]6:54 [937]6:62 [938]6:62 [939]7:12 [940]7:19
 [941]7:19 [942]7:24 [943]7:24 [944]7:38 [945]7:38 [946]7:38
 [947]7:39 [948]8:9 [949]8:11 [950]8:26 [951]8:40 [952]8:44
 [953]8:56 [954]8:58 [955]9:16 [956]10:5 [957]10:10
 [958]10:11 [959]10:11 [960]10:12-13 [961]10:14-15 [962]10:17
 [963]10:17 [964]10:17 [965]10:18 [966]10:18 [967]10:18
 [968]10:18 [969]10:18 [970]10:18 [971]10:26 [972]10:30
 [973]10:30 [974]10:30 [975]10:30 [976]10:30 [977]10:30
 [978]10:30 [979]10:30 [980]10:30 [981]10:32 [982]10:33
 [983]10:33 [984]10:33 [985]10:34-36 [986]10:37 [987]10:38
 [988]10:38 [989]11:3 [990]11:16 [991]11:35 [992]11:43
 [993]12:6 [994]12:21 [995]12:23 [996]12:24 [997]12:27
 [998]12:27 [999]12:27 [1000]12:27 [1001]12:27 [1002]12:27
 [1003]12:27 [1004]12:32 [1005]13:27 [1006]13:29 [1007]14:6
 [1008]14:7 [1009]14:9 [1010]14:9 [1011]14:9 [1012]14:9
 [1013]14:9 [1014]14:9 [1015]14:10 [1016]14:28 [1017]14:28
 [1018]14:28 [1019]14:28 [1020]14:28 [1021]14:28 [1022]15:1
 [1023]15:5 [1024]15:15 [1025]15:20 [1026]15:20 [1027]15:25
 [1028]15:33 [1029]16:2 [1030]16:15 [1031]16:15 [1032]16:15
 [1033]16:15 [1034]16:28 [1035]16:33 [1036]17:5 [1037]17:6
 [1038]17:21 [1039]17:21 [1040]18:23 [1041]18:40 [1042]19:25
 [1043]19:30 [1044]19:34 [1045]19:34 [1046]19:34 [1047]19:37
 [1048]19:37 [1049]19:38-42 [1050]19:443 [1051]20:13
 [1052]20:17 [1053]20:27 [1054]20:27 [1055]20:28

 Acts

 [1056]1:4 [1057]1:11 [1058]1:11 [1059]1:11 [1060]1:11
 [1061]1:11 [1062]1:18 [1063]2 [1064]2 [1065]2:22 [1066]2:22
 [1067]2:22 [1068]2:22 [1069]2:24 [1070]2:24 [1071]2:29
 [1072]2:30 [1073]2:30 [1074]2:30 [1075]2:30-31 [1076]2:31
 [1077]2:33 [1078]2:33 [1079]2:34 [1080]2:35 [1081]2:36
 [1082]2:36 [1083]2:36 [1084]2:36 [1085]2:38 [1086]3:25
 [1087]4 [1088]5:29 [1089]7:14 [1090]7:55 [1091]7:56
 [1092]7:56 [1093]7:57 [1094]7:59 [1095]8:2 [1096]8:2
 [1097]8:2 [1098]9:5 [1099]9:25 [1100]10:37-38 [1101]10:38
 [1102]10:38 [1103]10:41 [1104]11:26 [1105]11:26 [1106]11:26
 [1107]12:2 [1108]12:4 [1109]12:12 [1110]13:23 [1111]13:29
 [1112]13:30 [1113]13:30 [1114]14:24 [1115]15 [1116]15:2
 [1117]16:16 [1118]17:22 [1119]17:28 [1120]17:30-31
 [1121]17:30-31 [1122]17:31 [1123]18:9 [1124]19:9 [1125]19:35
 [1126]20:10 [1127]20:26 [1128]20:26 [1129]20:29 [1130]22:25
 [1131]23:1 [1132]23:6 [1133]23:11 [1134]23:34 [1135]25:1
 [1136]25:11 [1137]25:16 [1138]26:24 [1139]26:28 [1140]27:24

 Romans

 [1141]1:1 [1142]1:1-3 [1143]1:1-4 [1144]1:3 [1145]1:3-4
 [1146]1:7 [1147]1:8 [1148]1:8 [1149]2:6 [1150]2:15-16
 [1151]2:17-24 [1152]2:21 [1153]3:21 [1154]5:10 [1155]5:10
 [1156]5:12-14 [1157]5:15-17 [1158]5:18-19 [1159]5:19
 [1160]6:3 [1161]6:9 [1162]7:14 [1163]7:22 [1164]7:24
 [1165]7:24 [1166]7:24 [1167]7:24 [1168]8:9 [1169]8:14-17
 [1170]8:17 [1171]8:18 [1172]8:22 [1173]8:23 [1174]8:29
 [1175]8:32 [1176]8:32 [1177]8:35-36 [1178]8:37 [1179]8:38-39
 [1180]9:1 [1181]9:5 [1182]9:5 [1183]9:5 [1184]9:5 [1185]9:5
 [1186]9:5 [1187]9:5 [1188]9:21 [1189]9:22 [1190]9:25
 [1191]9:28 [1192]10:10 [1193]12:11 [1194]12:15 [1195]12:15
 [1196]12:19-20 [1197]13:14 [1198]13:32 [1199]14:4 [1200]14:10
 [1201]14:10 [1202]14:15 [1203]14:16 [1204]14:23 [1205]14:23
 [1206]15 [1207]15:21 [1208]15:30 [1209]16:1 [1210]16:4
 [1211]16:20 [1212]16:25-27 [1213]567

 1 Corinthians

 [1214]1:1 [1215]1:10 [1216]1:12 [1217]1:12 [1218]1:18
 [1219]1:23-24 [1220]1:23-24 [1221]2:2 [1222]2:4 [1223]2:4
 [1224]2:6 [1225]2:8 [1226]2:8 [1227]2:8 [1228]2:8 [1229]2:9
 [1230]2:9 [1231]2:9 [1232]2:10 [1233]2:12 [1234]3:10-11
 [1235]4:5 [1236]4:8 [1237]4:9 [1238]4:17 [1239]5:7
 [1240]6:9 [1241]6:9 [1242]6:10 [1243]6:10 [1244]7:31
 [1245]8:2 [1246]8:2 [1247]8:5-6 [1248]8:6 [1249]8:6
 [1250]8:6 [1251]8:6 [1252]8:6 [1253]8:6 [1254]9:16
 [1255]9:17 [1256]9:20-21 [1257]10:4 [1258]10:11 [1259]10:13
 [1260]10:13 [1261]10:13 [1262]10:25 [1263]11:3 [1264]11:7
 [1265]11:7 [1266]11:7 [1267]11:12 [1268]11:16 [1269]11:18
 [1270]11:24 [1271]11:24 [1272]11:24 [1273]11:24 [1274]11:24
 [1275]11:29 [1276]12:4 [1277]12:8 [1278]12:11 [1279]12:13
 [1280]12:26 [1281]12:26 [1282]12:26 [1283]12:28 [1284]13:9
 [1285]13:10 [1286]13:12 [1287]13:13 [1288]14:32 [1289]15
 [1290]15 [1291]15:3-4 [1292]15:12 [1293]15:12-13
 [1294]15:13-14 [1295]15:17 [1296]15:20 [1297]15:20
 [1298]15:20 [1299]15:20-22 [1300]15:20-22 [1301]15:20-24
 [1302]15:21 [1303]15:21 [1304]15:21 [1305]15:21
 [1306]15:21-22 [1307]15:22 [1308]15:22 [1309]15:23
 [1310]15:25 [1311]15:27-28 [1312]15:32 [1313]15:36-38
 [1314]15:42-4 [1315]15:42-43 [1316]15:42-44 [1317]15:44
 [1318]15:47 [1319]15:47 [1320]15:48 [1321]15:50 [1322]15:50
 [1323]15:51-52 [1324]15:53 [1325]15:53 [1326]15:53 [1327]15:53

 2 Corinthians

 [1328]1:12 [1329]2:7 [1330]2:11 [1331]3:6 [1332]4:7
 [1333]4:11 [1334]4:13 [1335]4:16 [1336]4:16 [1337]5:2
 [1338]5:4 [1339]5:10 [1340]5:10 [1341]5:16 [1342]5:17
 [1343]5:17-18 [1344]5:20 [1345]5:21 [1346]5:21 [1347]6:14-15
 [1348]8 [1349]8:6 [1350]8:19 [1351]9:4 [1352]10 [1353]10
 [1354]11:2 [1355]11:2 [1356]11:6 [1357]11:8 [1358]11:17
 [1359]11:28 [1360]11:33 [1361]12:9 [1362]12:9 [1363]12:11
 [1364]13:4 [1365]13:4 [1366]13:14

 Galatians

 [1367]1:8 [1368]1:8 [1369]1:9 [1370]1:15-16 [1371]1:15-17
 [1372]1:19 [1373]1:19 [1374]2:2 [1375]2:19 [1376]3:1
 [1377]3:8 [1378]3:13 [1379]3:13 [1380]3:13 [1381]3:13
 [1382]3:13 [1383]3:13 [1384]3:16 [1385]3:16 [1386]3:16
 [1387]3:19 [1388]3:27 [1389]3:27-28 [1390]4:4 [1391]4:4
 [1392]4:6-7 [1393]4:7 [1394]4:19 [1395]4:23 [1396]4:24
 [1397]5:10 [1398]5:15 [1399]5:17 [1400]6:1 [1401]6:3
 [1402]6:7 [1403]6:7 [1404]6:16 [1405]6:16 [1406]6:16
 [1407]6:17 [1408]6:17 [1409]6:17

 Ephesians

 [1410]1:4 [1411]1:4-5 [1412]1:9-10 [1413]1:10 [1414]1:10
 [1415]1:12 [1416]1:17 [1417]1:17 [1418]1:18 [1419]1:19-20
 [1420]1:19-20 [1421]1:20-21 [1422]1:21 [1423]1:21 [1424]1:22
 [1425]1:22 [1426]2:3 [1427]2:5 [1428]2:6 [1429]2:6
 [1430]2:6 [1431]2:6 [1432]2:7 [1433]2:7 [1434]2:7
 [1435]2:10 [1436]2:13 [1437]2:14 [1438]2:17 [1439]3:1
 [1440]3:2 [1441]3:14 [1442]3:14 [1443]3:17 [1444]3:17
 [1445]3:18 [1446]3:20-21 [1447]4:3 [1448]4:5 [1449]4:5
 [1450]4:5 [1451]4:10 [1452]4:11 [1453]4:13 [1454]4:14
 [1455]4:14 [1456]4:16 [1457]4:16 [1458]4:25 [1459]4:25
 [1460]4:25 [1461]4:26 [1462]5:2 [1463]5:5 [1464]5:5
 [1465]5:12 [1466]5:12 [1467]5:19 [1468]5:20 [1469]5:25
 [1470]5:28 [1471]5:28-29 [1472]5:31-32 [1473]6:11 [1474]6:11
 [1475]6:13 [1476]6:14 [1477]6:14 [1478]6:20 [1479]18

 Philippians

 [1480]1:18 [1481]1:21 [1482]1:23 [1483]1:23 [1484]1:27
 [1485]1:29 [1486]1:29 [1487]2 [1488]2:3 [1489]2:5
 [1490]2:5-7 [1491]2:5-7 [1492]2:5-8 [1493]2:6 [1494]2:6
 [1495]2:6 [1496]2:6-7 [1497]2:6-7 [1498]2:7 [1499]2:7
 [1500]2:7 [1501]2:7 [1502]2:7 [1503]2:7 [1504]2:7 [1505]2:7
 [1506]2:8 [1507]2:8 [1508]2:9 [1509]2:10 [1510]2:10-11
 [1511]2:10-11 [1512]2:16 [1513]2:21 [1514]3:19 [1515]3:19
 [1516]3:20 [1517]3:20-21 [1518]3:20-21 [1519]3:20-21
 [1520]3:21 [1521]3:21 [1522]3:21 [1523]3:21 [1524]4
 [1525]4:19 [1526]44

 Colossians

 [1527]1:5 [1528]1:15 [1529]1:15 [1530]1:15 [1531]1:15
 [1532]1:15 [1533]1:16 [1534]1:16-17 [1535]1:16-17 [1536]1:18
 [1537]1:18 [1538]1:18 [1539]1:18 [1540]1:18 [1541]1:18
 [1542]1:19 [1543]1:20 [1544]1:25 [1545]2:8-9 [1546]2:14
 [1547]2:14-15 [1548]3:11 [1549]3:21 [1550]4 [1551]393

 1 Thessalonians

 [1552]1:9-10 [1553]3:2 [1554]3:11 [1555]3:12-13 [1556]4:4
 [1557]4:13 [1558]4:13-17 [1559]4:14 [1560]4:17 [1561]4:17
 [1562]5:14 [1563]5:21-22 [1564]5:21-22 [1565]5:23 [1566]5:23

 2 Thessalonians

 [1567]2:1 [1568]2:1-3 [1569]2:3-4 [1570]2:8 [1571]2:8-9
 [1572]2:11-12 [1573]2:16-17

 1 Timothy

 [1574]1:4 [1575]1:17 [1576]1:17 [1577]1:17 [1578]1:20
 [1579]2:4 [1580]2:5 [1581]2:5 [1582]2:5 [1583]2:5-6
 [1584]2:5-6 [1585]2:5-6 [1586]3:11 [1587]3:16 [1588]3:16
 [1589]4:13 [1590]5:19 [1591]6:3-4 [1592]6:8 [1593]6:13
 [1594]6:13-15 [1595]6:16 [1596]6:16 [1597]6:16 [1598]6:16

 2 Timothy

 [1599]1:16 [1600]2:8 [1601]2:8 [1602]2:8 [1603]2:9
 [1604]2:11-13 [1605]2:13 [1606]2:14 [1607]2:24 [1608]3:6
 [1609]3:8 [1610]3:12 [1611]3:12-13 [1612]3:16 [1613]4
 [1614]4 [1615]4 [1616]4 [1617]4:1 [1618]4:1 [1619]4:2
 [1620]4:7 [1621]4:14 [1622]4:17

 Titus

 [1623]1:1 [1624]2:13 [1625]2:13 [1626]2:13 [1627]2:13
 [1628]3:1 [1629]3:14

 Philemon

 [1630]1:23

 Hebrews

 [1631]1:2 [1632]1:2 [1633]1:3 [1634]1:3 [1635]1:3 [1636]1:3
 [1637]1:3 [1638]1:3 [1639]1:3 [1640]1:3 [1641]1:3
 [1642]1:12 [1643]2:10 [1644]2:11 [1645]2:11-13 [1646]2:14
 [1647]2:14 [1648]2:14 [1649]2:14 [1650]2:14-15 [1651]2:16
 [1652]2:16 [1653]2:16 [1654]2:16 [1655]2:16 [1656]2:16
 [1657]2:16-17 [1658]3:1 [1659]3:1-2 [1660]3:14 [1661]4:8
 [1662]4:12 [1663]4:13 [1664]4:14 [1665]4:14 [1666]4:15
 [1667]4:15 [1668]5:1 [1669]5:1 [1670]5:1-3 [1671]5:4-5
 [1672]5:7 [1673]5:8 [1674]5:10 [1675]5:12 [1676]6:17
 [1677]6:18 [1678]6:18 [1679]6:18 [1680]6:19-20 [1681]6:20
 [1682]6:20 [1683]7:1-3 [1684]7:3 [1685]7:3 [1686]7:3
 [1687]7:6 [1688]7:14 [1689]7:14 [1690]7:21 [1691]9:24
 [1692]9:27 [1693]10:1 [1694]10:5 [1695]10:10 [1696]10:19-22
 [1697]10:29 [1698]10:37 [1699]10:38 [1700]11:1 [1701]11:10
 [1702]11:37-38 [1703]11:39-40 [1704]12:2 [1705]12:12-13
 [1706]12:29 [1707]13:8 [1708]13:8 [1709]13:8 [1710]13:12
 [1711]13:20 [1712]13:20-21 [1713]26

 James

 [1714]1:17 [1715]3:2 [1716]3:2 [1717]4:9 [1718]4:16

 1 Peter

 [1719]1:1 [1720]2:21 [1721]3:7 [1722]3:10-20 [1723]3:15
 [1724]3:22 [1725]4:1 [1726]4:15 [1727]5 [1728]5:8

 1 John

 [1729]2:19 [1730]4:2-3 [1731]5:1 [1732]5:1 [1733]5:20

 Jude

 [1734]1:8 [1735]1:9

 Revelation

 [1736]1 [1737]1:5 [1738]1:5 [1739]1:9 [1740]3:21 [1741]3:26
 [1742]3:33 [1743]9:7 [1744]9:17 [1745]17:14 [1746]21 [1747]28

 Wisdom of Solomon

 [1748]1:4-5 [1749]4:2 [1750]7:6 [1751]7:22

 Baruch

 [1752]3:16 [1753]3:35 [1754]3:35-37 [1755]3:35-37 [1756]3:37
 [1757]3:38 [1758]3:38 [1759]6:11

 Bel and the Dragon

 [1760]1:36

 Sirach

 [1761]1:2 [1762]3:21 [1763]39:27

Index of Greek Words and Phrases

 * agenetos: [1764]1
 * agennetos: [1765]1
 * agennetos: [1766]1
 * agreuon: [1767]1
 * adikian: [1768]1
 * aei gar hemeis hoi zontes: [1769]1
 * aei: [1770]1
 * aeigennetos: [1771]1
 * alogos: [1772]1
 * alethos, teleos, adiairetos, asunchutos: [1773]1
 * alla: [1774]1 [1775]2
 * amuetos: [1776]1
 * amuetois: [1777]1
 * anomoios: [1778]1
 * anthropotokos: [1779]1
 * anomian: [1780]1
 * antigrapheus: [1781]1
 * apokrisis: [1782]1
 * aparallaktos,: [1783]1
 * asebeian: [1784]1
 * asoaaton: [1785]1
 * asunchutos kai adiairetos: [1786]1
 * hagiasas: [1787]1
 * hamaxobioi: [1788]1
 * harpasas: [1789]1
 * alektos: [1790]1
 * alektos: [1791]1
 * anothen: [1792]1
 * ariston metron: [1793]1
 * archon tes mandras: [1794]1
 * halma, podokeien, diskon, akonta, palen: [1795]1
 * ean gar palin ischusete palin hettethesesthe: [1796]1
 * ean...skandalize: [1797]1
 * ego auto artuo chutran: [1798]1
 * ethnikos: [1799]1
 * ek gastros pro 'Eosphorou egennesa se: [1800]1
 * ek druos hupsikomoio Dios boulen epakousai: [1801]1
 * ek tes Theotokou Marias: [1802]1
 * ekeinoi cheirotonousi, cheirothetousi: [1803]1
 * ekkaidekaeterida: [1804]1
 * ekklesia: [1805]1 [1806]2
 * elaloun en tois marturiois sou enantion basileon kai ouk
 eschunomen: [1807]1
 * elenxei tous tapeinous tes ges: [1808]1
 * eleutheros: [1809]1
 * eleutheria: [1810]1 [1811]2
 * eleutheriotes,--eleutheria: [1812]1
 * eme men gar ouden an blapseien oute Meletos oute Anutos, oude gar
 an dunaito: [1813]1
 * en koino: [1814]1
 * en soi: [1815]1
 * en spuridi, spuris: [1816]1
 * en te basilei& 139; tou Christou kai Theou: [1817]1
 * eneulogethesontai en soi: [1818]1
 * enthousiazein: [1819]1
 * enthousiastes: [1820]1
 * enneakaidekaeterida: [1821]1
 * ex hupokeimenou tinos: [1822]1
 * ex autou tou hieratikou tagmatos: [1823]1
 * ex ouk onton estin: [1824]1
 * exeste ho ouranos epi touto: [1825]1
 * exelthe pasa he dunamis Kuriou: [1826]1
 * epi xurou histatai akmes holethros ee bionai: [1827]1
 * epi ten basileuousan polin: [1828]1
 * episkopos hupo trion e duo episkopon cheirotoneistho: [1829]1
 * epodes: [1830]1
 * epodos: [1831]1
 * epode: [1832]1
 * eparchiai: [1833]1
 * eparchike taxis` eparchia: [1834]1
 * epieikeia: [1835]1 [1836]2 [1837]3
 * epieikeias: [1838]1
 * eranizo = (a: [1839]1
 * eranizomai: [1840]1
 * eranistes: [1841]1 [1842]2
 * erastas: [1843]1
 * ergatas: [1844]1
 * eroneia: [1845]1
 * eskenosen: [1846]1
 * estibizon tous ophthalmous sou: [1847]1
 * etechthe: [1848]1
 * ephexes epi ete okto legetai ton en 'Antiochei& 139; thronon tes
 ekklesias scholasai opse de...cheirotoneitai Euphronios: [1849]1
 * hermeneia: [1850]1
 * ektise: [1851]1
 * empsuchon: [1852]1 [1853]2
 * enosis: [1854]1
 * epaise d' autocheir nin outis all' ego: [1855]1
 * eparchoi: [1856]1
 * eranos: [1857]1
 * eros: [1858]1
 * erotos: [1859]1
 * estai to epi ton chalinon tou hippou Lgion to Kuri& 251; to
 pantokratori: [1860]1
 * echois: [1861]1
 * helika: [1862]1
 * heliki: [1863]1
 * hexeis: [1864]1 [1865]2
 * heos an elthe ho apokeitai: [1866]1
 * heos an elthe ta apokeimena auto: [1867]1
 * e oikoumene: [1868]1
 * epatekas helie: [1869]1
 * he apostolike phone: [1870]1
 * he patrike theogonia: [1871]1
 * he smurna kai ho libanos toutestin he theologia te kai oikonomia:
 [1872]1
 * he tou soteriou pathous hemera: [1873]1
 * hegemoneuo: [1874]1
 * hegoumenos: [1875]1
 * hedion ho Lesbios: [1876]1
 * hemeteron: [1877]1
 * hemeis echresametha to halpha heos tou o humeis de heautous
 apedokate: [1878]1
 * hemera tou staurou, pascha staurosimon: [1879]1
 * hepatoskopia: [1880]1
 * en pote hote ouk en: [1881]1
 * idiotes: [1882]1
 * ieratikon tagma: [1883]1
 * hierai, deltoi: [1884]1
 * hierateion: [1885]1
 * hieratike taxis: [1886]1
 * hieratikon: [1887]1
 * hiereus: [1888]1
 * hieros: [1889]1
 * histemi: [1890]1
 * o ton kometatesion de largitionon komes: [1891]1
 * opse de pote autous kaleisthai Galatas exenikese, Keltoi gar kata
 te sphas to archaion kai para tois allois onomazonto: [1892]1
 * ho adelphos sou ho en Kaisarei& 139;: [1893]1
 * ho ek tes 'Italias: [1894]1
 * ho on: [1895]1
 * ho Theos: [1896]1
 * ho Paianeus: [1897]1
 * ho gar daimon epi diabole tou stoicheiou kai epitithetai tois
 alousi, kai aniesin autous kata tous tes selenes dromous: [1898]1
 * ho monophthalmos: [1899]1
 * ho monogenes Theos: [1900]1
 * ho nun basileuon: [1901]1
 * ho palaistinos: [1902]1
 * ho pantokrator, ho panton kraton, ho panton exousiazon: [1903]1
 * ho parakeklemenos: [1904]1
 * ho plasas ta panta: [1905]1
 * ho poion panta kai metaskeuazon: [1906]1
 * ho charakter tes hupostaseos: [1907]1
 * ho christos ekuophorethe hupo Marias kat' oikonomian: [1908]1
 * homoousion: [1909]1 [1910]2 [1911]3 [1912]4
 * hos: [1913]1
 * hophra theoio: [1914]1
 * upostasis: [1915]1
 * huious egennesa kai hupsosa: [1916]1
 * hupo: [1917]1
 * hupostasin: [1918]1
 * hupostasis: [1919]1 [1920]2 [1921]3 [1922]4 [1923]5 [1924]6 [1925]7
 [1926]8 [1927]9 [1928]10 [1929]11 [1930]12 [1931]13 [1932]14
 [1933]15 [1934]16 [1935]17
 * hupostasis, prosopon: [1936]1
 * hupostaseis: [1937]1 [1938]2
 * hupostasesi: [1939]1
 * hupostaseos: [1940]1 [1941]2
 * hupostaseos e ousias: [1942]1
 * huphistemi: [1943]1
 * hupoulos: [1944]1
 * omoteta: [1945]1
 * hos thusiasterion anatrepsas: [1946]1
 * hos phoinix: [1947]1
 * on apaugasma tes Doxes kai charakter tes hupostaseos autou: [1948]1
 * he rhomaiois ethos ekklesiazein: [1949]1
 * 'empsuchon: [1950]1
 * 'empsuchon: [1951]1
 * 'Akephaloi: [1952]1
 * 'Alekto: [1953]1
 * 'Anagnorismos: [1954]1
 * 'Asianos, baktrianos, Sardianos, Trallianos, 'Areianos,
 Menandrianos, Sabellianos: [1955]1
 * 'Eucharistias kai prosphoras ouk apodechontai: [1956]1
 * 'Ena christon, hena hui& 232;n, hena kurion homologoumen. kata
 tauten tes asunchutou henoseos ennoian homologoumen ten hagian,
 parthenon theotokon, dia to ton theon logon sarkothenai kai
 enanthropesai kai ex autes tes sullepseos henosai heauto ton ex
 autes lephthenta naon: [1957]1
 * 'Ex ouk onton: [1958]1
 * 'Epiphaneia: [1959]1
 * 'encheiridion: [1960]1
 * 'epignosis: [1961]1
 * 'lngeloi: [1962]1
 * Ei tis ou theotokon ten Marian hupolambanei choris esti tes
 Theotetos: [1963]1
 * Onagros: [1964]1
 * Ellen: [1965]1
 * En pote hote ouk en ho hui& 232;s tou theou. kai Gegonen husteron
 ho proteron me huparchon toioutos genomenos hote kai pote gegonen
 hoios kai pas pephuken anthropos: [1966]1
 * Ebraidi dialekto ta logia sunegrapsato: [1967]1
 * Elepolis mechane: [1968]1
 * Ellenikon therapeutike pathematon: [1969]1
 * Hairetikes kakomusias epitome: [1970]1
 * B: [1971]1
 * Bora: [1972]1
 * Galatai = Keltoi: [1973]1
 * Diabolos: [1974]1
 * Diallasson: [1975]1
 * Eipen aphron en kardia autou ouk esti Theos: [1976]1
 * EThELECACOTIADEKATERTICO: [1977]1
 * EThELECACCOMADEKATERTICO: [1978]1
 * Thetidos anaktoron: [1979]1
 * ThEOD: [1980]1
 * Theon hena en trisin hupostasesin: [1981]1
 * Theos: [1982]1 [1983]2
 * Theomises: [1984]1
 * Theomises: [1985]1
 * Theotokos: [1986]1 [1987]2 [1988]3 [1989]4
 * Thiasotai: [1990]1
 * Thusiasterion: [1991]1
 * Kurios ektise me archen hodon autou eis erga autou: [1992]1
 * Kappadokes Kretes Kilikes, tria kappa kakista: [1993]1
 * Kappadokes, Kretes, Kilikes, tria kappa kakista: [1994]1
 * Kappadoken pot' echidna kake daken; & 135;lla kai aute: [1995]1
 * Katthanein d' opheiletai: [1996]1
 * Kolophon: [1997]1
 * Krinotelen Pindarou, thesei de Philoxenou: [1998]1
 * Ktisma kai poiema: [1999]1
 * Meletios: [2000]1
 * Nomous palai tethnekotas: [2001]1
 * Nai ma ton hametera psucha paradonta tetraktun: [2002]1
 * Oute ex ouk onton gegenetai: [2003]1
 * Pallas poliouchos;: [2004]1
 * Par' o ouk eni parallage: [2005]1
 * Pausasthosan toinon hoi legontes hos he tou Logou phusis eis sarkos
 metabebletai phusin; hina me doxe metabletheisa kata ten hauten
 hermeneian gegenesthai kai he tou Logou phusis tois tou somatos
 pathemasi sumphthoros. & 169;Eteron gar esti to proslabon kai
 heteron esti to proslephthen. Dunamis elthen epi ten parthenon, hos
 ho angelos pros auten legei hoti Dunamis hupsistou episkiasei soi:
 [2006]1
 * Peri 'Archon: [2007]1 [2008]2 [2009]3 [2010]4 [2011]5 [2012]6
 [2013]7 [2014]8 [2015]9 [2016]10 [2017]11 [2018]12 [2019]13
 [2020]14 [2021]15 [2022]16 [2023]17 [2024]18 [2025]19 [2026]20
 [2027]21 [2028]22 [2029]23 [2030]24 [2031]25 [2032]26 [2033]27
 [2034]28 [2035]29 [2036]30 [2037]31 [2038]32 [2039]33 [2040]34
 [2041]35 [2042]36 [2043]37 [2044]38 [2045]39 [2046]40 [2047]41
 [2048]42 [2049]43 [2050]44 [2051]45 [2052]46 [2053]47 [2054]48
 [2055]49 [2056]50 [2057]51 [2058]52 [2059]53 [2060]54 [2061]55
 [2062]56 [2063]57 [2064]58 [2065]59 [2066]60 [2067]61 [2068]62
 [2069]63 [2070]64 [2071]65 [2072]66 [2073]67 [2074]68 [2075]69
 [2076]70 [2077]71 [2078]72 [2079]73 [2080]74 [2081]75 [2082]76
 [2083]77 [2084]78 [2085]79 [2086]80 [2087]81 [2088]82 [2089]83
 * Peri tes 'Indon pisteos: [2090]1
 * Pote hote ouk en: [2091]1
 * Pros ton chratounton esmen: [2092]1
 * Praus =: [2093]1
 * Rapismata: [2094]1
 * Satornilos: [2095]1
 * Satorninos: [2096]1
 * Satorneilos: [2097]1
 * Sungrapheus: [2098]1
 * Suntagma: [2099]1
 * Suspeiromenen: [2100]1
 * Tomos: [2101]1
 * Trapeza: [2102]1
 * Tria ta nooumena, hos heni de dialegometha: [2103]1
 * Trias: [2104]1
 * Trias ou pragmaton anison aparithmesis, all' ison kai homotimon
 sullepsis: [2105]1
 * Phalkios: [2106]1
 * Philotheos historia: [2107]1
 * Phlakitos, Plakentios: [2108]1
 * Pseudepigrapho: [2109]1
 * a: [2110]1 [2111]2 [2112]3
 * auton kopian: [2113]1
 * akatonomastos: [2114]1
 * b: [2115]1 [2116]2 [2117]3 [2118]4
 * basilei adiko kai ponerotato para pasan ten gen: [2119]1
 * biblion metanoias: [2120]1
 * g: [2121]1 [2122]2 [2123]3
 * garon: [2124]1
 * geode: [2125]1
 * genneseos, geneseos: [2126]1
 * gennethen: [2127]1
 * gennetos estin hama kai genetos: [2128]1
 * glossokomon: [2129]1
 * gnosis: [2130]1
 * gramma: [2131]1
 * d: [2132]1
 * diptuchon: [2133]1
 * deuteros meta basilea: [2134]1
 * deisidaimonon: [2135]1
 * dektikon esti: [2136]1
 * despotes: [2137]1
 * demosi& 139; tais pornais proupine: [2138]1
 * dia stenoteta tes para tois 'Italois glottes kai onomaton penian:
 [2139]1
 * diakonos: [2140]1
 * diaballo: [2141]1
 * diatribas: [2142]1
 * didaskalos: [2143]1
 * dielthon dia mesou auton eporeueto: [2144]1
 * dikaion kai beltion tinos dikaiou: [2145]1
 * diorutton: [2146]1
 * dragma ouk echon ischun: [2147]1
 * dragmata me echonta hischun: [2148]1
 * e: [2149]1
 * ei...skandalizei: [2150]1
 * eis oikonomian tou pleromatos ton kairon: [2151]1
 * eis ta 'apora tes theias Graphes kat' 'eklogen: [2152]1
 * eis ten basileuousan nean Romen: [2153]1
 * eugerotatos: [2154]1
 * eusebeian: [2155]1
 * eusebes: [2156]1
 * euchomenoi: [2157]1
 * euchetai: [2158]1
 * euchitai: [2159]1
 * eucharistias kai proseuches apechontai: [2160]1
 * eulogos aitia: [2161]1
 * en hesuchi& 139; theou eprachthe: [2162]1
 * z: [2163]1 [2164]2
 * zoon apteron, dipoun, platuonuchon; ho monon: [2165]1
 * zoon logikon thneton: [2166]1
 * zoopoion: [2167]1
 * e: [2168]1
 * th: [2169]1
 * thelema: [2170]1
 * thesis: [2171]1
 * theoteta: [2172]1
 * theion: [2173]1
 * thelema: [2174]1
 * theologia: [2175]1
 * theotokos: [2176]1 [2177]2 [2178]3 [2179]4 [2180]5 [2181]6 [2182]7
 [2183]8 [2184]9
 * theophoros: [2185]1
 * thruptomenon: [2186]1
 * thusiasterion: [2187]1
 * katharma: [2188]1
 * kallistos aner: [2189]1
 * katthane geusamene haimatos hiobolou: [2190]1
 * kenosis: [2191]1
 * kophinos: [2192]1
 * kumbolon: [2193]1
 * kai eperotesai en tois gluptois, kai hepatoskopesasthai: [2194]1
 * kai sidero kai molibdo prosdedemenoi: [2195]1
 * kai te heliki ton polon tes onou autou: [2196]1
 * kai to kat' oikous ektos hemeno ponon: [2197]1
 * kai to spermati sou: [2198]1
 * kath' hon ekmasen he ton ekklesion poliorkia: [2199]1
 * kath' hou ta alla legetai: [2200]1
 * kathegetes: [2201]1
 * kaine: [2202]1
 * kakon kako esterikto: [2203]1
 * karaphrugias pakatianes: [2204]1
 * karias phrugias pakatianes: [2205]1
 * karophrugian: [2206]1
 * kasigneton trias: [2207]1
 * kata thelema kai dunamin: [2208]1
 * kata theoteta: [2209]1
 * katalogoi: [2210]1
 * kat' exochen: [2211]1
 * katabeblekenai: [2212]1
 * katabole: [2213]1 [2214]2 [2215]3 [2216]4 [2217]5
 * kataboles kosmou: [2218]1
 * katapothenai: [2219]1
 * kateagota te ei tou en mele e diestrammena zontos kai tethneotos
 tauta endela: [2220]1
 * kekopiakos ekathezeto: [2221]1
 * kene elpiso pistis: [2222]1
 * kenos: [2223]1
 * klomenon: [2224]1
 * kleronomesousin: [2225]1
 * koimeterion: [2226]1
 * koine: [2227]1
 * koinonia: [2228]1
 * kopion ekathezeto: [2229]1
 * koreo: [2230]1
 * korubantionta: [2231]1
 * legei: [2232]1
 * lithos: [2233]1
 * logos: [2234]1
 * lakonaria: [2235]1
 * ll' ek tou somatos en tes Parthenou to techthen; kai dia touto
 Theia men he katabasis he de sullepsis anthropine; ouk aute oun
 edunato tou te somatos pneuma kai tes theotetos phusis: [2236]1
 * logion kuriakon exegeseis: [2237]1
 * magistros: [2238]1
 * maliota de dokei einai ousia to hupokeimenon proton: [2239]1
 * mia hupostasis: [2240]1
 * maieuseos: [2241]1
 * mantike: [2242]1
 * mataia elpis: [2243]1
 * mataios: [2244]1
 * methodeia: [2245]1 [2246]2
 * meta ten homologian en desmoteri& 251; metallaxantos: [2247]1
 * metarrei hosper Euripos: [2248]1
 * metapoiesis: [2249]1
 * meden agan: [2250]1
 * misoponeros: [2251]1
 * misoponeria: [2252]1
 * mustagogos: [2253]1
 * mustagogein: [2254]1
 * mustagogountes mustagogeo: [2255]1
 * mustikoteron: [2256]1
 * ne ton Dia: [2257]1
 * ne ton kuna: [2258]1
 * nun pantes hormethemen theoi nikes tropaia komisasthai para theri
 potamo ton d' ego hegemoneuso thouros polemoklonos Ares: [2259]1
 * neusai: [2260]1
 * nenikekas Galilaie: [2261]1
 * neokorous neokoros: [2262]1
 * nous: [2263]1
 * xoon: [2264]1
 * oikodomen: [2265]1
 * oikonomia: [2266]1
 * oikonomia: [2267]1 [2268]2 [2269]3 [2270]4 [2271]5 [2272]6 [2273]7
 [2274]8
 * oikonomian: [2275]1
 * oikonouia: [2276]1
 * oikonouian: [2277]1
 * hoi zontes: [2278]1
 * hoi legontes katharos eimi, me mou haptou houtos kapnos tou thumou
 mou: [2279]1
 * hoi legontes por& 191;o ap' emou, me engises moi hoti katharos
 eimi: [2280]1
 * hoi progonoi tas ekklesias okodomesan: [2281]1
 * ou kata ten tou andros diekeito notheian, all' enen aute tou
 barbarikou thrasous ouk oligon: [2282]1
 * ou christianoi alla christemporoi: [2283]1
 * oudeis opsetai: [2284]1
 * ouketi oudena eidon alla ton Iesoun monon: [2285]1
 * ousia: [2286]1 [2287]2 [2288]3 [2289]4 [2290]5 [2291]6 [2292]7
 [2293]8 [2294]9 [2295]10 [2296]11 [2297]12 [2298]13 [2299]14
 [2300]15
 * ousias: [2301]1 [2302]2
 * pathe, pathos: [2303]1 [2304]2
 * panta exienai kalon: [2305]1
 * panta kalon kinei: [2306]1
 * panta kinein lithon: [2307]1
 * paideias Ellenikes: [2308]1
 * paredokas hemas: [2309]1
 * paredokas hemas basilei paranomo apostate para panta ta ethne ta
 onta epi tes ges: [2310]1
 * paradidometha: [2311]1
 * paraskeue: [2312]1
 * parekalese: [2313]1
 * paroikia: [2314]1
 * patein: [2315]1
 * peri ton tolmonton heautous ektemnein: [2316]1
 * pneuma puthona: [2317]1
 * pneumatikon: [2318]1
 * poliouchos: [2319]1
 * politeuesthai: [2320]1
 * politeusamenon: [2321]1
 * politikon zoon: [2322]1
 * proedros: [2323]1
 * prokrima poiein: [2324]1
 * prosphux: [2325]1
 * prosopa: [2326]1
 * prosopon: [2327]1 [2328]2 [2329]3
 * praos: [2330]1
 * praotes: [2331]1 [2332]2
 * proukopte: [2333]1
 * proedria: [2334]1
 * proelpikotas: [2335]1
 * proelpikotes: [2336]1
 * prosopois: [2337]1
 * proskuneitai: [2338]1
 * prutaneis: [2339]1
 * protopatheia: [2340]1
 * protopathein: [2341]1
 * sarkosis kenosis: [2342]1
 * sunaxis: [2343]1 [2344]2
 * suskenos: [2345]1
 * soma: [2346]1
 * soma katertiso: [2347]1
 * soma psuchikon: [2348]1
 * sargane: [2349]1
 * sarkophoros, nekrophoros: [2350]1
 * siteresia: [2351]1
 * sitometrion: [2352]1
 * skapheusis: [2353]1
 * skenosis: [2354]1
 * skeuos: [2355]1
 * skenoumenon: [2356]1
 * skenoun: [2357]1
 * speiro: [2358]1
 * stimmi: [2359]1
 * stibe: [2360]1
 * sticharia: [2361]1
 * stoicheia: [2362]1
 * stoicheion: [2363]1
 * sulao: [2364]1
 * summusten: [2365]1
 * sumpatheia: [2366]1
 * sumperiepsethisthemen: [2367]1
 * sumperienechthemen: [2368]1
 * sunapheia: [2369]1 [2370]2
 * sunagoge: [2371]1
 * sunachthesetai: [2372]1
 * suneisaktai: [2373]1
 * sunodinei: [2374]1
 * somatia: [2375]1
 * soter: [2376]1
 * tes ton siteresion aphaireseos: [2377]1
 * ta theia logia: [2378]1
 * ta iera biblia: [2379]1
 * ta tes diathekes autou hos epi tou Zachariou tou haimatos: [2380]1
 * ta teleutaia: [2381]1
 * tas huphalous petras ton phaneron spiladon: [2382]1
 * tas christianikas ektelein euchas: [2383]1
 * ten enanthropesin de tou Theou Logou kaloumen oikonomian: [2384]1
 * ten trophen: [2385]1
 * ti pleon poieite: [2386]1
 * tiktetai: [2387]1
 * tina misthon echete: [2388]1
 * to hagion: [2389]1 [2390]2
 * to hierateion: [2391]1
 * to on: [2392]1 [2393]2 [2394]3 [2395]4
 * to hupokeimenon: [2396]1
 * to kurion to zoopoion: [2397]1
 * to pneuma tou puthonos: [2398]1
 * to prokeimenon: [2399]1
 * to tes oikonomias musterion: [2400]1
 * to philtron to humeteron: [2401]1
 * ton auton onomazei: [2402]1
 * tes ekklesiastikes historias ta paraleipomena: [2403]1
 * te kaine ktisei: [2404]1
 * ton anaktoron Anaktoron: [2405]1
 * ton onton: [2406]1 [2407]2
 * ton onton epistemes tes kata logous: [2408]1
 * to spermati sou: [2409]1
 * tad' ouch hup' allon alla tois hauton pterois: [2410]1
 * tetradion: [2411]1
 * tetradeion: [2412]1
 * tetraktus: [2413]1
 * tou ontos somatos antitupa esti ta theia musteria: [2414]1
 * tou chorou ton diakonon hegoumenos: [2415]1
 * ton hui& 232;n tou Theou katapatein kai to haima tes diathekes
 koinon hegesasthai: [2416]1
 * topoteretes: [2417]1
 * tria prosopa: [2418]1 [2419]2 [2420]3
 * treis hupostaseis: [2421]1 [2422]2 [2423]3
 * treis ousiai: [2424]1
 * triakonta: [2425]1
 * trion: [2426]1
 * uper: [2427]1
 * pherein te chre ta te daimonia anankaios, ta te apo ton polemion
 andreios: [2428]1
 * phusis: [2429]1
 * phasi de kai neessin haliplaneessi chereious: [2430]1
 * pheugein: [2431]1
 * pheuge eis Aigupton: [2432]1
 * phthorimaios daimon: [2433]1
 * phuton: [2434]1
 * phuton: [2435]1
 * phutikos: [2436]1
 * charakter: [2437]1 [2438]2 [2439]3 [2440]4
 * cheirothesia: [2441]1
 * cheirotonesantes de autois kat' ekklesian presbuterous: [2442]1
 * cheirotonesas: [2443]1
 * cheirotonia: [2444]1 [2445]2 [2446]3
 * cheirotonetheis hupo ton ekklesion: [2447]1
 * chresthai: [2448]1
 * chrematizo: [2449]1
 * chriostemporia: [2450]1
 * christemporos: [2451]1
 * psuche: [2452]1 [2453]2
 * psuchai eidola kamonton: [2454]1
 * psuchikon: [2455]1

Index of Hebrew Words and Phrases

 * ': [2456]1 [2457]2 [2458]3
 * 'vyvn: [2459]1
 * 'nms kryhlv: [2460]1
 * htkphlh: [2461]1
 * mtslyn: [2462]1
 * tsl': [2463]1
 * srg: [2464]1

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

 [2465]i  [2466]iii  [2467]v  [2468]vii  [2469]viii  [2470]xi
 [2471]xii  [2472]xiii  [2473]1  [2474]2  [2475]3  [2476]4  [2477]5
 [2478]6  [2479]7  [2480]8  [2481]9  [2482]10  [2483]11  [2484]12
 [2485]13  [2486]14  [2487]15  [2488]16  [2489]17  [2490]18  [2491]19
 [2492]20  [2493]21  [2494]22  [2495]23  [2496]24  [2497]25  [2498]26
 [2499]27  [2500]28  [2501]29  [2502]30  [2503]31  [2504]33  [2505]34
 [2506]35  [2507]36  [2508]37  [2509]38  [2510]39  [2511]40  [2512]41
 [2513]42  [2514]43  [2515]44  [2516]45  [2517]46  [2518]47  [2519]48
 [2520]49  [2521]50  [2522]51  [2523]52  [2524]53  [2525]54  [2526]55
 [2527]56  [2528]57  [2529]58  [2530]59  [2531]60  [2532]61  [2533]62
 [2534]63  [2535]64  [2536]65  [2537]66  [2538]67  [2539]68  [2540]69
 [2541]70  [2542]71  [2543]72  [2544]73  [2545]74  [2546]75  [2547]76
 [2548]77  [2549]78  [2550]79  [2551]80  [2552]81  [2553]82  [2554]83
 [2555]84  [2556]85  [2557]86  [2558]87  [2559]88  [2560]89  [2561]90
 [2562]91  [2563]92  [2564]93  [2565]94  [2566]95  [2567]96  [2568]97
 [2569]98  [2570]99  [2571]100  [2572]101  [2573]102  [2574]103
 [2575]104  [2576]105  [2577]106  [2578]107  [2579]108  [2580]109
 [2581]110  [2582]111  [2583]112  [2584]113  [2585]114  [2586]115
 [2587]116  [2588]117  [2589]118  [2590]119  [2591]120  [2592]121
 [2593]122  [2594]123  [2595]124  [2596]125  [2597]126  [2598]127
 [2599]128  [2600]129  [2601]130  [2602]131  [2603]132  [2604]133
 [2605]134  [2606]135  [2607]136  [2608]137  [2609]138  [2610]139
 [2611]140  [2612]141  [2613]142  [2614]143  [2615]144  [2616]145
 [2617]146  [2618]147  [2619]148  [2620]149  [2621]150  [2622]151
 [2623]152  [2624]153  [2625]154  [2626]155  [2627]156  [2628]157
 [2629]158  [2630]159  [2631]160  [2632]161  [2633]162  [2634]163
 [2635]164  [2636]165  [2637]166  [2638]167  [2639]168  [2640]169
 [2641]170  [2642]171  [2643]172  [2644]173  [2645]174  [2646]175
 [2647]176  [2648]177  [2649]178  [2650]179  [2651]180  [2652]181
 [2653]182  [2654]183  [2655]184  [2656]185  [2657]186  [2658]187
 [2659]188  [2660]189  [2661]190  [2662]191  [2663]192  [2664]193
 [2665]194  [2666]195  [2667]196  [2668]197  [2669]198  [2670]199
 [2671]200  [2672]201  [2673]202  [2674]203  [2675]204  [2676]205
 [2677]206  [2678]207  [2679]208  [2680]209  [2681]210  [2682]211
 [2683]212  [2684]213  [2685]214  [2686]215  [2687]216  [2688]217
 [2689]218  [2690]219  [2691]220  [2692]221  [2693]222  [2694]223
 [2695]224  [2696]225  [2697]226  [2698]227  [2699]228  [2700]229
 [2701]230  [2702]231  [2703]232  [2704]233  [2705]234  [2706]235
 [2707]236  [2708]237  [2709]238  [2710]239  [2711]240  [2712]241
 [2713]242  [2714]243  [2715]244  [2716]245  [2717]246  [2718]247
 [2719]248  [2720]249  [2721]250  [2722]251  [2723]252  [2724]253
 [2725]254  [2726]255  [2727]256  [2728]257  [2729]258  [2730]259
 [2731]260  [2732]261  [2733]262  [2734]263  [2735]264  [2736]265
 [2737]266  [2738]267  [2739]268  [2740]269  [2741]270  [2742]271
 [2743]272  [2744]273  [2745]274  [2746]275  [2747]276  [2748]277
 [2749]278  [2750]279  [2751]280  [2752]281  [2753]282  [2754]283
 [2755]284  [2756]285  [2757]286  [2758]287  [2759]288  [2760]289
 [2761]290  [2762]291  [2763]292  [2764]293  [2765]294  [2766]295
 [2767]296  [2768]297  [2769]298  [2770]299  [2771]300  [2772]301
 [2773]302  [2774]303  [2775]304  [2776]305  [2777]306  [2778]307
 [2779]308  [2780]309  [2781]310  [2782]311  [2783]312  [2784]313
 [2785]314  [2786]315  [2787]316  [2788]317  [2789]318  [2790]319
 [2791]320  [2792]321  [2793]322  [2794]323  [2795]324  [2796]325
 [2797]326  [2798]327  [2799]328  [2800]329  [2801]330  [2802]331
 [2803]332  [2804]333  [2805]334  [2806]335  [2807]336  [2808]337
 [2809]338  [2810]339  [2811]340  [2812]341  [2813]342  [2814]343
 [2815]344  [2816]345  [2817]346  [2818]347  [2819]348  [2820]349
 [2821]353  [2822]354  [2823]355  [2824]356  [2825]357  [2826]359
 [2827]360  [2828]361  [2829]362  [2830]363  [2831]364  [2832]365
 [2833]366  [2834]367  [2835]368  [2836]369  [2837]370  [2838]371
 [2839]372  [2840]373  [2841]374  [2842]375  [2843]376  [2844]377
 [2845]378  [2846]379  [2847]380  [2848]381  [2849]382  [2850]383
 [2851]384  [2852]385  [2853]386  [2854]387  [2855]388  [2856]389
 [2857]390  [2858]391  [2859]392  [2860]393  [2861]394  [2862]395
 [2863]396  [2864]397  [2865]398  [2866]399  [2867]400  [2868]401
 [2869]402  [2870]403  [2871]405  [2872]406  [2873]407  [2874]408
 [2875]409  [2876]410  [2877]411  [2878]412  [2879]413  [2880]417
 [2881]418  [2882]419  [2883]420  [2884]421  [2885]422  [2886]423
 [2887]424  [2888]425  [2889]426  [2890]427  [2891]428  [2892]429
 [2893]430  [2894]431  [2895]432  [2896]433  [2897]434  [2898]435
 [2899]436  [2900]437  [2901]438  [2902]439  [2903]440  [2904]441
 [2905]442  [2906]443  [2907]444  [2908]445  [2909]446  [2910]447
 [2911]448  [2912]449  [2913]450  [2914]451  [2915]452  [2916]453
 [2917]454  [2918]455  [2919]456  [2920]457  [2921]458  [2922]459
 [2923]460  [2924]461  [2925]462  [2926]463  [2927]464  [2928]465
 [2929]466  [2930]467  [2931]468  [2932]469  [2933]470  [2934]471
 [2935]472  [2936]473  [2937]474  [2938]475  [2939]476  [2940]477
 [2941]478  [2942]479  [2943]480  [2944]481  [2945]482  [2946]483
 [2947]484  [2948]485  [2949]486  [2950]487  [2951]488  [2952]489
 [2953]490  [2954]491  [2955]492  [2956]493  [2957]494  [2958]495
 [2959]496  [2960]497  [2961]498  [2962]499  [2963]500  [2964]501
 [2965]502  [2966]503  [2967]504  [2968]505  [2969]506  [2970]507
 [2971]508  [2972]509  [2973]510  [2974]511  [2975]512  [2976]513
 [2977]514  [2978]515  [2979]516  [2980]517  [2981]518  [2982]519
 [2983]520  [2984]521  [2985]522  [2986]523  [2987]524  [2988]525
 [2989]526  [2990]527  [2991]528  [2992]529  [2993]530  [2994]531
 [2995]532  [2996]533  [2997]534  [2998]535  [2999]536  [3000]537
 [3001]538  [3002]539  [3003]540  [3004]541  [3005]542  [3006]543
 [3007]544  [3008]545  [3009]546  [3010]547  [3011]548  [3012]549
 [3013]550  [3014]551  [3015]552  [3016]553  [3017]554  [3018]555
 [3019]556  [3020]557  [3021]558  [3022]559  [3023]560  [3024]561
 [3025]562  [3026]563  [3027]564  [3028]565  [3029]566  [3030]567
 [3031]568

 This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
 Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
 generated on demand from ThML source.

References
