The Stones of Venice, Vol. 1: The Foundations (John Ruskin, 1851)
==========================================================
Architecture as moral history; the Gothic ideal against industrial ugliness. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (bwb_O9-ACH-838_e4j7).

NORTHWEST MISSOURI STATE 
UNIVERSITY LIBRARY 
MARYVILLE, MISSOURI 64468 


Illustrated Sterling Edition 


Wels 


STONES OF VENICE 


VOLUME I—THE FOUNDATIONS 
VOLUME II—THE SEA-STORIES 


BY 


FONE RUSKIN, MUA, 


NORTHWEST MISSOURI STATE 
UNIVERSITY LIBRARY 
MARYVILLE, MISSOURI 64468 


BOSTON 
DANA _ESTES & COMPANY 


PUBLISHERS 


142274 


eZ R 


aa L~ pie 


PREFACE. 


In the course of arranging the following essay, I put many 
things aside in my thoughts to be said in the Preface, things 
which I shall now put aside altogether, and pass by ; for when 
a book has been advertised a year and a half, it seems best to 
present it with as little preface as possible. 

Thus much, however, it is necessary for the reader to knox , 
that, when I planned the work, I had materials by me, col- 
lected at different times of sojourn in Venice during the last 
seventeen years, which it seemed to me might be arranged 
with little difficulty, and which I believe to be of value as 
illustrating the history of Southern Gothic. Requiring, how- 
ever, some clearer assurance respecting certain points of 
chronology, I went to Venice finally in the Autumn of 1849, 
not doubting but that the dates of the principal edifices of 
the ancient city were either ascertained, or ascertainable with- 
out extraordinary research. ‘To my consternation, I found 
that the Venetian antiquaries were not agreed within a cen- 
tury as to the date of the building of the fagades of the Ducal 
Palace, and that nothing was known of any other civil edifice 
of the early city, except that at some time or other it had been 
fitted up for somebody’s reception, and been thereupon fresh 
painted. Every date in question was determinable only by 
internal evidence, and it became necessary for me to examine 
not only every one of the older palaces, stone by stone, but 
every fragment throughout the city which afforded any clue 
to the formation of its styles. This I did as well as I could, 
and I believe there wiil be found, in the following pages, the 
only existing account of the details of early Venetian architect- 
ure on which dependence can be placed, as far as it goes, I 


g0}6 


nl PREFACE. 


do not care to point out the deficiencies of other works on this 
subject ; the reader will find, if he examines them, either that 
the buildings to which I shall specially direct his attention 
have been hitherto undescribed, or else that there are great 
discrepancies between previous descriptions and mine: for 
which discrepancies I may be permitted to give this singleand 
sufficient reason, that my account of every building is based 
on personal examination and measurement of it, and that my 
taking the pains so to examine what I had to describe, was a 
subject of grave surprise to my Italian friends. ‘The work of 
the Marchese Selvatico is, however, to be distinguished with 
respect ; it is clear in arrangement, and full of useful, though 
vague, information ; and I have found cause to adopt, in great 
measure, its views of the chronological succession of the 
edifices of Venice. I shall have cause hereafter to quarrel with 
it on other grounds, but not without expression of gratitude 
for the assistance it has given me. Fontana’s ‘‘ Fabbriche di 
Venezia ’’ is also historically valuable, but does not attempt to 
give architectural detail. Cicognara, as is now generally 
known, is so inaccurate as hardly to deserve mention. 
Indeed, it is not easy to be accurate in an account of any- 
thing, however simple. Zoologists often disagree in their de, 
scriptions of the curve of a shell, or the plumage of a bird, 
though they may lay their specimen on the table, and ex- 
amine it at their leisure; how much greater becomes the like- 
lihood of error in the description of things which must be in 
many parts observed from a distance, or under unfavorable 
circumstances of light and shade ; and of which many of the, 
distinctive features have been worn away by time. I believe 
few people have any idea of the cost of truth in these things; 
of the expenditure of time necessary to make sure of the sim- 
plest facts, and of the strange way in which separate obser- 
vations will somevimes falsify each other, incapable of recon- 
cilement, owing to some imperceptible inadvertency. Iam 
ashamed of the number of times in which I have had to say, 
in the following pages, ‘‘ I am not sure,” and I claim for them 
no authority, as if they were thoroughly sified from error, 


PREF ACR. § 


even in what they more confidently state. Only, as far as my 
time, and strength, and mind served me, I have endeavored, 
down to the smallest matters, to ascertain and speak the truth. 

Nor was the subject without many and most discouraging 
difficulties, peculiar to itself. As far as my inquiries have ex~- 
tended, there is not a building in Venice, raised prior to the 
sixteenth century, which has not sustained essential change in 
one or more cf its most important features. By far the 
greater number present examples of three or four different 
styles, it may be successive, it may be accidentally associated ; 
and, in many instances, the restorations or additions have 
gradually replaced the entire structure of the ancient fabric, 
of which nothing but the name remains, together with a kind 
of identity, exhibited in the anomalous association of the 
modernized portions: the Will of the old building asserted 
through them all, stubbornly, though vainly, expressive ; 
superseded by codicils, and falsified by misinterpretation ; yet 
animating what would otherwise be a mere group of fantastic 
masque, as embarrassing to the antiquary, as to the miner: 
alogist, the epigene crystal, formed by materials of one sub- 
stance modelled on the perished crystals of another. The 
church of St. Mark’s itself, harmonious as its structure may 
at first sight appear, is an epitome of the changes of Venetian 
architecture from the tenth to the nineteenth century. Its 
crypt, and the line of low arches which support the screen, 
are apparently the earliest portions; the lower stories of the 
main. fabric are of the eleventh and twelfth centuries, with 
later Gothic interpolations ; the pinnacles are of the earliest 
fully developed Venetian Gothic (fourteenth century); but 
one of them, that on the projection of the eastern extremity 
of the Piazzetta de Leoni, is of far finer, and probably earlier 
workmanship than all the rest. The southern range of 
pinnacles is again inferior to the northern and. western, and 
visibly of later date. Then the screen, which most writers 
have described as part of the original fabric, bears its date 
inscribed on its architrave, 1394, and with it are associated a 
multitude of small screens, balustrades, decorations of the in- 
terior building, and probably the rose window of the south 

Stones of Venice—Vol. L—} 


6 PREFACE. 


transept. Then come thé interpolated traceries of the front 
and sides ; then the crocketings of the upper arches, extrava- 
gances of the incipient Renaissance: and, finally, the figures 
which carry the water-spouts on the north side—utterly 
barbarous seventeenth or eighteenth century work—connect 
the whole with the plastered restorations of the year 1844 
and 1845. Most of the palaces in Venice have sustained in- 
terpolations hardly less numerous ; and those of the Ducal 
Palace are so intricate, that a year’s labor would probably be 
insufficient altogether to disentangle and define them. I 
therefore gave up all thoughts of obtaining a perfectly clear 
chronological view of the early architecture ; but the dates 
necessary to the main purposes of the book the reader will 
find well established ; and of the evidence brought forward 
for those of less importance, he is himself to judge. Doubtful 
estimates are never made grounds of argument ; and the ac- 
curacy of the account of the buildings themselves, for which 
alone I pledge myself, is of course entirely independent of 
them. 

In like manner, as the statements briefly made in the chap- 
ters on construction involve questions so difficult and so gen- 
eral, that I cannot hope that every expression referring to 
them will be found free from error: and as the conclusions 
to which I have endeavored to lead the reader are thrown into 
a torm the validity of which depends on that of each succes- 
sive step, it might be argued, if fallacy or weakness could be 
detected in one of them, that all the subsequent reasonings 
were valueless. The reader may be assured, however, that it 
is not so; the method of proof used in the following essay 
being only one out of many which were in my choice, adopted 
because it seemed to me the shortest and simplest, not as bee 
ing the strongest. In many cases, the conclusions are those 
which men of quick feeling would arrive at instinctively ; and 
I then sought to discover the reasons of what so strongly 
recommended itself as truth. Though these reasons could 
every one of them, from the beginning to the end of the book, 
be proved insufficient, the truth of its conclusions would re- 
main the same. I should only regret that I had dishonored 


PREFACH. 7 


them by an ill-grounded defence ; and endeavor to repair my 
error by a better one. [ 

I have not, however, written carelessly ; nor should I in 
‘any wise have expressed doubt of the security of the follow- 
ing argument, but that it is physically impossible for me, bee 
ing engaged quite as much with mountains, and clouds, and 
trees, and criticism of painting, as with architecture, to verify, 
as I should desire, the exprossion of every sentence bearing 
upon empirical and technical matters. Life is not long 
enough ; nor does a day pass by without causing me to feel 
more bitterly the impossibility of carrying out to the extent 
which I should desire, the separate studies which general 
criticism continually forces me. to undertake. I can only as- 
sure the reader, that he will find the certainty of every state- 
ment I permit myself to make, increase with its importance; 
and that, for the security of the final conclusions of the fol: 
lowing essay, as well as for the resolute veracity of its account 
of whatever facts have come under my own immediate cogni- 
‘zance, I will pledge myself to the uttermost. 

It was necessary, to the accomplishment of the purpose of 
the work (of which account is given in the First Chapter), that 
I should establish some canons of judgment, which the gen- 
eral reader should thoroughly understand, and, if it pleased 
him, accept, before we took cognizance, together, of any 
architecture whatsoever, It has taken me more time and 
trouble to do this than I expected ; but, if I have succeeded, 
the thing done will be of use for many other purposes than 
that to which it is now put. The establishment of these 
canons, which I have called ‘“ the Foundations,” and some ac- 
count of the connection of Venetian architecture with that of 
the rest of Europe, have filled the present volume. The 
second will, I hope, contain all I have to say about Venice 
itself. 

It was of course inexpedient to reduce drawings of crowded 
details to the size of an octavo volume,—I do not say impossi« 
ble, but inexpedient ; requiring infinite pains on the part of 
the engraver, with no result except farther pains to the be+ 
holder. And as, on the other hand, folio books are not easy 


8 PREFACR. 


reading, I determined to separate the text and the unreduci- 
ble plates. I have given, with the principal text, all the illus. 
trations absolutely necessary to the understanding of it, and, 
in the detached work, such additional text as has special refer- 
ence to the larger illustrations. 

A considerable number of these larger plates were at first 
intended to be executed in tinted lithography ; but, finding 
the result unsatisfactory, I have determined to prepare the 
principal subjects for mezzotinting,—a change of method re- 
quiring two. new drawings to be made of every subject ; one 
a carefully penned outline for the etcher, and then a finished 
drawing upon the etching. This work does not proceed 
fast, while [ am also occupied with the completion of the ~ 
text; but the numbers of it will appear as fast as I can pre- 
pare them. 

For the illustrations of the body of the work itself, I have 
used any kind of engraving which seemed suited to the sub- 
jects—-line and mezzotint, on steel, with mixed lithographs 
and woodcuts, at considerable loss of uniformity in the ap- 
pearance of the volume, but, I hope, with advantage, in ren- 
dering the character of the architecture it describes. And 
both in the plates and the text I have aimed chiefly at clear 
intelligibility ; that any one, however little versed in the sub- 
ject, might be able to take up the book, and understand what 
it meant forthwith. Ihave utterly failed of my purpose, if I 
have not made all the essential parts of the essay intelligible 
to the least learned, and easy to the most desultory readers, 
who are likely to take interest in the matter at all. There 
are few passages which even require so much as an acquaint- 
ance with the elements of Euclid, and these may be missed, 
without harm to the sense of the rest, by every reader to 
whom they may appear mysterious; and the architectural 
terms necessarily employed (which are very few) are ex- 
plained as they occur, or in a note; so that, though I may 
often be found trite or tedious, I trust that I shall not be ob- 
scure. Iam especially anxious to rid this essay of ambiguity, 
because I want to gain the ear of all kinds of persons. Every 
man has, at some time of his life, personal interest in arehe 


PREFACE. ; 9 


tecture. He has influence on the design of sume publie 
building ; or he has to buy, or build, or alter his own house. 
It signifies less whether the knowledge of other arts be gen. 
eral or not ; men may live without buying pictures or statues: 
but, in architecture, all must in some way commit themselves; 
they must do mischief, and waste their money, if they do not 
know how to turn it to account. Churches, and shops, and 
warehouses, and cottages, and small row, and place, and ter- 
race houses, must be built, and lived in, however joyless or 
inconvenient. And it is assuredly intended that all of us 
should have knowledge, and act upon our knowledge, in 
matters with which we are daily concerned, and not to be left 
to the caprice of architects or mercy of contractors. There 
is not, indeed, anything in the following essay bearing on 
the special forms and needs of modern buildings; but 
the principles it inculcates are universal; and they are il- 
lustrated from the remains of a city which should surely 
be interesting to the men of London, as affording the 
richest existing examples of architecture raised by a mercan- 
tile community, for civil uses, and domestic magnificence. 


Denmark Hi, February, 1851. 


aad BAe 41 
teiveilia vivere) ait aie ty isipaag ag aaa satntit 
tte od tae aodto ber nahahetast oda inks ite Sel sOit 
thulgketacto: domyteiey att Ped iO MbIR Oe Ee era 9 vt 
peovlonntad? diner: Me: Pasig! ok dares tps annette 4 
doth absyadth kt joie: sc ATEad ese bies evict oF Baus 
“Enters amepoida hen «erhouad®) + : Fino no Ue ee OF won 
het Due wader Bree amie tani Due (ogwilon “Li oar 
- Fen ie leet “avr vil! yh hee! Ree allined ao rtat (aa 
Ke Yc aie Craaed Ele pet be Be Lieeea's rs yiioripeep! ah ye fk > Ti 

Pee wrubsly ora ennie: erevegus Goa Eatae kalssdalphiied avant 
Fab ods os dou het favre, cin oF dStitw dbw J 
feeds eerep ote radio OUT Yer ‘Sisslittote RY edit mes 
re eth thin t yseumey -ovidurdilelbe oulbe ae yt yaa cele 
hid Seariiliod - avohous to ein Fue al ist 
A been: ‘gould Hine + toate ini ote Gad wold  & a 
throes Piicdy toktis Pins sl! hy ‘sartioneng ‘tlt: ee fh 
arts paibidite us + obweel ots “ii “oh Bb yrihey 2 
waviens a yd honier wring tes wa! lysines. «bthd 
ahaa a obuetiob Pusch xen Spe is: “ct pie a 


a il ha 0 Bi ete te 


a 


a 


as pe Se nae 
fies me 


CONTENTS, 


PAGE 
PREFACE, ° e e e e e e ° e e e 


CHAPTER L 
The Quarry, . ender Uke ° . A P 


CHAPTER IL. 

The Virtues of Architecture, SRS Sa Leen” eer er ae 
CHAPTER IIL. 

The Six Divisions of Architecture, . 4 a te e . . 88 
CHAPTER IV. 

The Wall Base, ° e ° ° ° ° e e e e 63 
CHAPTER V, 

The Wall Veil, . e e e ° ° e ® e v“e 68 


CHAPTER VI. 
The Wall Cornice, . ew 6 « | « Piven) Téodation i ot 


CHAPTER VIL. 
The Pier Base, e ° ° e ° e ° e ° ® 80 


CHAPTER. VIII. 
The Shaft, ° ° ° ° ° ° ° e . ° e 92 


CHAPTER IX. 
The Capital, « e e e ° ° e e” P « ‘ 112 


CHAPTER X. 
The Arch Line, ° ® ° ° e ° ‘ e r) 128 


12 CONTENTS. 


PAGE 
CHAPTER XI. 


The Arch Masonry, A < 3 wie ie e ontte . 187 


CHAPTER XII. / 
The Arch Load, . PI OT SRM EEE Pipers + oe 18 


CHAPTER XIIL 
The Roof, * Jiaic : : weit lg)! eee 


CHAPTER XIV. 
The Roof Cornice, : ches) Savon ¢.. 8 ele 


CHAPTER XV. 
The Buttress, . A ; ee ape ‘ mate : : . 169 


CHAPTER XVL 
Form of Aperture, ; ° ° . ° ° 


e . e 176 


CHAPTER XVIL. 
Filling of Aperture, a ee See es We er 


CHAPTER XVIII. 
Protection of Aperture, es ar <i) ielie ne? oie) eee - 196 


CHAPTER XIX. 


* 


Superimposition, . . ° . ° 


CHAPTER XX. 
‘The Materialof Ornament, . . ». «.«. « eo « « 212% 


CHAPTER XXL 
Treatment of Ornament, ¢ 7 ° ° 


CHAPTER XXITL. 
The Angle, . . bok 257 


. e e ° ° 


OHAPTER XXIIL 
The Edge and Fillet, . . . . « « « (letiqais 26% 


CHAPTER XXIV. 
Phd Roll and Recess, .. eee ce gill 274 


CHAPTER XXvV. 


The Base, 5 A : 


CHAPTER XXVI. 


The Wall Veil and Shaft, . 


VONT'ENTS, 


CHAPTER XXVIL 


The Cornice and Capital, 


CHAPTER XXVIII. 
The Archivolt and Aperture, 


CHAPTER XXIX. 


The Roof, ' ° 


CHAPTER XXX. 


The Vestibule, . ° ° 


APPENDIX. 


1 Foundation of Venice, . e ° 
2. Power of the Doges, ° ° ° 
8. Serrar del Consiglio, . ° e e 
4. S. Pietro di Castello, . . . 
5. Papal Power in Venice, . . ° 
6. Renaissance Ornaments, ° * 
7%. Varieties of the Orders, . , ° 
8. The Northern Energy, 5 ° 
9. Wooden Churches of the North, : 
10. Church of Alexandria, , . 
11. Renaissance Landscape, . . ° 
12. Romanist Modern Art, . ; : 
13. Mr. Fergusson’s System, ° ° 
14. Divisions of Humanity, ie se 


e ° 


H . 299 


14 CONTENTS. 


15. Instinctive Judgments, . 2 a . e > . . 894 
16. Strength of Shafts, 4 5 Ao tee o* 8 @ » 897 
17. Answer to Mr. Garbett, . » e© 2» «© « o £4» 898 
18. Early English Capitals, . » «© «© 2 » «© « 407 
19. Tombs near St. Anastasia, a ett Leh cte. Ce. Sees 
20. Shafts of Ducal Palace, . * 3 3 » 5 A 408 
21. Ancient Representations of Water, . +. 8 ¢« » o 412 
22. Arabian Ornamentation, c ait. « 6 > » 425 
28. Varieties of Chamfer, TPR er a pe 
94 Renaissance Bases, é ¢ ° ° ® ° e os: .4ee 
25. Romanist Decoration of Bages, . ° ° e e ° 1 428 


BOF ILLUSTRATIONS. 


STONES OF VENICE, VOLUME ONE. 


PLATE PAGE 
{. Wall-veil Decoration. Ca’ Trevisan, Ca’ Dario, ys . co: 26 
2. Plans of Piers, " 4 P A = ° 5 . e 108 
& Arch\Masonry;.:, « «+. « «eget hina eraitet 168 
4, Arch Masonry, . J a . 4 . a ° e 140 
5. Arch Masonry. Broletto of Como, . . . ° . > 146 
6. Types of Towers, . 5 “ - 2 ° C ‘ - 206 
7. Abstract Lines, , 4 3 : c % . 3 4 - 222 
8. Decorations by Disks. Palazzo Dei Badoari Partecipami, . 240 
9, Idge Decoration, . 6 ° - . F ° e 264 


10. Profile of Bases, . . A , . - . oe 280 
11. Plans of Bases, . ‘ . . ‘ ‘ . fs ‘ eo: 282 
12. Decoration of Bases, A A ° rs ° “ A ° 288 
18. Wall-veil, Decoration, , ‘ ‘ : ° . H @ 290 
14. Spandril Decoration, . ° . . . ‘ ° » 294 
15. Cornice Profiles, ‘ . ° ~ e . : salicree? 800 


16. Cornice Decoration, ‘ ‘4 . : . . ° «| | 804 
17. Capitals. Concave Group, . ° . ° ; . . 316 
18. Capitals. Convex, . 5 . P P F « i ax ¥ 320 
19, Archivolt Decoration at Verona, F A - ° Py o 826 


20. Wall-veil Decoration. Ca’ Trevisan, . fs A ‘ en A 862 


21, Wall-veil Decoration, FA P n . a . . » 368 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 


2 JAORB PAGE 
i. Roofs, . ‘ ° ° ° ° . e ° f E 61 
2. Wall, ss . . ° e : ° ° A aoa 
8. Lines on Walls, . . . ° . . . . P 72 
4, Wall Cornices, . . a aa ° - - ; . ~ aS 
5. Wall Cornices, §. le he 2 ee ~ BS 75 
6. Wall Cornices, . c ° . ° . ° e : eats 
%. Wall Cornices,: . : ° ees . é ° A 7 
8. Wall Cornices, . ° . ‘ ° . - ° - ed 
9. Wall Plan, . ° a A A = . A : 2 81 
10. Pillars, ~. C ' ° A e ° : ° ° . 84 
AU¢-Pilters,., 2 03 @ oe we ww 8 «(OPT toe 


12) Pillarsand Base, «6 oe ew ow etulnanld dow 87 
18. Shaft in Rough, . > . . im ee ET Ming é 94 
14i Shaft Plans, ow wa tp oltgionfl, .qrgoanll desha6p 
15. Shaft Plans, . ° ° ° ‘ ° ° ° : gt? 104 
16. Shaft Plans, . « e ; ° : e 5 é . 102 
17. Shaft Plans, . ° ett OFS . ° . tat 169 
18. Shaft Plans, . . . . . e . 5 . . 109 
90: Capital =. 4 8 ew ek eee ee 
20. Abacus, . . . e . ° e e Bak Tes ~ 115 
21. Capitals, . % ° ° ° . e e y OMe ERG 
22. Capitals Truncated, . . ‘ ‘ ‘ ° oe Pia 1S 
23. Capitals, . . * ; . . : . ° ae SR 
24. Capitals, . . ° ° < e ° e ° : . 120 
25.. Capitals, . " Soe é1) *Seh oe goat, OD Lem 
26. Capitals, . ° x F ; . H . ° 5 121 
27. Venetian Windows, ‘ . . ‘ 5 Fy Fy ge 194 
28. Part of Church Santa Fosca, . : ° . ° : « 125 
29. Arch Lines, . ‘ ’ 3 $ é Q FR i aaa b) 
30, Arch Lines, F ; s A A - NM 5 A , 133 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. . 
FIGURE PAGE 
81. Arch Lines, . 5 e ° ° ° e % ‘ «©6184 
32. Horseshoe Arch, ° . ° e e e ° . o 185 
33. Arch Lines, . . ° ° , ° ° e ° . | 186 
eh Side Arch, wk ow wo ROT Baise) 188 
35. Arch Loads, , e e * ° ° - - ‘ - | 149 
36. Arch Front, e > ° e ‘ - ° Fs ° - 150 
87. Gabled Roof,. ‘ . 3 5 . 5 e ° «154 
38. Bracket, . ‘ 5 e e ® ° . ° S - 168 
39. Stone or Timber Bracket, . ¥ . s “ i - 164 
40: Brick. Bracket, ». 5 3 i . ° . . ‘ - 165 
41. Renaissance Bracket, . . k , ish 8 3 eee 165 
42. Southern Apse, - pe e . F ‘ 3 é . 174 
43. Aperture Plan, . . e e eo ») to gsiteign¥ 188 
44. Window Ovals, . le ° a . y . e A - 183 
45. Window Bars, 2, e ° ° ° 5 e e ao L187 
46. Window Bars, . > e ° ° Py ° . ° . 193 
47. Window Bars, A cs ° e . 5 a G - 194 
48. Door Protections, . A ; F ° . é ° - 19% 
42 Door Protections, Fiesole, . e 4 A :  FAGG 
50. Door Protections, Plans, . . . 7 ° 4 A . 198 
51. Angle Plan, . “ * i ° ° ° ° . - 258 
52. Angle Mouldings, Ornamental, . ° = é . 260 
53. Angle Mouldings, Ornamental, . e - ° ° 2 261 
54. Angle Mouldings, Ornamental, A F: 5 3 : . 262 
55. Angle Mouldings, Ornamental, . ° ° . ° - 268 


56. Dog Tooth Edge, A C C 4 ‘ F; ‘ - 268 
57. Byzantine Stilted Arches, . ° ° ° . ott 869). 
58. Curved Arch Armor, . . ° ° ° ° . : » 270 


59 Lower Roll, . ° RE, ° ‘ fe A e - 282 
60. Base Roll, « ° « e ° e e “eo e ° 283 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 

VIGURE 
61. Spandril Space, . ° ° ° ° ° 
62. Shaft from St. Zeno, 3 . ° ° 
68. Cornice Plans, 5 : ° e ° ° 
64. Cornice Plans, . Py s ° ° e ° 
65. Plan of Capitals, . 5 ° e ° e 
66. Plan of Capitals, : . ° ° ° e 
67. Plan of Capitals, . ° ° . ° e 
68. Plan of Capitals, . . . . ° 
69. Archivolt, . : . : : 3 P 
70. Archivolt Decoration. Southern and Byzantine, 

Sea, by Greek Architect, é . 3 
91. River, by Egyptian Artist, A : * . 


7%. Varieties of Chamfer, . e ° e ° 


THE STONES OF VENICH. 


CHAPTER L 


THE QUARRY. 


§ 1 Sivce the first dominion of men was asserteé over the 
ocean, three thrones, of mark beyond all others, have been set 
upon its sands: the thrones of Tyre, Venice,and England. Of 
the First of these great powers only the nemory remains; of the 
Second, the ruin ; the Third, whick inherits their greatness, if 
it forget their example, may be led through prouder eminence 
to less pitied destruction. 

The exaltation, the sin, and the punishment of Tyre have 
been recorded for us, in perhaps the most touching words ever 
uttered by the Prophets of Israel against the cities of the 
stranger. ‘but we read them as a lovely song; and close our 
ears to the sternness of their warning: for the very depth of 
the Fall of Tyre has blinded us to its reality, and we forget, 
as we watch the bleaching of the rocks between the sunshine 
and the sea, that they were once “as in Eden, the garden of 
God.” 

Her successor, like her in perfection of beauty, though less 
in endurance of dominion, is still left for our beholding in the 
final period of her decline: a ghost upon the sands of the sea, 
so weak—so quiet,—so bereft of all but her loveliness, that we 
might well doubt, as we watched her faint reflection in the 
mirage of the lagoon, which was the City, and which the 
Shadow. 

I would endeavor to trace the lines of this image before it 
be for ever lost, and to record, as far as I may, the warning 
which seems to me to be uttered by every one of the fast 


142274 


NORTHWEST MISSOURI STATE 
UNIVERSITY LIBRARY 


18 THK STONES OF VENICE. 


its range, as might have been anticipated, we find the names 
of all her hero princes,—of Pietro Urseolo, Ordalafo Falier, 
Domenico Michieli, Sebastiano Ziani, and Enrico Dandolo. 

§ v. The second period opens with a hundred and twenty 
years, the most eventful in the career of Venice—the central 
struggle of her life—stained with her darkest crime, the mur- 
der of Carrara—disturbed by her mest dangerous internal 
sedition, the conspiracy of Falier—oppressed by her most 
fatal war, the war of Chiozza—and distinguished by the glory 
of her two noblest citizens (for in this period the heroism of 
her citizens replaces that of her monarchs), Vittor Pisani and 
Carlo Zeno. 

I date the commencement of the fall of Venice from the 
death of Carlo Zeno, 8th May, 1418; * the visible commence; 
ment from that of another of her noblest and wisest children, 
the Doge Tomaso Mocenigo, who expired five years later. 
The reign of Foseari followed, gloomy with pestilence and 
war ; a@ war in which large acquisitions of territory were made 
by subtle or fortunate policy in Lombardy, and disgrace, 
significant as irreparable, sustained in the battles on the Po 
at Cremona, and in the marshes of Caravaggio. In 1454, 
Venice, the first of the states of Christendom, humiliated 
herself to the Turk: in the same year was established the In- 
quisition of State,t and from this period her government 
takes the perfidious and mysterious form under which it is 
usually conceived. In 1477, the great Turkish invasion spread 
terror to the shores of the lagoons ; and in 1508 the league 
of Cambrai marks the period usually assigned as the com- 
mencement of the decline of the Venetian power ;{ the com- 
mercial prosperity of Venice in the close of the fifteenth cen- 
tury blinding her historians to the previous evidence of the 
diminution of her internal strength. 


* Daru, liv. xii. ch. xii. 

+ Daru, liv. xvi. cap. xx. We owe-to this historian the or ee. of 
the statutes of the tribunal and date of its establishment. 

f{Ominously signified by their humiliation to the Papal power (as 
before to the Turkish) in 1509, and their abandonment of their right of 
appointing the clergy of their territories. 


THE QUARRY. ! 1S 


§ vt Now there is apparently a significative coincidence 
between the establishment of the aristocratic and oligarchical 
powers, and the diminution of the prosperity of the state. 
But this is the very question at issue; and it appears to me 
quite undetermined by any historian, or determined by each 
in accordance with his own prejudices. It is a triple ques- 
tion : first, whether the oligarchy established by the efforts 
of individual ambition was the cause, in its subsequent oper- 
ation, of the Fall of Venice ; or (secondly) whether the es. 
tablishment of the oligarchy itself be not the sign and evi- 
dence, rather than the cause, of national enervation ; or 
(lastly) whether, as I rather think, the history of Venice might 
not be written almost without reference to the construction 
of her senate or the prerogatives of her Doge. It is the his- 
tory of a people eminently at unity in itself, descendants of 
Roman race, long disciplined by adversity, and compelled by 
its position either to live nobly or to perish :—for a thousand 
years they fought for life; for three hundred they invited 
death: their battle was rewarded, and their call was heard. 

§ vu. Throughout her career, the victories of Venice, and, 
at many periods of it, her safety, were purchased by indi- 
vidual heroism ; and the man who exalted or saved her was 
sometimes (oftenest) her king, sometimes a noble, sometimes. 
a citizen. To him no matter, nor to her: the real question 
is, not so much what names they bore, or with what powers 
they were entrusted, as how they were trained ; how they 
were made masters of themselves, servants of their country, 
patient of distress, impatient of dishonor ; and what was the 
true reason of the change from the time when she could find 
saviours among those whom she had cast into prison, to that 
when the voices of her own children commanded her to sign 
covenant with Death.* 

§ vi. On this collateral question I wish the reader’s mind 
to be fixed throughout all our subsequent inquiries. It will 
give double interest to every detail: nor will the interest be 
profitless ; for the evidence which I shall be able to deduce 


* The senate voted the abdication of their authority by a majority of 
612 to 14, (Alison, ch, xxiii.) 


20 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


from the arts of Venice will be both frequent and irrefrag. 
able, that the decline of her political prosperity was exactly 
coincident with that of domestic and individual religion. 

I say domestic and individual ; for—and this is the second 
point which I wish the reader to keep in mind—the most 
curious phenomenon in all Venetian history is the vitality of 
religion in private life, and its deadness in public policy! 
Amidst the enthusiasm, chivalry, or fanaticism of the other 
states of Europe, Venice stands, from first to last, like a 
masked statue ; her coldness impenetrable, her exertion only 
aroused by the touch of a secret spring. That spring was 
her commercial interest,—this the one motive of all her im- 
portant political acts, or enduring national animosities. She 
could forgive insults to her honor, but never rivalship in her 
commerce ; she calculated the glory of her conquests by their 
value, and estimated their justice by their facility. The fame 
of success remains, when the motives of attempt are forgot- 
ten ; and the casual reader of her history may perhaps be sur- 
prised to be reminded, that the expedition which was com- 
manded by the noblest of her princes, and whose results added 
most to her military glory, was one in which while all Europe 
around her was wasted by the fire of its devotion, she first 
calculated the highest price she could exact from its piety for 
the armament she furnished, and then, for the advancement 
of her own private interests, at once broke her faith * and be- 
trayed her religion. 

§ rx. And yet, in the midst of this national criminality, we 
shall be struck again and again by the evidences of the most 
noble individual feeling. The tears of Dandolo were rot shed 
in hypocrisy, though they could not blind him to the impor: 
tance of the conquest of Zara. The habit of assigning to re. 
ligion a direct influence over all his own actions, and all the 
affairs of his own daily life, is remarkable in every great Vene- 
tian during the times of the prosperity of the state ; nor are 
instances wanting in which the private feeling of the citizens 


* By directing the arms of the Crusaders against a Christian prince 
{Daru, liv. iv. ch. iv. viii.) 


THE QUARRY. 21 


reaches the sphere of their policy, and even becomes the guida 
of its course where the scales of expediency are doubttully 
balanced. I sincerely trust that the inquirer would be disap« 
pointed who should endeavor to trace any more immediate 
reasons for their adoption of the cause of Alexander III. 
against Barbarossa, than the piety which was excited by the 
character of their supplant, and the noble pride which was 
provoked by the insolence of the emperor. But the heart of 
Venice is shown only in her hastiest- councils ; her worldly 
spirit recovers the ascendency whenever she has time to cal- 
culate the probabilities of advantage, or when they are suffi- 
ciently distinct to need no calculation ; and the entire subjec- 
tion of private piety to national policy is not only remarkable 
throughout the almost endless series of treacheries and tyran- 
nies by which her empire was enlarged and maintained, but 
symbolised by a very singular circumstance in the building of 
the city itself. I am aware of no other city of Kurope in 
which its cathedral was not the principal feature. But the 
principal church in Venice was the chapel attached to the 
palace of her prince, and called the “Chiesa Ducale.” |The 
patriarchal church,* inconsiderable in size and mean in deco- 
ration, stands on the outermost islet of the Venetian group, 
and its name, as well as its site, is probably unknown to the 
greater number of travellers passing hastily through the city. 
Nor is it less worthy of remark, that the two most important 
temples of Venice, next to the ducal chapel, owe their size and 
magnificence, not to national effort, but to the energy of the 
Franciscan and Dominican monks, supported by the vast or- 
ganization of those great societies on the mainland of Italy, 
and countenanced by the most pious, and perhaps also, in hig 
generation, the most wise, of all the princes of Venice,t who 
now rests beneath the roof of one of those very temples, and 
whose life is not satirized by the images of the Virtues which 
# Tuscan sculptor has placed around his tomb. 

§x. There are, therefore, two strange and sole:an lighty 


* Appendix 4, ‘‘ San Pietro di Castello.” 
{ Tomasc Vocenigo, above named, § ¥. 


22 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


in which we have to regard almost every scene in the fitfu, 
history of the Rivo Alto. We find, on the one hand, a deep 
and constant tone of individual religion characterising the 
lives of the citizens of Venice in her greatness; we find this 
spirit influencing them in all the familiar and immediate con- 
cerns of life, giving a peculiar dignity to the conduct even of 
their commercial transactions, and confessed by them with a 
simplicity of faith that may well put to shame the hesitation 
with which a man of the world at present admits (even if it 
be so in reality) that religious feeling has any influence over 
the minor branches of his conduct. And we find as the natu- 
ral consequence of all this, a healthy serenity of mind and 
energy of will expressed in all their actions, and a habit of 
heroism which never fails them, even when the immediate 
motive of action ceases to be praiseworthy. With the fulness 
of this spirit the prosperity of the state is exactly correspond- 
ent, and with its failure her decline, and that with a closeness 
and precision which it will be one of the collateral objects of 
the following essay to demonstrate from such accidental evi- 
dence as the field of its inquiry presents. And, thus far, all 
is natural and simple. But the stopping short of this religious 
faith when it appears likely to influence national action, corre- 
spondent as it is, and that most strikingly, with several char- 
acteristics of the temper of our present English legislature, is 
a subject, morally and politically, of the most curious interest 
and complicated difficulty ; one, however, which the range of 
my present inquiry will not permit me to «yproach, and for 
the treatment of which I must be content to furnish materials 
in the light I may be able to throw upon the private tenden- 
cies of the Venetian character. 

§ xr. There is, however, another most interesting feature in 
the policy of Venice which will be often brought before us 3 
and which a Romanist would gladly assign as the reason of 
its irreligion ; namely, the magnificent and successful struggle 
which she maintained against the temporal authority of the 
Church of Rome. It is true that, in a rapid survey of her 
career, the eye is at first arrested by the strange drama te 


which I have already alluded, closed by that ever memorable 


THE QUARRY. 23 


scene in the portico of St Mark’s,* the central expression in 
most men’s thoughts of the unendurable elevation of the pon- 
tifical power ; it is true that the proudest thoughts of Venice, 
as well as the insignia of her prince, and the form of her chief 
festival, recorded the service thus rendered to the Roman 
Church. But the enduring sentiment of years more than bal- 
anced the enthusiasm of a moment; and the bull of Clement 
V., which excommunicated the Venetians and their doge, 
likening them to Dathan, Abiram, Absalom, and Lucifer, is a 
stronger evidence of the great tendencies of the Venetian gov- 
ernment than the umbrella of the doge or the ring of the 
Adriatic. The humiliation of Francesco Dandolo blotted out 
the shame of Barbarossa, and the total exclusion of ecclesias- 
tics from all share in the councils of Venice became an endur- 
ing mark of her knowledge of the spirit of the Church of Rome, 
and of her defiance of it. 

To this exclusion of Papal influence from her councils, the 
Romanist will attribute their irreligion, and the Protestant 
their success.| The first may be silenced by a reference to 
the character of the policy of the Vatican itself ; and the second 
by his own shame, when he reflects that the English legislature 
sacrificed their principles to expose themselves to the very 
danger which the Venetian senate sacrificed theirs to avoid. 

§ xu. One more circumstance remains to be noted respect- 
ing the Venetian government, the singular unity of the fami- 
lies composing it,—unity far from sincere or perfect, but still 

* ¢¢Tn that temple porch, 

(The brass is gone, the porphyry remains, ) 

Did BARBAROSSA fling his mantle off, 

And kneeling, on his neck receive the foot 

Of the proud Pontiff—thus at last consoled 

For flight, disguise, and many an aguish shake 

On his stone pillow.” 
J need hardly say whence the lines are taken: Rogers’ ‘‘ Italy” has, 1] 
believe, now a place in the best beloved compartment of all libraries, 
and will never be removed from it. There is more true expression of 
the spirit of Venice in the passages devoted to her in that poem, than iv 
all else that has been written of her. 

+ At least, such success as they had. Vide Appendix 5, **'[he Papal 

Power in Venice.” 


24 THE STONES OF VENICR. 


admirable when contrasted with the fiery feuds, the almost 
daily revolutions, the restless successions of families and 
parties in power, which fill the annals of the other states of 
Italy. That rivalship should sometimes be ended by the dag: 
ger, or enmity conducted to its ends under the mask of law, 
could not but be anticipated where the fierce Italian spirit 
was subjected to so severe a restraint: it is much that jealousy 
appears usually unmingled with illegitimate ambition, and 
that, for every instance in which private passion sought its 
gratification through public danger, there are a thousand in 
which it was sacrificed to the public advantage. Venice may 
well call upon us to note with reverence, that of all the towers 
which are still seen rising like a branchless forest from her 
islands, there is but one whose office was other than that of 
summoning to prayer, and that one was a watch-tower only: 
from first to last, while the palaces of the other cities of Italy 
were lifted into sullen fortitudes of rampart, and fringed with 
forked battlements for the javelin and the bow, the sands of 
Venice never sank under the weight of a war tower, and her 
roof terraces were wreathed with Arabian imagery, of golden 
globes suspended on the leaves of lilies.* 

§ xm. These, then, appear to me to be the points of chief 
general interest in the character and fate of the Venetian peo-— 
ple. I would next endeavor to give the reader some idea of 
the manner in which the testimony of Art bears upon these 
questions, and of the aspect which the arts themselves assume 
when they are regarded in their true connexion with the his- 
tory of the state. 

Ist. Receive the witness of Painting. 

It will be remembered that I put the commencement of the 
Fall of Venice as far back as 1418. 

Now, John Bellini was born in 1428, and Titian in 1480. 
John Bellini, and his brother Gentile, two years older than he, 
close the line of the sacred painters of Venice. But the most 
solemn spirit of religious faith animates their works to the 

*The inconsiderable fortifications of the arsenal are no exception ta 


this statement, as far as it regards the city itself. They are little mors 
than a semblance of precaution against the attack of a foreign enemy, 


THE QUARRY. 26 


last, There is no religion in any work of Titian’s: there is 
not even the smallest evidence of religious temper or sympae 
thies either in himself, or in those for whom he painted. His 
larger sacred subjects are merely themes for the exhibition of 
pictorial rhetoric,—composition and color. His minor works 
are generally made subordinate to purposes of portraiture. 
The Madonna in the church of the Frari is a mere lay figure, 
introduced to form a link of connexion between the portraits 
of various members of the Pesaro family who surround 
her. 

Now this is not merely because John Bellini was a religious © 
man and Titian was not. Titian and Bellini are each true 
representatives of the school of painters contemporary with 
them; and the difference in their artistic feeling is a conse- 
quence not so much of difference in their own natural charac- 
ters as in their early education: Bellini was brought up in 
faith; Titian in formalism. Between the years of their births 
the vital religion of Venice had expired. 

§ xiv. The vital religion, observe, not the formal. Outward 
observance was as strict as ever; and doge and senator still 
were painted, in almost every important instance, kneeling 
before the Madonna or St. Mark; a confession of faith made 
universal by the pure gold of the Venetian sequin. But ob-. 
serve the great picture of Titian’s in the ducal palace, of the 
Doge Antonio Grimani kneeling before Faith: there is a 
curious lesson in it. The figure of Faith is a coarse portrait 
of one of Titian’s least graceful female models: Faith had 
become carnal. The eye is first caught by the flash of the 
Doge’s armor. The heart of Venice was in her wars, not in 
her worship. 

The mind of Tintoret, incomparably more deep and serious 
than that of Titian, casts the solemnity of its own tone over 
the sacred subjects which it approaches, and sometimes for- 
gets itself into devotion ; but the principle of treatment is ai- 
together the same as Titian’s: absolute subordination of the 
religious subject to purposes of decoration or portraiture. 

The evidence might be accumulated a thousandfold from 
the works of Vercnese, and of every succeeding painter,—thag 

Stones of Venice—-Vol. L—w. 


26 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


the fifteenth century had taken away the religious heart of 
Venice. 

§ xv. Such is the evidence of Painting. To collect that of 
Architecture will be our task through many a page to come ; 
but I must here give a general idea of its heads, 

Philippe de Commynes, writing of his entry into Venice in 
1495, says,— 

““Chascun me feit seoir.au meillieu de ces deux ambassa- 

deurs qui est Phonneur d’Italie que d’estre au meillieu; et me 
menerent au long de la grant rue, quilz appellent le Canal 
Grant, et est bien large. Les gallees y passent & travers et y 
ay veu navire de quatre cens tonneaux ou plus pres des 
maisons: et est la plus belle rue que je croy qui soit en tout 
le monde, et la mieulx maisonnee, et va le long de la ville. 
Les maisons sont fort grandes et haultes, et de bonne pierre, 
et les anciennes toutes painctes ; les aultres faictes depuis 
cent ans: toutes ont le devant de marbre blanc, qui leur 
vient d’Istrie, 4 cent mils de la, et encores maincte grant 
piece de porphire et de sarpentine sur le devant. 
Cest la plus triumphante cité que jaye jamais veue et qui 
plus faict d’honneur 4 ambassadeurs et estrangiers, et qui 
plus saigement se gouverne, et ot le service de Dieu est le 
plus sollempnellement faict: et encores qu il y peust bien 
avoir d’aultres faultes, si je croy que Dieu les a en ayde pour 
la reverence qu ilz portent au service de l’Kglise.” * 

§ xvi. This passage is of peculiar interest, for two reasons. 
Observe, first, the impression of Commynes respecting the 
religion of Venice: of which, asI have above said, the forms 
still remained with some glimmering of life in them, and were 
the evidence of what the real life had been in former times. 
But observe, secondly, the impression instantly made on 
Commynes’ mind by the distinction between the elder palaces 
and those built ‘‘ within this last hundred years; which all 
have their fronts of white marble brought from Istria, a hun- 
dred miles away, and besides, many a large piece of porphyry 
and serpentine upon their fronts.” 

On the opposite page I have given two of the ornaments of 

* Mémoires de Commynes, liv. vii. ch. xviii. 


WALL VEIL DECORATION. 


CA’ DARIO. 


TREVISAN, 


(CAW 


THE QUARRY, 27 


the palaces which so struck the French ambassador.* He 
was right in his notice of the distinction. There had indeed 
come @ change over Venetian architecture in the fifteenth cen- 
tury ; and a change of some importance to us.moderns: we 
English owe to it our St. Paul’s Cathedral, and Europe in 
general owes to it the utter degradation or destruction of her 
schools of architecture, never since revived. But that the 
reader may understand this, it is necessary that he should 
have some general idea of the connexion of the architecture 
of Venice with that of the rest of Europe, from its origin 
forwards, 

§ xvu. All European architecture, bad and good, old and 
new, is derived from Greece through Rome, and colored and 
_ perfected from the East. The history of architecture is 

nothing but the tracing of the various modes and directions 
of this derivation. Understand this, once for all: if you hold 
fast this great connecting clue, you may string all the types 
_of successive architectural invention upon it like so many 
beads. The Doric and the Corinthian orders are the roots, 
the one of all Romanesque, massy-capitaled buildings—Nor- 
man, Lombard, Byzantine, and what else you can name of 
the kind; and the Corinthian of all Gothic, Early English, 
French, German, and Tuscan. Now observe: those old 
Greeks gave the shaft ; Rome gave the arch; the Arabs 
pointed and foliated the arch. The shaft and arch, the 
frame-work and strength of architecture, are from the race 
of Japheth ; the spirituality and sanctity of it from Ismael, 
Abraham, and Shem. 

§ xvut There is high probability that the Greek received 
his shaft system from Egypt; but Ido not care to keep this 
earlier derivation in the mind of the reader. Ii is only neces 
sary that he should be ablo to refer to a fixed point of origin, 
when the form of the shaft was first perfected. But it may 
be incidentally observed, that if the Greeks did indeed receive 
their Doric from Egypt, then the three families of the earth 
have each contributed their part to its noblest architecture ; 
and Ham, the servant of the others, furnishes the sustaining 

* Appendix 6, ‘ ‘Renaissance Ornaments.” 


28 THE STONES OF ViNICH. 


or bearing member, the shaft ; Japheth the arch; Shem the 
spiritualisation of both. 

§ xix. I have said that the two orders, Doric and Corinthian, 
are the roots of all European architecture. You have, per- 
haps, heard of five orders ; but there are only two real orders, 
and there never can be any more until doomsday. On one 
of these orders the ornament is convex : those are Dorie, 
Norman, and what else you recollect of the kind. On the 
other the ornament is concave: those are Corinthian, Early 
English, Decorated, and what else you recollect of that kind. 
The transitional form, in which the ornamental line is straight, 
is the centre or root of both. All other orders are varieties 
of those, or phantasms and grotesques altogether indefinite in 
number and species.* 

§ xx. This Greek architecture, then, with its two orders, 
was clumsily copied and varied by the Romans with no par- 
ticular result, until they begun to bring the arch into exten. 
sive practical service; except only that the Doric capital was 
spoiled in endeavors to mend it, and the Corinthian much 
varied and enriched with fanciful, and often very beautiful 
imagery. And in this state of things came Christianity : 
seized upon the arch as her own ; decorated it, and delighted 
in it; invented a new Doric capital to replace the spoiled 
Roman one: and all over the Roman empire set to work, 
with such materials as were nearest at hand, to express and 
adorn herself as best she could. This Roman Christian archi- 
tecture is the exact expression of the Christianity of the time, 
very fervid and beautiful—but very imperfect ; in many re- 
spects ignorant, and yet radiant with a strong, childlike light 
of imagination, which flames up under Constantine, illumines 
all the shores of the Bosphorus and the Agean and the 
Adriatic Sea, and then gradually, as the people give them- 
selves up to idolatry, becomes Corpse-light. The architect- 
ure sinks into a settled form—a strange, gilded, and em- 
balmed repose : it, with the religion it expressed; and so’ 
would have remained for ever,—so does remain, where its 


* Appendix 7, ** Varieties of the Orders.” 


PH QUARRY. 29 


tanguor has been undisturbed.* But rough wakening was 
ordained for it. 

§ xx1. This Christian art of the declining empire is divided 
into two great branches, western and eastern ; one centred at 
Rome, the other at Byzantium, of which the one is the early 
Christian Romanesque, properly so called, and the other, car- 
ried to higher imaginative perfection by Greek workmen, is 
distinguished from it as Byzantine. But I wish the reader, 
for the present, to class these two branches of art together in 
his mind, they being, in points of main importance, the same ; 
that is to say, both of them a true continuance and sequence 
of the art of old Rome itself, flowing uninterruptedly down 
from the fountain-head, and entrusted always to the best 
workmen who could be found—Latins in Italy and Greeks in 
Greece ; and thus both branches may be ranged under the 
general term of Christian Romanesque, an architecture which 
had lost the refinement of raguu art in the degradation of the 
empire, but which was elevated by Christianity to higher 
aims, and by the fancy of the Greek workmen endowed with 
brighter forms. And this art the reader may conceive as ex- 
tending in its various branches over all the central provinces 
of the empire, taking aspects more or less refined, according 
to its proximity to the seats of government; dependent for 
all its power on the vigor and freshness of the religion which — 
animated it ; and as that vigor and purity departed, losing its 
own vitality, and sinking into nerveless rest, not deprived of 
its beauty, but benumbed and incapable of advance or change. 

§ xxu. Meantime there had been preparation for its re- 
newal. While in Rome and Constantinople, and in the dis- 
tricts under their immediate influence, this Roman art of 
pure descent was practised in all its refinement, an impure 
form of it—a patois of Romanesque—was carried by inferior 
workmen into distant provinces ; and still ruder imitations of 
this patois were executed by the barbarous nations on the 


*The reader will find the weak points of Byzantine architecture 
shrewdly seized, and exquisitely sketched, in the opening chapter of 
the most delightful book of travels I ever opened,—Curzen’s ** Monag 
feries of the Levant,” 


86 THE STONES OF VENIOR. 


skirts of the empire. But these barbarous nations were in 
the strength of their youth; and while, in the centre of 
Europe, a refined and purely descended art was sinking into 
graceful formalism, on its confines a barbarous and borrowed 
art was organising itself into strength and consistency. The 
reader must therefore consider the history of the work of the 
period as broadly divided into two great heads: the one em- 
bracing the elaborately languid succession of the Christian 
art of Rome ; and the other, the imitations of it executed by 
nations in every conceivable phase of early organisation, on 
the edges of the empire, or included in its now merely 
nominal extent. 

§ xxi. Some of the barbaric nations were, of course, not 
susceptible of this influence; and when they burst over the 
Alps, appear, like the Huns, as scourges only, or mix, as the 
Ostrogoths, with the enervated Italians, and give physical 
strength to the mass with which they mingle, without mate- 
rially affecting its intellectual character. But others, both 
south and north of the empire, had felt its influence, back ta 
the beach of the Indian Ocean on the one hand, and to the 
ice creeks of the North Sea on the other. On the north and 
west the influence was of the Latins ; on the south and east, 
of the Greeks. Two nations, pre-eminent above all the rest, 
represent to us the force of derived mind on either side. As 
the central power is eclipsed, the orbs of reflected light 
gather into their fulness; and when sensuality and idolatry 
had done their work, and. the religion of the empire was laid 
asleep in a glittering sepulchre, the living light rose upon 
both horizons, and the fierce swords of the Lombard and 
Arab were shaken over its golden paralysis. _ 

§ xxiv. The work of the Lombard was to give hardihood 
and system to the enervated body and enfeebled mind of Chris- 
tendom ; that of the Arab was to punish idolatry, ‘and to 
proclaira the spirituality of worship. The Lombard covered 
every church which he built with the sculptured representa. 
tions of bodily exercises—hunting and war.* The Arab ban- 
ished all imagination of creature form from his temples, and 

* Appendix 8. “ The Northern Energy,”’ 


THE QUARRY $1 


proclaimed from their minarets, “There isno god but God.” 
Opposite in their character and mission, alike in their mag: 
nificence of energy, they came from the North and from the 
South, the glacier torrent and the lava stream : they met and 
contended over the wreck of the Roman empire’; and the very 
centre of the struggle, the point of pause of both, the dead 
water of the opposite eddies, charged with embayed fragments 
of the Roman wreck, is VENICE. 

The Ducal palace of Venice contains the three elements in 
exactly equal proportions—the Roman, Lombard, and Arab. 
ft is the central building of the world. 

§ xxv. The reader will now begin to understand ‘something 
of the importance of the study of the edifices of a city which 
includes, within the circuit of some seven or eight miles, the 
field of contest between the three pre-eminent architectures of 
the world :—each architecture expressing a condition of res 
ligion ; each an erroneous condition, yet necessary to the cor- 
rection of the others, and corrected by them. 

§ xxvi. It will be part of my endeavor, in the following work, 
to mark the various modes in which the northern and southern 
architectures were developed from the Roman: here I must 
pause only to name the distinguishing characteristics of the 
great families. The Christian Roman and Byzantine work is 
round-arched, with single and well-proportioned shafts ; capi- 
tals imitated from classical Roman ; mouldings more or less 
so; and large surfaces of walls entirely covered with imagery, 
mosaic, and paintings, whether of scripture history or of 
sacred symbols. 

The Arab school is at first the same in its principal features, 
the Byzantine workmen being employed by the caliphs; but 
the Arab rapidly introduces characters half Persepolitan, half 
Egyptian, into the shafts and capitals: in his intense love of 
excitement he points the arch and writhes it into extravagant 
foliations ; he banishes the animal imagery, and invents an 
ornamentation of his own (called Arabesque) to replace it: 
this not being adapted for covering large surfaces, he concen: 
trates it on features oi interest, and bars his surfaces with 
horizontal lines of cclox, the expression of the level of the 


yd THE STONES OF VENICR. 


Desert. He retains the dome, and adds the minaret. All is 
done with exquisite refinement. 

§ xxvu. The changes effected by the Lombard are more 
curious still, for they are in the anatomy of the building, more 
than its decoration. The Lombard architecture represents, 
as I said, the whole of that of the northern barbaric nations 
And thisI believe was, at first, an imitation in wood of the Chris- 
tian Roman churches or basilicas. Without staying to examine 
the whole structure of a basilica, the reader will easily under- 
stand thus much of it: that it had a naveand two aisles, the 
nave much higher than the aisles ; that the nave was separated 
from the aisles by rows of shafts, which supported, above, 
large spaces of flat or dead wall, rising above the aisles, and 
forming the upper part of the nave, now called the clerestory, 
which had a gabled wooden roof. 

These high dead walls were, in Roman work, built of stone; 
but in the wooden work of the North, they must necessarily 
have been made of horizontal boards or timbers attached to 
uprights on the top of the nave pillars, which were themselves 
also of wood.* Now, these uprights were necessarily thicker 
than the rest of the timbers, and formed vertical square pilas- 
ters above the nave piers. As Christianity extended and civi- 
ligation increased, these wooden structures were changed into 
stone ; but they were literally petrified, retaining the form 
which had been made necessary by their being of wood. The 
upright pilaster above the nave pier remains in the stone edi- 
fice, and is the first form of the great distinctive feature of 
Northern architecture—the vaulting shaft. In that form the 
Lombards brought it into Italy, in the seventh century, and 
it remains to this day in St. Ambrogio of Milan, and St. Mi- 
cnele of Pavia. 

§ xxvut. When the vaulting shaft was introduced in the 
clerestory walls, additional members were added for its sup- 
port to the nave piers. Perhaps two or three pine trunks, 
used for a single pillar, gave the first idea of the grouped 
shaft. Be that as it may, the arrangement of the nave pier 
in the form of a cross accoimpanies the superimposition of 

* Appendix 9, ‘‘ Wooden Churches of the North,” 


THE QUARRY. 34 


the vaulting shaft ; together with corresponding grouping of 
minor shafts in doorways and apertures of windows. Thus, 
the whole body of the Northern architecture, represented by 
that of the Lombards, may be described as rough but ma. 
jestic work, round-arched, with grouped shafts, added vault- 
ing shafts, and endless imagery of active life and fantastic 
superstitions. 

§ xxix. The glacier stream of the Lombards, and the fol- 
lowing one of the Normans, left their erratic blocks, wher- 
ever they had flowed ; but without influencing, I think, the 
Southern nations beyond the sphere of their own presence. 
But the lava stream of the Arab, even after it ceased to flow, 
warmed the whole of the Northern air; and the history of 
Gothic architecture is the history of the refinement and spir- 
itualisation of Northern work under its influence. The no- 
blest buildings of the world, the Pisan-Romanesque, Tuscan 
(Giottesque) Gothic, and Veronese Gothic, are those of the 
Lioombard schools themselves, under its close and direct in- 
fluence ; the various Gothics of the North are the original 
forms of the architecture which the Lombards brought inte 
(taly, changing under the less direct influence of the Arab. 

§ xxx. Understanding thus much of the formation of the 
great Kuropean styles, we shall have no difficulty in tracing 
the succession of architectures in Venice herself. From what 
I said of the central character of Venetian art, the reader is 
not, of course, to conclude that the Roman, Northern, and 
Arabian elements met together and contended for the mastery 
at the same period. ‘The earliest element was the pure Chris- 
tian Roman ; but few, if any, remains of this art exist at 
Venice ; for the present city was in the earliest times only 
one of many settlements formed on the chain of marshy islands 
which extend from the mouths of the Isonzo to those of the 
Adige, and it was not until the beginning of the ninth cent- 
ury that it became the seat of government; while the cathe- 
dral of Torcello, though Christian Roman in general form, 
was rebuilt in the eleventh century, and shows evidence ot 
Byzantine workmanship in many of its details. This cathe- 
dral, however, with the church of Santa Fosca at Torcello, 

Vou. L—3 


34 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


San Giacomo di Rialto at Venice, and the crypt of St. Mark’s, 
forms a distinct group of buildings, in which the Byzantine 
influence is exceedingly slight ; and which is probably very 
sufficiently representative of the earliest architecture on the 
islands. 

§ xxx1. The Ducal residence was removed to Venice in 809, 
and the body of St. Mark was brought from Alexandria twenty 
years later. The first church of St. Mark’s was, doubtless, 
built in imitation of that destroyed at Alexandria, and from 
which the relics of the saint had been obtained, During the 
ninth, tenth, and eleventh centuries, the architecture of Ven- 
ice seems to have been formed on the same model, and is 
almost identical with that of Cairo under the caliphs,* it 
being quite immaterial whether the reader chooses to cail 
both Byzantine or both Arabic ; the workmen being certainly 
Byzantine, but forced to the invention of new forms by their 
Arabian masters, and bringing these forms into use in what- 
ever other parts of the world they were employed. 

To this first manner of Venetian architecture, together with 
such vestiges as remain of the Christian Roman, I shall de- 
vote the first division of the following inquiry. The examples 
remaining of it consist of three noble churches (those of Tor- 
cello, Murano, and the greater part of St. Mark’s), and about 
ten or twelve fragments of palaces. 

§ xxxu. To this style succeeds a transitional one, of a char- 
acter much more distinctly Arabian : the shafts become more 
slender, and the arches consistently pointed, instead of round ; 
certain other changes, not to be enumerated in a sentence, 
taking place in the capitals and mouldings. This style is al- - 
most exclusively secular. It was natural for the Venetians to 
imitate the beautiful details of the Arabian dwelling-house, 
while they would with reluctance adopt those of the mosque 
for Christian churches. 

T have not succeeded in fixing limiting dates for this style. 
It appears in part contemporary with the Byzantine manner, 
but outlives it. Its position is, however, fixed by the central] 
date, 1180, that of the elevation of the granite shafts of the 

* Appendix 10, ‘‘ Church of Alexandria.” 


THE QUARRY. 35 


Piazetta, whose capitals are the two most important pieces of 
detail in this transitional style in Venice. Examples of its ap- 
plication to domestic buildings exist in almost every street of 
the city, and will form the subject of the second division of 
the following essay. 

§ xxxm. The Venetians were always ready to receive les- 
sons in art from their enemies (else had there been no Arab 
work in Venice). But their especial dread and hatred of the 
Lombards appears to have long prevented them from receiv- 
ing the influence of the art which that people had introduced 
on the mainland of Italy. Nevertheless, during the practice 
of the two styles above distinguished, a peculiar and very 
primitive condition of pointed Gothic had arisen in ecclesias- 
tical architecture. It appears to be a feeble reflection of the 
Lombard-Arab forms, which were attaining perfection upon 
the continent, and would probably, if left to itself, have been 
soon merged in the Venetian-Arab school, with which it had 
from the first so close a fellowship, that it will be found diffi- 
cult to distinguish the Arabian ogives from those which seem to 
have been built under this early Gothic influence. The churches 
of San Giacopo dell’ Orio, San Giovanni in Bragora, the Car- 
mine, and one or two more, furnish the only important ex- 
amples of it. But, in the thirteenth century, the Franciscans | 
and Dominicans introduced from the continent their morality 
and their architecture, already a disiinet Gothic, curiously 
developed from Lombardic and Northern (German ?) forms; 
and the influence of the principles exhibited in the vast 
churches of St. Paul and the Frari began rapidly to affect the 
Venetian-Arab school Still the two systems never became 
united ; the Venetian policy repressed the power of the church, 
and the Venetian artists resisted its example; and thence- 
forward the architecture of the city becomes divided into 
ecclesiastical and civil: the one an ungraceful yet powerful 
form of the Western Gothic, common to the whole peninsula, 
and only showing Venetian sympathies in the adoption of 
certain characteristic mouldings ; the other a rich, luxuriant, 
and entirely original Gothic, formed from the Venetian-Arab 
by the influence of the Dominican and Franciscan architect 


86 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


ure, and especially by the engrafting upon the Arab forms & 
the most novel feature of the Franciscan work, its traceries 
These various forms of Gothic, the distinctive architecture oi 
Venice, chiefly represented by the churches of St. John and 
Paul, the Frari, and San Stefano, on the ecclesiastical side, 
and by the Ducal palace, and the other principal Gothic pal- 
aces, on the secular side, will be the subject of the third di 
vision of the essay. 

§ xxx1v. Now observe. The transitional (or especially 
Arabic) style of the Venetian work is centralised by the date 
1180, and is transformed gradually into the Gothic, which ex- 
tends in its purity from the middle of the thirteenth to the 
beginning of the fifteenth century ; that is to say, over the 
precise period which I have described as the central epoch of 
the life of Venice. I dated her decline from the year 1418 ; 
Foscari became doge five years later, and in his reign the firs¢ 
marked signs appear in architecture of that mighty change 
which Philippe de Commynes notices as above, the change ta 
which London owes St. Paul’s, Rome St. Peter’s, Venice and 
Vicenza the edifices commonly supposed to be their noblest, 
and Europe in general the degradation of every art she haa 
since practised. 

§ xxxv. This change appears first in a loss of truth and vi- 
tality in existing architecture all over the world. (Compare 
“Seven Lamps,” chap. ii.). All the Gothics in existence, 
southern or northern, were corrupted at once: the German 
and French lost themselves in every species of extravagance ; 
the English Gothic was confined, in its insanity, by a strait» 
waistcoat of perpendicular lines; the Italian effloresced on° 
the mainland into the meaningless ornamentation of the Cer- 
tosa of Pavia and the Cathedral of Como (a style sometimes 
ignorantly called Italian Gothic), and at Venice into the in- 
sipid confusion of the Porta della Carta and wild crockets of 
St. Mark’s. This corruption of all architecture, especially 
ecclesiastical, corresponded with, and marked the state of re- 
ligion over all Kurope,—the peculiar degradation of the Ro: 
manist superstition, and of public morality in consequence, 
which brought about the Reformation, 


THE QUARRY. 37 


€ xxxvtz Against the corrupted papacy arose two great 
divisions of adversaries, Protestants in Germany and Eng- 
land, Rationalists in France and Italy ; the one requiring the 
purification of religion, the other its destruction. The Pro- 
testant kept the religion, but cast aside the heresies of Rome, 
and with them her arts, by which last rejection he injured his 
own character, cramped his intellect in refusing to it one of 
its noblest exercises, and materially diminished his influence. 
Tt may be a serious question how far the Pausing of the Re- 
formation has been a consequence of this error. 

The Rationalist kept the arts and cast aside the religion. 
This rationalistic art is the art commonly called Renaissance, 
marked by a return to pagan systems, not to adopt them and 
hallow them for Christianity, but to rank itself under them as 
an imitator and pupil. In Painting it is headed by Giulic 
Romano and Nicolo Poussin ; in Architecture by Sansovine 
and Palladio. 

§ xxxvu. Instant degradation followed in every direction,— 
g. flood of folly and hypocrisy. Mythologies ill understood 
at first, then perverted into feeble sensualities, take the place 
ef the representations of Christian subjects, which had be- 
come blasphemous under the treatment of men like the Ca 
racci. Gods without power, satyrs without rusticity, nymphs 
without innocence, men without humanity, gather into idiot 
groups upon the polluted canvas, and scenic affectations en- 
cumber the streets with preposterous marble. Lower and 
lower declines the level of abused intellect ; the base school 
of landscape* gradually usurps the place of the historical 
painting, which had sunk into prurient pedantry,—the Alsa- 
tian sublimities of Salvator, the confectionery idealities of 
Claude, the duli manufacture of Gaspar and Canaletto, south 
of the Alps, and on the north the patient devotion of besotted 
tives to delineation of bricks and fogs, fat cattle and ditch. 
water. And thus Christianity and morality, courage, and 
intellect, and art all crumbiing together into one wreck, we 
are hurried on to the fall of Italy, the revolution in Franoa 


* Appendix 11, ‘‘ Renaissance Landscape.” 


88 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


and the condition of art in England (saved by her Protestant 
ism from severer penalty) in the time of George II. 

§ xxxvi, I have not written in vain if I have heretofore 
done anything towards diminishing the reputation of the Re- 
naissance landscape painting. But the harm which has been 
done by Claude and the Poussins is as nothing when com- 
pared to the mischief effected by Palladio, Scamozzi, and 
Sansovino. Claude and the Poussins were weak men, and 
have had no serious influence on the general mind. ‘There is 
little harm in their works being purchased at high prices. 
their real influence is very slight, and they may be left with- 
out grave indignation to their poor mission of furnishing 
drawing-rooms and assisting stranded conversation. Not so 
the Renaissance architecture. Raised at once into all the 
magnificence of which it was capable by Michael Angelo, then 
taken up by men of real intellect and imagination, such as 
Scamozzi, Sansovino, Inigo Jones, and Wren, it is impossible 
to estimate the extent of its influence on the European mind ; 
and that the more, because few persons are concerned with 
painting, and, of those few, the larger number regard it with 
slight attention ; but all men are concerned with architecture, 
and have at some time of their lives serious business with it. 
It does not much matter that an individual loses two or three 
hundred pounds in buying a bad picture, but it is to be re- 
gretted that a nation should lose two or three hundred thou- 
sand in raising a ridiculous building. Nor is it merely wasted 
wealth or distempered conception which we have to regret in 
this Renaissance architecture: but we shall find in it partly 
the root, partly the expression, of certain dominant evils of - 
modern times—over-sophistication and ignorant classicalism , 
the one destroying the healthfulness of general society, the 
other rendering our schools and universities useless to a large 
number of the men who pass through them. 

Now Venice, as she was once the most religious, was in her 
fail the most corrupt, of European states ; and as she was in - 
her strength the centre of the pure currents of Christian archi. 
tecture, so she is in her decline the source of the Renaissance. 
Tt was the originality and splendor of the Palaces of Vicenza 


THE QUARRY. 39 


wd Venice which gave this school its eminence in the eyes of . 
Europe ; and the dying city, magnificent in her dissipation, 
and graceful in her follies, obtained wider worship in her de 
erepitude than in her youth, and sank from the midst of her 
admirers into the grave. 

§ xxxrx. It is in Venice, therefore, and in Venice only that 
effectual blows can be struck at this pestilent art of the Renais- 
sance. Destroy its claims to admiration there, and it can as- 
sert them nowhere else. This, therefore, will be the final pur- 
pose of the following essay. I shall not devote a fourth section 
to Palladio, nor weary the reader with successive chapters of 
virtuperation ; but I shall, in my account of the earlier archi- 
tecture, compare the forms of all its leading features with 
those into which they were corrupted by the Classicalists ; and . 
pause, in the close, on the edge of the precipice of decline, so 
goon as I have made its depths discernible. In doing this I 
shall depend upon two distinct kinds of evidence :—the first, 
the testimony borne by particular incidents and facts to a 
want of thought or of feeling in the builders ; from which we 
way conclude that their architecture must be bad :—the sec- 
ond, the sense, which I doubt not I shall be able to excite in 
the reader, of a systematic ugliness in the architecture itself. 
Of the first kind of testimony I shall here give two instances, 
which may be immediately useful in fixing in the reader’s mind — 
the epoch above indicated for the commencement of decline. 

§ xt. I must again refer to the importance which I have 
above attached to the death of Carlo Zeno and the doge To- 
maso Mocenigo. The tomb of that doge is, as I said, wrought 
by a Florentine ; but it is of the same general type and feel- 
ing as all the Venetian tombs of the period, and it is one of the 

_ the last which retains it. The classical element enters largeiy 
into its details, but the feeling of the whole is as yet unaf- 
fected. Like all the lovely tombs of Venice and Verona, it is 
a sarcophagus with a recumbent figure above, and this figure 
is a faithful but tender portrait, wrought as far as it can be 
without painfulness, of the doge as he lay in death. He wears 
His ducal robe and bonnet—-his head \s laid slightly aside upon 


his pillow—his hands are simply crossed as they fall. The 


40 THE STONES OF VENICH. 


face is emaciated, the features large, but so pure and lordly 
in their natural chiselling, that they must have looked like 
marble even in their animation. They are deeply worn away 
by thought and death ; the veins on the temples branched and 
starting ; the skin gathered in sharp folds; the brow high- 
arched and shaggy; the eye-ball magnificently large; the 
curve of the lips just veiled by the light mustache at the side; 
the beard short, double, and sharp-pointed: all noble and 
quiet ; the white sepulchral dust marking like light the stern 
angles of the cheek and brow. ~ 

This tomb was sculptured in 1424, and is thus described by 
one of the most intelligent of the recent writers who represent 
the popular feeling respecting Venetian art. ‘ 


“Of the Italian school is also the rich but ugly (ricco ma 
non bel) sarcophagus in which repose the ashes of Tomaso 
Mocenigo. It may be called one of the last links which con- 
nect the declining art of the Middle Ages with that of the 
Renaissance, which was in its rise. We will not stay to ;ar- 
ticularise the defects of each of the seven figures of the front 
and sides, which represent the cardinal and theological virtues ; 
nor will we make any remarks upon those which stand in the 
niches above the pavilion, because we consider them unworthy 
both of the age and reputation of the Florentine school, which 
was then with reason considered the most notable in Italy.” * 


It is well, indeed, not to pause over these defects ; but it 
might have been better to have paused a moment beside that 
noble image of a king’s mortality. 

§ xu. In the choir of the same church, St. Giov. and Paolo, 
is another tomb, that of the Doge Andrea Vendramin. This 
doge died in 1478, after a short reign of two years, the most 
disastrous in the annals of Venice. He died of a pestilence 
which followed the ravage of the Turks, carried to the shores 
of the lagoons. He died, leaving Venice disgraced by sea and 
land, with the smoke of hostile devastation rising in the blue 
distances of Friuli; and there was raised to him the most 
eostly tomb ever bestowed on her monarchs, 

§ xu. If the writer above quoted was cold beside the 


* Selvatico, ‘ Architettura di Venezia,” p. 147, 


THE QUARRY. At 


statue of one of the fathers of his country, he atones for it by 
his eloquence beside the tomb of the Vendramin. I must not 
spoil the force of Italian superlative by translation. 


“Quando si guarda a quella corretta eleganza di profili e di 
proporzioni, a quella squisitezza d’ornamenti, a quel certo sa- 
pore antico che senza ombra d’imitazione traspare da tutta 
Popera’”—&e. “Sopra ornatissimo zoccolo fornito di squisiti 
intagh s’ alza uno stylobate ”»—&e. ‘Sotto le colonne, il pre- 
detto stilobate si muta leggiadramente in piedistallo, poi con 
bella novita di pensiero e di effetto va coronato da un fregio il 
pit gentile che veder si possa ”—&e. “Non puossi lasciar senza 
un cenno I arca dove sta chiuso il doge ; capo lavoro di pensi- 
ero e di esecuzione,” Xe. 


There are two pages and a half of closely printed praise, of 
which the above specimens may suffice; but there is nota 
word of the statue of the dead from beginning to end. Iam 
myself in the habit of considering this rather an important 
part of a tomb, and I was especially interested in it here, be- 
cause Selvatico only echoes the praise of thousands. It is 
unanimously declared the chef d’ceuvre of Renaissance sepul- 
chral work, and pronounced by Cicognara (also quoted by 
Selvatico) 


“Tl vertice a cui I arti Veneziane si spinsero col ministera 
del scalpello,”—‘“‘ The very culminating point to which the Ve- 
netian arts attained by ministry of the chisel.” 


To this culminating point, therefore, covered with dust and 
cobwebs, I attained, as I did to every tomb of importance in 
Venice, by the ministry of such ancient ladders as were to be 
found in the sacristan’s keeping. I was struck at first by the 
excessive awkwardness and want of feeling in the fall of the 
hand towards the spectator, for it is thrown off the middle of 
the body in order to show its fine cutting. Now the Moce- 
nigo hand, severe and even stiff in its articulations, has its 
veins finely drawn, its sculptor having justly felt that the deli- 
cacy of the veining expresses alike dignity and age and birth. 
The Vendramin hand is far more laboriously cut, but its blunt 


492 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


and clumsy contour at once makes us feel that all the care has 
been thrown away, and well it may be, for it has been entirely 
bestowed in cutting gouty wrinkles about the joints. Such as 
the hand is, I looked for its fellow. At first I thought it had 
been broken off, but, on clearing away the dust, I saw the 
wretched effigy had only one hand, and was a mere block on 
the inner side. The face, heavy and disagreeable in its feat- 
ures, is made monstrous by its semi-sculpture. One side of 
the forehead is wrinkled elaborately, the other left smooth ; 
one side only of the doge’s cap is chased ; one cheek only is 
finished, and the other blocked out and distorted besides ; 
finally, the ermine robe, which is elaborately imitated to its 
utmost lock of hair and of ground hair on the one side, is 
blocked out only on the other: it having been supposed 
throughout the work that ‘he effigy was only to be seen from 
below, and from one side. 

§ xxi. It was indeed to be so seen by nearly every one ; 
and I do not blame—I should, on the contrary, have praised 
—the sculptor for regulating his treatment of it by its posi- 
tion ; if that treatment had not involved, first, dishonesty, in 
giving only half a face, a monstrous mask, when we demanded 
true portraiture of the dead ; and, secondly, such utter cold- 
ness of feeling, as could only consist with an extreme of intel- 
lectual and moral degradation: Who, with a heart in his 
breast, could have stayed his hand as he drew the dim lines of 
the oid man’s countenance—unmajestic once, indeed, but at 
least sanctified by the solemnities of death—could have stayed 
his hand, as he reached the bend of the grey forehead, and 
measured out the last veins of it at so much the zecchin ? 

I do not think the reader, if he has feeling, will expect that 
much talent should be shown in the rest of his work, by the 
sculptor of this base and senseless lie. The whole monument 
is one wearisome aggregation of that species of ornamental 
flourish, which, when it is done with a pen, is called penman- 
ship, and when done with a chisel, should be called chisel- 
manship ; the subject of it being chiefly fat-limbed boys sprawl- 
ing on dolphins, dolphins incapable of swimming, and dragged 
along the sea by expanded pocket-handkerchiefs, 


THe QUARRY. 43 


But now, reader, comes the very gist and point of the whole 
matter. This lying monument to a dishonored doge, this 
culminating pride of the Renaissance art of Venice, is at least 
veracious, if in nothing else, in its testimony to the character 
of its sculptor. He was banished from Venice for forgery in 
1487.* 

§ xxiv. I have more to say about this convict’s work here- 
after ; but I pass at present, to the second, slighter, but yet 
more interesting piece of evidence, which I promised. 

The ducal palace has two principal fagades ; one towards 
the sea, the other towards the Piazzetta. The seaward side, 
and, as far as the seventh main arch inclusive, the Piazzetta 
side, is work of the early part of the fourteenth century, some 
of it perhaps even earlier ; while the rest of the Piazzetta side 
is of the fifteenth. The difference in age has been gravely dis- 
puted by the Venetian antiquaries, who have examined many 
- documents on the subject, and quoted some which they 
never examined. I have myself collated most of the written 
documents, and one document more, to which the Venetian 
antiquaries never thought of referring,—the masonry of the 
palace itself. 

§ xtv. That masonry changes at the centre of the eighth 
arch from the sea angle on the Piazzetta side. It has been 
of comparatively small stones up to that point ; the fifteenth 
century work instantly begins with larger stones, ‘“‘ brought 
from Istria, a hundred miles away.” } The ninth shaft from 
the sea in the lower arcade, and the seventeenth, which is 
above it, in the upper arcade, commence the series of fif- 
teenth century shafts. These two are somewhat thicker than 
the others, and carry the party-wall of the Sala del Scrutinio. 
Now observe, reader. The face of the palace, from this point 
to the Porta della, Carta, was built at the instance of that 
noble Doge Mocenigo beside whose tomb you have been 
standing ; at his instance, and in the beginning of the reign 
of his successor, Foscari; that is to say, circa 1424. This is 
not disputed ; it is only disputed that the sea fayade is earlier ; 

* Selvatico, p. 221. 

{ The older work is of Istrian stone also, but of different quality. 


44. THE STONES O# VENICE. 


of which, however, the proofs are as simple as they are incon. 
trovertibie.: for not only the masonry, but the sculpture, 
changes at the ninth lower shaft, and that in the capitals of 
the shafts both of the upper and lower arcade: the costumes 
of the figures introduced in the sea facade being purely Giot- 
tesque, correspondent with Giotto’s work in the Arena Chapel 
at Padua, while the costume on the other capitals is Renais- 
sance-Classic : and the lions’ heads between the arches change 
at the same point. And there are a multitude of other evi- 
dences in the statues of the angels, with which I shall not at 
present trouble the reader. 

§ xtvi. Now, the architect who built under Foscari, in 1424 
(remember my date for the decline of Venice, 1418), was 
obliged to follow the principal forms of the older palace. But 
he had not the wit to invent new capitals in the same style ; 
he therefore clumsily copied the old ones. The palace has 
seventeen main arches on the sea facade, eighteen on the 
Piazzetta side, which in all are of course carried by thirty-six 
pillars ; and these pillars I shall always number from right to 
left, from the angle of the palace at the Ponte della Paglia to 
that next the Porta della Carta. I number them in this sue- 
cession, because I thus have the earliest shafts first numbered. 
So counted, the Ist, the 18th, and the 36th, are the great 
supports of the angles of the palace ; and the first of the fif- 
teenth century series, being, as above stated, the 9th from the 
sea on the Piazzetta side, is the 26th of the entire series, and 
will always in future be so numbered, so that all numbers 
above twenty-six indicate fifteenth century work, and all below 
it, fourteenth century, with some exceptional cases of restora- 
tion. 

Then the copied capitals are: the 28th, copied from the 
7th ; the 29th, from the 9th; the 30th, from the 10th ; the 
31st, from the 8th; the 33d, from the 12th; and the 34th, 
from the 11th; the others being dull inventions of the 15th 
century, except the 36th, which is very nobly designed. 

§ xiv. The capitals thus selected from the earlier portion 
of the palace for imitation, together with the rest, will be ac< 
eurately described hereafter ; the point I have here to notice 


THE QUARRY. , 45 


is in the copy of the ninth capital, which was decorated (being, 
like the rest, octagonal) with figures of the eight Virtues :-~ 
Faith, Hope, Charity, Justice, Temperance, Prudence, Humil- 
ity (the Venetian antiquaries call it Humanity !), and Forti- 
tude. The Virtues of the fourteenth century are somewhat 
hard-featured ; with vivid and living expression, and plain 
every-day clothes of the time. Charity has her lap full of 
apples (perhaps loaves), and is giving one to a little child, who 
stretches his arm for it across a gap in the leafage of the capi- 
tal. Fortitude tears open a lion’s jaws ; Faith Jays her hand 
on her breast, as she beholds the Cross ; and Hope is praying, 
' while above her a hand is seen emerging from sunbeams—the 
hand of God (according to that of Revelations, ‘‘The Lord God 
giveth them light”) ; and the inscription above is, ‘‘Spes op- 
tima in Deo.” 

§ xiv. This design, then, is, rudely and with imperfect 
chiselling, imitated by the fifteenth century workmen : the 
Virtues have lost their hard features and living expression ; 
they have now all got Roman noses, and have had their hair 
curled. Their actions and emblems are, however, preserved 
until we come to Hope: she is still praying, but she is pray- 
ing to the sun only : The hand of God is gone. 

Is not this a curious and striking type of the spirit which 
had then become dominant in the world, forgetting to see 
God’s hand in the light He gave ; so that in the issue, when 
that light opened into the Reformation on the one side, and 
into full knowledge of ancient literature on the other, the one 
was arrested and the other perverted ? 

§ xix. Such is the nature of the accidental evidence on 
which I shall depend for the proof of the inferiority of charac- 
ter in the Renaissance workmen. But the proof of the infe- 
riority of the work itself is not so easy, for in this I have to 
appeal to judgments which the Renaissance work has itself dis- 
torted. I felt this difficulty very forcibly as I read a slight 
review of my former work, “The Seven Lamps,” in “The 
Architect :” the writer noticed my constant praise of St. 
Mark’s: “Mr. Ruskin thinks it a very beautiful building ! 
We,” said the Architect, “think it a very ugly building.” I 


46 THK STONES OF VENICE. 


was not surprised at the difference of opinion, but at the thing 
being consided so completely a subject of opinion. My op- 
ponents in matters of painting always assume that there is 
such a thing asa law of right, and that I do not understand it : 
but my architectual adversaries appeal to no law, they simply 
set their opinion against mine ; and indeed there is no law at 
present to which either they or I can appeal. No man can 
speak with rational decision of the merits or demerits of build- 
ings: he may with obstinacy ; he may with resolved adherence 
to previous prejudices ; but never as if the matter could be 
otherwise decided than by a majority of votes, or pertinacity 
of partizanship. Ihad always, however, a clear conviction that 
there was a law in this matter : that good architecture might 
be indisputably discerned and divided from the bad ; that the 
opposition in their very nature and essence was clearly visible; 
and that we were all of us just as unwise in disputing about 
the matter without reference to principle, as we should be for 
debating about the genuineness of a coin, without ringing it 
I felt also assured that this law must be universal if it wera 
conclusive ; that it must enable us to reject all foolish and basa 
work, and to accept all noble and wise work, without reference 
to style or national feeling ; that it must sanction the design 
of all truly great nations and times, Gothic or Greek or Arab } 
that it must cast off and reprobate the design of all foolish 
nations and times, Chinese or Mexican, or modern European : 
and that it must be easily applicable to all possible architec- 
tural inventions of human mind. I set myself, therefore, tc 
establish such a law, in full belief that men are intended, with: 
out excessive difficulty, and by use of their general common 
sense, to know good things from bad ; and that it is only be- 
cause they will not be at the pains required for the discern: 
ment, that the world is so widely encumbered with forgeries 
and basenesses. I found the work simpler than Ihad hoped ; 
the reasonable things ranged themselves in the order I re- 
quired, and the foolish things fell aside, and took themselves 
away so soon as they were looked in the face. I had then. 
with respect to Venetian architecture, the choice, either to ex 
tablish each division of law in a separate form, as I came to tha 


S 4! THE QUARRY. 47 


features with which it was concerned, or else to ask the read: 
er’s patience, while I followed out the general inquiry first, 
and determined with him a code of right and wrong, to which 
we might together make retrospective appeal. I thought this 
the best, though perhaps the dullest way ; and in these first 
following pages I haye therefore endeavored to arrange those 
foundations of criticism, on which I shall rest in my account 
of Venetian architecture, in a form clear and simple enough to 
be intelligible even to those who never thought of architecture 
before. To those who have, much of what is stated in them 
will be well known or self-evident ; but they must not be in- 
dignant at a simplicity on which the whole argument depends 
for its usefulness. From that which appears a mere truism 
when first stated, they will find very singular consequences 
sometimes following,—consequences altogether unexpected, 
and of considerable importance ; I will not pause here to dwell 
on their importance, nor on that of the thing itself to be done; 
for I believe most readers will at once admit the value of a 
criterion of right and wrong in so practical and costly an art 
as architecture, and will be apt rather to doubt the possibility 
of its attainment than dispute its usefulness if attained. I in- 
vite them, therefore, to a fair trial, being certain that even if 1 
should fail in my main purpose, and be unable to induce in my 
reader the confidence of judgment I desire, I shall at least, re- 
ceive his thanks for the suggestion of consistent reasons, which 
may determine hesitating choice, or justify involuntary prefer- 
ence. And if I should succeed, as I hope, in making the 
Stones of Venice touchstones, and detecting, by the moulder- 
ing of her marble, poison more subtle than ever was betrayed 
by the rending of her crystal ; and if thus I am enabled to 
show the baseness of the schools of architecture and nearly 
every other art, which have for three centuries been predomi- 
nant in Europe, I believe the result of the inquiry may be ser- 
viceable for proof of a more vital truth than any at which I 
have hitherto hinted. For observe: I said the Protestant had 
despised the arts, and the Rationalist corrupted them. But 
what has the Romanist done meanwhile ? He boasts that it 
was the papacy which raised the arts ; why could it not sue 


48 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


port them when it was left to its own strength? How came 
it to yield to Classicalism which was based on infidelity, and 
to oppose no barrier to innovations, which have reduced the 
once faithfully conceived imagery of its worship to stage deco- 
ration? Shall we not rather find that Romanism, instead of 
being a promoter of the arts, has never shown itself capable of 
a single great conception since the separation of Protestantism 
from its side?* So long as, corrupt though it might be, no 
clear witness had been borne against it, so that it still included 
in its ranks a vast number of faithful Christians, so long its 
arts were noble. But the witness was borne—the error made 
apparent ; and Rome refusing to hear the testimony or forsake 
the falsehood, has been struck from that instant with an intel- 
lectual palsy, which has not only incapacitated her from any 
further use of the arts which once were her ministers, but has 
made her worship the shame of its own shrines, and her wor- 
shippers their destroyers. Come, then, if truths such as these 
are worth our thoughts ; come, and let us know, before we 
enter the streets of the Sea city, whether we are indeed to subs 
mit ourselves to their undistinguished enchantment, and to 
look upon the last changes which were wrought on the lifted 
forms of her palaces, as we should on the capricious towering 
of summer clouds in the sunset, ere they sank into the deep 
of night ; or whether, rather, we shall not behold in the bright- 
ness of their accumulated marble, pages on which the sentence 
of her luxury was to be written until the waves should efface 
it, as they fulfilled—* God has numbered thy kingdom, and 
finished it.” 


CHAPTER IL. 
THE VIRTUES OF ARCHITECTURE, 


§ 1. We address ourselves, then, first to the task of deter- 
mining some law of right which we may apply to tne archi- 
tecture of all the world and of all time ; and by help of which, 
and judgment according to which, we may easily pronounce 


* Appendix 12, ‘* Romanist Modern Art.” 


THE VIRTUES OF ARCHITECTURE. 49 


whether a building is good or noble, as, by applying a plumb- 
line, whether it be perpendicular. 

The first question will of course be, What are the possible 
Virtues of architecture ? 

In the main, we require from buildings, as from men, two 
kinds of goodness: first, the doing their practical duty well: 
then that they be graceful and pleasing in doing it ; which 
last is itself another form of duty. 

Then the practical duty divides itself into two branches,— 
acting and talking :—acting, as to defend us from weather or 
violence ; talking, as the duty of monuments or tombs, to 
record facts and express feelings; or of churches, temples, 
public edifices, treated as books of history, to tell such his- 
tory clearly and forcibly. 

We have thus, altogether, three great branches of archi- 
tectural virtue, and we require of any building,— 

1. That it act well, and do the things it was intended to do 

in the best way. 

2. That it speak well, and say the things it was intended to 

say in the best words. 

3. That it look well, and please us by its presence, what- 

eyer it has to do or say.* 

§ u. Now, as regards the second of these virtues, it is evi- 
dent that we can establish no general laws, First, because it 
is not a virtue required in all buildings ; there are some which 
are only for covert or defence, and from which we ask no 
conversation. Secondly, because there are countless methods 
of expression, some conventional, some natural : each conven- 
tional mode has its own alphabet, which evidently can be no 
subject of general laws. Every natural mode is instinctively 
employed and instinctively understood, wherever there is true 
feeling ; and this instinct is above law. The choice of con- 
ventional. methods depends on circumstances out of calcula- 
tion, and that of natural methods on sensations out of con- 
trol; so that we can only say that the choice is right, when 
we feel that the means are effective ; .nd we cannot always 
pay that it is wrong when they are not so. 


* Appendix 13. ‘‘ Mr. Fergusson’s System.” 
Stones of Venice—Vol. 1 —3_ 


50 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


A building which recorded the Bible history by means ot 
a series of sculptural pictures, would be perfectly useless to a 
person unacquainted with the Bible beforehand ; on the other 
hand, the text of the Old and New Testaments might be writ- 
ten on its walls, and yet the building be a very inconvenient 
kind of book, not so useful as if it had been adorned with 
intelligible and vivid sculpture. So, again, the power of ex- 
citing emotion must vary or vanish, as the spectator becomes 
thoughtless or cold ; and the building may be often blamed 
for what is the fault of its critic, or endowed with a charm 
which is of its spectator’s creation. It is not, therefore, pos- 
sible to make expressional character any fair criterion of ex- 
cellence in buildings, until we can fully place ourselves in the 
position of those to whom their expression was originally ad- 
dressed, and until we are certain that we understand every 
symbol, and are capable of being touched by every association 
which its builders employed as letters of their language. I 
shall continually endeavor to put. the reader into such sym- 
pathetic temper, when I ask for his judgment of a building ; 
and in every work I may bring before him I shall point out, 
as far as I am able, whatever is peculiar in its expression ; 
nay, I must even depend on such peculiarities for much of my 
best evidence respecting the character of the builders. But 
I cannot legalize the judgment for which I plead, nor insist 
upon it if it be refused. I can neither force the reader te 
feel this architectural rhetoric, nor compel him to confess that 
the rhetoric is powerful, if it have produced no impression on 
his own mind. : 

§ mt. I leave, therefore, the expression of buildings for in- 
zidental notice only. But theix other two virtues are proper 
subjects of law,—their performance of their common and nec- 
assary work, and their conformity with universal and divine 
canons of loveliness: respecting these there can be no doubt, 
no ambiguity. I would have the reader discern them, so 
quickly that, as he passes along a street, he may, by a glance 
of the eye distinguish the noble from the ignoble work. He 
can do this, if he permit free play to his natural instinets ; 
and all that I have to do for him is to remove from those in. 


THE VIRTUES OF ARCHITECTURE. 51 


stincts the artificial restraints which prevent their action, and 
to encourage them to an unaffected and unbiassed choice be- 
tween right and wrong. 

§ 1v. We have, then, two qualities of buildings for subjects 
of separate inquiry: their action, and aspect, and the sources 
of virtue in both ; that is to say, Strength and Beauty, both 
of these being less admired in themselves, than as testifying 
the intelligence or imagination of the builder. 

For we have a worthier way of looking at human than at 
divine architecture: much of the value both of construction 
and decoration, in the edifices of men, depends upon our 
being led by the thing produced or adorned, to some contem- 
plation of the powers of mind concerned in its creation or 
adornment. We are not so led by divine work, but are con- 
tent to rest in the contemplation of the.thing created. I wish 
the reader to note this especially : we take pleasure, or should 
take pleasure, in architectural construction altogether as the 
manifestation of an admirable human intelligence ; it is not 
the strength, not the size, not the finish of the work which 
we are to venerate: rocks are always stronger, mountains 
always larger, all natural objects more finished ; but it is the 
intelligence and resolution of man in overcoming physical 
difficulty which are to be the source of our pleasure and sub- 
ject of our praise. And again, in decoration or beauty, it is 
less the actual loveliness of the thing produced, than the 
choice and invention concerned in the production, which are 
to delight us; the love and the thoughts of the workman more 
than his work: his work must always be imperfect, but his 
thoughts and affections may be true and deep. 

§ v. This origin of our pleasure in architecture I must in- 
sist upon at somewhat greater length, for I would fain do 
away with some of the ungrateful coldness which we show to- 
wards the good builders of oldtime. In no art is there closer 
connection between our delight in the work, and our admira- 
tion of the workman’s mind, than in architecture, and yet we 
rarely ask for a builder’s name. The patron at whose cost, 
the monk through whose dreaming, the foundation was laid, 
we remember occasionally ; never the man who verily did the 


52 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


work. Did the reader ever hear of William of Sens as having 
had anything to do with Canterbury Cathedral? or of Pietra 
Basegio as in anywise connected with the Ducal Palace of Ven- 
ice? There is much ingratitude and injustice in this ; and 
therefore I desire my reader to observe carefully how much 
of his pleasure in building is derived, or should be derived, 
from admiration of the intellect of men whose names he 
knows not. 

§ vi The two virtues of architecture which we can justly 
weigh, are, we said, its strength or good construction, and its 
beauty or good decoration. Consider first, therefore, what 
you mean when you say a building is well constructed or well 
built ; you do not merely mean that it answers its purpose,— 
this is much, and many modern buildings fail of this much ; 
"but if it be verily well built, it must answer this purpose iy 
the simplest way, and with no over-expenditure of means. 
We require of a light-house, for instance, that it shall stand 
firm and carry a light ; if it do not this, assuredly it has been 
ill built ; but it may do it to the end of time, and yet not be 
well built. It may have hundreds of tons of stone in it more 
than were needed, and have cost thousands of pounds more 
than it ought. To pronounce it well or ill built, we must 
know the utmost forces it can have to resist, and the best ar- 
rangements of stone for encountering them, and the quickest 
ways of effecting such arrangements: then only, so far as such 
arrangements have been chosen, and such methods used, is it 
well built. Then the knowledge of all difficulties to be met, 
and of all means of meeting them, and the quick and true 
fancy or invention of the modes of applying the means to the 
end, are what we have to admire in the builder, even as he is 
seen through this first or inferior part of his work, Mental 
power, observe : not muscular nor mechanical, nor technical, 
nor empirical,—pure, precious, majestic, massy intellect ; not 
to be had at vulgar price, nor received without thanks, and 
without asking from whom. 

§ vi. Suppose, for instance, we are present at the building 
of a bridge: the bricklayers or masons have had their cen 
tring erected for them, and that centring was put together 


THE VIRTUES OF ARCHITECTURE. 53 


by a carpenter, who had the liné of its curve traced for him 
by the architect: the masons are dexterously handling and 
fitting their bricks, or, by the help of machinery, carefully 
adjusting stones which are numbered for their places. There 
is probably in their quickness of eye and readiness of hand 
something admirable ; but this is not what I ask the reader 
to admire: not the carpentering, nor the bricklaying, nor 
anything that he can presently see and understand, but the 
choice of the curve, and the shaping of the numbered stones, 
and the appointment of that number ; there were many things 
to be known and thought upon before these were decided. 
The man who chose the curve and numbered the stones, had 
to know the times and tides of the river, and the strength of 
its floods, and the height and flow of them, and the soil of the 
banks, and the endurance of it, and the weight of the stones 
he had to build with, and the kind of traffic that day by day 
would be carried on over his bridge,—all this specially, and all 
the great general laws of force and weight, and their working ; 
and in the choice of the curve and numbering of stones are 
expressed not only his knowledge of these, but such ingenuity 
and firmness as he had, in applying special means to over- 
come the special difficulties about his bridge. There is no 
saying how much wit, how much depth of thought, how much 
fancy, presence of mind, courage, and fixed resolution there - 
may have gone to the placing of asingle stone of it. This is 
what we have to admire,—this grand power and heart of man 
in the thing ; not his technical or empirical way of holding 
the trowel and laying mortar. 

§ vut. Now there is in everything properly called art this 
concernment of the intellect, even in the province of the art 
which seems merely practical. For observe : in this bridge- 
building I suppose no reference to architectural principles ; 
all that I suppose we want is to get safely over the river ; the 
man who has taken us over is still a mere bridge-builder,—a 
builder, not an architect : he may be a rough, artless, feeling- 
less man, incapable of doing any one truly fine thing all his 
days. I shall call upon you to despise him presently in a sort, 
but not as if he were a mere smoother of mortar ; perhaps a 


54 THE STONES OF VENICR. 


great man, infinite in memory, indefatigable in labor, exhaust. 
less in expedient, unsurpassable in quickness of thought. 
Take good heed you understand him before you despise him. 

§ 1x. But why is he to be in anywise despised? By no 
means despise him, unless he happen to be without a soul,* 
or at least to show no signs of it ; which possibly he may not 
in merely carrying you across the river. Ile may be merely 
what Mr. Carlyle. rightly calls a human beaver after all ; and 
there may be nothing in all that ingenuity of his greater than 
a complication of animal faculties, an intricate bestiality,— 
nest or hive building in its highest development. You need 
something more than this, or the man is despicable ; you 
need that virtue of building through which he may show his 
affections and delights ; you need its beauty or decoration. 

§ x. Not that,in reality, one division of the man is more 
human than another. Theologists fall into this error very 
fatally and continually ; and a man from whom I have learned 
much, Lord Lindsay, has hurt his noble book by it, speaking 
as if the spirit of the man only were immortal, and were op- 
posed to his intellect, and the latter to the senses ; whereas 
all the divisions of humanity are noble or brutal, immortal or 
mortal, according to the degree of their sanctification: and 
there is no part of the man which is not immortal and divine 
when it is once given to God, and no part of him which is 
not mortal by the second death, and brutal before the first, 
when it is withdrawn from God. For to what shall we trust, 
for our distinction from the beasts that perish? To our 
higher intellect ?—yet are we not bidden to be wise as the 
serpent, and to consider the ways of the ant?—or to our . 
affections? uay; these are more shared by the lower animals 
than our intelligence. Hamlet leaps into the grave of his 
beloved, and leaves it,—a dog had stayed. Humanity and 
immortality consist neither in reason, nor in love; not in the 
body, nor in the animation of the heart of it, nor in the 
thoughts and stirrings of the brain of it,—but in the dedica- 
tion of them all to Him who will raise them up at the last 
day. 


* Appendix 14, ‘* Divisions of Humanity,” 


THH VIRTUHS Of ARCHITECTURE. 55 


§ x1. It is not, therefore, that the signs of his affections, 
which man leaves upon his work, are indeed more ennobling 
than the signs of his intelligence; but it is the balance of 
both whose expression we need, and the signs of the govern- 
ment of them all by Conscience ; and Discretion, the daughter 
of Conscience. So, then, the intelligent part of man being 
eminently, if not chiefly, displayed in the structure of his 
work, his affectionate part is to be shown in its decoration ; 
and, that decoration may be indeed lovely, two things are 
needed : first, that the affections be vivid, and honestly shown ; 
secondly, that they be fixed on the right things. 

§ xu. You think, perhaps, I have put the requirements in 
wrong order. Logically I have ; practically I have not: for 
it is necessary first to teach men to speak out, and say what 
they like, truly; and, in the second place, to teach them 
which of their likings are ill set, and which justly. If a man 
is cold in his likings and dislikings, or if he will not tell you 
what he likes, you can make nothing of him. Only get him 
to feel quickly and to speak plainly, and you may set him 
right. And the fact is, that the great evil of all recent 
architectural effort has not been that men liked wrong things: 
but that they either cared nothing about any, or pretended 
to like what they did not. Do you suppose that any modern 
architect likes what he builds, or enjoysit? Not in the least. 
He builds it because he has been told that such and such 
things are fine, and that he should like them. He pretends 
to like them, and gives them a false relish of vanity. Do you 
seriously imagine, reader, that any living soul in London likes 
triglyphs? *—or gets any hearty enjoyment out of pedi- 
ments?{ You are much mistaken. Greeks did: English 
people never did,—never will. Do you fancy that the archi- 
tect of old Burlington Mews, in Regent Street, had any 
particular satisfaction in putting the blank triangle over the 


*Triglyph. Literally, ‘‘Three Cut.” The awkward upright orna 
ment with two notches in it, and a cut at each side, to be seen every; 
where at the tops of Doric colonnades, ancient and modern. 

+ Pediment. The triangular space above Greek porticos, as on the 
Mansion House or Reyal Exchange. 


56 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


archway, instead of a useful garret window? By no manner 
of means. He had been told it was right to do so, and 
thought he should be admired for doing it. Very few faults 
of architecture are mistakes of honest choice: they are almost 
always hypocrisies. 

§ xu. So, then, the first thing we have to ask of the decora- 
tion is that it should indicate strong liking, and that honestly. 
It matters not so much what the thing is, as that the builder 
should really love it and enjoy it, and say so plainly. The 
architect of Bourges Cathedral liked hawthorns; so he has 
covered his porch with hawthorn,—it is a perfect Niobe of 
May. Never was such hawthorn; you would try to gather if 
forthwith, but for fear of being pricked. The old Lombard 
architects liked hunting; so they covered their work with 
horses and hounds, and men blowing trumpets two yards long, 
The base Renaissance architects of Venice liked masquing 
and fiddling; so they covered their work with comic masks 
and musical instruments. Even that was better than our 
English way of liking nothing, and professing to like tri- 
glyphs. 

§ xiv. But the second requirement in decoration, is a sign 
of our liking the right thing. And the right thing to be liked 
is God’s work, which He made for our delight and contentment 
in this world. And all noble ornamentation is the expression 
of man’s delight in God’s work. 

§ xv. So, then, these are the two virtues of building : first, 
the signs of man’s own good work ; secondly, the expression 
of man’s delight in better work than his own. And these are 
the two virtues of which I desire my reader to be able quickly - 
to judge, at least in some measure ; to have a definite opinion 
up to acertain point. Beyond a certain point he cannot form 
one. When the science of the building is great, great science 
is of course required to comprehend it: and, therefore, of 
difficult bridges, and light-houses, and harbor walls, and river 
dykes, and railway tunnels, no judgment may be rapidly 
formed. But of common buildings, built in common circum. 
stances, it is very possible for every man, or woman, or child, 
to form judgment both rational and rapid. Their necessary, 


THE VIRTUES OF ARCHITECTURE 54 


or even possible, features are but few ; the laws of their con- 
struction are as simple as they are interesting. The labor of 
a few hours is enough to render the reader master of their 
main points; and from that moment he will find in himself a 
power of judgment which can neither be escaped nor deceived, 
and discover subjects of interest where everything before had 
appeared barren. For though the laws are few and simple, 
the modes of obedience to them are not so. Every building 
preseuts its own requirements and difficulties ; and every good 
building has peculiar appliances or contrivances to meet them. 
Understand the laws of structure, and you will feel the special 
difficulty in every new building which you approach ; and you 
will know also, or feel instinctively,* whether it has been 
wisely met or otherwise. And an enormous number of build. 
ings, and of styles of buildings, you will be able to cast aside 
at once, as at variance with these constant laws of structure, 
and therefore unnatural and monstrous. 

§ xv. Then, as regards decoration, I want you. only to con. 
sult your own natural choice and liking. There is a right 
and wrong in it; but you will assuredly like the right if you 
suffer your natural instinct to lead you. Half the evil in this 
world comes from people not knowing what they do like, not 
deliberately setting themselves to find out what they really 
enjoy. All people enjoy giving away money, for instance : 
they don’t know that,—they rather think they like keeping it ; 
and they do keep it under this false impression, often to their 
great discomfort. Every body likes to do good ; but not one 
in a hundred finds this out. Multitudes think they like to do 
evil; yet no man ever really enjoyed doing evil since God 
made the world. 

So in this lesser matter of ornament. It needs some little 
care to try experiments upon yourself: it needs deliberate 
question and upright answer. But there is no difficulty to be 
overcome, no abstruse reasoning to be gone into; only alittle 
watchfulness needed, and thoughtfulness, and so much honesty 
as will enable you to confess to yourself and to all men, that 
you enjoy things, though great authorities say you should not, 

* Appendix 15; ‘* Instinctive Judgments.” 


58 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


§ xvm. This looks somewhat like pride; but it is true hu- 
mility, a trust that you haye been so created as to enjoy what 
is fitting for you, and a willingness to be pleased, as it was 
intended you should be. It is the child’s spirit, which we 
are then most happy when we most recover ; only wiser than. 
children in that we are ready to think it subject of thankful 
ness that we ean still be pleased with a fair color or a dancing 
light. And, above all, do not try to make all these pleasures 
reasonable, nor to connect the delight which you take in 
ornament with that which you take in construction or useful- 
ness. They have no connection ; and every effort that you 
make to reason from one to the other will blunt your sense of 
beauty, or confuse it with sensations altogether inferior to it. 
You were made for enjoyment, and the world was filled with 
things which you will enjoy, unless you are too proud to be 
pleased by them, or too grasping to care for what you cannot 
turn to other account than mere delight. Remember that the 
most beautiful things in the world are the most useless ; pea- 
cocks and lilies for instance; at least I suppose this quill I hold 
in my hand writes better than a peacock’s would, and the peas- 
ants of Vevay, whose fields in spring time are as white with 
lilies as the Dent du Midi is with its snow, told me the hay 
was none the better for them. 

§ xvuz. Our task therefore divides itself into two branches, 
and these I shall follow in succession. I shall first consider 
the construction of buildings, dividing them into their really 
necessary members or features; and I shall endeavor so to 
lead the reader forward from the foundation upwards, as that 
he may find out for himself the best way of doing everything, 
and having so discovered it, never forget it. I shall give him 
stones, and bricks, and straw, ohistlay and trowels, and the 
ground, and then ask him to build; only helping him, as I 
can, if I find him puzzled. And when he has built his house 
or church, I shall ask him to ornament it, and leave it to him 
to choose the ornaments as I did to find out the construction ; 
I shall use no influence with him whatever, except to counter- 
act previous prejudices, and leave him, as far as may be, free. 
And when he has thus found out how to build, and chosen 


THE SIX DIVISIONS OF ARCHITECTURE. o9 


his forms of decoration, I shall do what I can to confirm hia 
confidence in what he has done. I shall assure him that no 
one in the world could, so far, have done better, and require 
him to condemn, as futile or fallacious, whatever has no re- 
semblance to his own performances. 


CHAPTER I. 


THE SIX DIVISIONS OF ARCHITECTURE, 

§1. The practical duties of buildings are twofold. 

They have either (1), to hold and protect something ; or (2), 
So place or carry something. 


1. Architecture of Protection. This is architecture in- 
tended to protect men or their possessions from violence 
of any kind, whether of men or of the elements. It will 
include all churches, houses, and treasuries ; fortresses, 
fences, and ramparts; the architecture of the hut and 
sheepfoid ; of the palace and the citadel: of the dyke, 
breakwater, and sea-wall. And the protection, when 
of living creatures, is to be understood as including 
commodiousness and comfort of habitation, wherever 
these are possible under the given circumstances. 


9. Architecture of Position. This is architecture intended 
- to carry men or things to some certain places, or to 
hold them there. This will include all bridges, aque- 
ducts, and road architecture ; light-houses, which have 
to hold light in appointed places; chimneys to carry 
smoke or direct currents of air; staircases; towers, 
which are to be watched from or cried from, as in 
mosques, or to hold bells, or to place men in positions 
of offence, as ancient moveable attacking towers, and 
most fortress towers. 


§ «a. Protective architecture has to do one or all of three 
things: to wall a space, to roof it, and to give access to it, of 


60 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


persons, light, and air; and it is therefore to be considered 
under the three divisions of walls, roofs, and apertures. 

We will take, first, a short, general view of the connection 
of these members, and then examine them in detail: endeav: 
oring always to keep the simplicity of our first arrangement 
in view ; for protective architecture has indeed no other 
members than these, unless flooring and paving be con- 
sicered architecture, which it is only when the flooring is also 
a roof; the laying of the stones or timbers for footing being 
pavior’s or carpenter’s work, rather than architect’s ; and, at 
all events, work respecting the well or ill doing of which we 
shall hardly find much difference of opinion, except in points 
of «esthetics. We shall therefore concern ourselves only with 
the construction of walls, roofs, and apertures. 

§ut 1. Walls.—A wall is an even and united fence, 
whether of wood, earth, stone, or metal. When meant for 
purposes of mere partition or enclosure, it remains a wall 
proper: but it has generally also to sustain a certain vertical 
or lateral pressure, for which its strength is at first increased 
by some general addition to its thickness; but if the pressure 
becomes very great, it is gathered up into piers to resist ver- 
tical pressure, and supported by buttresses to resist lateral 
pressure. 

If its functions of partition or enclosure are continued, to- 
gether with that of resisting vertical pressure, it remains as a 
wall veil between the piers into which it has been partly 
gathered ; but if it is required only to resist the vertical or 
roof pressure, it is gathered up into piers altogether, loses 
its wall character, and becomes a group or line of piers. 

On the other hand, if the lateral pressure be slight, it may 
retain its character of a wall, being supported against the 
pressure by buttresses at intervals ; but if the lateral pressure 
be very great, it is supported against such pressure by a con- 
tinuous buttress, loses its wall character, and becomes a dyke 
or rampart. 

§ 1v. We shall have therefore (A) first to get a general idea 
of a wall, and of right construction of walls; then (B) to see 
how this wall is gathered into piers ; and to get a general idea 


THE 8IX DIVISIONS OF ARCHITECTURE. 61 


of piers and the right construction of piers; then (C) to see 
how a wall is supported by buttresses, and to get a general 
idea of buttresses and the right construction of buttresses. 
This is surely very simple, and it is all we shall have to do 
with walls and their divisions. 

§v. 2. Roofs.—A roof is the covering of a space, narrow or 
wide. It will be most conveniently studied by first consider- 
ing the forms in which it may be carried over a narrow space, 
and then expanding these ona wide plan ; only there is some 


Fig. 1. 


difficulty here in the nomenclature, for an arched roof over a 
narrow space has (I believe) no name, except that which be- 
longs properly to the piece of stone or wood composing such 
a roof, namely, lintel. But the reader will have no difficulty 
in understanding that he is first to consider roofs on the sec- 
tion only, thinking how best to construct a. narrow bar or slice 
of them, of whatever form ; as, for instance, x, y, or z, over the 
plan or area a, Fig. L Having: done this, let him imagine 
these several divisions, first moved along (or set side by side} 


52 THE STONES Ob VENICE. 


over a rectangle, b, Fig. 1, and then revolved round a point (ot 
crossed at it) over a polygon, ¢, or circle, d, and he will have 
every form of simple roof: the arched section giving succes- 
sively the vaulted roof and dome, and the gabled section giv- 
ing the gabled roof and spire. 

As we go farther into the subject, we shall only have to add 
one or two forms to the sections here given, in order to em- 
brace all the wncombined roofs in existence ; and we shall not 
trouble the reader with many questions respecting cross-vault- 
ing, and other modes of their combination. 

§ vi. Now, it also happens, from its place in buildings, that 
the sectional roof over a narrow space will need to be consid- 
ered before we come to the expanded roof over a broad one. 
For when a wall has been gathered, as above explained, into 
piers, that it may better bear vertical pressure, it is generally 
necessary that it should be expanded again at the top into a 
continuous wall before it carries the true roof. Arches or 
lintels are, therefore, thrown from pier to pier, and a leve} 
preparation for carrying the real roof is made above them. 
After we have examined the structure of piers, therefore, we 
shall have to see how lintels or arches are thrown from pier to 
pier, and the whole prepared for the superincumbent roof ; 
this arrangement being universal in all good architecture pre- 
pared for vertical pressures ; and we shall then examine the 
condition of the great roof itself. And because the structure 
of the roof very often introduces certain lateral pressures which 
have much to do with the placing of buttresses, it will be well 
to do all this before we examine the nature of buttresses, and, 
therefore, between parts (B) and (C) of the above plan, § ry, 
So now we shall have to study : (A) the construction of walls ; 
(B) that of piers ; (C) that of lintels or arches prepared for 
roofing ; (D) that of roofs proper ; and (E) that of buttresses. 

§ vu. 8. Apertures.—There must either be intervals between 
the piers, of which intervals the character will be determined 
by that of the piers themselves, or else doors or windows in 
the walls proper. And, respecting doors or windows, we have 
to determine three things: first, the proper shape of the entire 
aperture ; secondly, the way in which it is to be filled with 


THE WALL BASH. 63 


valves or glass ; and thirdly, the modes of protecting it on the 
outside, and fitting appliances of convenience to it, as porches 
or balconies. And this will be our division F; and if the 
reader will have the patience to go through these six heads, 
which include every possible feature of protective architecture, 
and to consider the simple necessities and fitnesses of each, ] 
will answer for it, he shall never confound good architecture 
with bad any more. For, as to architecture of position, a 


- great part of it involves necessities of construction with which 


the spectator cannot become generally acquainted, and of the 
compliance with which he is therefore never expected to judge, 
—as in chimneys, light-houses, &c. : and the other forms of it 
are so closely connected with those of protective architecture, 
that a few words in Chap. XIX. respecting staircases and 
towers, will contain all with which the reader need be troubled 
on the subject. 


CHAPTER IV. 
THE WALL BASE. 


§ 1. Ovr first business, then, is with Wall, and to find out 
wherein lies the true excellence of the ‘“ Wittiest Partition.” 
For it is rather strange that, often as we speak of a “dead” 
wall, and that with considerable disgust, we have not often, 
since Snout’s time, heard of a living one. But the common 
epithet of opprobrium is justly bestowed, and marks a right 
feeling. A wall has no business to be dead. It ought to have 

members in its make, and purposes in its existence, like an 
organized creature, and to answer its ends in a living and en- 
ergetic way ; and it is only when we do not choose to put any 
strength nor organization into it, that it offends us by its 
deadness. Every wall ought to be a “sweet and lovely wall.” 
I do not care about its having ears; but, for instruction and 
exhortation, I would often have it to ‘hold up its fingers.” 
What its necessary members and excelleuces are, it is ow 
present business to discover, 


64 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


§ n. A wall has been defined to be an even and united fence 
of wood, earth, stone, or metal. Metal fences, however, sel- 
dom, if ever, take the form of walls, but of railings ; and, hike 
all other metal constructions, must be left out of our present 
investigation ; as may be also walls composed merely of light 
planks or laths for purposes of partition or inclosure. Sub- 
stantial walls, whether of wood or earth (I use the word earth 
as including clay, baked or unbaked, and stone), have, in their 
perfect form, three distinct members :—the Foundation, Body 
or Veil, and Cornice. 

§ m. The foundation is to the wall what the paw is to an 
animal. It is a long foot, wider than the wall, on which the 
wall is to stand, and which keeps it from settling into the 
ground. It is most necessary that this great element of secu- 
rity should be visible to the eye, and therefore made a part 
of the structure above ground. Sometimes, indeed, it be- 
comes incorporated with the entire foundation of the build 
ing, a vast table on which walls or piers are alike set: but 
even then, the eye, taught by the reason, requires some ad- 
ditional preparation or foot for the wall, and the building is 
felt to be imperfect without it. This foundation we shall call 
the Base of the wall. 

§1v. The body of the wall is of course the principal mass 
of it, formed of mud or clay, of bricks or stones, of logs or 
hewn timber ; the condition of structure being, that it is of 
equal thickness everywhere, below and above. It may be 
half a foot thick, or six feet thick, or fifty feet thick; but if 
of equal thickness everywhere, it is still a wall proper: if to 
its fifty feet of proper thickness there be added so much as 
ap inch of thickness in particular parts, that added thickness . 
is co be considered as some form of buttress or pier, or other 
appliance.* 

In perfect architecture, however, the walls are generally 


* Many walls are slightly sloped or curved towards their tops, and have 
buttresses added to them (that of the Queen’s Bench Prison is a curious 
instance of the vertical buttress and inclined wall) ; but in all such in- 
stances the slope of the wall is properly to be considered a condition of 
incorporated buttress 


THE WALL BASE. 68 


kept of moderate thickness, and strengthened by piers or 
buttresses ; and the part of the wall between these, being 
generally intended only to secure privacy, or keep out the 
slighter forces of weather, may be properly called a Wall 
Veil. I shall always use this word “ Veil” to signify the even 
portion of a wall, it being more expressive than the term 
Body. 

§ v. When the materials with which this veil is built are 
very loose, or of shapes which do not fit well together, it 
sometimes becomes necessary, or at least adds to security, to 
introduce courses of more solid material. Thus, bricks al- 
ternate with rolled pebbles in the old walls of Verona, and 
hewn stones with brick in its Lombard churches. A banded 
structure, almost a stratification of the wall, is thus produced ; 
and the courses of more solid material are sometimes deco- 
rated with carving. Even when the wall is not thus banded 
through its whole height, it frequently becomes expedient to 
lay a’course of stone, or at least of more carefully chosen 
materials, at regular heights; and such belts or bands we 
may call String courses. These are a kind of epochs in the 
wall’s existence ; something like periods of rest and reflection 
in human life, before entering on a new career. Or else, in 
the building, they correspond to the divisions of its stories 
within, express its internal structure, and mark off some por- 
tion of the ends of its existence already attained. 

§ vi. Finally, on the top of the wall some protection from 
the weather is necessary, or some preparation for the recep- 
tion of superincumbent weight, called a coping, or Cornice. 
I shall use the word Cornice for both; for, in fact, a coping 
is a roof to the wall itself, and is carried by a small cornice 
as the roof of the building by a large one. In either case, the 
cornice, small or large, is the termination of the wall’s exist- 
ence, the accomplishment of its work. When it is meant to 
carry some superincumbent weight, the cornice may be con- 
sidered as its hand, opened to carry something above its 
head ; as the base was considered its foot: and the three 
parts should grow out of each other and form one whole, like 
the root, stalk, and bell of a flower. 

6 


66 THER STONES OF VENTOR. 


These three parts we shall examine in succession; and, 
first, the Base. 

§ va. It may be sometimes in our power, and it is always 
expedient, to prepare for the whole building some settled 
foundation, level and firm, out of sight. But this has not 
been done in some of the noblest buildings in existence. It 
cannot always be done perfectly, except at enormous expense ; 
and, in reascning upon the superstructure, we shall never 
suppose it to be done. The mind of the spectator does not 
conceive it ; and he estimates the merits of the edifice on the 
supposition of its being built upon the ground. Even if there 
be a vast table land of foundation elevated for the whole of 
it, accessible by steps all around, as at Pisa, the surface of 
this table is always conceived as capable of yielding somewhat 
to superincumbent weight, and generally is so; and we shall 
base all our arguments on the widest possible supposition, 
that is to say, that the building stands on a surface either of 
earth, or, at all events, capable of yielding in some degree te 
its weight. 

§ vi. Now, let the reader simply ask himself how, on such 
@ suriace, he would set about building a substantial wall, 
that should be able to 
bear weight and to stand 
for ages. He would as- 
beet suredly look about for 


: NS the largest stones he 
io Lt. had at his disposal, and, 
HAG 


rudely levelling the 
ground, he would lay 
these well together over 
a considerably larger 
width than he required 
the wall to be (suppose 
as at a, Fig. IL), in order 
to equalise the pressure 
of the wall over a large surface, and form its foot. On the 
top of these he would perhaps lay a second tier of large 
stones, 6, or even the third, c, making the breadth semewhat 


THR WALL BASR. 6% 


.egs each time, so as to prepare for the pressure of the wall 
on the centre, and, naturally or necessarily, using somewhat 
smaller stones above than below (since we supposed him to 
look about for the largest first), and cutting them more 
neatly. His third tier, if not his second, will probably ap- 
pear a sufficiently secure foundation for finer work ; for if 
the earth yield at all, it will probably yield pretty equally 
under the great mass of masonry now knit together over it. 
So he will prepare for the wall itself at once by sloping off the 
next tier of stones to the right diameter, as at d. If there be 
any joints in this tier within the wall, he may perhaps, for 
further security, lay a binding stone across them, e, and ther 
begin the work of the wall veil itself, whether in bricks or 
stones. 

§ rx. I have supposed the preparation here to be for a large 
wall, because such a preparation will give us the best general 
type. But it is evident that the essential features of the ar- 
rangement are only two, that is to say, one tier of massy work 
for foundation, suppose c, missing the first two; and the re- 
, ceding tier or real foot of the wall, d. The reader will find 
these members, though only of brick, in most of the con, 
siderable and independent walls in the suburbs of London. 

§ x. It is evident, however, that the general type, Fig. 2, 
will be subject to many different modifications in different 
circumstances. Sometimes the ledges of the tiers a and 6 
may be of greater width; and when the building is in a 
secure place, and of finished masonry, these may be sloped 
off also like the main foot d. In Venetian buildings these 
lower ledges are exposed to the sea, and therefore left rough 
hewn ; but in fine work and in important positions the lower 
ledges may be bevelled and decorated like the upper, or 
another added above d ; and all these parts may be in differ- 
ent proportions, according to the disposition of the building 
above them. But we have nothing to do with any of these 
variations at present, they being all more or less dependent 
upon decorative considerations, except only one of very great 
importance, that is to say, the widening of the lower ledge 
into a stone seat, which may be often done ip buildings of great 


68 THE STONES OF VENIOR 


size with most beautiful effect : it looks kind and hospitable 
and preserves the work above from violence. In St. Mark’s 
at Venice, which is a small and low church, and needing ne 
great foundation for the wall veils of it, we find only the 
three members, b, c, and d. Of these the first rises about a 
foot above the pavement of St. Mark’s Place, and forms an 
elevated dais in some of the recesses of the porches, chequered 
red and white ; c forms a seat which follows the line of the 
walls, while its basic character is marked by its also carrying | 
certain shafts with which we have here no concern; d is of 
white marble ; and all are enriched and decorated in the sim- 
plest and most perfect manner possible, as we shall see in 
Chap. XXV. And thus much may serve to fix the type of 
wall bases, a type oftener followed in real practice than any 
other we shall hereafter be enabled to determine : for wall 
bases of necessity must be solidly built, and the architect is 
therefore driven into the adoption of the right form ; or if 
he deviate from it, it is generally in meeting some necessity 
of peculiar circumstances, as in obtaining cellars and under- 
ground room, or in preparing for some grand features or par- 
ticular parts of the wall, or in some mistaken idea of decora 
tion,—into which errors we had better not pursue him until 
we understand something more of the rest of the building - 
let us therefore proceed to consider the wall veil. 


CHAPTER V. 
THE WALL VEIL. 


§ 1. Tue summer of the year 1849 was spent by the writer 
in researches little bearing upon his present subject, and con- 
nected chiefly with proposed illustrations of the mountain 
forms in the works of J. M. W. Turner. But there are some- 
times more valuable lessons to be learned in the school of 
nature than in that of Vitruvius, and a fragment of building 
among the Alps is singularly illustrative of the ehief feature 
which I have at present to develop as necessary to the per: 
fection of the wall veil. 


THE WALL V#IL. 69 


It is a fragment of some size ; a group of broken walls, one 
of them Bee ; crowned with a cornice, nodding some 
hundred and fifty foet over its massy flank, three thousand 
above its glacier base, and fourteen thousand above the sea, 
—a wall truly of some majesty, at once the most precipitous 
and the strongest mass in the whole chain of the Alps, the 
Mont Cervin. 

§ u. It has been falsely represented as a peak or tower. It 
is a vast ridged promontory, connected at its western root 
with the Dent d’Erin, and lifting itself like a rearing horse 
with its face to the east. All the way along the flank of it, 
for half a day’s journey on the Zmutt glacier, the grim black 

terraces of its foundations range almost without a break ; and 
_ the clouds, when their day’s work is done, and they are weary, 
lay themselves down on those foundation steps, and rest till 
dawn, each with his leagues of gray mantle stretched along 
the grisly ledge, and the cornice of the mighty wall gleaming 
in the moonlight, three thousand feet above. 

§ mt. The eastern face of the promontory i is hewn down, as 
if by the single sweep of a sword, from the crest of it to the 
base ; hewn concave and smooth, like the hollow of a wave: 
on each flank of it there is set a buttress, both of about equal 
height, their heads sloped out from the main wall about seven 
hundred feet below its summit. That on the north is the 
most important; it is as sharp as the frontal angle of a bas- 
tion, and sloped sheer away to the north-east, throwing out 
spur beyond spur, until it terminates in a long low curve of 
russet precipice, at whose foot a great bay of the glacier of the 
Col de Cervin lies as level as a lake. This spur is one of 
the few points from which the mass of the Mont Cervin is in 
anywise approachable. It is a continuation of the masonry of 
the mountain itself, and affords us the means of examining 
the character of its materials. 

§ iv. Few architects would like to build with them. The 
slope of the rocks to the north-west is covered two feet deep 
with their ruins, a mass of loose and slaty shale, of a dull 
brick-red color, which yields beneath the foot like ashes, so 
that, in running down, you step one yard, and slide three 


70) THE STONES OF VENICE. 


The rock is indeed hard beneath, but still disposed in thin 
courses of these cloven shales, so finely laid that they look in 
places more like a heap of crushed autumn leaves than a rock ; 
and the first sensation is one of unmitigated surprise, as if 
the mountain were upheld by miracle ; but surprise becomes 
more intelligent reverence for the great builder, when we 
find, in the middle of the mass of these dead leaves, a course 
of living rock, of quartz as white as the snow that encircles it, 
and harder than a bed of steel. 

§ v. It is one only of a thousand iron bands that knit the 
strength of the mighty mountain. Through the buttress and 
the wall alike, the courses of its varied masonry are seen in 
their successive order, smooth and true as if laid by line and 
plummet,* but of thickness and strength continually varying, 
and with silver cornices glittering along the edge of each, 
laid by the snowy winds and carved by the sunshine,—stain- 
less ornaments of the eternal temple, by which “neither the 
hammer nor the axe, nor, any tool, was heard while it was in 
building.” 

§ viz. I do not, however, bring this forward as an instance 
of any universal law of natural building ; there are solid as 
well as coursed masses of precipice, but it is somewhat curious 
that the most noble cliff in Kurope, which this eastern front 
of the Cervin is, I believe, without dispute, should be to us 
an example of the utmost possible stability of precipitousness 
attained with materials of imperfect and variable character ; 
and, what is more, there are very few cliffs which do not dis- 
play alternations between compact and friable conditions of 
their material, marked in their contours by bevelled slopes’ 
when the bricks are soft, and vertical steps when they are 
harder. And, although we are not hence to conclude that it is 
well to introduce courses of bad materials when we can get 
perfect material, I believe we may conclude with great cer- 
tainty that it is better and easier to strengthen a wall neces- 
sarily of imperfect substance, as of brick, by introducing care- 
fully laid courses of stone, than by adding to its thickness ; 


* On the eastern side. violently contorted on the northern and western. 


THR WALL VETE. re 


and the first impression we receive from the unbroken aspect 
of a wall veil, unless it be of hewn stone throughout, is that 
it must be both thicker and weaker than it would have been, 
had it been properly coursed. The decorative reasons for 
adopting the coursed arrangement, which we shall notice here- 
after, are so weighty, that they would alone be almost suffi- 
cient to enforce it; and the constructive ones will apply 
universally, except in the rare cases in which the choice of 
perfect or imperfect material is entirely open to us, or where 
the general system of the decoration of the building requires 
absolute unity in its surface. 

§ vu. As regards the arrangement of the intermediate parts 
themselves, it is regulated by certain conditions of bonding 
and fitting the stones or bricks, which the reader need hardly 
be troubled to consider, and which I wish that bricklayers 
themselves were always honest enough to observe. But J 
hardly know whether to note under the head of esthetic or 
constructive law, this important principle, that masonry is al- 
ways bad which appears: to have arrested the attention of the 
architect more than absolute conditions of strength require. 
Nothing is more contemptible in any work than an appearance 
of the slightest desire on the part of the builder to direct at- 
tention to the way its stones are put together, or of any trouble 
taken either to show or to conceal it more than was rigidly ne- 
cessary: it may sometimes, on the one hand, be necessary 
to conceal it as far as may be, by delicate and close fitting, 
when the joints would interfere with lines of sculpture or of 
mouldings; and it may often, on the other hand, be de- 
lightful to show it, as it is delightful in places to show the 
anatomy even of the most delicate human frame: but studi- 
ously to conceal it is the error of vulgar painters, who are 
afraid to show that their figures have bones ; and studiously 
to display it is the error of the base pupils of Michael Angelo, 
who turned heroes’ limbs into surgeons’ diagrams,—but with 
less excuse than theirs, for there is less interest in the 
anatomy displayed. Exhibited masonry is in most cases the 
expedient of architects who do not know how to fill up blank 
_ spaces, and many a building, which would have been decent 


72 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


enough if let alone, has been scrawled over with straight 
lines, as in Fig. ILL, on exactly the same principles, and with 
just the same amount of intelligence as a boy’s in scrawling 
his copy-book when he cannot write. The device was thought 
ingenious at one period of architectural history ; St. Paul’s 
and Whitehall are covered with it, and it is in this I imagine 
that some of our modern 
architects suppose the 
great merit of those build- 
ings to consist. There is, 
however, no excuse for 
errors in disposition of 
masonry, for there is but 
one law upon the subject, 
and that easily complied 
with, to avoid all affecta- 
tion and all unnecessary 
expense, either in showing or concealing. Every one knows 8 
building is built of separate stones ; nobody will ever object 
to seeing that it is so, but nobody wants to count them. The 
divisions of a church are much like the divisions of a sermon 3 
they are always right so long as they are necessary to edifica- 
tion, and always wrong when they are thrust upon the attention 
as divisions only. There may be neatness in carving when 
there is richness in feasting ; but I have heard many a dis- 
course, and seen many a church wall, in which it was all carv- 
ing and no meat. 


CHAPTER VI. 
THE WALL CORNIOR, 


§ 1 We have lastly to consider the close of the wall’s exist- 
ence, or its cornice. It was above stated, that a cornice has 
one of two offices: if the wall have nothing to carry, the 
cornice is its roof, and defends it from the weather ; if there 
is weight to be carried above the wall, the cornice is its hand, 
and is expanded to carry the said weight, 


THE WALL CORNIOR. "3 


There are several ways of roofing or protecting indepen- 
dent walls, according to the means nearest at hand: sometimes 
the wall has a true roof all to itself ; sometimes it terminates 
in a small gabled ridge, made of bricks set slanting, as con- 
stantly in the suburbs of London; or of hewn stone, in 
stronger work; or in a single sloping face, inclined to tle 
outside. We need not trouble ourselves at present about 
these small roofings, which are merely the diminutions of 
large ones ; but we must examine the important and constant 
member of the wall structure, which prepares it either for 
these small roofs or for weights above, and is its true cornice. 

§u. The reader will, perhaps, as heretofore, be kind 
enough to think for himself, how, having 
carried up his wall veil as high as it may 
be needed, he will set about protecting 
it from weather, or preparing it for 
weight. Let him imagine the top of the 
unfinished wall, as it would be seen from 
above with all the joints, perhaps un- 
cemented, or imperfectly filled up with 
cement, open to the sky; and small 
broken materials filling gaps between 


large ones, and leaving cavities ready for 
the rain to soak into, and loosen and dis- 
solve the cement, and split, as it froze, the 6 
whole to pieces. Iam much mistaken if 
ay | s 


his first impulse would not: be to take a 

great flat stone and lay it on the top; or 

rather a series of such, side by side, pro 

jecting well over the edge of the wall Pra WV 

veil. If, also, he proposed to lay a weight 

(as, for instance, the end of a beam) on the wall, he would 
feel at once that the pressure of this beam on, or rather among, 
the small stones of the wall veil, might very possibly dislodge 
or disarrange some of them ; and the first impulse would be, 
in this case, also to lay a large flat stone on the top of all te 
receive the beam, or any other weight, and distribute if 
equally among the small stones below, as at a, Fig. IV. 

Stones of Venice-—Voi. 1.—+ 


74. THE STONES OF VENICE. 


§ ut We must therefore have our flat stone in either case; 
and let b, Fig. IV., be the section or side of it, as it is set 
across the wall. Now, evidently, if by any chance this weight 
happen to be thrown more on the edges of this stone than 
the centre, there will be a chance of these edges breaking off. 
Had we not better, therefore, put another stone, sloped off to 
the wall, beneath the projecting one, as at c. But now our 
cornice looks somewhat too heavy for the wall; and as the 
upper stone is evidently of needless thickness, we will thin it 
somewhat, and we have the form d. Now observe : the lower 
or bevelled stone here at d corresponds to d in the base (Fig. 
IL, page 66). That was the foot of the wall; this is its hand. 
And the top stone here, which is a constant member of cor- 
nices, corresponds to the under stone ¢, in Fig. IL, which is a 
constant member of bases. The reader has no idea at present 
of the enormous importance of these members ; but as we shall 
have to refer to them perpetually, I must ask him to compare 
them, and fix their relations wellin his mind: and, for conveni- 
ence, I shall call the bevelled or sloping stone, X, and the up- 
right edged stone, Y. The reader may remember easily which 
is which ; for X is an intersection of two slopes, and may there- 
fore properly mean either of the two sloping stones ; and Y is 
a figure with a perpendicular line and two slopes, and may 
therefore fitly stand for the upright stone in relation to each 
of the sloping ones ; and as we shall have to say much more 
about cornices than about bases, let X and Y stand for the 
stones of the cornice, and Xb and Yb for those of the base, 
when distinction is needed. 

§ 1v. Now the form at d, Fig. IV., is the great root and. 
primal type of all cornices whatsoever. In order to see what 
forms may be developed from it, let us take its profile a little 
larger—a, Fig. V., with X and Y duly marked. Now this 
form, being the root of all cornices, may either have to finish 
the wall and so keep off rain ; or, as so often stated, to carry 
weight. If the former, it is evident that, in its present profile, 
the rain will run back down the slope of X; and if the latter, 
that the sharp angle or edge of X, at k, may be a little too 
weak for its work, and run a, chance of giving way. To avoid 


THE WALL CORNICE. 45 


the evil in the first case, suppose we hollow the slope of X 
inwards, as at b; and to avoid it in the second case, suppose 
we strengthen X by letting it bulge outwards, as at ¢. 

§ v. These (0 and ¢c) are the profiles of two vast families of 
cornices, springing from the same root, which, with a third 
arising from their combination (owing its origin to sesthetic 
considerations, and inclining sometimes to the one, sometimes 
to the other), have been employed, each on its third part of 
the architecture of the whole world throughout all ages, and 
must continue to be so employed through such time as is yet 
to come. We do not at present speak of the third or com. 


rs a 
F g 
tre. V. 


bined group; but the relation of the two main branches to 
each other, and to the line of origin, is given at e, Fig. V.; 
where the dotted lines are the representatives of the two 
families, and the straight line of the root. The slope of this 
right line, as well as the nature of the curves, here drawn as 
segments of circles, we leave undetermined : the slope, as well 
as the proportion of the depths of X and Y to each other, 
vary according to the weight to be carried, the strength of the 
stone, the size of the cornice, and a thousand other accidents ; 
and the nature of the curves according to esthetic laws. It is 
in these infinite felds that the invention of the architect is 


76 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


permitted to expatiate, but not in the alteration of primitive 
forms. 

§ vi. But to proceed. It will doubtless appear to the 
reader, that, even allowing for some of these permissible vari- 
ations in the curve or slope or X, neither the form at b, nor 
any approximation to that form, would be sufficiently under- 
cut to keep the rain from running back upon it. This is true ; 
but we have to consider that the cornice, as the close of the 
wall’s life, is of all its features that which is best fitted for 
honor and ornament. It has been esteemed so by almost all 
builders, and has been lavishly decorated in modes hereafter 
to be considered. But it is evident that, as it is high above 
the eye, the fittest place to receive the decoration is the slope 
of X, which is inclined towards the spectator ; and if we cut 
away or hollow out this slope more than we have done at v, al) 
decoration will be hid in the shadow. If, therefore, the cli- 
mate be fine, and rain of long continuance not to be dreaded, 
we shall not hollow the stone X further, adopting the curve at 
b merely as the most protective in our power. But if the climate 
be one in which rain is frequent and dangerous, as in alterna- 
tions with frost, we may be compelled to consider the cornice 
in a character distinctly protective, and to hollow out X far- 
ther, so as to enable it thoroughly to accomplish its purpose. 
A cornice thus treated loses its character as the crown or honor 
of the wall, takes the office of its protector, and is called a 
pripstong. The dripstone is naturally the attribute of North- 
ern buildings, and therefore especially of Gothic architec- 
ture; the true cornice is the attribute of Southern build- 
ings, and therefore of Greek and Italian architecture; and 
it is one of their peculiar beauties, and eminent features of 
superiority. 

§ vu. Before passing to the dripstone, however, let us ex- 
amine a little farther into the nature of the true cornice. 
We cannot, indeed, render either of the forms b or c, Fig. V., 
perfectly protective from rain, but we can help them a little 
in their duty by a slight advance of their upper ledge. This, 
with the form b, we can best manage by cutting off the sharp 
upper point of its curve, which is evidently weak and useless: 


THE WALL CORNICE. tc 


and we shall have the form f. By aslight advance of the 
upper stone c, we shall have the parallel form g. 

These two cornices, f and g, are characteristic of early 
Byzantine work, and are found on all the most lovely ex- 
amples of it in Venice. The type ais rarer, but occurs pure 
in the most exquisite piece of composition in Venice—the 
northern portico of St. Mark’s; and will be given in due 
time. 

§ vit. Now the reader has doubtless noticed that these 
forms of cornice result, from considerations of fitness and 
necessity, far more neatly and decisively than the forms of 
the base, which we left only very generally determined. The 
reason is, that there are many ways of building foundations, 
and many good ways, dependent upon the peculiar accidents 
of the ground and nature of accessible materials. There is 
also room to spare in width, and a chance of a part of the 
arrangement being concealed by the ground, so as to modify 
height. But we have no room to spare in width on the top 
of a wall, and all that we do must be thoroughly visible ; and 
we can but have to deal with bricks, or stones of a certain 
degree of fineness, and not with mere gravel, or sand, or 
clay,—so that as the conditions are limited, the forms become 
determined ; and our steps will be more clear and certain the 
farther we advance. The sources of a river are usually half 
lost among moss and pebbles, and its first movements doubt- 
ful in direction ; but, as the current gathers force, its banks 
are determined, and its branches are numbered. 

§ 1x. So far of the true cornice: we have still to determine 
the form of the dripstone. 

We go back to our primal type or root of cornice, a of 
Fic. V. We take this at a in Fig. VI., and we are to con- 
sider it entirely as a protection against rain. Now the only 
way in which the rain can be kept from running back on the 
slope of X is by a bold hollowing out of it upwards, b, But, 
clearly, by thus doing, we shall so weaken the projecting part 
of it that the least shock would break it at the neck, c; we 
must therefore cut the whole out of one stone, which will give 
us the form d. That the water may not lodge on the upper 


"8 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


ledge of this, we had better round it off; and it will better 
protect the joint at the bottom of the slope if we let the stone 
project over it in a roll, cutting the recess deeper above. 
These two changes are made in e: e isthe type of dripstones ; 
the projecting part being, however, more or less rounded into 
“9 approximation to the shape of a falcon’s beak, and often 


Saat 


Fie. VI. 


reaching it completely. But the essential part of the arrange- 
ment is the up and under cutting of the curve. Wherever 
we find this, we are sure that the climate is wet, or that the 
builders have been bred in a wet country, and that the rest of 
the building will be prepared for rough weather. The up 
cutting of the curve is sometimes all the distinction between 
the mouldings of far-distant countries and utterly strange 
nations. 

Fig. VIL. representing a moulding with an outer and inner 
curve, the latter under-cut. Take the 
outer line, and this moulding is one con- 
stant in Venice, in architecture traceable 
to Arabian types, and chiefly to the early 
mosques of Cairo. But take the inner’ 
line ; it is a dripstone at Salisbury. In 
that narrow interval between the curves 
there is, when we read it rightly, an ex- 
pression of another and mightier curve, 

ome —the orbed sweep of the earth and sea, 

between the desert of the Pyramids, and 

the green and level fields through which the clear streams of 
Sarum wind so slowly. 

And so delicate is the test, that though pure cornices are 


“THE WALL CORNICE. — 79 


often found in the north,—borrowed from classical models,— 
so surely as we find a true dripstone moulding in the South, 
the influence of Northern builders has been at work ; and this 
will be one of the principal evidences which I shall use in dee 
tecting Lombard influence on Arab work ; for the true Byzan- 
tine and Arab mouldings are all open to the sky and light, 
but the Lombards brought with them from the North the fear 


of rain, and in all the fa : 
- Lombardic Gothic 
we instantly recog- 
nize the shadowy 
a B ° d 


dripstone: a, Fig. 
VIL, is from a noble 
fragment at Milan, 


in the Piazza dei Mer- 
canti; b, from the 
Broletto of Como. 
Compare them with 
e fe > g 4 


e and d, both from 


Salisbury ;- e and f Fie, VIII, 
from Lisieux, Normandy; g and A from Wenlock Abbey, 
Shropshire. 


§ x. The reader is now master of all that he need know © 
about the construction of the general wall cornice, fitted 
either to become a crown of the wall, or to carry weight 
above. If, however, the weight above become considerable, 
it may be necessary to support the cornice at intervals with 
brackets ; especially if it be required to project far, as well as 
to carry weight; as, for instance, if there be a gallery on top 
of the wall. This kind of bracket-cornice, deep or shallow, 
forms a separate family, essentially connected with roofs and: 
galleries ; for if there be no superincumbent weight, it is 
evidently absurd to put brackets to a plain cornice or drip- 
stone (though this is sometimes done in carrying out.a style) ; 
so that, as soon as we see a bracket put to a cornice, it im- 
plies, or should imply, that there is a roof or gallery ebove it. 
Hence this family of cornices I shall consider in connectior 
with roofing, calling them “roof cornices,” while what wa 


80 THE STONES OF VENIUVE. 


have hitherto examined are proper “ wall cornices.” The root 
cornice and wall cornice are therefore treated in division D. 

We are not, however, as yet nearly ready for our roof. 
We have only obtained that which was to be the object of our 
first division (A); we have got, that is to say, a general idea 
of a wall and of the three essential parts of a wall; and we 
have next, it will be remembered, to get an idea of a pier and 
the essential parts of a pier, which were to be the subjects of 
our second division (B). 


CHAPTER VIL 
THE PIER BASE. 


§1. In § mt of Chap. IL, it was stated that when a wall 
had to sustain an addition of vertical pressure, it was first 
‘fitted to sustain it by some addition to its own thickness ; but 
if the pressure became very great, by being gathered up into 
Prsrs. 
I must first make the reader understand what I mean by a 
wall’s being gathered up. Take a piece of tolerably thick 
drawing-paper, or thin Bristol board, five or six inches square. 
Set it on its edge on the table, and put a small octavo book 
on the edge or top of it, and it will bend instantly. Tear it 
into four strips all across, and roll up each strip tightly. Set 
these rolls on end on the table, and they will carry the small 
octavo perfectly well. Now the thickness or substance of the . 
paper employed to carry the weight is exactly the same as it 
was before, only it is differently arranged, that is to say, 
“gathered up.” * If therefore a wall be gathered up like the 
Bristol board, it will bear greater weight than it would if it 


*The experiment is not quite fair in this rude fashion ; for the smal} 
rolls owe their increase of strength much more to their tubular form than 
their aggregation of material ; butif the paper be cut up into small strips, 
and tied together firmly in three or four compact bundles, it wil! exhibit 
increase of strength enough to show the principle. Vide, however, Ap 
pendix 16, ‘‘ Strength of Shafts.” 


THE PI#k BASE. 81 


remained a wall veil. The sticks into which you gather it are: 
called Piers. A pier is a coagulated wall. 

§ u. Now you cannot quite treat the wall as you did the 
Bristol board, and twist it up at once ; but let us see how you 
can treat it. Let a, Fig. IX., be the plan of a wall which you 
have made inconveniently and expensively thick, and which 
still appears to be slightly too weak for what it must carry : 


CT 


tr 


e iil (i in 


—— 


‘oOo @ | 


divide it, as at B, into equal spaces, a, b, a, b, &c. Cut out a 
thin slice of it at every a on each side, and put the slices you 
cut out on at every b on each side, and you will have the plan 
at B, with exactly the same quantity of bricks. But your wall 
is now so much concentrated, that, if it was only slightly too 
weak before, it will be stronger now than it need be; so you 
may spare some of your space as well as your bricks by cut 
Vou. L—6 


82 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


’ ting off the corners of the thicker parts, as suppose ¢, ¢, ¢, & 
at c: and you have now a series of square piers connected by 
a wall veil, which, on less space and with less materials, will 
Ao the work of the wall at a perfectly well. 

§ mt. Ido not say how much may be cut away in the corners 
c, ¢,—that is a mathematical question with which we need not 
trouble ourselves : all that we need know is, that out of every 
slice we take from the “ b’s” and put on at tho “a’s,” we may 
keep a certain percentage of room and bricks, until, suppos- — 
ing that we do not want the wall veil for its own sake, this 
latter is thinned entirely away, like the girdle of the Lady of 
Avenel, and finally breaks, and we have nothing but a row of 
square piers, D. 

§ 1v. But have we yet arrived at the form which will spare 
most room, and use fewest materials? No; and to get farther 
we must apply the general principle to our wall, which is 
equally true in morals and mathematics, that the strength of 
materials, or of men, or of minds, is always most svailable 
when it is applied as closely as possible to a single point. 

Let the point to which we wish the strength c! our squara 
piers to be applied, be chosen. Then we shall of coursc put 
them directly under it, and the point will be in their centre. 
But now some of their materials arc not so near or close to 
this point as others. Those at the coruers are farthc: off than 
the rest. 

Now, if every particle of the pier be brought as near as 
possible to the centre of it, the form it assumes is the circle. 

The circle must be, therefore, the best possible form of plan . 
for a pier, from the beginning of time to the end of it. A cir- 
cular pier is called a pillar or column, and all good archi- 
tecture adapted to vertical support is made up of pillars, has 
always been so, and must ever be so, as long as the laws of 
the universe hold. 

The final condition isrepresented at x, in its relation to that 
at p. It will be observed that though each circle projects a 
littie beyond the side of the square out of which it is formed, 
the space cut off at the angles is greater than that added at 
the sides; for, having our materials in a more concentrated 


THE PIER BASE. 83 


arrangement, we can afford to part with some of them in this 
last transformation, as in all the rest. 

§ v. And now, what have the base and the cornice of the 
wall been doing while we have been cutting the veil to pieces 
and gathering it together ? 

The base is also cut to pieces, gathered together, and be- 
comes the base of the column. 

The cornice is cut to pieces, gathered together, and be- 
comes the capital of the column. Do not be alarmed at the 
new word, it does not mean a new thing ; a capital is only the 
cormice of a column, and you may, if you like, call a cornice 
the capital of a wall. 

We have now, therefore, to examine these three concentrated 
forms of the base, veil, and cornice: first, the concentrated 
base, still called the Basz of the column; then the concen- 
trated veil, called the Suarr of the column ; then the concen- 
trated cornice, called the Carrrat of the column. 

And first the Base :— 

§ vr. Look back to the main type, Fig. IL, page 66, and 
apply its profiles in due proportion to the feet of the pillars at 
Ein Fig. IX., p. 81: If each step in Fig. I. were gathered 
accurately, the projection of the entire circular base would be 
Jess in proportion to its height than it is in I’... IL ; but the . 
approximation to the result in Fig. X. is quite accurate enough 
for our purposes. (I pray the reader to observe that I have 
not made the smallest change, except this necessary expres- 
sion of a reduction in diameter, in Fig. II. as it is applied in 
Fig. X., only Ihave not drawn the joints of the stones because 
these would confuse the outlines of the bases ; and I have not 
represented the rounding of the shafts, because it does not 
bear at present on the argument.) Now it would hardly be 
convenient, if we had to pass between the pillars, to have to 
squeeze ourselves through one of those angular gaps or bréches 
de Roland in Fig. X. Our first impulse would be to cut them 
open; but we cannot do this, or our piers are unsafe. We 
have but one other resource, to fill them up until we have a 
floor wide enough to let us pass easily: this we may perhaps 
obtain at the first ledge, we are nearly sure to get it at the 


84 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


second, and we may then obtain access to the raised interval, 
either by raising the earth over the lower courses of founda- 
tion, or by steps round the entire building. 


Fig. XI. is the arrangement of Fig. X. so treated. 

§ vu. But suppose the pillars are so vast that the lowest 
chink in Fig. X. would be quite wide enough to let us pass 
through it. Is there then any reason for filling it up? Yes, 
It will be remembered that in Chap. IV. § vu. the chief reason 


for the wide foundation of the wall was stated to be “that it 
might equalise its pressure over a large surface ;” but when 
the foundation is cut to pieces asin Fig. X., the pressure is 
thrown on a succession of narrowed and detached spaces of 


THE PIER BASE. 85 


that surface. If the ground is in some places more disposed 
to yield than in others, the piers in those places will sink 
more than the rest, and this distortion of the system will be 
probably of more importance in pillars than in a wall, because 
the adjustment of the weight above is more delicate ; we thus 
actually want the weight of the stones between the pillars, in 
order that the whole foundation may be bonded into one, 
and sink together if it sink at all: and the more massy the 
pillars, the more we shall need to fill the intervals of their 
foundations. In the best form of Greek architecture, the in- 
tervals are filled up tc the root of the shaft, and the columns 
have no independent base; they stand on the even floor of: 
their foundation. 

§ vit. Such a structure is not only admissible, but, when 
she column is of great thickness in proportion to its height, 
and the sufficient firmness, either of the ground or prepared 
floor, is evident, it is the best of all, having a strange dignity 
in its excessive simplicity. It is, or ought to be, connected 
in our minds with the deep meaning of primeval memorial. 
“And Jacob took the stone that he had put for his pillow, 
and set it up for a pillar.” Ido not fancy that he put a base 
for it first. If you try to put a base to the rock-piers of 
Stonehenge, you will hardly find them improved ; and two of 
the most perfect buildings in the world, the Parthenon and 
Ducal palace of Venice, have no bases to their pillars: the 
Jatter has them, indeed, to its upper arcade shafts; and had 
once, it is said, a continuous raised base for its lower ones: 
but successive elevations of St. Mark’s Place have covered this 
base, and parts of the shafts themselves, with an inundation 
of paving stones ; and yet the building is, I doubt not, as 
grand as ever. Tinally, the two most noble pillars in Venice, 
those brought from Acre, stand on the smooth marble surface 
of the Piazzetta, with no independent bases whatever. They 
are rather broken away beneath, so that you may look under 
parts of them, and stand (not quite erect, but leaning some- 
what) safe by their own massy weight. Nor could any basis 
possibly be devised that would not spoil them. 

4 1x. But it is otherwise if the pillar be so slender ag te 


8&6 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


look doubtfully balanced. It would indeed stand quite .as 
safely without an independent base as it would with one (at 
least, unless the base be in the form of a socket). But it will 
- not appear so safe to the eye. And here for the first time, I 
have to express and apply a principle, which I believe the 
reader will at once grant,—that features necessary to express 
security to the imagination, are often as essential parts of 
good architecture as those required for security itself. It was 
said that the wall base was the foot or paw of the wall. Hx- 
actly in the same way, and with clearer analogy, the pier base 
is the foot or paw of the pier. Let us, then, take a hint from 
‘nature. <A foot has two offices, to bear up, and to hold firm, 
As far as it has to bear up, it is uncloven, with slight projec- 
tion,—look at an elephant’s (the Doric base of animality) ;* 
but as far as it has to hold firm, it is divided and clawed, with 
wide projections, —look at an eagle’s. 

§ x. Now observe. In proportion to the massiness of the 
column, we require its foot to express merely the power o1 
bearing up ; in fact, it can do without a foot, like the Squire 
in Chevy Chase, if the ground only be hard enough. But in 
the column be slender, and look as if it might lose its balance, 
we require it to look as if it had hold of the ground, or the 
ground hold of it, it does not matter which,—some expression 
of claw, prop, or socket. Now let us go back to Fig. XL, and 
take up one of the bases there, in the state in which we left it. 
We may leave out the two lower steps (with which we have 
nothing more to do, as they have become the united floor oz 
foundation of the whole), and, for the sake of greater clear. 
ness, I shall not draw the bricks in the shaft, nor the flat stone - 
which carries them, though the reader is to suppose them re- 
maining as drawn in Fig. XI. ; but I shall only draw the shaft 
and its two essential members of base, Kb and Yb, as explained 
at p. 74, above: and now, expressing the rounding of these 
numbers on a somewhat larger scale, we have the profile a, 
Fig. XII. ; b, the perspective appearance of such a base seen 
from above ; and ¢, the plan of it. 

§ x1. Now Tam quite sure the reader is not satisfied of the 

* Appendix 17, ‘‘ Answer to Mr, Garbett.” 


THE PIER BASE. 8% 


stability of this form as it is seen at b; nor would he ever be 
so with the main contour of a circular base. Observe, we have 
taken some trouble to reduce the member Yb into this round 
form, and all that we have gained by so doing, is this unsatis- 
factory and unstable look of the base ; of which the chief 
reason is, that a circle, unless enclosed by right lines, has never 
an appearance of fixture, or definite place, *—we suspect it of 
motion, like an orb of heaven ; and the second is, that the 


ys 


Fig. XII. 


whole base, considered as the foot of the shaft, has no grasn 
nor hold: it is a club-foot, and looks too blunt for the limb, — 
it wants at least expansion, if not division, 
§ xu. Suppose, then, instead of taking so much trouble 
* Yet more so than any other figure enclosed by a curved line: for the 


eircle, in its relations to its own centre, is the curve of greatest stability. 
Compare § xx. of Chap. XX. 


88 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


with the member Yb, we save time and labor, and leave it a 
square block. Xb must, however, evidently follow the pillar, 
as its condition is that it slope to the very base of the wall veil, 
and of whatever the wall veil becomes. So the corners of Yb 
_ will project beyond the circle of Xb, and we shall have (Fig. 
XIL.) the profile d, the perspective appearance e, and the plan 
f. Iam quite sure the reader likes e much better than he did 
b. The circle is now placed, and we are not afraid of its roll- 
ing away. The foot has greater expansion, and we have saved 
labor besides, with little loss‘of space, for the interval between 
the bases is just as great as it was before,—we have only filled 
up the corners of the squares. 

But is it not possible to mend the form still further? 
There is surely still an appearance of separation between Xh: 
and Yb, as if the one might slip off the other. The foot is — 
expanded enough ; but itneeds some expression of grasp as 
well. It has no toes. Suppose we were to puta spur or 
prop to Xb at each corner, so as to hold it fast in the centre 
of Yb. We will do this in the simplest possible form. We 
will have the spur, or small buttress, sloping straight from 
the corner of Yb up to the top of Xb, and as seen from above, 
of the shape of a triangle. Applying such spurs in Fig. XIL., 
we have the diagonal profile at g, the perspective h, and the 
pian 7. 

§xm. I am quite sure the reader likes this last base the 
best, and feels as if it were the firmest. But he must care- 
fully distinguish between this feeling or imagination of the 
eye, and the real stability of the structure. That this real 
stability has been slightly increased by the changes between B 
and A, in Fig. XII, is true. There is in the base h somes 
what less chance of accidental dislocation, and somewhat 
greater solidity and weight. But this very slight gain of se- 
curity is of no importance whatever when compared with the 
genoral requirements of the structure. The pillar must be 
perfectly secure, and more than secure, with the base 6, or the 
building will be unsafe whatever other base you put to the 
pillar. The changes are made, not for the sake of the almost 
inappreciable increase of security they involve, but in order 


THE PIRR BASE. 89 


to convince the eye of the real security which the base b ap. 
pears to compromise. This is especially the case with regard 
to the props or spurs, which are absolutely useless in reality, 
but are of the highest importance as an expression of safety. 
And this will farther appear when we observe that they have 
been above quite arbitrarily supposed to be of a triangular 
form. Why triangular? Why should not the spur be made 
wider and stronger, so as to occupy the whole width of the 
angle of the square, and to become a complete expansion of 
Xb to the edge of the square? Simply because, whatever its 
width, it has, in reality, no supporting power whatever ; and 
the expression of support is greatest where it assumes a form 
approximating to that of the spur or claw of an animal. We 
shall, however, find hereafter, that it ought indeed to be 
much wider than it is in Fig. XII, where it is narrowed in 
order to make its structure clearly intelligible. 

§ xiv. If the reader chooses to consider this spur as an 
esthetic feature altogether, he is at liberty to do so, and to 
transfer what we have here said of it to the beginning of 
Chap. XXV. I think that its true place is here, as an expres- 
sion of safety, and not a means of beauty ; but I will assume 
only, as established, the form e of Fig. XII., which is abso- 
lutely, as a construction, easier, stronger, and more perfect 
than 6. A word or two now of its materials. The wall base, 
it will be remembered, was built of stones more neatly cut as 
they were higher in place ; and the members, Y and X, of 
the pier base, were the highest members of the wall base 
gathered. But, exactly in proportion to this gathering or 
concentration in form, should, if possible, be the gathering 
or concentration of substance. For as the whole weight of 
the building is now to rest upon few and limited spaces, it is 
of the greater importance that it should be there received by 
solid masonry. Xb and Yb are therefore, if possible, to be 
each of a single stone; or, when the shaft is small, both cut 
out of one block, anc. especially if spurs are to be added to 
Xb. The reader must not be angry with me for stating 
things so self-evident, for these are all necessary steps in the 
chain of argument which I must not break. Iven this chang¢ 


90 THE STONES OF VRNICEH. 


from detached stones to a single block is nct without signifi- 
cance; for it is part of the real service and value of the 
member Yb to provide for the reception of the shaft a sur- 
face free from joints ; and the eye always conceives it asa 
firm covering over all inequalities or fissures in the smaller 
masonry of the floor. 

§ xv. I have said nothing yet of the proportion of the 
height of Yb to its width, nor of that of Yb and Xb to each 
other. Both depend much on the height of shaft, and are 
besides variable within certain limits, at the architect's dis- 
cretion. But the limits of the height of Yb may be thus gen- 
erally stated. If it looks so thin as that the weight of the 
column above might break it, it is too low ; and if it is higher 
than its own width, it is too high. The utmost admissible 
height is that of a cubic block ; for if it ever become higher 
than it is wide, it becomes itself a part of a pier, and not the 
base of one. 

§ xvi I have also supposed Yb, when expanded from be- 
neath Xb, as always expanded into a square, and four spurs 
only to be added at the angles. But Yb may be expanded 
into a pentagon, hexagon, or polygon; and Xb then may 
have five, six, or many spurs. In proportion, however, as the 
sides increase in number, the spurs become shorter and less 
energetic in their effect, and the square is in most cases the 
best form. 

§ xvi. We have hitherto conducted the argument entirely 
on the supposition of the pillars being numerous, and in a 
range. Suppose, however, that we require only a single pil- 
lar : as we have free space round it, there is no need to fill up 
the first ranges of its foundations; nor need we do so in order 
to equalise pressure, since the pressure to be met is its own 
alone. Under such circumstances, it is well to exhibit the 
lower tiers of the foundation as well as Yb and Xb. The 
noble bases of the two granite pillars of the Piazzetta at 
Venice are formed by the entire series of members given ‘in 
Fig. X., the lower courses expanding into steps, with a superb 
breadth of proportion to the shaft. The member Xb is of 
course circular, having its proper decorative mouldings, not 


THE PIER BASE. 91 


here considered ; Yb is octagonal, but filled up into a square 
by certain curious groups of figures representing the trades 
of Venice. The three courses below are octagonal, with their 
sides set across the angles of the innermost octagon, Yb. 
The shafts are 15 feet in circumference, and the lowest octa- 
gons of the base 56 (7 feet each side). 

§ xvm. Detached buildings, like our own Monument, are 
not pillars, but towers built in imitation of Pillars. As towers 
they are barbarous, being dark, inconvenient, and unsafe, 
besides lying, and pretending to be what they are not. As 
shafts they are barbarous, because they were designed at a 
time when the Renaissance architects had introduced and 
forced into acceptance, as de rigueur, a kind of columnar 
high-heeled shoe,—a thing which they called a pedestal, and 
which is to a true base exactly what a Greek actor’s cothurnus 
was to a Greek gentleman’s sandal. But the Greek actor 
knew better, I believe, than to exhibit or to decorate his cork 
sole; and, with shafts as with heroes, it is rather better to 
put the sandal off than the cothurnus on. There are, indeed, 
oceasions on which a pedestal may be necessary ; it may be 
better to raise a shaft from a sudden depression of plinth to a 
level with others, its companions, by means of a pedestal, 
than to introduce a higher shaft ; or it may be better to place 
a shaft of alabaster, if otherwise too short for our purpose, on 
a pedestal, than to use a larger shaft of coarser material ; but 
the pedestal is in each case a make-shift, not an additional 
perfection. It may, in the like manner, be sometimes con- 
venient for men to walk on stilts, but not to keep their stilts 
on as ornamental parts of dress. The bases of the Nelson 
Column, the Monument, and the column of the Place Ven- 
déme, are to the shafts, exactly what highly ornamented 
wooden legs would be to human beings. 

§ x1x. So far of bases of detached shafts. As we do not jet 
know in what manner shafts are likely to be grouped, we can 
say nothing of those of grouped shafts until we know more of 
what they are to support. 

Lastly ; we have throughout our reasoning upon the base 
snpposed the pier to be circular. But circumstances may 


92 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


occur to prevent its being reduced to this form,.and it may 
remain square or rectangular; its base will then be simply 
the wall base following its contour, and we have no spurs at 
the angles. Thus much may serve respecting pier bases ; we 
have next to examine the concentration of the Wall Veil, or 
the Shaft. 


CHAPTER VUI 
THE SHAFT. 


§ 1. We have seen in the last Chapter how, in converting 
the wall into the square or cylindrical shaft, we parted at every 
change of form with some quantity of material. In propor- 
tion to the quantity thus surrrendered, is the necessity that 
what we retain should be good of its kind, and well set to- 
gether, since everything now depends on it. 

It is clear also that the best material, and the closest con- 
centration, is that of the natural crystalline rocks; and that, 
by having reduced our wall into the shape of shafts, we may 
be enabled to avail ourselves of this better material, and to 
exchange cemented bricks for crystallised blocks of stone. 
Therefore, the general idea of a perfect shaft is that of a single 
stone hewn into a form more or less elongated and cylindrical. 
Under this form, or at least under the ruder one of a long 
stone set upright, the conception of true shafts appears first 
to have occurred to the human mind; for the reader must 
note this carefully, once for all, it does not in the least follow 
that the order of architectural features which is most reason- 
able in their arrangement, is most probable in their invention. 
I have theoretically deduced shafts from walls, but shafts were 
never so reasoned out in architectural practice. The man who 
first propped a thatched roof with poles was the discoverer of 
their principle ; and he who first hewed a long stone into a 
cylinder, the perfecter of their practice. 

§ u. It is clearly necessary that shafts of this kind (we will 
eall them, for convenience, block shafts) should be composed 


THE SHAFT. 93 


of stone not liable to flaws or fissures ; and therefore that we 
must no longer continue our argument as if it were always 
possible to do what is to be done in the best way ; for the 

style of a national architecture may evidently depend, in great 
- measure upon the nature of the rocks of the country. 

Our own English rocks, which supply excellent building 
stone from their thin and easily divisible beds, are for the 
most part entirely incapable of being worked into shafts of any 
size, except only the granites and whinstones, whose hardness 
renders them intractable for ordinary purposes ;—and English 
architecture therefore supplies no instances of the block shaft 
applied on an extensive scale ; while the facility of obtaining 
large masses of marble has in Greece and Italy been partly the 
cause of the adoption of certain noble types of architectural 
form peculiar to those countries, or, when occurring elsewhere, 
derived from them. 

We have not, however, in reducing our walls to shafts, cal- 
culated on the probabilities of our obtaining better materials 
than those of which the walls were built; and we shall there- 
fore first consider the form of shaft which will be best when 
we have the best materials ; and then consider how far we can 
imitate, or how far it will be wise to imitate, this form with 
any materials we can obtain. 

§ m. Now as I gave the reader the ground, and the stones, 
that he might for himself find out how to build his wall, I 
shall give him the block of marble, and the chisel, that he may 
himself find out how to shape his column. Let him suppose 
the elongated mass, so given him, rudely hewn to the thick- 
ness which he has calculated will be proportioned to the weight 
it has to carry. The conditions of stability will require that 
some allowance be made in finishing it for any chance of slight 
disturbance or subsidence of the ground below, and that, as 
everything must depend on the uprightness of the shaft, as 
little chance should be left as possible of its being thrown off 
its balance. It will therefore be prudent to leave it slightly 
thicker at the base than at the top. This excess of diameter 
at the base being determined, the reader is to ask himself how 
most easily and simply to smooth the column from one extrem. 


94 THE STONES OF VENIC#. 


ity to the other. To cut it into a true straight-sided cone 
would be a matter of much trouble and nicety, and would in- 
cur the continual risk of chipping into it too deep. Why not 
leave some room for a chance stroke, work it slightly, very 
slightly convex, and smooth the curve by the eye between the © 
two extremities? you will save much trouble and time, and 
the shaft will be all the stronger. 

This is accordingly the natural form of a detached block 
shaft, It is the best. No other will ever be so agreeable to 
the mind cr eye. I do not mean that it is not capable of 
more refined execution, or of the application of some of the 


 —-. 


Fie. XIII, 


Jaws of esthetic beauty, but that itis the best recipient of 
execution and subject of law ; better in either case than if you 
had taken more pains, and cut it straight. 

§ 1v. You will observe, however, that the convexity is to be 
very slight, and that the shaft is not to bulge in the centre, 
but to taper from the root ina curved line ; the peculiar char. 
acter of the curve you will discern better by exaggerating, in 
a diagram, the conditions of its sculpture. 

Let a, a, b, b, at a, Fig. XIIL, be the rough block: of the 
shaft, iaid on the ground ; and as thick as you can by any 
chance require it to be ; you will leave it of this full thickness 
at ifs base at a, but at the other end you will mark off upon if 
the diameter c, d, which you intend it to have at the summit ; 
you will then take your mallet and chisel, and working from ¢ 


THR SHAFT. 95 


and d you will roughly knock off the corners shaded in the 
figure, so as to reduce the shaft to the figure described by the 
inside lines in a and the outside lines in B; you then proceed 
to smooth it, you chisel away the shaded parts in B, and leave 
your finished shaft of the form of the inside lines e, g, f, h. 

The result of this operation will be of course that the shaft 
tapers faster towards the top than it does near the ground. 
Observe this carefully ; itis a point of creat future importance. 

§ v. So far of the shape of detached or block shafts. We 
can carry the type no farther on merely structural considera- 
tions : let us pass to the shaft of inferior materials. 

Unfortunately, in practice, this step must be soon made. 
It is alike difficult to obtain, transport, and raise, block shafts 
more than ten or twelve feet long, except in remarkable posi- 
tions, and as pieces of singular magnificence. Large pillars 
are therefore always composed of more than one block of 
stone. Such pillars are either jointed like basalt columns, and 
composed of solid pieces of stone set one above another ; or 
they are filled up towers, built of small stones cemented into 
a mass, with more or less of regularity : Keep this distinction 
carefully in mind, it is of great importance ; for the jointed 
cchimn, every stone composing which, however thin, is (so to 
speak) a complete slice of the shaft, is just as strong as the 
block pillar of one stone, so long as no forces are brought into 
action upon it which would have a tendency to cause horizon- 
tal dislocation. But the pillar which is built as a filled-wp 
tower is of course liable to fissure in any direction, if its 
cement give way. 

But, in either case, it is evident that all constructive reason 
of the curved contour is at once destroyed. Far from being 
an easy or natural procedure, the fitting of each portion of 
the curve to its fellow, in the separate stones, would require 
painful care and considerable masonic skill ; while, in the case 
of the filled-up tower, the curve outwards would be even 
unsafe ; for its greatest strength (and that the more in pro- 
portion to its careless building) lies in its bark, or shell of 
outside stone; and this, if curved outwards, would at once 
burst outwards, if heavily loaded above. 


96 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


If, therefore, the curved outline be ever retained in such 
shafts, it must be in obedience to esthetic laws only. 

§ vi. But farther. Not only the curvature, but even the 
tapering by straight lines, would be somewhat difficult of 
execution in the pieced column. Where, indeed, the entire 
shaft is composed of four or five blocks set one upon another, 
the diameters may be easily determined at the successive 
joints, and the stones chiselled to the same slope. But this 
becomes sufficiently troublesome when the joints are numer- 
ous, so that the pillar is like a pile of cheeses ; or when it is 
to be built of small and irregular stones. We should be 
naturally led, in the one case, to cut all the cheeses to the 
same diameter ; in the other to build by the plumb-line ; and 
in both to give up the tapering altogether. 

§ vu, Farther. Since the chance, in the one case, of hori- 
zontal dislocation, in the other, of irregular fissure, is much 
increased by the composition of the shaft out of joints or 
small stones, a larger bulk of shaft is required to carry the 
given weight; and, cwleris paribus, jointed and cemented 
shafts must be thicker in proportion to the weight they carry 
than those which are of one block. 

We have here evidently natural causes of a very marked 
division in schools of architecture : one group composed of 
buildings whose shafts are either of a single stone or of few 
joints ; the shafts, therefore, being gracefully tapered, and 
reduced by successive experiments to the narrowest possible 
diameter proportioned to the weight they carry: and the 
other group embracing those buildings whose shafts are of 
many joints or of small stones; shafts which are therefore 
not tapered, and rather thick and ponderous in proportion to 
the weight they carry ; the latter school being evidently some- 
what imperfect and inelegant as compared with the former. 

It may perhaps appear, also, that this arrangement of the 
materials in cylindrical shafts at all would hardly have sug- 
gested itself to a people who possessed no large blocks out of 
which to hew them ; and that the shaft built of many pieces 
is probably derived from, and imitative of the shaft hewn 
from few or from one, 


THE SHAFT. 9% 


§ vim. If, therefore, you take a good geological map of 
Europe, and lay your finger upon the spots where volcanic 
influences supply either travertin or marble in accessible and 
available masses, you will probably mark the points where 
the types of the first school have been originated and devel- 
oped. If, in the next place, you will mark the districts where 
broken and rugged basalt or whinstone, or slaty sandstone, 
supply materials on easier terms indeed, but fragmentary and 
unmanageable, you will probably distinguish some of the 
birthplaces of the derivative and less graceful school. You 
will, in the first case, lay your finger on Pestum, Agrigentum, 
and Athens; in'the second, on Durham and Lindisfarne. 

The shafts of the great primal school are, indeed, in their 
first form, as massy as those of the other, and the tendency of 
both is to continual diminution of their diameters : but in the 
first school it is a true diminution in the thickness of the inde- 
pendent pier ; in the last, it is an apparent diminution, obtained 
by giving it the appearance of a group of minor piers. The 
distinction, however, with which we are concerned is not that 
of slenderness, but of vertical or curved contour ; and we may 
note generally that while throughout the whole range of 
Northern work, the perpendicular shaft appears in continually 
clearer development, throughout every group which has inher- 
ited the spirit of the Greek, the shaft retains its curved or 
tapered form; and the occurrence of the vertical detached shaft 
may at all times, in European architecture, be regarded as one 
of the most important collateral evidences of Northern influence. 

§ 1x. It is necessary to limit this observation to European 
architecture, because the Egyptian shaft is often untapered, 
like the Northern. It appears that the Central Southern, or 
Greek shaft, was tapered or curved on esthetic rather than 
constructive principles ; and the Egyptian which precedes, 
and the Northern which follows it, are both vertical, the one 
because the best form had not been discovered, the other 
because it could not be attained. Both are in acertain degree 
barbaric ; and both possess in combination and in their orna- 
ments a power altogether different from that of the Greek 
shaft. and at least as impressive if not as admirable. 

Stones of Venice—Vol. I.-—d 


98 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


§ x. We have hitherto spoken of shafts as if their number 
were fixed, and only their diameter variable according to the 
weight to be borne. But this supposition is evidently gratu- 
itous ; for the same weight may be carried either by many 
and slender, or by few and massy shafts. If the reader will 
lock back to Fig. TX., he will find the number of shafts into 
which the wall was reduced to be dependent altogether upon 
the length of the spaces a, b, a, b, &e., a length which was ar- 
bitrarily fixed. We are at liberty to make these spaces of 
what length we choose, and, in so doing, to increase the num- 
ber and diminish the diameter of the shafts, or vice versd. 

§ x1. Supposing the materials are in each case to be of the 
same kind, the choice is in great part at the architect’s 
discretion, only there is a limit on the one hand to the multi- 
plication of the slender shaft, in the inconvenience of the nar- 
rowed interval, and on the other, to the enlargement of the 
massy shaft, in the loss of breadth to the building.* That will 
be commonly the best proportion which is a natural mean be- 
tween the two limits ; leaning to the side of grace or of gran- 
deur according to the expressional intention of the work. I 
say, commoniy the best, because, in some cases, this expres- 
sional invention may prevail over all other considerations, and 
a column of unnecessary bulk or fantastic slightness be adopted 
in order to strike the spectator with awe or with surprise. 
The architect is, however, rarely in practice compelled to use 
one kind of material only; and his choice lies frequently be- 
tween the employment of a larger number of solid and perfect 
small shafts, or a less number of pieced and cemented large 
ones. Itis often possible to obtain from quarries near at hand, 
blocks which might be cut into shafts eight or twelve feet 


* In saying this, it is assumed that the interval is one which is to be 
traversed by men ; and that a certain relation of the shafts and intervale 
to the size of the human figure is therefore necessary. When shafts are 
used in the upper stories of buildings, or on a scale which ignores all re- 
lation to the human figure, nosuch relative limits exist either to slender- 
ness or solidity. 

+ Vide the interesting discussion of this point in Mr. Fergusson’s ac- 
count of the Temple of Karnak, ‘‘ Principles of Beanty in Art,’ p. 219. 


THE SHAFT. 99 


iong and four or five feet round, when larger shafts can only 
be obtained in distant localities ; and the question then is be- 
tween the perfection of smaller features and the imperfection 
of larger. We shall find numberless instances in Italy in 
which the first choice has been boldly, and I think most wisely 
made ; and magnificent buildings have been composed of sys- 
tems of small but perfect shafts, multiplied and superimposed. 
So long as the idea of the symmetry of a perfect shaft 
remained in the builder’s mind, his choice could hardly be di- 
rected otherwise, and the adoption of the built and tower-like 
shaft appears to have been the result of a loss of this sense of 
symmetry consequent on the employmest of intractable ma- 
terials. 

§ xu. But farther: we have up to this point spoken of 
shafts as always set in ranges, and at equal intervals from each 
other. But there is no necessity for this; and material dif- 
ferences may be made in their diameters if two or more be 
grouped so as to do together the work of one large one, and 
that within, or nearly within, the space which the larger one 
would have occupied. 

§ xur Let a, B, c, Fig. XIV., be three surfaces, of which B 
and c contain equal areas, and each of them double that of a: 
then supposing them all loaded to the same height, B or o 
would receive twice as much weight as a; therefore, to carry 
B or Cc loaded, we should need a shaft of twice the strength 
needed to carry a. Lets be the shaft required to carry a, 
and 8, the shaft required to carry B or c; then § may be di- 
vided into two shafts, or §, into four shafts, as at s,, all equal 
in area or solid contents ;* and the mass a might be carried 
safely by two of them, and the masses B and ©, each by four 
of them, 

Now if we put the single shafts each under the centre of 
the mass et have to bear, as represented by the shaded 
circles at a, a,, a,, the masses a and c are both of them very ill 
supported, Sy even B insufficiently ; but apply the four and 

* T have assumed that the strength of similar shafts of equal heighi 


is as the squares of their diameters; which, though not actually a corm 
rect expression, is sufficiently so for all our present purposes, 


100 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


the two shafts as at 6, 
b,, b,, and they are sup- @ 
ported satisfactorily. “Ss 
Let the weight on each 

of the masses be doub- 


led, and the shafts 
doubled in area, then 
we shall have such ar- 
rangements as those at B 


c, ¢, ¢,; and if again 
the shafts and weight 


be doubled, we shall 
have d, d,, d,. ‘ 

§ xiv. Now it will at © = = 
once be observed that 


the arrangement of the 
shafts in the series of B 
and cis always exactly 


the same in their rela- 
tions to each other; O © © 
only the group of B is 
set evenly, and the 8 © A Se © 


group of c is set ob- a 
liquely,—the one car- 


rying a square, the ‘ 

other a cross. R bps 
You have in these 

two series the primal ¢ © es © O 


representations of 
shaft arrangement in 
the Southern and Nor- 
thern schools; while 
the group 6, of which b, 
is the double, set even- 
ly, and c, the double, 
set obliquely, is com- 
mon to both. The reader will be surprised to find how 
all the complex and varied forms of shaft arrangement will 


Fie. XIV. 


THE SHAFT. 101 


range themselves into one or other of these groups; and 
still more surprised to find the oblique or cross set system 
on the one hand, and the square set system on the other, 
severally distinctive of Southern and ‘Northern work. The 
dome of St. Mark’s, and the crossing of the nave and tran- 
septs of Beauvais, are both carried by square piers; but 


the piers of St. Mark’s are set square to the walls of the 
church, and those of Beauvais obliquely to them : and this 
difference is even a more essential one than that between 
the smooth surface of the one and the reedy complication of 
the other. The two squares here in the margin (Fig. XV.) are 
exactly of the same size, but their 

expression is altogether different, | i i} 

and in that difference lies one of | : | 

the most subtle distinctions be- q Hi 

tween the Gothic and Greek spirit, 5 

—from the shaft, which bears the 

building, to the smallest decora- 

tion. The Greek square is by preference set evenly, the Gothic 
square obliquely ; and that so constantly, that wherever we 
find the level or even square occurring as a prevailing form, 
either in plan or decoration, in early northern work, there we 
may at least suspect the presence of a southern or Greek in- 
fluence ; and, on the other hand, wherever the oblique square 
is prominent in the south, we may confidently look for farther 
evidence of the influence of the Gothic architects. The rule 
must not of course be pressed far when, in either school, there 
has been determined search for every possible variety of deco- 
rative figures ; and accidental circumstances may reverse the 
usual system in special cases ; but the evidence drawn from 
this character is collaterally of the highest value, and the trac- 
ing it out is a pursuit of singular interest. Thus, the Pisan 
Romanesque might in an instant be pronounced to have been 
formed under some measure of Lombardic influence, from the 
oblique squares set under its arches; and in it we have the 
spirit of northern Gothic affecting details of the southern ;— 
obliquity of square, in magnificently shafted Romanesque. 
At Monza, on the other hand, the levelled square is the char 


192 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


acteristic figure of the entire decoration of the fagade of the 
Duomo, eminently giving it southern character ; but the de- 
tails are derived almost entirely from the northern Gothic. 
Here then we have southern spirit and northern detail. O1 
the cruciform outline of the load of the shaft, a still more 
positive test of northern work, we shall have more to say in 
the 28th Chapter; we must at present note certain farther 
changes in the form of the grouped shaft, which open the 
way to every branch of its endless combinatic ns, southern or 
northern. 

§ xv. 1. If the group at d,, Fig. XIV., be taken from under 
its loading, and have its centre 
filled up, it will become a quatre- 
foil; and it will represent, in 
their form of most frequent oc- 
currence, a family of shafts, 
whose plans are foiled figures, 
trefoils, quatrefoils, cinquefoils, 
&c.; of which a trefoiled ex- 
f=4 ample, from the Frari at Venice, 
= isthe third in Plate I, and a 
Sy quatrefoil from Salisbury the 
eighth. It is rare, however, to 
find in Gothic archi‘ecture 
shafts of this family composed of 
a large number of foils, because 
multifoiled shafts are seldom true 
grouped shafts, but are rather 
canaliculated conditions of massy 
piers. The representatives of 
this family may be considered 
as the quatrefoil on the Gothic 
side of the Alps ; and the Egyptian multifoiled shaft on the | 
south, approximating to the general type, b, Fig. XVL 

§ xvi. Exactly opposed to this great family is that of shafts 
which have concave curves instead of convex on each of their 
sides ; but these are not, properly speaking, grouped shafts 
at all, and their proper place is among decorated piers ; only 


Fie, XVI. 


THE SHAFT. 10% 


they must be named here in order to mark their exact oppo. 
sition to the foiled system. In their simplest form, repre- 
sented by c, Fig. XVI, they have no representatives in good 
architecture, being evidently weak and meagre ; but approxi- 
mations to them exist in late Gothic, as in the vile cathedral 
of Orleans, and in modern cast-iron shafts. In their fully de- 
veloped form they are the Greek Doric, a, Fig. XVI, and 
occur in caprices of the Romanesque and Italian Gothic: d, 
Fig. XVL, is from the Duomo of Monza. 

§ xvi. 2. Between c, and d, of Fig. XIV. there may be 
evidently another condition, represented at 6, Plate IL, and 
formed by the insertion of a central shaft within the four ex- 
ternal ones. This central shaft we may suppose to expand in 
proportion to the weight it has to carry. If the external 
shafts expand in the same proportion, the entire form remains 
unchanged ; but if they do not expand, they may (1) be 
pushed out by the expanding shaft, or (2) be gradually swal- 
lowed up in its expansion, as at 4, Plate IL If they are 
pushed out, they are removed farther from each other by 
every increase of the central shaft; and others may then be 
introduced in the vacant spaces; giving, on the plan, a cen- 
tral orb with an ever increasing host of satellites, 10, Plate 
IL. ; the satellites themselves often varying in size, and per- 
haps quitting contact with the central shaft. Suppose them 
in any of their conditions fixed, while the inner shaft expands, 
and they will be gradually buried in it, forming more com- 
plicated conditions of 4, Plate II. The combinations are thus 
altogether infinite, even supposing the central shaft to be cir- 
cular only ; but their infinity is multiplied by many other in- 
finities when the central shaft itself becomes square or cross- 
let on the section, or itself multifoiled (8, Plate IL) with 
satellite shafts eddying about its recesses and angles, in every 
possible relation of attraction. Among these endless condi- 
tions of change, the choice of the architect is free, this only 
being generally noted: that, as the whole value of such piers 
depends, first, upon their being wisely fitted to the weight 
above them, and, secondly, upon their all working together - 
and one not failing the rest, perhaps to the ruin of all, he 


£104 THE STONES OF VENICH. 


must never multiply shafts without visible cause in the dispo 
sition of members superimposed:* and in his multiplied 
group he should, if possible, avoid a marked separation be- 
tween the large central shaft and its satellites ; for if this ex- 
ist, the satellites will either appear useless altogether, or else, 
which is worse, they will look as if they were meant to keep 
the central shaft together by wiring or caging it in ; like iron 
rods set round a supple cylinder,—a fatal fault in the piers of 
Westminster Abbey, and, in a less degree, in the noble nave 
of the cathedral of Bourges. 

§ xvi. While, however, we have been thus subdividing or 
assembling our shafts, how far has it been possible to retain 
their curved or tapered outline? So long as they remain dis- 
tinct and equal, however close to each other, the independent 
curvature may evidently be retained. But when once they 
come in contact, it is equally evident that a column, formed 
of shafts touching at the base and separate at the top, would 
appear as if in the very act of splitting asunder. Hence, in all 
the closely arranged groups, and especially those with a cen- 
tral shaft, the tapering is sacrificed ; and with less cause for 
regret, because it was a provision against subsidence or dis- 
tortion, which cannot now take place with the separate mem- 
bers of the group. Lvidently, the work, if safe at all, must 
be executed with far greater accuracy and stability when its 
supports are so delicately arranged, than would be implied by 
such precaution. _In grouping shafts, therefore, a true per- 
pendicular line is, in nearly all cases, given to the pier; and 
the reader will anticipate that the two schools, which we have 
already found to be distinguished, the one by its perpendic- 
ular and pieced shafts, and the other by its curved and block 
shafts, will be found divided also in their employment of 
grouped shafts ;—it is likely that the idea of grouping, how- 
ever suggested, will be fully entertained and acted upon by 
the one, but hesitatingly by the other ; and that we shall find, 
on the one hand, buildings displaying sometimes massy piers 

* How far this condition limits the system of shaft grouping we shal) 


see presently. The reader must remember, that we at heey reasor 
respecting shafts in the abstract only, 


LHE SHAFT. 108 


of smail stones, sometimes clustered piers of rich complexity, 
and on the other, more or less regular succession of block 
shafts, each treated as entirely independent of those around it. 

§ x1x. Farther, the grouping of shafts once admitted, it ia 
probable that the complexity and richness of such arrange-- 
ments would recommend them to the eye, and induce their 
frequent, even their unnecessary introduction ; so that weight 
which might have been borne by a single pillar, would be in © 
preference supported by four or five. And if the stone of the 
country, whose fragmentary character first occasioned the 
_ building and piecing of the large pier, were yet in beds con- 
sistent enough to supply shafts of very small diameter, the 
strength and simplicity of such a construction might justify 
it, as well as its grace. The fact, however, is that the charm 
which the multiplication of line possesses for the eye has 
always been one of the chief ends of the work in the grouped 
schools ; and that, so far from employing the grouped piers 
in order to the introduction of very slender block shafts, the 
most common form in which such piers occur is that of a solid 
jointed shaft, each joint being separately cut into the contour 
of the group required. 

§ xx. We have hitherto supposed that all grouped or clus- 
tered shafts have been the result or the expression of an actual 
gathering and binding together of detached shafts. This is 
not, however, always so: for some clustered shafts are little 
more than solid piers channelled on the surface, and their form 
appears to be merely the development of some longitudinal 
furrowing or striation on the original single shaft. That clus- 
tering or striation, whichever we choose to call it, is in this 
case a decorative feature, and to be considered under the head 
of decoration. 

§ xxr. It must be evident to the reader at a glance, that the 
real serviceableness of any of these grouped arrangements 
must depend upon the relative shortness of the shafts, and 
that, when the whole pier is so lofty that its minor members 
become mere reeds or rods of stone, those minor members 
can no longer be charged with any considerable weight. And 
the fact is, that in the most complicated Gothic arrangements, 


106 THE STONES CHF VENICE. 


when the pier is tall and its satellites stand clear of it, no read 
work is given them to do, and they might all be removed 
without endangering the building. They are merely the ex- 
pression of a great consistent system, and are in architecture 
what is often found in animal anatomy,—a bone, or process 
of a bone, useless, under the ordained circumstances of its life, 
to the particular animal in which it is found, and slightly de- 
veloped, but yet distinctly existent, and representing, for the 
sake of absolute consistency, the same bone in its appointed, 
and generally useful, place, either in skeletons of all animals, 
or in the genus to which the animal itself belongs. 

§ xxu. Farther: as it is not easy to obtain pieces of stone 
long enough for these supplementary shafts (especially as it is 
always unsafe to lay a stratified stone with its beds upright), 
they have been frequently composed-of two or more short 
shafts set upon each other, and to conceal the unsightly junc- 
tion, a flat stone has been interposed, carved into certain 
mouldings, which have the appearance of a ring on the shaft. 
Now observe : the whole pier was the gathering of the whole 
wall, the base gathers into base, the veil into the shaft, and 
the string courses of the veil gather into these rings; and 
when this is clearly expressed, and the rings do indeed corre- 
spond with the string courses of the wall veil, they are per- 
fectly admissible and even beautiful; but otherwise, and oc- 
curring, as they do in the shafts of Westminster, in the 
middle of continuous lines, they are but sorry make-shifts, 
and of late since gas has been invented, have become espec- 
ially offensive from their unlucky resemblance to the joints of 
gas-pipes, or common water-pipes. There are two leaden 
ones, for instance, on the left hand as one enters the abbey at 
Poet’s Corner, with their solderings and funnels looking ex- 
actly like rings and capitals, and most disrespectfully mimick- 
ing the shafts of the abbey, inside. 

Thus far we have traced the probable conditions of shaft 
structure in pure theory ; I shall now lay before the reader 
a brief statement, of the facts of the thing in time past and 
present. 

§ xxi. In the earliest and grandest shaft architecture which 


THE SHAFT. 104 


we know, that of Egypt, we have no grouped arrangements, 
properly so called, but either single and smooth shafts, or 
richly reeded and furrowed shafts, which represent the ex- 
treme conditions of a complicated group bound together ta 
sustain a single mass ; and are indeed, without doubt, nothing 
else than fades of bundles of reeds, or of ciusters of lo« 
tus :* but in these shafts there is merely the idea of a group, 
not the actual function or structure of a group ; they are just 
as much solid and simple shafts as those which are smooth, 
and merely by the method of their decoration present to the 
eye the image of a richly complex arrangement. 

§ xxiv. After these we have the Greek shaft, less in scale, 
and losing all suggestion or purpose of suggestion of complex- 
ity, its so-called Autings being, visibly as actually, an external 
decoration. 

§ xxv. The idea of the shaft remains absolutely single in 
the Roman and Byzantine mind ; but true grouping begins in 
Christian architecture by the placing of two or more separate 
shafts side by side, each having its own work to do; then 
three or four, still with separate work ; then, by such steps as 
those above theoretically pursued, the number of the mem- 
bers increases, while they coagulate into a single mass ; and 
we have finally a shaft apparently composed of thirty, forty, 
fifty, or more distinct members ; a shaft which, in the reality 
of its service, is as much a single shaft as the old Egyptian 
one ; but which differs from the Egyptian in that all its mem- 
bers, how many soever, have each individual work to do, and 
a separate rib of arch or roof to carry: and thus the great 
Christian truth of distinct services of the individual soul is 
typified in the Christian shaft; and the old Egyptian servi- 
tude of the multitudes, the servitude inseparable from the 
children of Ham, is typified also in that ancient shaft of the 
Egyptians, which in its gathered strength of the river reeds, 
seems, as the sands of the desert drift over its ruin, to be in- 
tended to remind us for ever of the end of the association of 


* The capitals being formed by the flowers, or by a representation of 
the bulging cat of the reeds at the top, under the weight of the archi: 
rave. 


10° THE STONES OF VENICE. 


the wicked. “Can the rush grow up without mire, or the 
flag grow without water ?—So are the paths of all that forget 
God ; and the hypocrite’s hope shall perish.” 

§ xxvz Let the reader then keep this distinction of the 
three systems clearly in his mind: Egyptian system, an ap- 
parent cluster supporting a simple capital and single weight ; 
Greek and Roman system, single shaft, single weight ; Gothic 
system, divided shafts, divided weight: at first actually and 
simply divided, at last apparently and infinitely divided ; so 
that the fully formed Gothic shaft is a return to the Egyp 
tian, but the weight is divided in the one and undivided in 
the other. 

§ xxvu. The transition from the actual to the apparent 
cluster, in the Gothic, is a question of the most curious in- 
terest ; I have thrown together the shaft sections in Plate IL. 
to illustrate it, and.exemplify what has been generally stated 
above.* 

1. The earliest, the most frequent, perhaps the most beau- 
tiful of all the groups, is also the simplest ; the two shafts ar- 
ranged as at b or c, (Fig. XIV.) above, bearing an oblong 
mass, and substituted for the still earlier structure a, Fig. XIV. 
In Plate XVII. (Chap. XXVIL) are three examples of the tran- 
sition: the one on the left, at the top, is the earliest single- 
shafted arrangement, constant in the rough Romanesque win- 
dows; a huge hammer-shaped capital being employed to 
sustain the thickness of the wall. It was rapidly superseded 
by the double shaft, as on the right of it; avery early example 
from the cloisters of the Duomo, Verona. Beneath, is a most 
elaborate and perfect one from St. Zeno of Verona, where the 
group is twice complicated, two shafts being used, ‘both with 
quatrefoil sections. The plain double shaft, however, is by 
far the most frequent, both in the Northern and Southern 
Gothic, but for the most part early ; it is very frequent in 
cloisters, and in the singular one of St. Michael’s Mount, Nor- 


“T have not been at the pains to draw the complicated piers in this 
plate with absolute exactitude to the scale of each: they are accurate 
enough for their purpose: those of them respectizz which we shall hay: 
farther question will be given on a much larger scale. 


ee 


PLATE II,—PLANS oF PIERS, 


THE SHAFT. 109 


mandy, a small pseudo-arcade runs along between the pairs of 
shafts, a miniature aisle. The group is employed on a mag- 
nificent scale, but ill proportioned, for the main piers of the 
apse of the cathedral of Coutances, its purpose being to con. 
ceal one shaft behind the other, and make it appear to the 
spectator from the nave as if the apse were sustained by sin- 
gle shafts, of inordinate slenderness. The attempt is ill; 
judged, and the result unsatisfactory. 

§ xxviz. 2. When these pairs of shafts come near each 
other, as frequently at the turnings of angles (Fig. XVIL), the 
quadruple group results, 6 2, Fig. XIV., of which r") eo 
the Lombardic sculptors were excessively fond, @ ee 
usually tying the shafts together in their centre, 
in a lover’s knot. They thus occur in Plate V., 

Fig. XVII. — from the Broletto of Como; atthe @.0 

angle of St. Michele of Lucca, Plate  ¥1%- XVU. 

XXII. ; and in the balustrade of St. Mark’s. 

This is a group, however, which I have never 
- seen used on a large scale.* 

-§ xxrx. 8. Such groups, consolidated by a 
small square in their centre, form the shafts of 
St. Zeno, just spoken of, and figured in Plate 
XVIL, which are among the most interesting 
pieces of work I know in Italy. I give their 
entire arrangement in Fig. XVII. : both shafts 
have the same section, but one receives a half 
turn as it ascends, giving it an exquisite spiral 
contour: the plan of their bases, with their 
plinth, is given at 2, Plate II. ; and note it care- 
fully, for it is an epitome of all that we observed 

Fa. XVIII. —_ above, respecting the oblique and even square. 
It was asserted that the oblique belonged to the north, the 
even to the south: we have here the northern Lombardic 
nation naturalised in Italy, and, behold, the oblique and even 
quatrefoil linked together ; not confused, but actually linked 
by a bar of stone, as seen in Plate XVIL., under the capitals. 


* The largest I remember support a monument in St. Zeno of Verona; 
they are of red marble, some ten or twelve feet high. 


110 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


4, Next to these, observe the two groups of five shafts each, 
5 and 6, Plate IL, one oblique, the other even. Both ara 
from upper stories; the oblique one from the triforium of 
Salisbury ; the even one from the upper range of shafts in the 
facade of St. Mark’s at Venice.” 

§ xxx. Around these central types are grouped, in Plate IL, 
four simple examples of the satellitic cluster, all of the North- 
ern Gothic: 4, from the Cathedral of Amiens; 7, from that 
of Lyons (nave pier); 8, the same from Salisbury ; 10, from 
the porch of Notre Dame, Dijon, having satellites of three 
magnitudes: 9 is one of the piers between the doors of the 
same church, with shafts of four magnitudes, and is an in- 
stance of the confusion of mind of the Northern architects 
between piers proper and jamb mouldings (noticed farther in 
the next chapter, § xxxr.): for this fig. 9, which is an angle at 
the meeting of two jambs, is treated like a rich independent 
shaft, and the figure below, 12, which is half of a true shaft, 
is treated like a meeting of jambs. 

All these four examples belonging to the oblique or North- 
ern system, the curious trefoil plan, 3, lies between the two, as 
the double quatrefoil next it unites the two. The trefoil is 
from the Frari, Venice, and has a richly worked capital in the 
Byzantine manner,—an imitation, I think, of the Byzantine 
work by the Gothic builders: 1 is to be compared with it, 
being one of the earliest conditions of the cross shaft, from 
the atrium of St. Ambrogio at Milan. 13 is the nave pier of 
St. Michele at Pavia, showing the same condition more fully 
developed: and 11 another nave pier from Vienne. on the 
Rhone, of far more distinct Roman derivation, for the flat 
pilaster is set to the nave, and is fluted like an antique one 
12 is the grandest development I have ever seen of the cross 
shaft, with satellite shafts in the nooks of it: it is half of one 
of the great western piers of the cathedral of Bourges, meas: 
uring eight feet each side, thirty-two round.; Then the one 


* The effect of this last is given in Plate VI. of the folio series. 

+ The entire development of this cross system in connection with the 
vaulting ribs, has been most clearly explained by Professor Willis 
{Architecture of Mid. Ages, Chap, IV.); and I strongly recommen¢e 


THR SHAFT. 112 


below (15) is half of a nave pier of Rouen Cathedral, showing 
the mode in which such conditions as that of Dijon (9) and 
that of Bourges (12) were fused together into forms of inex- 
tricable complexity (inextricable I mean in the irregularity of 
proportion and projection, for all of them are easily resolva- 
ble into simple systems in connection with the roof ribs), 
This pier of Rouen is a type of the last condition of the good 
Gothic ; from this point the small shafts begin to lose shape, 
and run into narrow fillets and ridges, projecting at the same 
time farther and farther in weak tongue-like sections, as de- 
scribed in the “Seven Lamps.” I have only here given one 
example of this family, an unimportant but sufficiently char- 
acteristic one (16) from St. Gervais of Falaise. One side of 
the nave of that church is Norman, the other Flamboyant, and 
the two piers 14 and 16 stand opposite each other. It would 
be useless to endeavor to trace farther the fantasticism of 
the later Gothic shafts; they become mere aggregations of 
mouldings very sharply and finely cut, their bases at the 
same time running together in strange complexity and their 
capitals diminishing and disappearing. Some of their condi- 
tions, which, in their rich striation, resemble crystals of beryl, 
are very massy and grand; others, meagre, harsh, or effem- 
inate in themselves, are redeemed by richness and boldness 
of decoration ; and I have long had it in my mind to reason 
out the entire harmony of this French Flamboyant system, 
and fix its types and possible power. But this inquiry is 
foreign altogether to our present purpose, and we shall there- 
fore turn back from the Flamboyant to the Norman side of 
the Falaise aisle, resolute for the future that all shafts of 
which we may have the ordering, shall be permitted, as with 
wisdom we may also permit men or cities, to gather them- 
selves into companies, or constellate themselves into clusters, 
but not to fuse themselves into mere masses of nekulous ag- 


gregation. 
every reader who is inclined to take pains in the matter, to read thas 


chapter. I have been contented, in my own text, to pursue the ab 
stract idea of shaft form. 


112 THE STONES OF VENIOCH. 


CHAPTER IX. 
THE CAPITAL. 


§ 1. Tue reader will remember that in Chap. VIL § v. it 
‘was said that the cornice of the wall, being cut to pieces and 
gathered together, formed the capital of the column. We 
have now to follow it in its transformation. 

We must, of course, take our simplest form or root of cor- 
nices (a, in Fig. V., above). We will take X and Y there, and 
we must necessarily gather them together as we did Xb and Yb 
in Chap. VIL Look back to the tenth paragraph of Chap. 
VIL, read or glance it over again, substitute X and Y for Xb 
and Yb, read capital for base, and, as we said that the capital 
was:the hand of the pillar, while the base was its foot, read 
also fingers for toes ; and as you look to the plate, Fig. XIL., 
turn it upside down. Then A, in Fig. XII, becomes now your 
best general form of block capital, as before of block base. 

$m. You will thus have a perfect idea of the analogies 
between base and capital ; our farther inquiry is into their 
differences. You cannot but have noticed that when Fig. XII. 
is turned upside down, the square stone (Y) looks too heavy 
for the supporting stone (X) ; and thatin the profile of cornice 
(a of Fig. V.) the proportions are altogether different. You 
will feel the fitness of this in an instant when you consider 
that the principal function of the sloping part in Fig. XII. is 
as a prop to the pillar to keep it from slipping aside ; but the 
function of the sloping stone in the cornice and capital is to 
carry weight above. ‘The thrust of the slope in the one case 
should therefore be lateral, in the other upwards. 

§ ut We will, therefore, take the two figures, e and h of 
Fig. XII, and make this change in them as we reverse them, 
using now the exact profile of the cornice a,—the father of 
cornices ; and we shall thus have a and b, Fig. XTX. 

Both of these are sufficiently ugly, the reader thinks ; so da 
I; but we will mend them before we have done with them: 


[HH CAPITAD. 118 


that at 2 is assuredly the ugliest,—like a tile on a flower-pot. 
It is, nevertheless, the father of capitals ; being the simplest 
condition of the gathered father of cornices. But itis to be 
observed that the diameter of the shaft here is arbitrarily as- 
sumed to be small, in order more clearly to show the general 
relations of the slop- 
ing stone to the 
shaft and upper 
stone; and _ this 
smallness of the 
shaft diameter is 
inconsistent with 
the serviceableness 
and beauty of the 
arrangement at a, 
if it were to be 
-realised (as we shall 
see presently) ; but 
itis not inconsistent 
with its central £ 
character, as the \ 
representative of 
every species of 
possible capital ; 
nor is its tile and 
flower-pot look to 
be regretted, as it 
may remind the 
reader of the re- 
- ported origin of the 
Corinthian capital. 
The stones of the 
cornice, hitherto 
called X and Y, re- 
ceive, now that they Fie, XIX, 

form the capital, 

each a separate name ; the sloping stone is called the Bell of 
the capital, and that laid above it, the Abacus. Abacus meang 

Vc. 1.—8 


{14 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


2 board o1 tile: I wish there were an English word for it, but 
{ fear there is no substitution possible, the term having been 
long fixed, and the reader will find it convenient to familiarise 
himself with the Latin one. 

§ 1v. The form of base, e of Fig. XIL, which corresponds to 
this first form of capital, a, was said to be objectionable only 
because it looked insecure ; and the spurs were added as a kind 
of pledge of stability to the eye. But evidently the projecting 
corners of the abacus at a, Fig. XIX., are actually insecure ; 
they may break off, if great weight be laid upon them. This 
is the chief reason of the ugliness of the form ; and the spurs 
in b are now no mere pledges of apparent stability, but have 
very serious practical use in supporting the angle of the aba- 
cus. If, even with the added spur, the support seems insuffi- 
ecient, we may fill up the crannies between the spurs and the 
bell, and we have the form ec. 

Thus a, though the germ and type of capitals, is itself (ex- 
cept under some peculiar conditions) both ugly and insecure ; 
bis the first type of capitals which carry light weight ; c, of 
capitals which carry excessive weight. 

§ v. I fear, however, the reader may think he is going 
slightly too fast, and may not like having the capital forced 
upon him out of the cornice ; but would prefer inventing a 
capital for the shaft itself, without reference to the cornice at 
all. We will do so then ; though we shall come to the same 
result. 

The shaft, it will be remembered, has to sustain the same 
weight as the long piece of wall which was concentrated into 
the shaft ; it is enabled to do this both by its better form and 
better knit materials ; and it can carry a greater weight than 
the space at the top of it is adapted to receive. The first 
point, therefore, is to expand this space as far as possible, and 
that in a form more convenient than the circle for the adjust- 
ment of the stones above. In general the square is a more 
convenient form than any other; but the hexagon or octagon 
is sometimes better fitted for masses of work which divide in 
six or eight directions. Then our first impulse would be tc 
put a square or hexagonal stone on the top of the shaft, prc« 


THE CAPITAL. 115 


jecting as far beyond it as might be safely ventured ; as at a, 
Fig. XX. This is the abacus. Our next idea would be to put 
a conical shaped stone beneath this abacus, to support: its 
outer edge, as at b. This is the bell. 

§ vt. Now the entire treatment of the capital depends simply 
on the manner in which this bell-stone is prepared for fitting 
the shaft below and the abacus above. Placed as at a, in Fig. 
XIX., it gives us the simplest of possible forms; with the 
spurs added, as at 0, it gives the germ of the richest and most 
elaborate forms: but there are two modes of treatment more 
dexterous than the one, and less elaborate than the other, 
which are of the highest possible im- 
portance,—modes in which the bell is 
brought to its proper form by truncation. 

§ vu. Let d and f, Fig. XIX., be two 
bell-stones ; d is part of a cone (a sugar- 
loaf upside down, with its point cut off) ; 

JF part of a four-sided pyramid. Then, 4 
assuming the abacus to be square, d will 
already fit the shaft, but has to be chisel- 
led to fit the abacus ; f will already fit the 
abacus, but has to be chiselled to fit the 
shaft. 

From the broad end of d chop or chisel 
off, in four vertical planes, as much as ¢ 
will leave its head an exact square. The ra ett ey 
vertical cuttings will form curves on the 
sides of the cone (curves of a curious kind, which the reader 
need not be troubled to examine), and we shall have the form 
at e, which is the root of the greater number of Norman capitals. 

From f cut off the angles, beginning at the corners of the 
square and widening the truncation downwards, so as to give 
the form at g, where the base of the bell is an octagon, and its 
top remains a square. A very slight rounding away of the 
angles of the octagon at the base of g will enable it to fit the 
circular shaft closely enough for all practical purposes, and 
this form, at g, is the root of nearly all Lombardic capitals. 

_ If, instead of a square, the head of the bell were hexagonal 


116 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


or octagonal, the operation of cutting would be the same on 
each angle; but there would be produced, of course, six or 
eight curves on the sides of e, and twelve or sixteen sides te 
the base of g. 

§ vi. The truncations in e and g may of course be executed 
on concave or convex forms of d and f; but e is usually 
worked on a straight-sided bell, and the truncation of g often 
becomes concave while the bell remains straight ; for this 
simple reason,-—that the sharp points at the angles of g, being 
somewhat difficult to cut, and easily broken off, are usually 
avoided by beginning the truncation a little way down the 
side of the bell, and then recovering the 
lost ground by a deeper cut inwards, aa 
here, Fig. XXL This is the actual form 
of the capitals of the balustrades of St 
Mark’s : it is the root of allthe Byzantine 
Arab capitals, and of all the most beauti- 
ful capitals in the world, whose function 
is to express lightness. 

§ ix. We have hitherto proceeded entirely on the assump- 
tion that the form of cornice which was gathered together ta 
produce the capital was the root of cornices, a of Fig. V. 
But this, it will be remembered, was said in § vi. of Chap. VL 
vo be especially characteristic of southern work, and that in 
northern and wet climates it took the form of a dripstone. 

Accordingly, in the northern climates, the dripstone 
gathered together forms a peculiar northern capital, com- 
monly called the Early English,* owing to its especial use in 
that style. 

There would have been no absurdity in this if shafts were 
always to be exposed to the weather ; but in Gothic con- 
structions the most important shafts are in the inside of the 
building. The dripstone sections of their capitals are there: 
fore unnecessary and ridiculous. 

§ x. They are, however, much worse than unnecessary. 

The edge of the dripstone, being undercut, has no bearing 
power, and the capital fails, therefore, in its own principe: 

* Appendix 19, ** Early English Capitala” 


Tic. XXII. 


THH CAPITAL. 117 


function ; and besides this, the undercut contour admits of 
no distinctly visible decoration ; it is, therefore, left utterly 
barren, and the capital looks as if it had been turned in ge 
' lathe. The Early English capital has, there- 
fore, the three greatest faults that any design 
can have : (1) it fails in its own proper pur- 
pose, that of support ; (2) it is adapted toa 
purpose to which it can never be put, that 
of keeping off rain; (8) it cannot be de- 
corated. : 

The Early English capital is, therefore, a ff 
barbarism of triple grossness, and degrades 
the style in which it is found, otherwise very 
noble, to one of second-rate order. 

§ x1. Dismissing, therefore, the Early 
English capital, as deserving no place in 
our system, let us reassemble in one view 
the forms which have been legitimately de- 
veloped, and which are to become hereafter 
subjects of decoration. To the forms a, 6, 
and c, Fig. XIX., we must add the two 
simplest truncated forms e and g, Fig. XIX., 
putting their abaci on them (as we con- 
sidered their contours in the bells only), and 
we shall have the five forms now given in 
parallel perspective in Fig. XXII, which are 
the roots of all good capitals existing, or 
capable of existence, and whose variations, 
infinite and a thousand times infinite, are all ses 
produced by introduction of various curva- [ 
tures into their contours, and the endless 
methods of decoration superinduced on such 
curvatures. 

§ xm. There is, however, a kind of varia- 
tion, also infinite, which takes place in these , 
radical forms, before they receive either curvature or decora- 
tion. Thisis the variety of proportion borne by the different 
lines of the capital to each other, and to the shafts This ig 


Fie. XXII, 


118 THE STONES OF VEN<CR. 


a structural question, at present to be considered as far as is 
possible. 

§ xm. All the five capitals (which are indeed five orders 
with legitimate distinction ; very different, however, from the 
five orders as commonly understood) may be represented by 
the same profile, a section through the sides of a, b, d, and e, 
or through the angles of ¢, Fig. XXII. This profile we will 
put on the top of a shaft, as at A, Fig. XXIII, which shaft 
we will suppose of equal diameter above and below for the 
sake of greater simplicity: in this simplest condition, how- 


Fie, XXIII. 


ever, relations of proportion exist between five quantities, any 
one, or any two, or any three, or any four of which may changs, 
irrespective of the others. These five quantities are : 

1. The height of the shaft, a Bs 

2. Its diameter, bc; 

3. The length of slope of bell, 6 d; 
. The inclination of this slope, or angle ¢ bd; 

. The depth of abacus, d e. 

For every change in any one of these quantities we have 
a new proportion of capital: five infinities, supposing change 
only in one quantity at a time: infinity of infinities in the sum 
of possible changes, 


ee 


ot 


YH CAPITAL, 119 


It is, therefore, only possible te note the general laws of 
change ; every scale of pillar, and every weight laid upon it 
admitting, within certain limits, a variety out of which the 
architect has his choice ; but yet fixing limits which the pro- 
portion becomes ugly when it approaches, and dangerous 
when it exceeds. But the inquiry into this subject is too 
difficult for the general reader, and I shall content myself with 
proving four laws, easily understood and generally applicable ; 
for proof of which if the said reader care not, he may miss the 
next four paragraphs without harm. 

§ xiv. 1. The more slender the shaft, the greater, propor- 
tionally, may be the projection of the abacus. For, looking 
back to Fig. XXIIL, let the height a b be fixed, the length 
d b, the angle d 6 c, and the depth de. Let the single quantity 
bc be variable, let B be a capital and shaft which are tound te 
be perfectly safe in proportion to the weight they bear, and 
let the weight be equally distributed over the whole of the 
abacus. Then this weight may be represented by any number 
. of equal divisions, suppose four, as J, m, n, r, of brickwork 
above, of which each division is one fourth of the whole 
weight ; and let this weight be placed in the most trying way 
on the abacus, that is to say, let the masses/ and r be detached - 
from m and n, and bear with their full weight on the outside 
of the capital. We assume, in B, that the width of abacus ef 
is twice as great as that of the shaft, bc, and on these condi- 
tions we assume the capital to be safe. 

But 0 ¢ is allowed to be variable. Let it become 8, c, at ©, 
which is a length representing about the diameter of a shaft 
containing half the substance of the shaft B, and, therefore, 
able to sustain not more than half the weight sustained by B. 
But the slope 6 d and depth de remaining unchanged, we 
have the capital of C, which we are to load with only half the 
weight: of J, m,n, 7, i. e., with Zand r alone. Therefore the 
weight of J and r, now represented by the masses J, r,, is dis- 
tributed over the whole of the capital. But the weight r was 
adequately supported by the projecting piece of the first capi- 
tal h fc: much more is it now adequately supported by 7 h, 
fc, Therefore, if the capital of B was safe, that of C ia 

Stones of Venice—Vo1. l=: 


120 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


more than safe. Now in B the length ef was only twice 6 ¢_ 
but in ©, e, f, will be found more than twice that of 6, c, 
Therefore, the more slender the shaft, the greater may be the 
proportional excess of the abacus over its diameter. 

§ xv, 2. The smaller the scale of the building, the greater may 
be the excess of the abacus over the diameter of the shaft. 'This 
principle requires, I think, no very lengthy proof: the reader 
¢an understand at once that the cohesion and strength of stone 
which can sustain a small projecting mass, will not sustain a 
vast one overhanging in the same proportion. A bank even 
of loose earth, six feet high, will sometimes overhang its base 
a foot or two, as you may see any day in the gravelly banks of 
the lanes of Hampstead: but make the bank of gravel, equally 
loose, six hundred feet high, and see if you can get it to over- 
hang a hundred or two! much more if there be weight above 
it increased in the same proportion. Hence, let any capital 
be given, whose projection is just safe, and no more, on its 
existing scale; increase its proportions every way equally, 
though ever so little, and it is unsafe ; diminish them equally, . 
and it becomes safe in the exact degree of the diminution. 


=| ae 


Fia. XXIV. 


Let, then, the quantity e d, and angle a be, at A of Fig 
XXIIL, be invariable, and let the length db vary: then we 
shall have such a series of forms as'may be represented by a, 
b, c, Fig. XXIV., of which a is a proportion for a colossal 
building, 6 for a moderately sized building, while c could only 
be admitted on a very small scale indeed. 

§ xvi. 3. The greater the excess of abacus, the steeper must be 
the slope of the bell, the shaft diameter being constant. 

This will evidently follow from the considerations in the 
last paragraph ; supposing only thet, instead of the scale of 


THE CAPITAL. 


12) 


shaft and capital varying together, the scale of the capital 
varies alone. For it will then still be true, that, if the projec 
tion of the capital be just safe on a given scale, as its excess 


over the shaft diameter increases, the pro- 
jection will be unsafe, if the slope of the 
bell remain constant. But it may be 
rendered safe by making this slope 
steeper, and so increasing its supporting 
power. 

Thus let the capital a, Fig. XXV., be 
just safe. Then the capital },in which 
the slope is the same but the excess 
greater, is unsafe. But the capital ¢, in 
which, though the excess equals that of 
b, the steepness of the supporting slope is 
increased, will be as safe as 6, and prob- 
ably as strong as a.* 

§ xvi. 4. The steeper the slope of the 
bell, the thinner may be the abacus. 

The use of the abacus is eminently to 
equalise the pressure over the surface of 


a 


@ 
Fie, XXV. 


the bell, so that the weight may not by any accident be directed 


exclusively upon its edges. In proportion to the strength of 


ee 
ate 


Fie, XXVI. 


these edges, this function of the abacus 
is superseded, and these edges are 
strong in proportion to the steepness of 
the slope. Thus in Fig. XXVL, the 
bell at a@ would carry weight safely 
enough without any abacus, but that at 
e would not : it would probably have its 
edges broken off. The abacus super- 
imposed might be on a very thin, lit- 
tle more than formal, as at b; but onc 
must be thick, as at d. 


§ xvm. These four rules are all that are necessary for general 


* In this case the weight borne is supposed to increase as the abacug 
widens; the illustration wou!d have been clearer if I had assumed thy 
breadth of abacus to be constant, and that u! the shaft to vary. 


£29 THE STONES OF VENICK. 


criticism ; and observe that these are only semi-imperative,-—~ 
rules of permission, not of compulsion. Thus Law 1 asserts 
that the slender shaft may have greater excess of capital thar 
the thick shaft; but it need not, unless the architect chooses . 
his thick shafts must have-small excess, but his slender ones 
need not have large. So Law 2 says, that as the building is 
smaller, the excess may be ereater ; but it need not, for the 
excess which is safe in the large is still safer in the small. Se 
Law 8 says that capitals of great excess must have steep slopes ; 
but in does not say that capitals of small excess may not have 
steep slopes also, if we choose. And lastly, Law 4 asserts the 
necessity of the thick abacus for the shallow bell; but the 
steép bell may have a thick abacus also. ; 

§ xrx. It will be found, however, that in practice some con- 
fession of these laws will always be useful, and especially of 
the two first. The eye always requires, on a slender shaft, a 
more spreading capital than it does on a massy one, and @ 
bolder mass of capital on a small scale than on a large. And, 
in the application of the first rule, it is to be noted that a shaft 
becomes slender either by diminution of diameter or increase 
of height ; that either mode of change presupposes the weight 
above it diminished, and requires an expansion of abacus. 1 
know no mode of spoiling a noble building more frequent in 
actual practice than the imposition of flat and slightly ex- 
panded capitals on tall shafts. 

§ xx. The reader must observe, also, that, in the demonstra. 
tion of the four laws, I always assumed the weight above to 
be given. By the alteration of this weight, therefore, the archi- 
tect has it in his power to relieve, and therefore alter, the 
forms of his capitals. By its various distribution on their 
centres or edges, the slope of their bells and thickness of abaci 
will be affected also ; so that he has countless expedients at his 
command for the various treatment of his design. He can di- 
vide his weights among more shafts; he can throw them ir 
different places and different directions on the abaci; he can 
alter slope of bells or diameter of shafts; he can use spurred 
or plain bells, thin or thick abaci ; and all these changes ad- 
mitting of infinity in their degrees, and infinity a thousand 


THE CAPITAL. 128 


times told in their relations: and all this without reference to 
decoration, merely with the five forms of block capital ! 

§ xxt. In the harmony of these arrangements, in their fit- 
ness, unity, and accuracy, lies the true proportion of every 
building,—proportion utterly endless in its infinities of change, 
with unchanged beauty. And yet this connection of the frame 
of their building into one harmony has, I believe, never been 
so much.as dreamed of by architects. It has been instinc- 
tively done in some degree by many, empirically in some de- 
gree by many more ; thoughtfully and thoroughly, I believe, 
by none. 

§ xxu. We have hitherto considered the abacus as necessa- 
rily a separate stone from the bell: evidently, however, the 
strength of the capital will be undiminished if both are cut out 
of one block. This is actually the case in many capitals, es- 
pecially those on a small scale ; and in others the detached 
upper stone is a mere representative of the abacus, and is 
much thinner than the form of the capital requires, while the 
true abacus is united with the bell, and concealed by its dec- 
oration, or made part of it. 

§ xxuz Farther. We have hitherto considered bell and 
abacus as both derived from the concentration of the cornice. - 
But it must at once occur to the reader, that the projection of 
the under stone and the thickness of the upper, which are 
quite enough for the work of the continuous cornice, may not 
be enough always, or rather are seldom likely to. be so, for the 
harder work of the capital. Both may have to be deepened 
and expanded : but as this'would cause a want of harmony in 
the parts, when they occur on the same level, it is better in 
such case to let the entire cornice form the abacus of the 
capital, and put a deep capital bell beneath it. 

§ xxiv. The reader will understand both arrangements in- 
stantly by two examples. Fig. XXVII represents two win- 
dows, more than usually beautiful examples of a very frequent 
Venetian form. Here the deep cornice or string course which 
runs along the wall of the house is quite strong enough for 
the work of the capitals of the slender shafts: its own upper 
stone is therefore also theirs; its own lower stone, by its 


124 SHE STONES OF VENICE. 


revolution or oncentration, forms their bells: but to mark 
the increased mportance of its function in so doing, it re- 
ceives decoration, as the bell 
of the capital, which it did 
not receive as the under 
stone of the cornice. 

In Fig. XXVIIL, a little 
bit of the church of Santa 
Fosca at Torcello, the cor- 
nice or string course, which 
goes round every part of 
the church, is not strong 
enough to form the capitals 
of the shafts. It therefore 
forms their abaci only ; and 
in order to mark the di- 
minished importance of its 
function, it ceases to re- 
ceive, as the abacus of the 
capital,the decoration which 
it received as the string 
course of the wall. 

This last arrangement is of great frequency in Venice, 
occurring most characteristically in St. Mark’s: and in the 
Gothic of St. John and Paul we find the two arrangements 
beautifully united, though in great simplicity; the string 
courses of the walls form the capitals of the shafts of the 
traceries, and the abaci of the vaulting shafts of the apse. 

§ xxv. We have hitherto spoken of capitals of circular 
shafts only : those of square piers are more frequently formed 
by the cornice only ; otherwise they are like those of circular 
piers, without the difficulty of reconciling the base of the 
bell with its head. 

§ xxvi. When two or more shafts are grouped together, 
their capitals are usualy treated as separate, until they come 
into actual contact. if there be any awkwardness in the 
junction, it is conceai:d by the decoration, and one abacus 
serves, in most cases, for all. The double group, Fig. XX VIL. 


Fie, XXVII. 


4. B CAPITAL. 128 


is the simplest possible type of the arrangement. In tha 
ticher Northern Gothic groups of eighteen or twenty shafts 
cluster together, and sometimes the smaller shafts crouch 
under the capitals of the larger, and hide their heads in the 
crannies, with small nominal abaci of their own, while the 
larger shafts carry the serviceable abacus of the whole pier, 
as in the nave of Rouen. There is, however, evident sacrifice 
of sound principle in this system, the smaller abaci being of 
no use. They are the exact contrary of the rude early abacus 
at Milan, given in Plate XVI. There one poor abacus 


stretched itself out to do all the work: here there are idle 
abaci getting up into corners and doing none. 

§ xxvu. Finally, we have considered the capital hitherto 
entirely as an expansion of the bearing power of the shaft, 
supposing the shaft composed ofa single stone. But, evidently, 
the capital has a function, if possible, yet more important, 
when the shaft is composed of small masonry. It enables all 
that masonry to act together, and to receive the pressure from 
above collectively and with a single strength, And thus, con- 
sidered merely as a large stone set on the top of the shaft, i 
is a feature of the highest architectural importance, irrespee 


126 YHER TYONES OF VENICE. 


tive of its expansion, which indeed is, in some very noble cap. 
itals, exceedingly smal’, And thus every large stone set at any 
important point to reassemble the force of smaller masonry 
and prepare it for the sustaining of weight, is a capital or 
“head ” stone (the true meaning of the word) whether it pro- 
ject or not. Thus at 6, in Plate IV., the stones which support 
the thrust of the brickwork are capitals, which have no pro- 
jection at all; and the large stones in the window above are 
capitals projecting in one direction only. 

§ xxvut. The reader is now master of all he need know 
respecting construction of capitals; and from what has been 
laid before him, must assuredly feel that there can never be 
any new system of architectural forms invented ; but that all 
vertical support must be, to the end of time, best obtained by 
shafts and capitals. It has been so obtained by nearly every 
nation of builders, with more or less refinement in the man- 
agement of the details; and the later Gothic builders of the 
North stand almost alone in their effort to dispense with the 
natural development of the shaft, and banish the capital from 
their compositions, 

They were grad‘1ally led into this error through a series of 
steps which it is not here our business to trace. But they 
may be generalised in a few words. 

§ xxix. All classical architecture, and the Romanesque — 
which is legitimately descended from it, is composed of bold 
independent shafts, plain or fluted, with bold detached eapi- 
tals, forming arcades or colonnades where they are needed; . 
and of walls whose apertures are surrounded by courses of» 
parallel lines called mouldings, which are continuous round 
the apertures, and have neither shafts nor capitals. The shaft 
system and moulding system are entirely separate. 

The Gothic architects confounded the two. They clustered 
the shafts till they looked like a group of mouldings. They 
shod and capitaled the mouldings till they looked like a group 
of shafts. So thata picr became merely the side of a door or 
window rolled up, ani the side of the window a pier unrolled 
(vide last Chapter, § x <x.), both being composed of a series of 
small shafts, each with base and capital. The architect seemed 


THE OAPITAL. 17 


to have whole mats of shafts at his disposal, like the rush 
mats which one puts under cream cheese. If he wanted a 
great pier he rolled up the mat; if he wanted the side of a 
door he spread out the mat; and ncw the reader has to add 
to the other distinctions between the Hgyptian and the Gothic 
shaft, already noted in § xxvz of Chap. VIIL, thisone more—: 
the most important of all—that while the Egyptian rush clus. 
ter has only one massive capital altogether, the Gothic rush 
mat has a separate tiny capital to every xeveral rush. 

§ xxx. The mats were gradually made of finer rushes, until 
it became troublesome to give each rush its capital. In fact, 
when the groups of shafts became excessively complicated, the 
expansion of their small abaci was of no use : it was dispensed 
with altogether, and the mouldings of pier and jamb ran up 
continuously into the arches. 

This condition, though in many respects faulty and false, is 
yet the eminently characteristic state of Gothic : it is the defi- 
nite formation of it as a distinct style, owing no farther aid to 
classical models ; and its lightness and complexity render it, 
when well treated, and enriched with Flamboyant decoration, 
a very glorious means of picturesque effect. It is, in fact, this 
form of Gothic which commends itself most easily to the gen- 
eral mind, and which has suggested the innumerable foolish 
theories about the derivation of Gothic from tree trunks and 
avenues, which have from time to time been brought forward 
by persons ignorant of the history of architecture. 

§ xxx1. When the sense of picturesqueness, as well as that 
of justness and dignity, had been lost, the spring of the con- 
tinuous mouldings was replaced by what Professor Willis calls 
the Discontinuous impost ; which, being a barbarism of the 
basest and most painful kind, and being to architecture what 
the setting of a saw is to music, I shall not trouble the reader 
to examine. For it is not in my plan to note for him all the 
various conditions of error, but only to guide him to the ap- 
preciation of the right ; and I only note even the true Contin 
uous or Flamboyant Gothic because this is redeemed by its 
beautiful decoration, afterwards to be considered. or, as far 
as structure is concerned, the moment the capital vanishes 


128 THE STONES OF VENICR. 


from the shaft, that moment we are in error: all good Gothis 
has true capitals to the shafts of its jambs and traceries, and 
all Gothic is debased the instant the shaft vanishes. It matterg 
not how slender, or how small, or how low, the shaft may be :- 
wherever there is indication of concentrated vertical support, 
then the capital is a necessary termination. I know how 
much Gothic, otherwise beautiful, this sweeping principle con- 
demns ; but it condemns not altogether. We may still take 
delight in its lovely proportions, its rich decoration, or its 
elastic and reedy moulding ; but be assured, wherever shafts, 
or any approximations to the forms of shafts, are employed, for 
whatever office, or on whatever scale, be it in jambs or piers, 
or balustrades, or traceries, without capitals, there is a defiance 
of the natural laws of construction ; and that, wherever such 
examples are found in ancient buildings, they are either the ex: 
periments of barbarism, or the commencements of decline. 


CHAPTER X. 
THE ARCH LINE. 


§ 1. We have seen in the last section how our means of ver 
tical support may, for the sake of economy both of space and 
material, be gathered into piers or shafts, and directed to the 
sustaining of particular points. The next question is how to 
connect these points or tops of shafts with each other, so as to 
be able to lay on them a continuous roof. This the reader, as 
before, is to favor me by finding out for himself, under these’ 
following conditions. 

Let s, s, Fig. XXIX., opposite, be two shafts, with their 
capitals ready prepared for their work ; and a, b, b, and ¢, ¢, c, 
be six stones of different sizes, one very long and large, and 
two smaller, and three smaller still, of which the reader is to 
choose which he likes best, in order to connect the tops of the 
shafts. 

I suppose he will first try if he can lift the great stone a, 
and if he can, he will put it very simply on the tops of the twa 
pillars, as at A. 


LHE ARCH LiNn#. 129 


Very. well indeed : he has done already what a number of 
Greek architects have been thought very clever for having 
done. But suppose he cannot lift the great stone a, or sup. 


pose I will not give it to him, but only the two smaller stones 
at.b, 6; he will doubtless try to put them up, tilted against 
each other, as at d. Very awkward this ; 


worse than card- 
house building. But if he cuts off the corners of the stones, 
Vou. 3.—9 


i30 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


30 as to make each of them of the form e, they will stand uz 
very securely, as « B. 

But suppose he wannct lift even these less stones, but can 
raise those atc, c,c. hen, cutting each of them into the 
form at e, he will doubties2 set them up as at f- 

§m This last arrangemest looks a little dangerous. Is | 
there not a chance of the sto.e i the middle pushing ths 
others out, or tilting them up at. aside, and slipping down 
itself between them? There is such a chance: and if by 
somewhat altering the form of the stunes, we can diminish 
this chance, all the better. I must say “we” now, for per- 
haps I may have to help the reader a litile. 

The danger is, observe, that the midmost stone at f pushes 
out the side ones: then if we can give the side ones such 2 
shape as that, left to themselves, they would fall heavily for- 
ward, they will resist this push oué by their weight, exactly ir 
proportion to their own particular inclination or desire tc 
tumble in. Take one of them separately, standing up asat g ; 
it is just possible it may stand up as it is, like the Tower o} 
Pisa : but we want it to fall forward. Suppose we cut away 
the parts that are shaded at A and leave it as at 7, it is very 
certain it cannot stand alone now, but will fall forward to our 
entire satisfaction. 

Farther: the midmost stone at fis likely to be trouble- 
some chiefly by its weight, pushing down between the others ; 
the more we lighten it the better: so we will cut it into ex. 
actly the same shape as the side ones, chiselling away the 
shaded parts, as at A. We shall then have all the three stones - 
&, 1, m, of the same shape ; and now putting them together, 
we have, at C, what the reader, I doubt not, will perceive at 
once to be a muck more satisfactory arrangement than that 
at f. 

§ ut We have now got three arrangements ; in one using 
only one pisce of stone, in the second two, and in the third 
three. The first arrangement has no particular name, excep‘ 
the “horizontal :” but the single stone (or beam, it may be,? 
is called a linte! ; the second eon es is called a “ Gable ;' 
the third an ‘© Arch.” 


YHR AROE LINR. 13} 


We might have used pieces of wood instead of stone in ali 
these arrangements, with no difference in plan, so long as the 
beams were kept loose, like the stones ; but as beams can be 
securely nailed together at the ends, we need not trouble our- 
selves so much about their shape or balance, and therefore the 
plan at fis a peculiarly wooden construction (the reader wili 
doubtless recognise in it the profile of many a farm-house 
roof): and again, because beams are tough, and light, and 
long, as compared with stones, they are admirably adapted 
for the constructions at A and B, the plain lintel and gable, 
while that at C is, for the most part, left to brick and stone. 

§1v. But farther. The constructions, A, B, and C, though 
very conveniently to be first considered as composed of one, 
two, and three pieces, are by no means necessarily so. When 
we have once cut the stones of the arch into a shape like that 
of k, 1, and m, they will hold together, whatever their number, 
place, or size, as at n ; and the great value of the arch is, that 
it permits small stones to be used with safety instead of large 
ones, which are not always to be had. Stones cut into the 
shape of &, 1, and m, whether they be short or long (I have 
drawn them all sizes at n on purpose), are called Voetiasning : : 
this isa hard, ugly French name ; but the reader will per. 
haps be kind enough to recollect it ; ; it will save us both some 
trouble: and to make amends for this infliction, I will relieve 
him of the term keystone. One voussoir is as much a keystone 
as another; only people usually call the stone which is last 
put in the keystone ; and that one happens generally to be at 
the top or middle of the arch. 

§ v. Not only the arch, but even the lintel, may be built o7 
many stones or bricks. The reader may see lintels built in 
this way over most of the windows of our brick London 
houses, and s0 also the gable: there are, therefore, two dis- 
tinct questions respecting each arrangement :—First, what is 
the line or direction of it, which gives it its strength? and, 
secondly, what is the manner of masonry of it, which gives it 
its consistence? The first of these I shall consider in this 
Chapter under the head of the Arch Line, using the term arch 
as including al manner of construction (though we shall 


132 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


have no trouble except about curves) ; and in the next Chap 
ter I shall consider the second, under the head, Arch Masonry. 

§ v1. Now the arch line is the ghost or skeleton of the arch ; 
or rather it is the spinal marrow of the arch, and the vous- 
soirs are the vertebree, which keep it safe and sound, and clothe 
it. This arch line the architect has first to conceive and shape 
in his mind, as opposed to, or having to bear, certain forces 
which will try to distort it this way and that; and against 
which he is first to direct and bend the line itself into as 
strong resistance as he may, and then, with his voussoirs and 
what else he can, to guard it, and help it, and keep it to its 
duty and in its shape. So the arch line is the moral charac- 
ter of the arch, and the adverse forces are its temptations 
and the voussoirs, and what else we may help it with, are its 
armor and its motives to good conduct. 

§ vn. This moral character of the arch is called by archi- 
tects its ‘Line of Resistance.” There is a great deal of nicety 
in calculating it with precision, just as there is sometimes in 
finding out very precisely what is a man’s true line of moral 
conduct ; but this, in arch morality and in man morality, is a 
very simple and easily to be understood principle,—that if 
either arch or man expose themselves to their special tempta- 
tions or adverse forces, outside of the voussoirs or proper and 
appointed armor, both will fall. An arch whose line of resist- 
ance is in the middle of its voussoirs is perfectly safe : in pro- 
portion as the said line runs near the edge of its voussoirs, 
the arch is in danger, as the man is who nears temptation ; 
and the moment the line of resistance emerges out of the 
voussoirs the arch falls. 

§ vu. There are, therefore, properly speaking, two arch 
lines. One is the visible direction or curve of the arch, which 
may generally be considered as the under edge of its vous- 
soirs, and which has often no more to do with the real stabil- 
ity of the arch, than a man’s apparent conduct has with his 
heart. The other line, which is the line of resistance, or line 
of good behavior, may or may not be consistent with the out. 
ward and apparent curves of the arch; but if not, then the 
security of the arch depends simply upon this, whether the 


THH ARCH LINE. 133 


roussoirs which assume or pretend to the one line are wide 
enough to inelude the other. 

§ rx. Now when the reader is told that the line of resistance 
varies with every change either in place or quantity of the 
weight above the arch, he will see at once that we have no 
chance of arranging arches by their moral characters : we can 
only take the apparent arch line, or visible direction, as a 
ground of arrangement. We shall consider the possible or 
probable forms or contours of arches in the present Chapter, 
and in the succeeding one the forms of voussoir and other 
help which may best fortify these visible lines against every 
temptation to lose their consistency. 

§ x. Look back to Fig. XXIX. Evidently the abstract or 
ghost line of the arrangement at A is a plain horizontal line, 
as here ata, Fig. XXX. 
The abstract line of the 
arrangement at B, Fig. 
XXIX., is composed of 
two straight lines, set @ 
against each other, as 
here at b. The abstract 
line of C, Fig. XXIX., is 
acurve of some kind, not 
at present determined, . ———— d 
suppose c, Fig. XXX. Fie. XXX. 

Then, as } is two of the 

straight lines at a, set up against each other, we may conceive 
an arrangement, d, made up of two of the curved lines atc, 
set against each other. This is called a pointed arch, which 
is a contradiction in terms: it ought to be called a curved 
gable ; but it must keep the name it has got. 

Now a, b, c, d, Fig. XXX., are the ghosts of the lintel, the 
gable, the arch, and the pointed arch. With the poor lintel 
ghost we need trouble ourselves no farther; there are no 
changes in him: but there is much variety in the other three, 
and the method of their variety wil) be best discerned by 
studying 6 and d, as subordinate {« «nd connected with the 
simple arch at c, 


134 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


§ x1. Many architects, especially the worst, have been very 
curious in designing out of the way arches,—elliptical arches, 
and four-centred arches, so called, and other singularities. 
The good architects have generally been content, and we for 
the present will be so, with God’s arch, the arch of the rain- 
bow and of the apparent heaven, and which the sun shapes 
for us as itsets and rises. Let us watch the sun for a moment 
as it climbs: when it is a quarter up, it will give us the arch 
a, Fig. XXXL. ; when it is half up, 6, and when three quarters 


Deca 


N. 
D ‘sg 


Fie, XXXI. 


up,c. There will be an infinite number of arches between 
these, but we will take these as sufficient representatives of all. 
Then a is the low arch, b the central or pure arch, ¢ the high 
arch, and the rays of the sun would have drawn for us their 
voussoirs. 

§ xu. We will take these several arches successively, and 
fixing the top of each accurately, draw two right lines thence 
to its base, d, e, f, Fig. XXXL Then these lines give us the 
relative gables of each of the arches ; d is the Italian or south: 
ern gable, e the central gable, f the Gothic gable. 


THE ARCH LINE. 135 


§ xm. We will again take the three arches with their gablea 
in succession, and on each of the sides of the gable, between 
it and the arch, we will describe another arch, as at g, h, 2 
Then the curves so described give the pointed arches belong- 
ing to each of the round arches; g, the flat pointed arch, h, 
the central pointed arch, and 7, the lancet pointed arch. 

§ xtv. If the radius with which these intermediate curves 
are drawn be the base of /, the last is the equilateral pointed 
arch, one of great importance in Gothic work. But between 
the gable and circle, in all the three figures, there are an infi- 
nite number of pointed arches, describable with different radii; 
and the three round arches, be it remembered, are themselves 
representatives of an infinite number, passing from the flattest 
conceivable curve, through the semicircle and horseshoe, up 
to the full circle. 

The central and the last group are the most important. 
The central round, or semicircle, is the Roman, the Byzan- 
tine, and Norman arch ; and its relative pointed includes one 
wide branch of Gothic.. The horseshoe round is the Arabic 
and Moorish arch, and its relative pointed includes the whole 
range of Arabic and lancet, or Early English and French 
Gothics. I mean of course by the relative pointed, the entire 
group of which the equilateral arch is the rep- 
resentative. Between it and the outer horre- 
shoe, as this latter rises higher, the reader 
will find, on experiment, the great families of 
what may be called the horseshoe pointed,— “aoxxxn. 
curves of the highest importance, but which 
are all included, with English lancet, under the term, relative 
pointed of the horseshoe arch. 

§ xv. The groups above described are all formed of circular 
ares, and include all truly useful aud beautiful arches for 
ordinary work. I believe that singular and complicated 
curves are made use of in modern engineering, but with these 
the general reader can have no concern: the Ponte della 
Trinita at Florence is the most graceful instance I know of 
such structure ; the arch made use of being very subtle, and 
approximating to the low ellipse ; for which, in common work, 


136 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


a barbarous pointed arch, called four-centred, and composed 
of bits of circles, is substituted by the English builders. The 
high ellipse, I believe, exists in eastern architecture. I have 
never myself met with it on a large scale ; but it occurs in the 
niches of the later portions of the Ducal palace at Venice, to- 
gether with a singular hyperbolic arch, a in Fig. XXXIIL, to 
be described hereafter: with such caprices we are not here 
concerned. 

§ xvr. We are, however, concerned to notice the absurdity 
of another form of arch, which, with the four-centred, belongs 
to the English perpendicular Gothic. 

Taking the gable of any of the groups in Fig. XXXI. (sup- 
pose the equilateral), here at b, in Fig. XXXIIL, the dotted 


line representing the relative pointed arch, we may evidently 
conceive an arch formed by reversed curves on the inside of 
the gable, as here shown by the inner curved lines. I imag: 
ine the reader by this time. knows enough of the nature of 
arches to understand that, whatever strength or stability was 
gained by the curve on the outside of the gable, exactly so 
much is lost by curves on the inside. The natural tendency - 
of such an arch to dissolution by its own mere weight renders 
it a feature of detestable ugliness, wherever it occurs on a 
large scale. It is eminently characteristic of Tudor work, and 
" it is the profile of the Chinese roof (I say on a large scale, be- 
cause this as well as all other capricious arches, may be made 
secure by their masonry when small, but not otherwise). 
Some allowable modifications of it will be noticed in the 
chapter on Roofs. 

§ xvu. There is only one more form of arch which we have 
fo notice. When the last described arch is used, not as the 


THE ARCH MASON?IY. 137 


principal arrangement, but as a mere heading to a common 
pointed arch, we have the form c, Fig. XXXIII. Now this 
is better than the entirely reversed arch for two reasons ; first, 
less of the line is weakened by reversing ; secondly, the double 
curve has a very high esthetic value, not existing in the mere 
segments of circles. For these reasons arches of this kind are 
uot only admissible, but even of great desirableness, when 
their scale and masonry render them secure, but above a cer- 
tain scale they are altogether barbarous ; and, with the re- 
versed Tudor arch, wantonly employed, are the characteristics 
of the worst and meanest schools of architecture, past or 
present. 

This double curve is called the Ogee; it is the profile of 
many German leaden roofs, of many Turkish domes (there 
more excusable, because associated and in sympathy with ex- 
quisitely managed arches of the same line in the walls below), 
of Tudor turrets, as in Henry the Seventh’s Chapel, and it is 
at the bottom or top of sundry other blunders all over the 
world. 

§ xvm. The varieties of the ogee curve are infinite, as the 
reversed portion of it may be engrafted on every other form 
of arch, horseshoe, round, or pointed. Whatever is generally 
worth of note in these varieties, and in other arches of 
caprice, we shall best discover by examining their masonry ; 
for it is by their good masonry only that they are rendered 
either stable or beautiful. To this question, then, let us 
address ourselves. 


CHAPTER XL 
THE ARCH MASONRY. 


§ 1 On the subject of the stability of arcnes, volumes have 
been written and volumes more are required. The reader 
will not, therefore, expect from me any very complete ex- 
planation of its conditions within the limits of a single chap- 
ter. But that which is necessary for him to know is very 
simple and very easy ; and yet, I believe, some part of it ig 
-very little known, or noticed. 


138 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


We must first have a clear idea of what is meant by an 
arch. It is a curved shell of firm materials, on whose back a 
burden is to be laid of loose materials. So far as the materials 
above it are not loose, but themselves hold together, the open- 
ing below is not an arch, but an eacavation. Note this differ- 
ence very carefully. If the King of Sardinia tunnels through 
the Mont Cenis, as he proposes, he will not require to build 
a brick arch under his tunnel to carry the weight of the Mont 
Cenis: that would need scientific masonry indeed. The 
Mont Cenis will carry itself, by its own cohesion, and a 
succession of invisible granite arches, rather larger than the 
tunnel. But when Mr. Brunel tunnelled the Thames bottom, 
he needed to build a brick arch to carry the six or seven feet 
of mud and the weight of water above. That is a type of all 
arches proper. 

§ mn. Now arches, in practice, partake of the nature of the 
two. So far as their masonry above is Mont-Cenisian, that is 
to say, colossal in comparison of them, and granitic, so that 
the arch is a mere hole in the rock substance of it, the form 
of the arch is of no consequence whatever : it may be rounded, 
or lozenged, or ogee'd, or anything else ; and in the noblest 
architecture there is always some character of this kind given 
to the masonry. It is independent enough not to care about 
the holes cut in it, and does not subside into them like sand. 
But the theory of arches does not presume on any such con- 
dition of things; it allows itself only the shell of the arch 
proper ; the vertebra, carrying their marrow of resistance ; 
and, above this shell, it assumes the wall to be in a state of - 
flux, bearing down on the arch, like water or sand, with its 
whole weight. And farther, the problem which is to be 
solved by the arch builder is not merely to carry this weight, 
but to carry it with the least thickness of shell. It is easy to 
carry it by continually thickening your voussoirs : if you have 
six feet depth of sand or gravel to carry, and you choose to 
employ granite voussoirs six feet thick, no question but your 
arch is safe enough. But it is perhaps somewhat too costly . 
the thing to be done is to carry the sand or gravel with brick 
voussoirs, six inches thick, or, at any rate, with the least 


PLATE IIJ,—ArcH Masonry. 


THE ARCH MASONRY. ¥3?e 


thickness of voussoir which will be safe; and to do this re. 
quires peculiar arrangement of the lines of the arch. There 
are many arrangements, useful all in their way, but we have 
only to do, in the best architecture, with the simplest and 
most easily understood.. We have first to note those which 
regard the actual shell of the arch, and then we shall give a 
few examples of the superseding of such expedients by Mont- 
Cenisian masonry. 

§ ut. What we have to say will apply to all arches, but the 
_ central pointed arcli is the best for general illustration. Let 
a, Plate I1., be the shell of a pointed arch with loose loading 
above; and suppose you find that shell not quite thick 
enough ; and that the weight bears too heavily on the top of 
the arch, and is likely to break it in: you proceed to thicken 
your shell, but need you thicken it all equally? Not so; you 
would only waste your good voussoirs. If you have any coin- 
mon sense you will thicken it at the top, where a Mylodon’s 
skull is thickened for the same purpose (and some human 
skulls, I fancy), as at b. The pebbles and gravel above will 
now shoot off it right and left, as the bullets do off a cuiras- 
sier’s breastplate, and will have no chance of beating it in. 

If still it be not strong enough, a farther addition may be 
made, as at c, now thickening the voussoirs a little at the 
base also. But as this may perhaps throw the arch incon- 
veniently high, or occasion a waste of voussoirs at the top, 
we may employ another expedient. 

§1v. I imagine the reader’s common sense, if not his pre- 
vious knowledge, will enable him to understand that if the 
arch at a, Plate IIL, burst in at the top, it must burst owl at 
the sides. Set up two pieces of pasteboard, edge to edge, 
and press them dewn with your hand, and you will see them 
bend out at the sides. Therefore, if you can keep the arch 
from starting out at the points p, p, it cannot curve in at the 
top, put what weight on it you will, unless by sheer crushing 
of the stones to fragments. 

§ v. Now you may keep the arch from starting out at p by 
loading it at p, putting more weight upon it and against it at 
that point ; and this, in praciice, is the way it is usually done 


140 VHH SYONES OF VENICE. 


But we assume at present that the weight above is sand oy 
water, quite unmanageable, not te be directed to the point. 
we choose ; and in practice, it may sometimes happen that 
we cannot put weight upon the arch at p. We may perhaps 
want an opening above it, or it may be at the side ur the 
building, and many other circumstances may occur to ‘ninder 
as. 

§ vi But if we are not sure that we can put weight above 
it, we are perfectly sure that we can hang weight under it. 
You may always thicken your shell inside, and put the weight | 
upon it as at x 2, ind, Plate Il. Not much chance of its 
bursting out at p, now, is there ? 

§ vu. Whenever, therefore, an arch has to bear vertical 
pressure, it will bear it better when its shell is shaped as at 5 
or d, than as at a: b and d are, therefore, the types of arches 
built to resist vertical pressure, all over the world, and from 
the beginning of architecture to its end. None others can be 
compared with them : all are imperfect except these. 

The added projections at x #, in d, are called Cusps, and 
they are the very soul and life of the best northern Gothic ; 
yet never thoroughly understood nor found in perfection, 
except in Italy, the northern builders working often, even in 
the best times, with the vulgar form at a. 

The form at } is rarely found in the north: its perfection 
is in the Lombardic Gothic ; and branches of it, good and bad 
according to their use, occur in Saracenic work. 

§ vm. The true and perfect cusp is single only. But it. 
was probably invented (by the Arabs ?) not as a constructive, 
but a decorative feature, in'‘pure fantasy ; and in early northern 
work it is only the application to the arch of the foliation, so 
called, of penetrated spaces in stone surfaces, already enough 
explained in the “Seven Lamps,” Chap. IIL, p. 85 ef seg. It 
is degraded in dignity, and loses its usefulness, exactly in 
proportion to its multiplication on the arch. In later archi- 
tecture, especially English Tudor, it is sunk into dotage, and 
becomes a simple excrescence, a bit of stone pinched up out 
of the arch, as a cook pinches the paste at the edge of a pie. 

§ x. The depth and place of the cusp, that is to say, its 


iin 


Wn 
\V ia 
ae 


a i am i 
po aN! ee ANG avai ut 


aie 


4 i : : Nt 
sul 


PLATE Iv.—ARCH MASONRY. 


THE ARCH MASONRY. 14° 


exact application to the shoulder of the curve of the arch. 
varies with the direction of the weight to be sustained. I have . 
spent more than a month, and that in hard work too, in merely 
trying to get the forms of cusps into perfect order: whereby 
the reader may guess that I have not space to go into the 
subject now; but I shall hereafter give a few of the leading 
and most perfect examples, with their measures and masonry. 

§ x. The reader now understands all that he need about 
the shell of the arch, considered as an united piece of stone. 

He has next to consider the shape of the voussoirs. This, 
as much as is required, he will be abie best to comprehend by 
a few examples ; by which I shall be able also to illustrate, or 
rather which will force me to illustrate, some of the methods 
of Mont-Cenisian masonry, which were to be the second paré 
of our subject.. 

§xt 1 and 2, Plate IV., are two cornices; 1 from St. 
Antonio, Padua ; 2, from the Cathedral of Sens. I want them 
for cornices; but I have put them in this plate because, 
though their arches are filled up behind, and are in fact mere 
blocks of stone with arches cut into their faces, they illustrate 
the constant masonry of small arches, both in Italian and 
Northern Romanesque, but especially Italian, each arch being 
cut out of its own proper block of stone: this is Mont- 
Cenisian enough, on a small scale. 

3 is a window from Carnarvon Castle, and very primitive 
and interesting in manner,—one of its arches being of one 
stone, the other of two. And here we have an instance of a 
form of arch which would be barbarous enough on a large 
scale, and of many pieces; but quaint and agreeable thus 
massively built. 

4 is from a little belfry in a Swiss village above Vevay ; one 
fancies the window of an absurd form, seen in the distance, 
but one is pleased with it on seeing its masonry. It could 
hardly be stronger. 

§ xu. These then are arches cut of one block. The next 
step is to form them of two pieces, set together at the head 
of the arch. 6, from the Eremitani, Padua, is very quaint 
and primitive in manner: it is a curious church altogether, 


142 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


and has some strange traceries cut out of single blocks, One 
. is given in the “Seven Lamps,” Plate VIL, in the left-hand 
corner at the bottom. 

7, from the Frari, Venice, very firm and fine, and admirably 
decorated, as we shall see hereafter. 5, the simple two-pieced 
construction, wrought with the most exquisite proportion and 
precision of workmanship, as is everything else in the glorious 
church to which it belongs, San Fermo of Verona. The ad- 
dition of the top piece, which completes the circle, does not 
affect the plan of the beautiful arches, with their simple and 
perfect cusps; but it is highly curious, and serves to show 
how the idea of the cusp rose out of mere foliation. The 
whole of the architecture of this church may be characterised 
as exhibiting the maxima of simplicity in construction, and 
perfection in workmanship,—a rare unison: for, in general, 
simple designs are rudely worked, and as the builder perfects 
his execution, he complicates his plan. Nearly all the arches 
of San Fermo are two-pieced. 

§ xur. We have seen the construction with one and two 
pieces: a and 6, Fig. 8, Plate IV., are the general types of 
the construction with three pieces, uncusped and cusped; ¢ 
and d with five pieces, uncusped and cusped. Of these the 
three-pieced construction is of enormous importance, and must 
detain us some time. The five-pieced is the three-pieced with 
a joint added on each side, and is also of great importance. 
The four-pieced, which is the two-pieced with added joints, 
rarely occurs, and need not detain us. 

§ xiv. It will be remembered that in first working out the ~ 
principle of the arch, we composed the arch of three pieces. 
Three is the smallest number which can exhibit the real 
principle of arch masonry, and it may be considered as repre- 
sentative of all arches built on that principle ; the one and 
two-pieced arches being microscopic Mont-Cenisian, mere 
caves in blocks of stone, or gaps between two rocks leaning 
together. 

But the three-pieced arch is properly representative of all ; 
and the larger and more complicated constructions are merely 
produced by keeping the’ central piece for what is called a 


THE ARCH MASONRY. 143 


keystone, and putting additional joints at the sides. Now so 
long as an arch is pure circular or pointed, it does not matter 
how many joints or youssoirs you have, nor where the joints 
are ; nay, you may joint your keystone itself, and make it 
two-pieced. But if the arch be of any bizarre form, espe-' 
cially ogee, the joints must be in particular places, and the 
masonry simple, or it will not be thoroughly good and secure ; 
and the fine schools of the ogee arch have only arisen in © 
countries where it was the custom to build arches of few 
pieces. 

§ xv. The typical pure pointed arch of Venice is a. five- 
pieced arch, with its stones in three orders of magnitude, the 
longest being the lowest, as at b,, Plate III. If the arch be . 
very large, a fourth order of magnitude is added, as at a,. 
The portals of the palaces of Venice have one or other of 
these masonries, almost without exception. Now, as one 
piece is added to make a larger door, one piece is taken away 
to make a smaller one, or a window, and the masonry. type of 
the Venetian Gothic window is consequently three-pieced, c,,. 

§ xvi. The reader knows already where a cusp is useful. It 
is wanted, he will remember, to give weight to those. side 
stones, and draw them inwards against the thrust of the top 
stone. ‘Take one of the side stones of c, out for a moment, as 
at d. Now the proper place of the cusp upon it varies with 
the weight which it bears or requires; but in practice this 
nicety is rarely observed ; the place of the cusp is almost al- 
ways determined by esthetic considerations, and it is evident 
that the variations in its place may be infinite. Consider the 
cusp asa wave passing up the side stone from its bottom to its 
top ; then you will have the succession of forms from e, to g 
(Plate III.), with infinite degrees of transition from each to 
each ; but of which you may take e, f, and g, as representing 
three great families of cusped arches. Use e for your side 
stones, and you have an arch as that at h below, which may 
be called a down-cusped arch. Use / for the side stone, and 
you have 7, which may be called a mid-cusped arch. Use g, 
and you have #, an up-cusped arch. 

§ xvu. The reader will observe that I call the arch mid 


144 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


cusped, not when the cusped point isin the middle of the 
curve of the arch, but when it is in the middle of the side 
piece, and also that where the side pieces join the keystone 
there will be a change, perhaps somewhat abrupt, in the cur- 
‘vature. 

I have preferred to call the arch mid-cusped with respect 
to its side piece than with respect to its own curve, because 
the most beautiful Gothic arches in the world, those of the 
Lombard Gothic, have, in all the instances I have examined, 
a form more or less approximating to this mid-cusped one at 
i (Plate III.), but having the curvature of the cusp carried 
up into the keystone, as we shall see presently: where, how- 
- ever, the arch is built of many voussoirs, a mid-cusped arch 
will mean one which has the point of the cusp midway be- 
tween its own base and apex. 

The Gothic arch of Venice is almost invariably up-cusped 
as atk. The reader may note that, in both down-cusped and 
up-cusped arches, the piece of stone, added to form the cusp, 
is of the shape of a scymitar, held down in the one case and 
up in the other. ; 

§ xvi. Now, in the arches h, 7, k, a slight modification has 
béen made in the form of the central piece, in order that it 
may continue the curve of the cusp. This modification is not 
to be given to it in practice without considerable nicety of 
workmanship ; and some curious results took place in Venice 
from this difficulty. 

At 1(Plate III.) is the shape of the Venetian side stone, 
with its cusp detached from the arch. Nothing can possibly 
be better or more graceful, or have the weight better disposed 
in order to cause it to nod forwards against the keystone, as 
above explained, Ch. X. § 1, where I developed the whole 
system of the arch from three pieces, in order that the reader 
might now clearly see the use of the weight of the cusp. 

Now a Venetian Gothic palace has usually at least three 
stories ; with perhaps ten or twelve windows in each story, 
and this on two or three of its sides, requiring altogether 
some hundred to a hundred and fifty side pieces. 

I have no doubt, from observation of the way the windows 


THE ARCH MASONRY. 145 


are set together, that the side pieces were carved in pairs, 
like hooks, of which the keystones were to be the eyes; that 
these side pieces were ordered by the architect in the gross, 
and were used by him sometimes for wider, sometimes for 
narrower windows; bevelling the two ends as required, fit- 
ting in keystones as he best could, and now and then varying 
the arrangement by turning the side pieces upside down. 

There were various conveniences in this way of working; 
one of the principal being that the side pieces with their cusps 
were always cut to their complete form, and that no part of 
the cusp was carried out into the keystone, which followed the 
curve of the outer arch itself. The ornaments of the cusp 
might thus be worked without any troublesome reference to 
the rest of the arch. 

§ xrx. Now let us take a pair of side pieces, made to order, 
like that at J, and see what we can make of them. We will 
try to fit them first with a keystone which continues the 
curve of the outer arch, as at m. This the reader assuredly 
thinks an ugly arch. There are a great many of them in 
Venice, the ugliest things there, and the Venetian builders 
quickly began to feel them so. What could they do to bet- 
ter them? The arch at m has a central piece of the form 7. 
Substitute for it a piece of the form s, and we have the arch 
at n. 

§ xx. This arch at n is not so strong as that at m ; but, 
built of good marble, and with its pieces of proper thickness, 
it is quite strong enough for all practical purposes on a 
small scale. I have examined at least two thousand windows 
of this kind and of the other Venetian ogees, of which that at 
y (in which the plain side-piece d is used instead of the 
cusped one) is the simplest ; and I never found one, even in 
the most ruinous palaces (in which they had had to sustain the 
distorted weight of falling walls) in which the central piece 
was fissured ; and this is the only danger to which the win- 
dow is exposed ; in other respects it is as strong an arch ag 
can be built. 

It is not to be supposed that the change from the r keystona 
to the s keystone was instantaneous. It was a change wrought 

VoL. L—10 


out by many curious experiments, which we shall have te 
trace hereafter, and to throw the resultant varieties of form 
into their proper groups. 

§ xxi. One step more: I take a mid-cusped side piece in 
its block form at ¢, with the bricks which load the back of it. 
Now, as these bricks support it behind, and since, as far as 
the use of the cusp is concerned, it matters not whether its 
weight be in marble or bricks, there is nothing to hinder 
us from cutting cut some of the marble, as at wu, and filling 
up the space with bricks. (Why we should take a fancy to 
do this, I do not pretend to guess at present; all I have to 
assert is, that, if the fancy should strike us, there would be 
no harm in it). . Substituting this side piece for the other in 
the window n, we have that at w, which may, perhaps, be of 
some service to us afterwards ; here we have nothing more to 
do with it than to note that, thus built, and properly backed 
by brickwork, it is just as strong and-safe a form as that at 
n; but that this, as well as every variety of ogee arch, de- 
pends entirely for its safety, fitness, and beauty, on the 
masonry which we have just analysed ; and that, built on a 
large scale, and with many voussoirs, all such arches would be 
unsafe and absurd in general architecture. Yet they may be 
used occasionally for the sake of the exquisite beauty of which 
their rich and fantastic varieties admit, and sometimes for the 
sake of another merit, exactly the opposite of the construc- 
tional ones we are at present examining, that they seem to 
stand by enchantment. 

§ xx. In the above reasonings, the inclination of the joints 
of the voussoirs to the curves of the arch has not been con- 
sidered. It is a question of much nicety, and which I have 
not been able as yet fully to investigate : but the natural idea 
of the arrangement of these lines (which in round arches are 
of course perpendicular to the curve) would be that every 
voussoir should have the lengths of its outer and inner arched 
surface in the same proportion to each other. Hither this 
actual law, or a close approximation to it, is assuredly en- 
forced in the best Gothic buildings. 

§ xxu. I may sum up all that it is necessary for the reader 


THE ARCH MASONRY. 147 


to keep in mind of the general laws connected with this sub- 
ject, by giving him an example of each of the two forms of 
the perfect Gothic arch, uncusped and cusped, treated with 
the most simple and magnificent masonry, and partly, in both 
cases, Mont-Cenisian. 

The first, Plate V., is a window from the Broletto of Como. 
It shows, in its filling, first, the single-pieced arch, carried on 
groups of four shafts, and a single slab of marble filling the 
space above, and pierced with a quatrefoil (Mont-Cenisian, 
this), while the mouldings above are each constructed with a 
separate system of voussoirs, all of them shaped, I think, on 
the principle above stated, § xxi, in alternate serpentine and 
marble; the outer arch being a noble example of the pure 
uncusped Gothic construction, b of Plate IIT. 

§ xxiv. Fig. XXXIV. is the masonry of the side arch of, 
as far as I Ss or am able to judge, the most perfect Gothic 
sepulchral monument in the world, the foursquare canopy of 
the (nameless? ) * tomb standing over the small cemetery gate 
of the Church of St. Anastasia at Verona. I shall have fre- 
quent occasion to recur to this monument, and, I believe, 
shall be able sufficiently to justify the terms in which I speak 
of it: meanwhile, I desire only that the reader should observe 
the severity and simplicity of the arch lines, the exquisitely 
delicate suggestion of the ogee curve in the apex, and chiefly 
the use of the cusp in giving inward weight to the great pieces 
of stone on the flanks of the arch, and preventing their thrust 
outwards from being severely thrown on the lowermost stones. 
The effect of this arrangement is, that the whole massy canopy 
is sustained safely by four slender pillars (as will be seen here- 
after in the careful plate I hope to give of it), these pillars 
being rather steadied than materially assisted against the 
thrust, by iron bars, about. an inch thick, connecting them at 
the heads of the abaci; a feature of peculiar importance 
in this monument, inasmuch as we know it to be part of the 


* At least I cannot find any account of it in Maffei’s ‘‘ Verona,” nor 
anywhere else, to be depended upon. It is, I doubt not, a work of the 
beginning of the thirteenth century. Vide Appendix 19, ‘‘Tombs at 
St. Anastasia.” 


eriginal construction, by a beautiful little Gothic wreathed 
pattern, like one of the hems of garments of Fra Angelicc, 
running along the iron bar itself So carefully, and seo far, is 


cok 


‘Bie, XXXIV. 


the system ci decoration carried out in this pure and loveiy 
monument, my most beloved throughout all the length and 
breadth of Italy ; —chief, as I think, among ali the sepulchra 
marbles cf a land cf mourning, 


WHR ARCH LOAD. i149 


CHAPTER XI. 
THE ARCH LOAD. 


$1. In the preceding enquiry we have always supposed 
either that the load upon the arch was perfectly loose, as of 
gravel or sand, or that it was Mont-Cenisian, and formed one 
mass with the arch voussoirs, of more or less compactness. 

In practice, the state is usually something between the two. 
Over bridges and tunnels it sometimes approaches to the con 
dition of mere dust or 
yielding earth; but in 
architecture it is mostly 
firm masonry, not alto- g 
gether acting with the 
voussoirs, yet by no means 
bearing on them with per- 
fectly dead weight, but 
locking itself together 
above them, and capable 
of being thrown into forms 
which relieve them, in 
some degree, from its 
pressure. 

§ u. It is evident that if 
we are to place a contin- 
uous roof above the line 
of arches, we must fill up 
the intervals between 
them on the tops of the 
columns. We have at pres- 
ent nothing granted us 
but the bare masonry, as here at a, Fig. XXXV., and we 
must fill up the intervals between the semicircle so as to 
obtain a level line of support. We may first do this simply 
as at 6, with plain mass of wall; so laying the roof on the top, 
which is the method of the pure Byzantine and Italian Roman: 


tov LUM SLOWED CL VYiWVLOM, 


esque. But if we find 
too much stress is thus 
laid on the arches, we 
may introduce smal 
second shafts on the top 
of the great shaft, a, Fig 
XXXVL, which may as. 
sist in carrying the roof, 
conveying great part of 
its weight at once to the 
heads of the main shafta, 
and relieving from its 
pressure the centres of 
the arches. 

§ iu. The new shaft 
thus introduced may 
either remain lifted on 
the head of the great 
shaft, or may be carried 
to the ground in front of 
it, or through it, b, Fig. 
~ XXXVI. ; in which latter 
case the main shaft di- 
vides into two or more 
minor shafts, and forms 
a group with the shaft 
brought down from. 
above. 

§ 1v. When this shaft, 
brought from roof to 
ground, is subordinate to 
the main pier, and either 
is carried down the face 
of it, or forms no large 
part of the group, the principle is Romanesque cr Gothic, 6, 
Fig. XXXVL When it becomes a bold central shaft, and 
the main pier splits into two minor shafts on its sides, the 


principle is Classical or Palladian, ¢, Fig. XXXVI. ~Which 


THE ARCH LOAD. 154 


e 

fatter arrangement becomes absurd or unsatisfactory in pro. 
portion to the sufficiency of the main shaft to carry the roof 
without the help of the minor shafts or arch, which in many 
instances of Palladian work look as if they might be removed 
without danger to the building. 

§ v. The form a is a more pure Northern Gothic type than 
even b, which is the connecting link between it and the clas. 
sical type. Itis found chiefly in English and other northern 
Gothic, and in early Lombardic, and is, I doubt not, derived 
as above explained, Chap. I. § xxvu. 6 isa general French 
Gothic and French Romanesque form, as in great purity at 
Valence. 

The smali shafts of the torm a and 8, as being northern, 
are generally connected with steep vaulted roofs, and receive 
for that reason the name of vaulting shafts. 

§ vz. Of these forms 0, Fig. XXXV., is the purest and 
most sublime, expressing the power of the arch most distinctly. 
All the others have some appearance of dovetailing and mor- 
ticing of timber rather than stonework ; nor have I ever yet 
seen a single instance, quite satisfactory, of the management 
of the capital of the main shaft, when it had either to sustain 
the base of the vaulting shaft, as in a, or to suffer it to pass 
through it, asin 6, Fig. XXXVI. Nor is the bracket which 
frequently carries the vaulting shaft in English work a fitting 
support for a portion of the fabric which is at all events pre- 
sumed to carry a considerable part of the weight of the roof. 

§ vn. The triangular spaces on the flanks of the arch are 
called Spandrils, and if the masonry of these should be found, 
in any of its forms, too heavy for the arch, their weight may 
be diminished, while their strength remains the same, by piere- 
ing them with circular holes or lights. This is rarely neces- 
sary in ordinary architecture, though sometimes of great use 
in bridges and iron roofs (a succession of such circles may be 
seen, for instance, in the spandrils at the Euston Square 
station) ; but, from its constructional value, it becomes the 
best form in which to arrange spandril decorations, as we 
shall see hereafter. ; 

§ vin. The height of the load above the arch is determined 


{52 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


by the needs of the building and possible length of the shaft, 
but with this we have at present nothing to do, for we have 
performed the task which was set us. We have ascertained, 
as it was required that we should in § vi of Chap. III. (A), 
the construction of walls ; (B), that of piers ; (C), that of piers 
with lintels or arches prepared for roofing. We have next, 
therefore, to examine (D) the structure of the roof. 


CHAPTER XII. 
THE ROOF. 


§ 1. Hirgerro our enquiry has been unembarrassed by any 
considerations relating exclusively either to the exterior or 
interior of buildings. But it can remain so no longer. Ags 
far as the architect is concerned, one side of a wall is gener- 
ally the same as another; but in the roof there are usually 
two distinct divisions of the structure ; one, a shell, vault, or 
flat ceiling, internally visible, the other, an upper structure, 
built of timber, to protect the lower ; or of some different 
form, to support it. Sometimes, indeed, the internally visi- 
ble structure is the real roof, and sometimes there are more 
than two divisions, as in St. Paul’s, where we have a central 
shell with a mask below and above. Still it will be conven- 
ient to remember the distinction between the part of the roof 
which is usually visible from within, and whose only business 
is to stand strongly, and not fall in, which I shall call the 
Roof Proper; and, secondly, the upper roof, which, being 
often partly supported by the lower, is not so much con. _ 
cerned with its own stability as with the weather, and is ap: 
pointed to throw off snow, and get rid of rain, as fast as pos- 
sible, which I shall call the Roof Mask. - 

§ 1. It is, however, needless for me to engage the reader 
in the discussion of the various methods of construction of 
Roofs Proper, for this simple reason, that no person without 
long experience can tell whether a roof be wisely constructed 
or not ; nor tell at all, even with help of any amount of expe. 


THE ROOF. 153 


rience, without examination of the several parts and bearings 
of it, very different from any observation possible to the gen- 
eral critic: and more than this, the enquiry would be useless 
to us in our Venetian studies, where the roofs are either not 
contemporary with the buildings, or flat, or else vaults of the 
simplest possible constructions, which have been admirably 
explained by Willis in his “ Architecture of the Middle Ages,” 
Chap. VIL, to which I may refer the reader for all that it would 
be well for him to know respecting the connexion of the dif- 
ferent parts of the vault with the shafts. He would also do 
well to read the passages on Tudor vaulting, pp. 185-193, in 
Mr. Garbett’s rudimentary Treatise on Design, before alluded 
to.* Ishall content myself therefore with noting one or two 
points on which neither writer has had occasion to touch, re- 
specting the Roof Mask. 

Sim. It was said in§ v. of Chapter III. that we should 
not have occasion, in speaking of roof construction, to add 
materially to the forms then suggested. The forms which 
we have to add are only those resulting fromthe other curves 
the arch developed in the last chapter ; that is to say, the 
various eastern domes and cupolas arising out of the revolu- 
tion of the horseshoe and ogee curves, together with the well- 
known Chinese concave roof. All these forms are of course 
purely decorative, the bulging outline, or concave surface, - 
being of no more use, cr rather of less, in throwing off snow 
or rain, than the ordinary spire and gable; and it is rather 
curious, therefore, that all of them, on a small scale, should 
have obtained so extensive use in Germany end Switzerland, 
their native climate being that of the east, where their pur- 
pose seems rather to concentrate ight upon their orbed sur- 
faces. I much doubt their applicability, on a large scale, to 
architecture ef any admirable dignity ; their chief charm is, to 
the European eye, that of strangeness; and it seems to me 
possible that in the east the bulging form may be also de- 
\ichtful, from the idea of its enclosing a volume of cool air. 
I enjoy them in St. Mark’s, chiefly because they increase the 
fantastic and unreal character of St. Mark’s Place ; and be 

* Appendix 17. 


154 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


cause they appear to sympathise with an expression, commot. 
I think, to all the buildings of that group, of a natural buoy 
ancy, as if they floated in the air or on the surface of the sea. 
But, assuredly, they are not features to be recommended for 
imitation.* 

§1v. One form, closely connected with the Chinese con- 
cave, is, however, often constructively right,—the gable with 
an inward angle, occurring with exquisitely picturesque ef- 
fect. throughout the domestic architecture of the north, es- 
pecially Germany and Switzerland; the lower slope being 
either an attached external pent- 
house roof, for protection of the 
wall, asin Fig. XXXVIL, or else a 
kind of buttress set on the angle of 
the tower; and in either case the 
roof itself being a simple gable, 
continuous beneath it. 

§ v. The true gable, as it is the 
simplest and most natural, so I es- 
teem it the grandest of roofs; 
whether rising in ridgy darkness, 
like a grey slope of slaty. mountains, 
over the precipitous walls of the 
northern cathedrals, or stretched in 
burning breadth above the white 
and square-set groups of the south- 
ern architecture. But this differ- 
ence between its slope in the northern and southern structure 
is a matter of far greater importance than is commonly sup- 
posed, and it is this to which I would especially direct the ° 
reader’s attention. 

§ vi. One main cause of it, the necessity of throwing off 


*T do not speak of the true dome, because I have not studied its con- 
struction enough to know at what largeness of scale it begins to be rather 
a tour de force than a convenient or natural form of roof, and because the 
ordinary spectator’s choice among its various outlines must always be de- 
pendent on esthetic considerations ouly, and can in no wise be grounded 
on any conception of its infinitely complicated structural principles. 


THE ROOF. 155 


snow in the north, has been a thousand times alluded to: 
another I do not remember having seen noticed, namely, that 
rooms in a roof are comfortably habitable in the north, which 
are painful sotto piombi in Italy ; and that there is in wet 
climates a natural tendency in all men to live as high as possi- 
ble, out of the damp and mist. These two causes, together 
with accessible quantities of good timber, have induced in 
the north a general steep pitch of gable, which, when rounded 
or squared above a tower, becomes a spire or turret; and this 
feature, worked out with elaborate decoration, is the key-note 
of the whole system of aspiration, so called, which the Ger- 
man critics have so ingeniously and falsely ascribed to a de- 
votional sentiment pervading the Northern Gothic : I entirely 
and boldly deny the whole theory ; our cathedrals were for 
the most part built by worldly people, who loved the world, 
and would have gladly staid in it for ever ; whose best hope 
was the escaping hell, which they thought to do by building 
cathedrals, but who had very vague conceptions of Heaven in 
general, and very feeble desires respecting their entrance 
therein ; and the form of the spired cathedral has no more 
intentional reference to Heaven, as distinguished from the 
flattened slope of the Greek pediment, than the steep gable 
of a Norman house has, as distinguished from the flat roof of 
a Syrian one. We may now, with ingenious pleasure, trace — 
such symbolic characters in the form; we may now use it 
with such definite meaning ; but we only prevent ourselves 
from all right understanding of history, by attributing much 
influence to these poetical symbolisms in the formation of a 
national style. The human race are, for the most part, not 
to be moved by such silken cords ; and the chances of damp 
in the cellar, or of loose tiles in the roof, have, unhappily, 
much more to do with the fashions of a man’s house building 
than his ideas of celestial happiness or angelic virtue. Associ- 
ations of affection have far higher power, and forms which 
can be no otherwise accounted for may often be explained by 
reference to the natural features of the country, or to any- 
thing which habit must have rendered familiar, and therefore 
delightful ; but the direct symbolisation of a sentiment is a 


156 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


weak motive with all men, and far more so in the practical 
minds of the north than among the early Christians, who 
were assuredly quite as heavenly-minded, when they built 
basilicas, or cut conchas out of the catacombs, as were ever 
the Norman barons or monks. 

§ vu. There is, however, in the north an animal activity 
which materially aided the system of building begun in mere 
utility,—an animal life, naturally expressed in erect work, as 
the languor of the south in reclining or level work. Imagine 
the difference between the action of a man urging himself to 
his work in a snow storm, and the inaction of one laid at his 
length on a sunny bank among cicadas and fallen olives, and 
you will have the key to a whole group of sympathies which 
were forcefully expressed in the architecture of both ; remem- 
bering always that sleep would be to the one luxury, to the 
other death. 

§ var. And to the force of this vital instinct we have farther 
to add the influence of natural scenery ; and chiefly of the 
groups and wildernesses of the tree which is to the German 
mind what the olive or palm is to the southern, the spruce fir. 
The eye which has once been habituated to the continual ser- 
ration of the pine forest, and to the multiplication of its infi- 
nite pinnacles, is not easily offended by the repetition of simi- 
lar forms, nor easily satisfied by the simplicity of flat or 
massive outlines. Add to the influence of the pine, that of 
the poplar, more especially in the valleys of France ; but think 
of the spruce chiefly, and meditate on the difference of feeling 
with which the Northman would be inspired by the frost-work 
wreathed upon its glittering point, and the Italian by the dark 
green depth of sunshine on the broad table of the stone-pine * 
(and consider by the way whether the spruce fir be a more ° 


* I shall not be thought to have overrated the effect of forest scenery 
on the northern mind; but I was glad to hear a Spanish gentleman, the 
other day, describing, together with his own, the regret which the peas- 
ants in his neighborhood had testified for the loss of a noble stone-pine, 
one of the grandest in Spain, which its proprietor had suffered to be cut 
down for small gain. He said that the mere spot where it had grown 
was still popularly known as ‘‘ Hl Pino.” 


THE ROOF. 154 


heavenly-minded tree than those dark canopies of the Medi 
terranean isles). 

§ 1x. Circumstance and sentiment, therefore, aiding each 
other, the steep roof becomes generally adopted, and delighted 
in, throughout the north; and then, with the gradual exag- 
geration with which every pleasant idea is pursued by the 
human mind, it is raised into all manner of peaks, and points, 
and ridges ; and pinnacle after pinnacle is added on its flanks, 
and the walls increased in height, in proportion, until we get 
indeed a very sublime mass, but one which has no more prin- 
ciple of religious aspiration in it than a child’s tower of cards, 
What is more, the desire to build high is complicated with the 
peculiar love of the grotesque* which is characteristic of the 
north, together with especial delight in multiplication of small 
forms as well as in exaggerated points of shade and: energy, 
and acertain degree of consequent insensibility to perfect 
grace and quiet truthfulness; so that a northern architect 
could not feel the beauty of the Elgin marbles, and there will 
always be (in those who have devoted themselves to this par- 
ticular school) a certain incapacity to taste the finer characters 
of Greek art, or to understand Titian, Tintoret, or Raphael: 
whereas among the Italian Gothic workmen, this capacity was 
never lost, and Nino Pisano and Orcagna could have under- 
stood the Theseus in an instant, and would have received from it 
new life. There can be no question that theirs was the great- 
est school, and carried out by the greatest men; and that 
while those who began with this school could perfectly well 
feel Rouen Cathedral, those who study the Northern Gothic 
remain in a narrowed field—one of small pinnacles, and dots, 
and crockets, and twitched faces—and cannot comprehend the 
meaning of a broad surface ora grand line. Nevertheless the 
northern school is an admirable and delightful thing, but a 
lower thing than the southern. The Gothic of the Ducal 
Palace of Venice is in harmony with all that is grand in all 
the world : that of the north isin harmony with the grotesque 
northern spirit only. 

§ x. We are, however, beginning to lose sight of our roof 

* Appendix 8, 


158 THE STONES OF VENICH. 


structure in its spirit, and must return to our text. As the 
height of the walls increased, in sympathy with the rise of the 
roof, while their thickness remained the same, it became more 
and more necessary to support them by buttresses ; but—and 
this is another point that the reader must specially note—it is 
not the steep roof mask which requires the buttress, but the 
vaulting beneath it; the roof mask being a mere wooden 
frame tied together by cross timbers, and in small buildings 
often put together on the ground, raised afterwards, and set 
on the walls like a hat, bearing vertically upon them; and 
farther, I believe in most cases the northern vaulting requires 
its great array of external buttress, not so much from any 
peculiar boldness in its own forms, as from the greater com- 
parative thinness and height of the walls, and more deter- 
mined throwing of the whole weight of the roof on particular 
points. Now the connexion of the interior frame-work (or 
true roof) with the buttress, at such points, is not visible to 
the spectators from without ; but the relation of the roof mask 
to the top of the wall which it protects, or from which it 
springs, is perfectly visible ; and it is a point of so great im- 
portance in the effect of the building, that it will be well to 
make ita subject of distinct consideration in the following 
Chapter. 


CHAPTER XIV. 
THE ROOF CORNICE. 


§ 1. Ir will be remembered that in the Sixth Chapter we 
paused (§ x.) at the point where the addition of brackets to 
the ordinary wall cornice would have converted it into a 
structure proper for sustaining a roof. Now the wall cornice 
was treated throughout our enquiry (compare Chapter VIL 
§ v.) as the capital of the wall, and as forming, by its concen- 
tration, the capital of the shaft. But we must not reason 
back from the capital to the cornice, and suppose that an ex- 
tension of the principles of the capital to the whole length of 
the wall, will serve for the roof cornice; for all our conclu: 


THE ROOF CORNICE. 159 


sions respecting the capital were based on the supposition of 
its being adapted to carry considerable weight condensed on 
its abacus: but the roof cornice is, in most cases, required 
rather to project boldly than to carry weight ; and arrange- 
ments are therefore to be adopted for it which will secure the 
projection of large surfaces without being calcrlated to resist 
extraordinary pressure. This object is obtain d by the use 
of brackets at intervals, which are the peculiar ilistinction of 
the roof cornice. 

§ u. Roof cornices are generally to be divided into two 
great families: the first and simplest, those which are com- 
posed merely by the projection of the edge of the roof mask 
over the wall, sustained by such brackets or spurs as may be 
necessary ; the second, those which provide a walk round the 
edge of the roof, and which require, therefore, some stronger 
support, as well as a considerable mass of building above or 
beside the roof mask, and a parapet. ‘These two families we 
shall consider in succession. 

§ ut. 1. The Haved Cornice. We may give it this name, 
as represented in the simplest form by cottage eaves. It is 
used, however, in bold projection, both in north, and south, 
and east ; its use being, in the north, to throw the rain well 
away from the wall of the building; in the south to give it 
shade; and it is ordinarily constructed of the ends of the 
timbers of the roof mask (with their tiles or shingles con- 
tinued to the edge of the cornice), and sustained by spurs of 
timber. This is its most picturesque and natural form ; not 
inconsistent with great splendor of architecture in the medie- 
val italian domestic buildings, superb in its mass of cast 
shadow, and giving rich effect to the streets of Swiss towns, 
even when they have no other claim to interest. A farther 
value is given to it by its waterspouts, for in order to avoid 
loaaing it with weight of water in the gutter at the edge, 
where it would be a strain on the fastenings of the pipe, it 
has spouts of discharge at intervals of three or four feet,— 
rows of magnificent leaden or iron dragons’ heads, full of de- 
lighiful character, except to any person passing along the 
middle of the street in a heavy shower. I have had my share 


160 THE STONES OF VENIOR. 


of their kindness in my time, but owe them no grudge; on 
the contrary, much gratitude for the delight of their fantastic 
outline on the calm blue sky, when they had no work to do 
but to open their iron mouths and pant in the sunshine. 

§ xv. When, however, light is more valuable than shadow, 
or when the architecture of the wail is too fair to be con- 
cealed, it becomes necessary to draw the cornice into nar- 
rower limits ; a change of considerable smportance, in that it 
permits the gutter, instead of being of lead and hung to the 
edge of the cornice, to be of stone, and sayported by brackets 
in the wall, these brackets becoming proper recipients of after 
decoration (and sometimes associated with the stone channels 
of discharge, called gargoyles, which be,ong, however, more 
properly to the other family of cornices), The most perfect 
and beautiful example of this kind of cor,.ice is the Venetian, 
in which the rain from the tiles is received in a stone gutter 
supported by small brackets, delicately nm oulded, and having 
its outer lower edge decorated with the English dogtooth 
moulding, whose sharp zigzag mingles richly with the curved 
edges of the tiling. I know no cornice more beautiful in its 
extreme simplicity and serviceableness. 

§ v. The cornice of the Greek Doric is a condition of the 
same kind, in which, however, there are no brackets, but use- 
less appendages hung to the bottom of the gutter (giving, 
however, some impression of support as seen from a distance), 
and decorated with stone symbolisms of raindrops. The 
brackets are not allowed, because they would interfere with 
the sculpture, which in this architecture is put beneath the 
cornice ; and the overhanging form of the gutter is nothing 
more than a vast dripstone moulding, to keep the rain from 
such sculpture : its decoration of guttz, seen in silver points’ 
against the shadow, is pretty in feeling, with a kind of con- 
tinual refreshment and remembrance of rain in it; but the 
whole arrangement is awkward and meagre, and is only en- 
durable when the eye is quickly drawn away from it to sculp- 
ture. 

$ vr. In later cornices, invented for the Greek orders, and 
farther developed by the Romans, the bracket appears in true 


THE ROOF CORNICE. 161 


importance, though of barbarous and effeminate outline: and 
gorgeous decorations are applied to it, and to the various 
horizontal mouldings which it carries, some of them of great 
beauty, and of the highest value to the medieval architects 
who imitated them. Buta singularly gross mistake was made 
in the distribution of decoration on these rich cornices (I do 
not know when first, nor does it matter to me or to the 
reader), namely, the charging with ornament the under sur- 
face of the cornice between the brackets, that is to say, the 
exact piece of the whole edifice, from top to bottom, where 
ornament is deast visible. I need hardly say much respecting 
the wisdom of this procedure, excusable only if the whole 
building were covered with ornament; but it is curious to 
see the way in which modern architects have copied it, even 
when they had little enough. ornament to spare. For in- 
stance, I suppose few persons look at the Athenzum Club- 
house without feeling vexed at the meagreness and meanness 
of the windows of the ground floor: if, however, they look 
up under the cornice, and have good eyes, they will perceive 
that the architect has reserved his decorations to put between 
the brackets; and by going up to the first floor, and out on 
the gallery, they may succeed in obtaining some glimpses of 
the designs of the said decorations. 

§ vir. Such as they are, or were, these cornices were soon 
considered essential parts of the “order” to which they be- 
longed; and the same wisdom which endeavored to fix the 
proportions of the orders, appointed also that no order should 
go without its cornice. The reader has probably heard of the 
architectural division of superstructure into architrave, frieze, 
and cornice ; parts which have been appointed by great archi- 
tects to all their work, in the same spirit in which great rheto- 
ricians have ordained that every speech shall have an exor- 
dium, and narration, and peroration. The reader will do 
well to consider that it may be sometimes just as possible to 
carry a roof, and get rid of rain, without such an arrange- 
ment, as it is to tell a plain fact without an exordium or per- 
oration; but he must very absolutely consider that the 
architectural peroration or cornice is strictly and sternly 

Vou. I.—11 


162 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


limited to the end of the wall’s speech,—that is, to the edg¢ 
of the roof; and that it has nothing whatever to do with shafts 
nor the orders of them. And he will then be able fully to 
enjoy the farther ordinance of the late Roman and Renais- 
sance architects, who, attaching it to the shaft as if it were 
part of its shadow, and having to employ their shafts often in 
places where they came not near the roof, forthwith cut the roof. 
cornice to pieces and attached a bit of it to every column; 
thenceforward to be carried by the unhappy shaft wherever it 
went, in addition to any other work on which it might happen 
to be employed. TI do not recollect among any living beings, 
except Renaissance architects, any instance of a parallel or 
comparable stupidity: but one can imagine a savage getting 
hold of a piece of one of our iron wire ropes, with its rings 
upon it at intervals to bind it together, and pulling the wires 
asunder to apply them to separate purposes; but imagining 
there was magic in the ring that bound them, and so cutting 
that to pieces also, and fastening a little bit of it to every 
wire. 

§ vu. Thus much may serve us to know respecting the first 
family of wall cornices. The second is immeasurably more 
important, and includes the cornices of all the best buildings 
in the world. It has derived its best form from medieval 
military architecture, which imperatively required two things ; 
first, a parapet which should permit sight and offence, and af- 
ford defence at the same time ; and secondly, a projection bold 
enough to enable the defenders to rake the bottom of the wall 
with falling bodies ; projection which, if the wall happened to 
slope inwards, required not to be small. The thoroughly 
magnificent forms of cornice thus developed by necessity in - 
military buildings, were adopted, with more or less of bold- 
ness or distinctness, in domestic architecture, according to 
the temper of the times and the circumstances of the indi- 
vidual—decisively in the baron’s house, imperfectly in the 
burgher’s : gradually they found their way into ecclesiastical 
architecture, under wise modifications in the early cathedrais, 
with infinite absurdity in the imitations of them ; diminish- 
ing in size as their original purpose sank into a decorative 


THE ROOF CORNICE. 163 


one, until we find battlements, two-and-a-quarter inches 
square, decorating the gates of the Philanthropic Society. 

§ 1x. There are, therefore, two distinct features in all cor- 
nices of this kind: first, the bracket, now become of enormous 
importance and of most serious practical service ; the second, 
the parapet : and these two features we shall consider in suc- 
cession, and in so doing, shall learn all that is needful for us 
to know, not only respecting cornices, but respecting brackets 
in general, and balconies. 

§ x. 1. The Bracket. In the simplest form of military cor- - 
nice, the brackets are composed of two or more long stones, 
supporting each other in gradually in- 
creasing projection, with roughly rounded 
ends, Fig. XXXVIIL, and the parapet is 
simply a low wall carried on the ends of 
these, leaving, of course, behind, or within 
it, a hole between each bracket for the 
convenient dejection of hot sand and lead. 
This form is best seen, I think, in the old 
Scotch castles; it is very grand, but has 
a giddy look, and one is afraid of the i 
whole thing toppling off the wall. The Aa 
next step was to deepen the brackets, so eg amma 
as to get them propped against a great depth of the main © 
rampart, and to have the inner ends of the stones held by 
a greater weight of that main wall above ; while small arches 
were thrown from bracket to bracket to carry the par- 
apet wall more securely. This is the most perfect form of 
cornice, completely satisfying the eye of its security, giving 
full protection to the wall, and applicable to all architecture, 
the interstices between the brackets being filled up, when one 
does not want to throw boiling lead on any body below, and 
the projection being always delightful, as giving greater com- 
mand and view of the building, from its angles, to those walk- 
ing on the rampart. And as, in military buildings, there were 
usually towers at the angles (round which the battlements 
swept) in order to flank the walls, so often in the translation 
into civil or ecclesiastical architecture, a small turret remained 

Stones of Venice—Vol. L—S * 


‘> iL 


164 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


at the angle, or a more bold projection of balcony, to give 
larger prospect to those upon the rampart. This coruice, 
perfect in all its parts, as arranged for ecclesiastical architec- 
ture, and exquisitely decorated, is the one employed in the 
duomo of Florence and campanile of Giotto, of which I have 
already spoken as, I suppose, the most perfect architecture in 
the world. 

§ xr. In less important positions and on smaller edifices, 
this cornice diminishes in size, while it retains its arrange- 
ment, and at last we find nothing but the spirit and form of it 
left; the real practical purpose having ceased, and arch, 
brackets and all, being cut out of a single stone. Thus we 
find it used in early buildings throughout the 
whole of the north and south of Europe, in 
forms sufficiently represented by the two ex- 
amples in Plate IV. : 1, from St. Antonio, Padua ; 
2, from Sens, in France. 

§ xm. I wish, however, at present- to fix the 
reader’s attention on the form of the bracket it- 
self ; a most important feature in modern as well] 
as ancient architecture. The first idea of a 
bracket is that of a long stone or piece of timber 
projecting from the wall, as a, Fig. XXXIX., of 
which the strength depends on the toughness 
of the stone or wood, and the stability on the 
weight of the wall above it (unless it be the end 
ofa main beam), But let it be supposed that 
the structure at a, being of the required pro- 
jection, is found too weak: then we may 
strengthen it in one of three ways ; (1) by put- - 
ting a second or third stone beneath it, as at 6 ; 
(2) by giving it a spur, as atc; (8). by giving it 
a shaft and another bracket below, d; the great 
use of this arrangement being that the lowermost bracket has 
the help of the weight of the shaft length of wall above its in- 
sertion, which is, of course, greater than the weight of the small 
shaft: and then the lower bracket may be farther helped by 
the structure at b or e. 


Fie, XXXIX, 


THH ROOF CORNICE. 165 


§ xm. Of these structures, a and ¢ are evidently adapted 
especially for wooden buildings; 6 and d for stone ones; 
the last, of course, susceptible of the richest decoration, 
and superbly employed in the cornice of the cathedral of 
Monza: but all are beautiful in their way, and are 
the means of, I think, nearly half the picturesque- ‘Se 
ness and power of medizval building ; the forms b 
and ¢ being, of course, the most frequent ; a, when b hat | 
it occurs, being usually rounded off, as at a, Fig. 
XL.; 6, also, as in Fig. XXXVI, or else itself 
composed of a single stone cut into the form of the c 
group 0 here, Fig. XL., or plain, as at c, which is 
also the proper form of the brick bracket, when stone 
is not to be had. The reader will at once perceive @ 
that the form d is a barbarism (unless when the | 
scale is small and the weight to be carried exceed- 
ingly light) : it is of course, therefore, a favorite form 
with the Renaissance architects; and its introduction is one 
of the first corruptions of the Venetian architecture. 

§ xiv. There is one point necessary to be noticed, though 
bearing on decoration more than construction, before we leave 
the subject of the bracket. The whole power of the con- 
struction depends upon the stones being well lei into the 
wall; and the first function of the decoration should be . 
to give the idea of this insertion, if possible ; at all 
events, not to contradict this idea. If the reader 
will glance at any of the brackets used in the ordi- 
nary architecture of London, he will find them of 
some such character as Fig. XLI ; not a bad form 
in itself, but exquisitely absurd in its curling lines, 
which give the idea of some writhing suspended 

tendril, instead of a stiff support, and by their careful 
avoidance of the wall make the bracket look pinned on. and 
in constant danger of sliding down. This is, also, a Classical 
and Renaissance decoration. 

§ xv. 2. The Parapet. Its forms are fixed in military 
architecture by the necessities of the art of war at the time 
_of building, and are always beautiful wherever they have been 


Fic. XL. 


166 THE SVONES OF VENICE. 


really thus fixed ; delightful in the variety of their setting, and 
in the quaint darkness of their shot-holes, and fantastic changes 
of elevation and outline. Nothing is more remarkable than 
the swiftly discerned difference between the masculine irregu- 
larity of such true battlements, and the formal pitifulness of 
those which are set on modern buildings to give them a mili- 
tary air,—as on the jail at Edinburgh. 

§ xvi. Respecting the Parapet for mere safeguard upon 
buildings not military, there are just two fixed laws. Itshould 
be pierced, otherwise it is not recognised from below for a 
parapet at all, and it should not be in the form of a battle- 
ment, especially in church architecture. 

The most comfortable heading of a true parapet is a plain 
level on which the arm can be rested, and along which it can 
glide. Any jags or elevations are disagreeable ; the latter, as 
interrupting the view and disturbing the eye, if they are 
higher than the arm, the former, as opening some aspect of 
danger if they are much lower; and the inconvenience, there- 
fore, of the battlemented form, as well as the worse than ab- 
surdity, the bad feeling, of the apphance of a military feature 
to a church, ought long ago to have determined its rejection. 
Still (for the question of its picturesque value is here so 
closely connected with that of its practical use, that it is vain 
to endeavor to discuss it separately) there is a certain agree- 
ableness in the way in which the jagged outline dovetails the 
shadow of the slated or leaded roof into the top of the wall, 
which may make the use of the battlement excusable where 
there is a difficulty in managing some unvaried line, and 
where the expense of a pierced parapet cannot be encoun- 
tered : but remember always, that the value of the battlement . 
consists in its letting shadow into the light of the wall, or 
vice versd, when it comes against light sky, letting the light 
of the sky into the shade of the wall; but that the actual out- 
line of the parapet itself, if the eye be arrested upon this, 
instead of upon the alternation of shadow, is as ugly a suc- 
cession of line as can by any possibility be invented. There- 
fore, the battlemented parapet may only be used where this 
alternation of shade is certain to be shown, under nearly ail. 


THE ROOF CORNICE. 167 


conditions of effect ; and where the lines to be dealt with are 
on a scale which may admit battlements of bold and manly 
size. The idea that a battlement is an ornament anywhere, 
and that a miserable and diminutive imitation of castellated 
outline will always serve to fill up blanks and. Gothicise un- 
manageable spaces, is one of the great idiocies of the present 
day. A battlement is in its origin a piece of wall large 
enough to cover a man’s body, and however it may be deco- 
rated, or pierced, or finessed away into traceries, as long as 
so much of its outline is retained as to suggest its origin, so 
long its size must remain undiminished. To crown a turret 
six feet high with chopped battlements three inches wide, is 
children’s Gothic: it is one of the paltry falsehoods for which 
there is no excuse, and part of the system of using models of 
architecture to decorate architecture, which we shall hereafter 
note as one of the chief and most destructive follies of. the 
Renaissance ;* and in the present day the practice may be 
classed as one which distinguishes the architects of whom 
there is no hope, who have neither eye nor head for their 
work, and who must pass their lives in win struggles against 
the refractory lines of theiv own buildings. 

§ xvu. As the only excuse for the battlemented parapet is 
its alternation of shadow, so the only fault of the natural or 
level parapet is its monotony of line. This is, however, in 
practice, almost always broken by the pinnacles of the but- 
tresses, and if not, may be varied by the tracery of its pene- 
trations. The forms of these evidently admit every kind of 
change ; for a stone parapet, however pierced, is sure to be 
strong enough for its purpose of protection, and, as regards 


* Not of Renaissance alone: the practice of modelling buildings on a 
minute scale for niches aud tabernacle-work has always been more or 
less admitted, and I suppose authority for diminutive battlements might 
be gathered from the Gothic of almost every period, as well as for many 
other faults and mistakes: no Gothic school having ever been thor- 
oughly systematised or perfected, even in its best times, But that a 
mistaken decoration sometimes occurs among a crowd of noble ones, is 
no more an excuse for the habitual—far less, the exclusive—uxe of 
such a decoration, than the accidental or seeming misconstructions of a 
Greek chorus are an excuse for a school boy’s ungrammatical exercisa, 


168 THE STONES OF VENICR. 


the strength of the building in general, the lighter it is the 
better. More fantastic forms may, therefore, be admitted in 
a parapet than in any other architectural feature, and for most 
services, the Flamboyant parapets seem to me preferable to 
all others ; especially when the leaden roofs set off by points 
of darkness the lace-like intricacy of penetration. These, 
however, as well as the forms usually given to Renaissance 
balustrades (of which, by the bye, the best piece of criticism 
I know is the sketch in “‘David Copperfield” of the personal 
appearance of the man who stole Jip), and the other and 
finer forms invented by Paul Veronese in his architectural 
backgrounds, together with the pure columnar balustrade of 
Venice, must be considered as altogether decorative features. 

§ xvut. So also are, of course, the jagged or crown-like 
finishines of walls employed where no real parapet of protec- 
tion is desired ; originating in the defences of outworks and 
single walls: these are used much in the east on walls sur- 
rounding unroofed courts. The richest examples of such 
decoration are Arabian ; and from Cairo they seem to have 
been brought to Venice. It is probable that few of my 
readers, however familiar the general form of the Ducal 
Palace may have been rendered to them by innumerable draw- 
ings, have any distinct idea of its roof, owing to the staying 
of the eye on its superb parapet, of which we shall give ac- 
count hereafter. In most of the Venetian cases the parapets 
which surround roofing are very sufficient for protection, ex- 
cept that the stones of which they are composed appear loose 
and infirm : but their purpose is entirely decorative ; every 
wall, whether detached or roofed, being indiscriminately 
fringed with Arabic forms of parapet, more or less Gothi- 
cised, according to the lateness of their date. 

I think there is no other point of importance requiring il- 
lustration respecting the roof itself, or its cornice: but this 
Venetian form of ornamental parapet connects itself curiously, 
at the angles of nearly all the buildings on which it occurs, 
with the pinnacled system of the north, founded on the struct. 
ure of the buttress. This, it will be remembered, is to be 
the subject of the fifth division of our inquiry. 


4H BUTTRESS. 169 


CHAPTER XV. 
THE BUTTRESS. 


§ 1. We have hitherto supposed ourselves concerned with 
the support of vertical pressure only ; and the arch and roof 
have been considered as forms of abstract. strength, without 
reference to the means by which their lateral pressure was to. 
be resisted. Few readers will need now to be reminded, that 
every arch or gable not tied at its base by beams or bars, ex- 
ercises a lateral pressure upon the walls which sustain it,— 
pressure which may, indeed, be met and sustained by increas- 
ing the thickness of the wall or vertical piers, and which is in 
reality thus met in most Italian buildings, but may, with less 
expenditure of material, and with (perhaps) more graceful 
effect, be met by some particular application of the provisions 
against lateral pressure called Buttresses. These, therefore, 
we are next to-examine. 

§ u. Buttresses are of many kinds, according to the char- 
acter and direction of the lateral forces they are intended to 
resist. But their first broad division is into buttresses which 
meet and break the force before it arrives at the wall, and 
buttresses which stand on the lee side of the wall, and prop it 
against the force. . 

‘The lateral forces which walls have to sustain are of three 
distinct kinds: dead weight, as of masonry or still water; 
moving weight, as of wind or running water; and sudden 
concussion, as of earthquakes, explosions, &c. 

Clearly, dead weight can only be resisted by the buttress 
acting asa prop; for a buttress on the side of, or towards 
the weight, would only add to its effect. This, then, forms 
the first great class of buttressed architecture ; lateral thrusts, . 
of roofing or arches, being met by props of masonry outside— 
the thrusts from within, the prop without; or the crushing 
force of water on a ship’s side met by its cross timbers—the 
thrust here from without the wall, the prop within. 

Moving weight may, 0. course, be resisted by the prop on 


170 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


the lee side of the wall, but is often more effectually met, on 
the side which is attacked, by buttresses of peculiar forms, 
cunning buttresses, which do not attempt to sustain the 
weight, but parry it, and throw it off in directions clear of 
the wall. 

Thirdly : concussions and vibratory motion, though in real- 
ity only supported by the prop buttress, must be provided 
for by buttresses on both sides of the wall, as their direction 
cannot be foreseen, and is continually changing. 

We shall briefly glance at these three systems of buttress- 
ing; but the two latter being of small importance to our pres- 
ent purpose, may as well be dismissed first. 

§ i. 1. Buttresses for guard against moving weight and 
set towards the weight they resist. 

The most familiar instance of this kind of buttress we have 
in the sharp piers of a bridge, in the centre of a powerful 
stream, which divide the current on their edges, and throw it 
to each side under the arches. A ship’s bow is a buttress of 
the same kind, and so also the ridge of a breastplate, both 
adding to the strength of it in resisting a cross blow, and giv- 
ing a better chance of a bullet glancing aside. In Switzer- 
land, projecting buttresses of this kind are often built round 
churches, heading up hill, to divide and throw off the ava- 
lanches. ‘The various forms given to piers and harbor quays, 
and to the bases of lighthouses, in order to meet the force of 
the waves, are all conditions of this kind of buttress. But in 
works of ornamental architecture such buttresses are of rare 
occurrence ; and I merely name them in order to mark their 
place in our architectural system, since in the investigation of 
our present subject we shall not meet with a single example 
of them, unless sometimes the angle of the foundation ofa 
palace set against the sweep of the tide, or the wooden piers 
of some canal bridge quivering in its current. 

§1v. 2. Buttresses for guard against vibratory motion. 

The whole formation of this kind of buttress resolves itself 
into mere expansion of the base of the wall, so as to make it 
stand steadier, as a man stands with his feet apart when he is 
likely to lose his balance, This approach to a pyramidal form 


THE BUTTRESS. 171 


is also of great use as a guard against the action of artillery; 
that if a stone or tier of stones be battered out of the lower 
portions of the wall, the whole upper part may not topple over 
or crumble down at once. Various forms of this buttress, 
sometimes applied to particular points of the wall, sometimes 
forming a great sloping rampart along its base, are frequent 
in buildings of countries exposed to earthquake. They give 
a peculiarly heavy outline to much of the architecture of the 
kingdom of Naples, and they are of the form in which strength 
and solidity are first naturally sought, in the slope of the 
Egyptian wall. The base of Guy’s Tower at Warwick isa 
singularly bold example of their military use ; and so, in gen- 
eral, bastion and rampart profiles, where, however, the object 
of stability against a shock is complicated with that of sustair- 
ing weight of earth in the rampart behind. 

§ v. 3. Prop buttresses against dead weight. 

This is the group with which we have principally to do; 
and a buttress of this kind acts in two ways, partly by its 
weight and partly by its strength. It acts by its weight when 
its mass is so great that the weight it sustains cannot stir it, 
but is lost upon it, buried in it, and annihilated : neither the 
shape of such a buttress nor the cohesion of its materials are 
of much consequence ; a heap of stones or sandbags, laid up 
against the wall, will answer as well as a built and cemented. 
mass. 

But a buttress acting by its strength is not of mass suffi- 
cient to resist the weight by mere inertia ; but it conveys the 
weight through its body to something else which is so capa- 
ble; as, for instance, a man leaning against a door with his 
hands, and propping himself against the ground, conveys the 
force which would open or close the door against him through 
his body to the ground. A buttress acting in this way must 
be of perfectly coherent materials, and so strong that though 
the weight to be borne could easily move it, it cannot break 
it: this kind of buttress may be called a conducting buttress. 
Practically, however, the two modes of action are always in 
some sort united. Again, the weight to be borne may either 
act generally on the whole wall surface, or with excessive en- 


172 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


ergy on particular points : when it acts on the whole wall sur. 
face, the whole wall is generally supported ; and the arrange. 
ment becomes a continuous rampart, as a dyke, or bank of 
reservoir. 

§ v1. It is, however, very seldom that lateral force in archi- 
tecture is equally distributed. In most cases the weight of 
the roof, or the force of any lateral thrust, are more or less 
confined to certain points and directions. In an early state of 
architectural science this definiteness of direction is not yet 
clear, and it is met by uncertain application of mass or 
strength in the buttress, sometimes by mere thickening of the 
wall into square piers, which are partly piers, partly buttresses, 
as in Norman keeps and towers. But as science advances, the 
weight to be borne is designedly and decisively thrown upon 
certain points ; the direction and degree of the forces which 
are then received are exactly calculated, and met by conduct- 
ing buttresses of the smallest possible dimensions ; themselves, 
in their turn, supported by vertical buttresses acting by weight, 
and these perhaps, in their turn, by another set of conducting 
buttresses: so that, in the best examples of such arrange- 
ments, the weight to be borne may be considered as the shock 
of an electric fluid, which, by a hundred different rods and 
channels, is divided and carried away into the ground. 

§ vi. In order to give greater weight to the vertical but- 
tress piers which sustain the conducting buttresses, they are 
loaded with pinnacles, which, however, are, I believe, in all 
the buildings in which they become very prominent, merely 
decorative : they are of some use, indeed, by their weight ; 
but if this were all for which they were put there, a few cubie 
feet of lead would much more securely answer the purpose, 
without any danger from exposure to wind. If the reader 
likes to ask any Gothic architect with whom he may happen 
to be acquainted, to substitute a lump of lead for his pinnacles, 
he will see by the expression of his face how far he considers 
the pinnacles decorative members. In the work which seems 
to me the great type of simple and masculine buttress struct- 
ure, the apse of Beauvais, the pinnacles are altogether insig« 
nificant, and are evidently added just as exclusively to enter 


THE BUTTRESS. 173 


tain the eye and lighten the aspect of the buttress, as the 
slight shafts which are set on its angles ; while in other very 
noble Gothic buildings the pinnacles are introduced as niches 
for statues, without any reference to construction at all: and 
sometimes even, as in the tomb of Can Signoria at Verona, on 
small piers detached from the main building. 

§ vu. I believe, therefore, that the development of the pin- 
nacle is merely a part of the general erectness and picturesque- 
ness of northern work above alluded to: and that, if there had 
been no other place for the pinnacles, the Gothic builders 
would lave put them on the tops of their arches (they often 
did on the tops of gables and pediments), rather than not have 
had them; but the natural position of the pinnacle is, of 
course, where it adds to, rather than diminishes, the stability 
of the building ; that is to say, on its main wall piers and the 
vertical piers at the buttresses. And thus the edifice is sur- 
rounded at last by a complete company of detached piers and 
pinnacles, each sustaining an inclined ‘prop against the central 
wall, and looking something like a band of giants holding it 
up with the butts of their lances. This arrangement would 
imply the loss of an enormous space of ground, but the inter- 
- vals of the buttresses are usually walled in below, and form 
minor chapels. 

§ 1x. The science of this arrangement has made it the 
subject of much enthusiastic declamation among the Gothic 
architects, almost as unreasonable, in some respects, as the 
declamation of the Renaissance architeets respecting Greek 
structure. The fact is, that the whole northern buttress sys- 
tem is based on the grand requirement of tall windows and 
vast masses of light at the end of the apse. In order to gain 
this quantity of light, the piers between the windows are di- 
minished in thickness until they are far too weak to bear the 
roof, and then sustained by external buttresses. In the Italian 
method the light is rather dreaded than desired, and the wall 
is made wide enough between the windows to bear the roof, 
and so left. In fact, the simplest expression of the difference 
in the systems is, that a northern apse is 1 southern one with 
its inter-fenestrial piers set edgeways. Thus, a, Fig. XLIL, is 


174 THR STONES OF VENICE. 


the general idea of the southern apse ; take it to pieces, and 
set all its piers edgeways, as at b, and you have the northern 
one. You gain much light for the interior, but you cut the 
exterior to pieces, and instead of a bold rounded or polygonal 
surface, ready for any kind of decoration, you have a series 
cf dark and damp cells, which no device that I have yet seen 
has succeeded in decorating in a perfectly satisfactory man: 
ner. If the system be farther carried, and a second or third 
order of buttresses be added, the real fact is that we have a 
building standing on two or three rows cf concentric piers, 
eth the roof off the whole of it except the central circle, and 
only ribs left, to carry the weight of the bit of remaining roof 
ia the middle ; and after the eye has been accustomed to the 


J = 


Pre, XLIL 


bold and simple rounding of the Ttalian apse, the skeleton 
character of the disposition is painfully felt. After spending 
some mouchs in Venice, I thought Bourges Cathedral looked 
exactly like a half-built ship on its shoree It is useless, how- 
ever, to dispute respecting the merits of the two systems ° 
both are noble in their place ; the Northern decidedly the 
most scientific, or at least involving the greatest display of 
science, the Italian the calmest and purest, this having im it 
the sublimity of a calm heaven or a windless noon, the other 
that of a mountain flank tormented by the north wind, and 
withering into grisly furrows of alternate chasm and crag. 

§ x. If I have succeeded in making the reader understand 
the veritable action of the buttress, he will have no difficulty 
in determining its fittest form. He has to deal with two dise 
tinct kinds: one, a narrow vertical pier, acting principally by 


THE BUTTRESS. 175 


its weight, and crowned by a pinnacle ; the other, commonly 
called a Flying buttress, a cross bar setfrom such a pier (when 
detached from the building) against the main wall. This 
latter, then, is to be considered as a mere prop or shore, and 
its use by the Gothic architects might be illustrated by the 
supposition that we were to build all our houses with walls too 
thin to stand without wooden props outside, and then to sub- 
stitute stone props for wooden ones. I have some doubts of 
the real dignity of such a proceeding, but at all events the 
merit of the form of the flying buttress depends on its faith- 
fully and visibly performing this somewhat humble office ; it 
is, therefore, in its purity, a mere sloping bar of stone, with 
an arch beneath it to carry its weight, that is to say, to pre- 
vent the action of gravity from in any wise deflecting it, or 
causing it to break downwards under the lateral thrust ; it is 
thus formed quite simple in Nortre Dame of Paris, and in the 
Cathedral of Beauvais, while at Cologne the sloping bars are 
pierced with quatrefoils, and at Amiens with traceried arches. 
Both seem to me effeminate and false in principle ; not, of 
sourse, that there is any occasion to make the flying buttress 
heavy, if a ight one will answer the purpose ; but it seems as 
if some security were sacrificed to ornament. At Amiens the 
arrangement is now seen to great disadvantage, for the early 
traceries have been replaced by base flamboyant ones, utterly 
weak and despicable. Of the degradations of the original 
form which took place in after times, I have spoken at p. 35 
of the “Seven Lamps.” 

§ x1. The form of the common buttress must be familar to 
the eye of every reader, sloping if low, and thrown into 
successive steps if they are to be carried to any considerable 
height. There is much dignity in them when they are of 
essential service ; but even in their best examples, their awk- 
ward angles are among the least manageable features of the 
Northern Gothic, and the whole organisation of its system was 
destroyed by their unnecessary and lavish application on a 
diminished scale ; until the buttress became actually confused 
with the shaft, and we find stranyely crystallised masses of 
diminutive buttress applied, for merely vertical support, in the 


176 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


northern tabernacle work ; while in some recent. copies of it 
the principle has been so far distorted that the tiny buttress- 
ings look as if they carried the superstructure on the points 
of their pinnacles, as in the Cranmer memorial at Oxford, 
Indeed, in most modern Gothic, the architects evidently con- 
sider buttresses as convenient breaks of blank surface, and 
general apologies for deadness of wall. They stand in the 
place of ideas, and I think are supposed also to have something 
of the odor of sanctity about them ; otherwise, one hardly sees 
why a warehouse seventy feet high should have nothing of the 
kind, and a chapel, which one can just get into with one’s hat 
off, should have a bunch of them at every corner ; and worse 
than this, they are even thought ornamental when they can be 
of no possible use ; and these stupid penthouse outlines are 
forced upon the eye in every species of decoration: in St. 
Margaret’s Chapel, West Street, there are actually a couple of 
buttresses at the end of every pew. 

§ xu. It is almost impossible, in consequence of these un- 
wise repetitions of it, to contemplate the buttress without some 
degree of prejudice; and I look upon it as one of the most 
justifiable causes of the unfortunate aversion with which many 
of our best architects regard the whole Gothic school. It 
may, however, always be regarded with respect when its form 
is simple and its service clear ; but no treason to Gothic can be 
greater than the use of it in indolence or vanity, to enhance 
the intricacies of structure, or occupy the vacuities of design. 


CHAPTER XVI. 


FORM OF APERTURE. 


§ 1 We have now, in order, examined the means of raising 
walls and sustaining roofs, and we have finally to consider the 
structure of the necessary apertures in the wall veil, the door 
and window ; respecting which there are three main points to 
be considered. 


FORM OF APERTURE. 17% 


1. The form of the aperture, %.e., its outline, its size, and 
the forms of its sides. 

2. The filling of the aperture, i.e., valves and glass, and 
their holdings. 

3. The protection of the aperture; and its appliances, 1.e., 
canopies, porches, and balconies. We shall examine 
these in succession. 


§ u. 1. The form of the aperture: and first of doors. We 
will, for the present, leave out of the question doors and gates 
in unroofed walls, the forms of these being very arbitrary, and 
confine ourselves to the consideration of doors of entrance into 
roofed buildings. Such doors will, for the most part, be at, 
or near, the base of the building ; except when raised for pur- 
poses of defence, as in the old Scotch border towers, and our 
own Martello towers, or, as in Switzerland, to permit access in 
deep snow, or when stairs are carried up outside the house for 
convenience or magnificence. But in most cases, whether high 
or low, a door may be assumed to be considerably lower than 
the apartments or buildings into which it gives admission, and 
therefore to have some height of wall above it, whose weight 
must be carried by the heading of the door. It is clear, there- 
fore, that the best heading must be an arch, because the 
strongest, and that a square-headed door must be wrong, unless — 
under Mont-Cenisian masonry ; or else, unless the top of the 
door be the roof of the building, as in low cottages. And a 
square-headed door is just so much more wrong and ugly than 
a connexion of main shafts by lintels, as the weight of wall 
above the door is likely to be greater than that above the main 
shafts. Thus, while I admit the Greek general forms of tem- 
ple. to be admirable in their kind, 1 think the Greek door 
always offensive and unmanageable. 

§ m. We have it also determined by necessity, that the 
apertures shall be at least above a man’s height, with perpen- 
dicular sides (for sloping sides are evidently unnecessary, and 
even inconvenient, therefore absurd) and level threshold ; and 
this aperture we at present suppose simply cut through the 
wall without any bevelling of, the jambs. Such a door, wide 

Vou. L—12 


178 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


enough for two persons to pass each other easily, and with 
such fillings or valves as we may hereafter find expedient, 
may be fit enough for any building into which entrance is re- 
quired neither often, nor by many persons at a time. But 
when entrance and egress are constant, or required by 
crowds, certain further modifications must take place. 

§ 1v. When entrance and egress are constant, it may be 
supposed that the valves will be absent or unfastened,—that 
people will be passing more quickly 
than when the entrance and egress 
are unfrequent, and that the square 
angles of the wall will be incon- 


b Im venient to such quick passers 
‘ through. It is evident, therefore, 
Fig. XLII that what would be done in time, 


for themselves, by the passing 
multitude, should be done for them at once by the architect ; 
and that these angles, which would be worn away by friction, 
should at once be bevelled off, or, as it is called, splayed, and 
the most contracted part of the aperture made as short as pos- 
sible, so that the plan of the entrance should become as at a, 
Fig. XLII. 

§v. Farther. As persons on the outside may often ap- 
proach the door or depart from it, beside the building, so as 
to turn aside as they enter or leave the door, and therefore 
touch its jamb, but, on the inside, will in almost every case 
approach the door, or depart from it in the direct line of the 
entrance (people generally walking forward when they enter 
a hall, court, or chamber of any kind, and being forced to do 
so when they enter a passage), it is evident that the bevelling 
may be very slight on the inside, but should be large on the 
outside, so that the plan of the aperture should become as at 
b, Fig. XLUI Farther, as the bevelled wall cannot con. 
veniently carry an unbevelled arch, the door arch must be 
bevelled also, and the aperture, seen from the outside, will 
have somewhat the aspect of a small cavern diminishing to- 
wards the interior. 

§$ vt If, however, beside frequent entrance, entrance is re 


FORM OF APERTURE. 179 


quired for multitudes at the same time, the size of the aper- 
ture either must be increased, or other apertures must be in- 
troduced. It may, in some buildings, be optional with the 
architect whether he shall give many small doors, or few 
large ones; and in some, as theatres, amphitheatres, and 
other places where the crowd are apt to be impatient, many 
doors are by far the best arrangement of the two. Often 
however, the purposes of the building, as when it is to be en- 
tered by processions, or where the crowd most usually enter 
in one direction, require the large single entrance ; and (for 
here again the esthetic and structural laws cannot be sepa- 
rated) the expression and harmony of the building require, in 
nearly every case, an entrance of largeness proportioned te 
the multitude which is to meet within. Nothing is more un- 
seemly than that a great multitude should find its way out 
and in, as ants and wasps do, through holes ; and nothing 
more undignified than the paltry doors of many of our Eng- 
lish cathedrals, which look as if they were made, not for the 
open egress, but for the surreptitious drainage of a stagnant 
congregation. Besides, the expression of the church door 
should lead us, as far as possible, to desire at least the west- 
ern entrance to be single, partly because no man of right 
feeling would willingly lose the idea of unity and fellowship 
in going up to worship, which is suggested by the vast single 
entrance ; partly because it is at the entrance that the most 
serious words of the building are always addressed, by its 
sculptures or inscriptions, to the worshipper ; and it is well, 
that these words should be spoken to all atonce, as by one great 
voice, not broken up into weak repetitions over minor doors. 
In practice the matter has been, I suppose, regulated almost 
altogether by convenience, the western doors being single in 
small churches, while in the larger the entrances become three 
or five, the central door remaining always principal, in con- 
sequence of the fine sense of composition which the medieval 
builders never lost. These arrangements have formed the 
noblest buildings in the world. Yet it is worth observing® 
* And worth questioning, also, whether the triple porch has not been 
associated with Romanist views of mediatorship; the Redeemer being 


180 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


how perfect in its simplicity the single entrance may become 
when it is treated as in the Duomo and St. Zeno of Verona, 
and other such early Lombard churches, having noble porches, 
and rich sculptures grouped around the entrance. 

§ vu. However, whether the entrances be single, triple, or 
manifold, it is a constant law that one shall be principal, and 
all shall be of size in some degree proportioned to that of 
the building. And this size is, of course, chiefly to be ex- 
pressed in width, that being the only useful dimension in a 
door (except for pageantry, chairing of bishops and waving of 
banners, and other such vanities, not, I hope, after this cen- 
tury, much to be regarded in the building of Christian 
temples) ; but though the width is the only necessary dimen- 
sion, it is well to increase the height also in some proportion 
to it, in order that there may be less weight of wall above, 
resting on the increased span of the arch. This is, however, 
so much the necessary result of the broad curve of the arch 
itself, that there is no structural necessity of elevating the 
jamb ; and I believe that beautiful entrances might be made 
of every span of arch, retaining the jamb at a little more than 
a man’s height, until the sweep of the curves became so vast 
that the small vertical line became a part of them, and one 
entered into the temple as under a great rainbow. 

§ vim. On the other hand, the jamb may be elevated indef- 
initely, so that the increasing entrance retains at least the 
proportion of width it had originally ; say 4 ft. by 7 ft. 5 in. 
But a less proportion of width than this has always a meagre, 
inhospitable, and ungainly look except in military architecture, 
where the narrowness of the entrance is necessary, and its 


represented as presiding over the central door only, and the lateral én- 
rances being under the protection of saints, while the Madonna almost 
always has one or both of the transepts. But it would be wrong to press 
chis, for, in nine cases out of ten, the architect has been merely influenced 
in his placing of the statues by an artist’s desire of variety in their forms 
and dress; and very naturally prefers putting a canonisation over one 
door, a martyrdom over another, and an assumption over a third, to 
repeating a crucifixion or ajudgmentabove all. The architect’s doctrine 
is only, therefore, to be noted with indisputable reprobation when the 
Madonna gets possession of the main door. 


FORM OF APERTURE. 181 


height adds to its grandeur, as between the entrance towers 
of our British castles. This law however, observe, applies 
only to true doors, not to the arches of porches, which may be 
of any proportion, as of any number, being in fact interco- 
lumniations, not doors; as in the noble example of the west 
front of Peterborough, which, in spite of the destructive 
absurdity of its central arch being the narrowest, would still, 
if the paltry porter’s lodge, or gatehouse, or turnpike, or what- 
ever it is, were knocked out of the middle of it, be the noblest 
west front in England. 

§ 1x. Further, and finally. In proportion to the height and 
size of the building, and therefore to the size of its doors, will 
be the thickness of its walls, especially at the foundation, that 
is to say, beside the doors; and also in proportion to the 
numbers of a crowd will be the unruliness and pressure of it. 
Hence, partly in necessity and partly in prudence, the splay- 
ing or chamfering of the jamb of the larger door will be 
deepened, and, if possible, made at a larger angle for the large 
door than for the small one ; so that the large door will always 
be encompassed by a visible breadth of jamb proportioned to 
its own magnitude. The decorative value of this feature we 
shall see hereafter. 

§ x. The second kind of apertures we have to examine 
are those of windows. 

Window apertures are mainly of two kinds; those for out- 
look, and those for inlet of light, many being for both pur- 
poses, and either purpose, or both, combined in military archi- 
tecture with those of offence and defence. But all window 
apertures, as compared with door apertures, have almost 
infinite licence of form and size: they may be of any shape, 
from the slit or cross slit to the circle ;* of any size, from the 
loophole of the castle to the pillars of light of the cathedral 
apse. Yet, according to their place and purpose, one or two 


* The arch heading is indeed the best where there is much incumbent 
weight, but a window frequently has very little weight above it, especial- 
ly when placed high, and the arched form loses light in a low room: 
therefore the square-headed window is admissible where the square 
headed door is not, 


{82 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


Jaws of fitness hold respecting them, which let us examine in 
the two classes of windows successively, but without reference 
to military architecture, which here, as before, we may dismiss 
as a subject of separate science, only noticing that windows, 
like all other features, are always delightful, if not beautiful, 
when their position and shape have indeed been thus neces- 
sarily determined, and that many of their most picturesque 
forms have resulted from the requirements of war. We should 
also find in military architecture the typical forms of the two 
classes of outlet and inlet windows in their utmost develop- 
ment; the greatest sweep of sight and range of shot on the 
one hand, and the fullest entry of light and air on the other, 
being constantly required at the smallest possible apertures. 
Our business, however, is to reason out the laws for ourselves, 
not to take the examples as we find them. 

§ x1. 1. Outlook apertures. For these no general outline is 
determinable by the necessities or inconveniences of outlook- 
ing, except only that the bottom or sill of the windows, at 
whatever height, should be horizontal, for the convenience of 
leaning on it, or standing on it if the window be to the ground. 
The form of the upper part of the window is quite immaterial, 
for all windows allow a greater range of sight when they are 
approached than that of the eye itself: it isthe approachability 
of the window, that is to say, the annihilation of the thickness 
of the wall, which is the real point to be attended to. | If, 
therefore, the aperture be inaccessible, or so small that the 
thickness of the wall cannot be entered, the wall is to be 
bevelled * on the outside, so as to increase the range of sight 
as far as possible; if the aperture can be entered, then bevelled 
from the point to which entrance is possible. The bevelling 
will, if possible, be in every direction, that is to say, upwards 
at the top, outwards at the sides, and downwards at the bottom, 
but essentially downwards ; the earth and the doings upon it 
being the chief object in outlook windows, except of observa- 
tories; and where the object is a distinct and special view 
downwards, it will be of advantage to shelter the eye as far 


“TI do not like the sound of the word ‘‘splayed ;” I always shall’ use 
** bevelled” instead. 


HORM OF APERTURE. 183 


as possible from the rays of light coming from above, and the 
head of the window may be left horizontal, or even the whole 
aperture sloped outwards, as the slit in a letter-box is inwards. 

The best windows for outlook are, of course, oriels and bow 
windows, but these are not to be considered under the head 
of apertures merely; they are either balconies roofed and 
glazed, and to be considered under the head of external appli- 
ances, or they are each a story of an external semi-tower havy- 
ing true aperture windows on each side of it. 

§ xm. 2. Inlet windows. These windows may, of course, be 
of any shape and size whatever, according to the other neces- 
sities of the building, and the quantity and direction of light 
desired, their purpose being now to throw it in streams on 
particular lines or spots ; nuw to diffuse it everywhere ; some- 
times to introduce it in broad masses, tempered in strength, as 
in the cathedral colored window ; sometimes in starry showers 
of scattered brilliancy, like the apertures in the roof of an 
Arabian bath ; perhaps the most beautiful of all forms being 
the rose, which has in it the unity of both characters and 
sympathy with that of the source of light itself. It is notice- 
able, however, that while both the circle and pointed oval are 
beautiful window forms, it would be very pain- 
ful to cut either of them in half and connect 
them by vertical lines, as in Fig. XLIV. The 
reason is, I believe, that so treated, the upper 
arch is not considered as connected with the ay xray. 
lower, and forming an entire figure, but as the 
ordinary arch roof of the aperture, and the lower arch as an 
arch floor, equally unnecessary and unnatural. Also, the ellip- 
tical oval is generally an unsatisfactory form, because it gives 
the idea of useless trouble in building it, though it occurs 
quaintly and pleasantly in the former windows of France: I 
believe it is also objectionable because it has an indeterminate, 
slippery look, like that of a bubble rising through a fluid. — It, 
and all elongated forms, are still more objectionable placed 
horizontally, because this is the weakest position they can 
structurally have; that is to say, less light is admitted, with 
greater loss of strength to the building, than by any other 


184 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


form. If admissible anywhere, it is for the sake of variety at 
the top of the building, as the flat parallelogram sometimes 
not ungracefully in Italian Renaissance. 

§ xu’ The question of bevelling becomes a little more 
complicated in the inlet than the outlook window, because 
the mass or quantity of light admitted is often of more conse: 
quence than its direction, and often vice versd ; and the out- 
look window is supposed to be approachable, which is far 
from being always the case with windows for light, so that 
the bevelling which in the outlook window is chiefly to open 
range of sight, is in the inlet a means not only of admitting 
the light in greater quantity, but of directing it to the spot 
on which it is to fall. But, in general, the bevelling of the 
one window will reverse that of the other ; for, first, no nat- 
uras light will strike on the inlet window from beneath, un- 
less reflected light, which is (I believe) injurious to the health 
and the sight; and thus, while in the outlook window the 
outside bevel downwards is essential, in the inlet it would be 
useless: and the sill is to be flat, if the window be on a level 
with the spot itis to light ; and sloped downwards within, 
if above it. Again, as the brightest rays of light are the 
steepest, the outside bevel upwards is as essential in the roof 
of the inlet as it was of small importance in that of the out- 
look window. 

§ xiv. On the horizontal section the aperture will expand 
internally, a somewhat larger number of rays being thus re- 
flected from the jambs; and the aperture being thus the 
smallest possible outside, this is the favorite military form of 
inlet window, always found in magnificent development in 
the thick walls of medizeval castles and convents. Its effect is 
tranquil, but cheerless and dungeon-like in its fullest develop- 
ment, owing to the limitation of the range of sight in the out- 
look, which, if the window be unapproachable, reduces it to 
a mere point of light. A modified condition of it, with some 
combination of the outlook form, is probably the best for do- 
mestic buildings in general (which, however, in, modern archi- 
tecture, are unhappily so thin walled, that the outline of the 
jambs becomes a matter almost of indifference), it being gen 


FILLING OF APERTURE. 188 


erally noticeable that the depth of recess which I have ob. 
served to be essential to nobility of external effect has also a 
certain dignity of expression, as appearing to be intended 
rather to admit light to persons quietly occupied in their 
homes, than to stimulate or favor the curiosity of idleness. 


CHAPTER XVII. 
FILLING OF APERTURE. 


§ 1. Tuus far we have been concerned with the outline only 
of the aperture: we were next, it will be remembered, to 
consider the necessary modes of filling it with valves in the 
ease of the door, or with glass or tracery in that of the 
window. 

1. Fillings of doors. We concluded, in the previous Chap- 
ter, that doors in buildings of any importance or size should 
have headings in the form of an arch. This is, however, the 
most inconvenient form we could choose, as respects the fitting 
of the valves of the doorway ; for the arch-shaped head of the 
valyes not only requires considerable nicety in fitting to the 
arch, but adds largely to the weight of the door,—a double 
disadvantage, straining the hinges and making it cumbersome. 
in opening. And this inconvenience is so much perceived by 
the eye, that a door valve with a pointed head is always a dis- 
agreeable object. It becomes, therefore, a matter of true 
necessity so to arrange the doorway as to admit of its being 
fitted with rectangular valves. 

§ u. Now, in determining the form of the aperture, we 
supposed the jamb of the door to be of the utmost height re- 
quired for entrance. The extra height of the arch is unneces- 
sary as an opening, the arch being required for its strength 
only, not for its elevation. There is, therefore, no reason why 
it should not be barred across by a horizontal lintel, into which 
the valves may be fitted, and the triangular or semicircular 
arched space above the lintel may then be permanently closed, 
as we choose, either with bars, or glass, or stone. 


186 THE STONES OF YHNICL. 


This is the form of all good doors, without exception, ovet 
the whole world and in all ages, and no other can ever be ins 
vented. 

§ u1. In the simplest doors the cross lintel is of wood only, 
and glass or bars occupy the space above, a very frequent form 
in Venice. In more elaborate doors the cross lintel is of 
stone, and the filling sometimes of brick, sometimes of stone, 
very often a grand single stone being used to close the entire 
space: the space thus filled is called the Tympanum. In 
large doors the cross lintelis too long to bear the great incum- 
bent weight of this stone filling without support ; it 1s, there- 
fore, carried by a pier in the centre ; and two valves are used, 
fitted to the rectangular spaces on each side of the pier. In 
the most elaborate examples of this condition, each of these 
secondary doorways has an arch heading, a cross lintel, and a 
triangular filling or tympanum of its own, all subordinated to 
the main arch ‘above. 

§ 1v. 2. Fillings of windows. 

When windows are large, and to be filled with glass, the 
sheet of glass, however constructed, whether of large panes or 
small fragments, requires the support of bars of some kind, 
either of wood, metal, or stone. Wood is inapplicable on a 
large scale, owing to its destructibility ; very fit for door- 
valves, which can be easily refitted, and in which weight 
would be an inconvenience, but very unfit for window-bars, 
which, if they decayed, might let the whole window be blown 
in before their decay was observed, and in which weight 
would be an advantage, as offering more resistance to the 
wind. 

Tron is, however, fit for window-bars, and there seems no 
constructive reason why we should not have iron traceries, as 
well as iron pillars, iron churches, and iron steeples. But I 
have, in the “Seven Lamps,” given reasons for not consider« 
ing such structures as architecture at all. 

The window-bars must, therefore, be of stone, and of stone 
only. 

§ v. The purpose of the window being always to let in ag 
much light, and command as much view, as possible, these 


FILLING OF APERTURE. 18% 


bars of stone are to be made as slender and as few as they can 
be, consistently with their due strength. 

Let it be required to support the breadth of glass, a, b, Fig. 
XLY. The tendency of the glass sustaining any force, as of 
wind from without, is to bend 


into an arch inwards, in the @ 8 8 
dotted line, and break in the Bil 
centre. It is to be supported, 

therefore, by the bar put in its @ f-—o—_o—_]] 
centre, c. 


But this central bar, c, may e f_o—_o0—_o—_-_]] 
not be enough, and the spaces 


a c, cb, may still need support. f—-—_o0—-—_4 5, 
The next step will be to put I 


two bars instead of one, and i l}--0—c—_0—0 of 
divide the window into three 


spaces as at d. oh 0 a 

But this may still not be me Ey 
enough, and the window may 
need three bars. Now the greatest stress is always on the centre 
of the window. If the three bars are equal in strength, as at 
e, the central bar is either too slight for its work, or the lat- 
eral bars too thick for theirs. Therefore, we must slightly 
increase the thickness of the central bar, and diminish that of 
the lateral ones, so as to obtain the arrangement at fh. If 
the window enlarge farther, each of the spaces fg, g h, is 
treated as the original space a b, and we have the grours of 
bars & and J. 

So that, whatever the shape of the window, whatever the 
direction and number of the bars, there are to be central or 
main bars; second bars, subordinated to them; third bars 
subordinated to the second, and so on to the number required. 
This is called the subordination of tracery, a system delight- 
ful to the eye and mind, owing to its anatomical framing and 
unity, and to its expression of the laws of good government 
in all fragile and unstable things. All tracery, therefore, 
which is not subordinated, is barbarous, in so far as this part 
of its structure is concerned. 


188 THE STONES OF VENICE 


§ vi. The next question will be the direction of the bars. 
The reader will understand at once, without any laborious 
proof, that a given area of glass, supported by its edges, is 
stronger in its resistance to violence when it is arranged ina 
long strip or band than in a square; and that, therefore, glass 
is generally to be arranged, especially in windows on a large 
scale, in oblong areas: and if the bars so dividing it be placed 
horizontally, they will have less power of supporting them- 
selves, and will need to be thicker in consequence, than if 
placed vertically. As far, therefore, as the form of the win- 
dow permits, they are to be vertical. 

§ vit. But even when so placed, they cannot be trusted to 
support themselves beyond a certain height, but will need 
cross bars to steady them. Cross bars of stone are, therefore, 
to be introduced at necessary intervals, not to divide the 
glass, but to support the upright stone bars. The glass is 
always to be divided longitudinally as far as possible, and the 
upright bars which divide it supported at proper intervals. 
However high the window, it is almost impossible that it 
should require more than two cross bars. 

§ vir. It may sometimes happen that when tall windows 
are placed very close to each other for the sake of more light, 
the masonry between them may stand in need, or at least be 
the better of, some additional support. The cross bars of the 
windows may then be thickened, in order to bond the inter- 
mediate piers more strongly together, and if this thickness 
appear ungainly, it may be modified by decoration. 

§ 1x. We have thus arrived at the idea of a vertical frame 
work of subordinated bars, supported by cross bars at the 
necessary intervals, and the only remaining question is the 
method of insertion into the aperture. Whatever its form, if 
we merely let the ends of the bars into the voussoirs of its 
heading, the least settlement of the masonry would distort the 
arch, or push up some of its voussoirs, or break the window 
bars, or push them aside. Evidently our object should be to 
connect the window bars among themselves, so framing them 
together that they may give the utmost possible degree of 
support to the whole window head in case of any settlement. 


FILLING OF APERTURE. 188 


But we know how to do this already: our window bars are 
nothing but small shafts. Capital them; throw small arches 
across between the smaller bars, large arches over them be- 
tween the larger bars, one comprehensive arch over the whole, 
or else a horizontal lintel, if the window have a flat head; and 
we have a complete system of mutual support, independent of 
the aperture head, and yet assisting to sustain it, if need be. 
But we want the spandrils of this arch system to be them- 
selves as light, and to let as much light through them, as pos- 
sible: and we know already how to pierce them (Chap. XIi. 
§ vu.). We pierce them with circles; and we have, if the 
circles are small and the stonework strong, the traceries of 
Giotto and the Pisan school; if the circles are as large as pos- 
sible and the bars slender, those which I have already figured 
and described as the only perfect traceries of the Northern 
Gothic.* The varieties of their design arise partly from the 
different size of window and consequent number of bars; 
partly from the different heights of their pointed arches, as 
well as the various positions of the window head in relation 
to the roof, rendering one or another arrangement better 
for dividing the light, and partly from esthetic and expres- 
sional requirements, which, within certain limits, may be al- 
lowed a very important influence: for the strength of the bars 
is ordinarily so much greater than is absolutely necessary, 
that some portion of it may be gracefully sacrificed to the 
attainment of variety in the plans of tracery—a variety which, 
even within its severest limits, is perfectly endless ; more es- 
pecially in the pointed arch, the proportion of the tracery 
being in the round arch necessarily more fixed. 

§ x. The circular window furnishes an exception to the 
common law, that the bars shall be vertical through the 
greater part of their length : for if they were so, they could 
neither have secure perpendicular footing, nor secure heading, 
their thrust being perpendicular to the curve of the voussoirs 
only in the centre of the window; therefore, a small circle, 
like the axle of a wheel, is put into the centre of the window, 
large enough to give footing to the necessary number of radi, 

* «Seven Lamps.” p, 60. 


190 THE STONHS OF VENICR. 


ating bars ; and the bars are arranged as spokes, being all of 
course properly capitaled and arch-headed. This is the best 
form of tracery for circular windows, naturally enough called 
wheel windows when so filled. 

§ xt. Now, I wish the reader especially to observe that we 
have arrived at these forms of perfect Gothic tracery without 
the smallest reference to any practice of any school, or to 
any law of authority whatever. They are forms having essen- 
tially nothing whatever to do either with Goths or Greeks. 
They are eternal forms, based on laws of gravity and cohe- 
sion ; and no better, nor any others so good, will ever be in- 
vented, so long as the present laws of gravity and cohesion 
subsist. 

§ xi. It does not at all follow that this group of forms 
owes its origin to any such course of reasoning as that which 
has now ‘ed us to it. On the contrary, there is not the smali- 
est doubt that tracery began, partly, in the grouping of win- 
dows together (subsequently enclosed within alarge arch*), and 
partly in the fantastic penetrations of a single slab of stones 
under the arch, as the circle in Plate V. above. The perfect 
form seems to have been accidentally struck in passing from 
experiment on the one side, to affectation on the other ; and 
it was so far from ever becoming systematised, that I am 
aware of no type of tracery for which a less decided preference 
is shown in the buildings in which it exists. The early pierced 
traceries are multitudinous and perfect in their kind,—the late 
Flamboyant, luxuriant in detail, and lavish in quantity,—but 
the perfect forms exist in comparatively few churches, gener- — 
ally in portions of the church only, and are always connected, 
and that closely, either with the massy forms out of which 
they have emerged, or with the enervated types inte which 
they are instantly to degenerate. 

§ xu. Nor indeed are we to look upon them as in all points 


*On the north side of the nave of the cathedral of Lyons, there is an 
early French window, presenting one of the usual groups of foliated 
arches and circles, left, as it were, loose, without any enclosing curve 
The effect is very painful. This remarkable window is associated with 
others of the sommon form. 


FILLING OF APERTURE. 19] 


Seperior fo the more ancient examples. We have above con- . 
ducted our reasoning entirely on the supposition that a single 
aperture is given, which it is the object to fill with glass, di- 
minishing the power of the light as little as possible. But 
there are many cases, as in triforium and cloister lights, in 
which glazing is not required ; in which, therefore, the bars, 
if there be any, must have some more important function 
than that of merely holding glass, and in which their actual 
use is to give steadiness and tone, as it were, to the arches 
and walls above and beside them ; or to give the idea of pro- 
tection to those who pass along the triforium, and of seclu- 
sion to those who walk in the cloister. Much thicker shafts, 
and more massy arches, may be properly employed in work 
of this kind; and many groups of such tracery will be found 
resolvable into true colonnades, with the arches in pairs, or in 
triple or quadruple groups, and with small rosettes pierced 
above them for light. All this ic just as right in its place, as 
the glass tracery is in its own function, and often much more 
grand. But the same indulgence is not to be shown to the 
affectations which succeeded the developed forms. Of these 
there are three principal conditions: the Flamboyant of 
France, the Stump tracery of Germany, and the Perpendicu- 
lar of England. 

§ xv. Of these the first arose, by the most delicate and 
natural transitions, out of the perfect school. It was an en- 
deavor to introduce more grace into its lines, and more 
change into its combinations ; and the esthetic results are so 
beautiful, that for some time after the right road had been 
left, the aberration was more to be admired than regretted. 
The final conditions became fantastic and effeminate, but, in 
the country where they had been invented, never lost their 
peculiar grace until they were replaced by the Renaissance. 
Lhe copies of the school in England and Italy have all its 
faults and none of its beauties; in France, whatever it lost in 
method or in majesty, it gained in fantasy: literally Flam- 
boyant, it breathed away its strength into the air; but there is 
not more difference between the commonest dogerel that ever 
broke prose into unintelligibility, and the burning mystery 


192 THH STONES OF VENICE. 


of Coleridge, or spirituality of Elizabeth Barrett, than there is 
between the dissolute dulness of English Flamboyant, and 
the flaming undulations of the wreathed lines of delicate 
stone, that confuse themselves with the clouds of every morn- 
ing sky that brightens above the valley of the Seine. 

§ xv. The second group of traceries, the intersectional or 
German group, may be considered as including the entire 
range of the absurd forms which were invented in order to 
display dexterity in stone-cutting and ingenuity in construc- 
tion. They express the peculiar character of the German 
mind, which cuts the frame of every truth joint from joint, in 
order to prove the edge of its instruments ; and, in all cases, 
prefers a new or a strange thought to a good one, and a 
subtle thought to a useful one. The point and value of the 
German tracery consists principally in turning the features 
of good traceries upside down, and cutting them in two 
where they are properly continuous. To destroy at once 
foundation and membership, and suspend everything in the 
air, keeping out of sight, as far as possible, the evidences of a 
beginning and the probabilities of an end, are the main ob- 
jects of German architecture, as of modern German divinity. 

§ xv1. This school has, however, at least the merit of in- 
genuity. Not so the English Perpendicular, though a very 
curious school also in its way. In the course of the rea- 
soning which led us to the determination of the perfect 
Gothic tracery, we were induced successively to reject certain 
methods of arrangement as weak, dangerous, or disagreeable. 
Collect all these together, and practise them at once, and you 
have the English Perpendicular. 

As thus. You find in the first place (§ v.), that your tracery . 
bars are to be subordinated, less to greater; so you take a 
group of, suppose, eight, which you make all exactly equal, 
giving you nine equal spaces in the window, as at A, Fig, 
XLVI. You found, in the second place (§ vm), that there 
was no occasion for more than two cross bars; so you take-at 
least four or five (also represented at A, Fig. XLVL), alse 
carefully equalised, and set at equal spaces. You found, in 


the third place (§ vii), that these bars were to be strength; 


FILLING OF APERTURE. 193 


ened, in order to support the main piers; you will therefor 
cut the ends off the uppermost, and the fourth into thrée 
pieces (as also at A). In the fourth place, you found (§ 1x.) 
that you were never to run a vertical bar into the arch head ; 
so you run them all into it (as at B, Fig. XLVI): and this 
last arrangement will be useful in two ways, for it will not 
only expose both the bars and the archivolt to an apperent; 
probability of every species of dislocation at any moment, but 
it will provide you with two pleasing interstices at the-flanks, 
in the shape of carving-knives, a, b, which, by throwing across 


{ 
ies 


(qm il 
rite 
Tat 


\ 


B Cc 


Fie. XLVI, 


the curves c, d, you may easily multiply into four ; and these, 
as you can put nothing into their sharp tops, will afford you a 
more than usually rational excuse for a little bit of German- 
ism, in filling them with arches upside down, e, f- You will: 
now have left at your disposal two and forty similar inter- 
stices, which, for the sake of variety, you will proceed to fill 
with two and forty similar arches : and, as you were told that 
the moment a bar received an arch heading, it was to be 
treated as a shaft and capitalled, you will take care to give 
your bars no capitals nor bases, but to run bars, foliations 
and all, well into each other after the fashion of cast-iron, as 

Vou. L—13 


194 THE STONES OF VHENICE. 


at C. You have still two triangular spaces occurring in an 
important part of your window, g, g, which, as they are very 
conspicuous, and you cannot make them uglier than they are, 
you will do wisely to let alone ;—and you will now have the 
west window of the cathedral of Winchester, a very perfect 
example of English Perpendicular. Nor do I think that you 
can, on the whole, better the arrangement, unless, perhaps, 
by adding buttresses to some of the bars, as is done in the 
cathedral at Gloucester ; these buttresses having the double 
advantage of darkening the window when seen from within, 
and suggesting, when it is seen from without, the idea of its 
being divided by two stout party walls, with a heavy thrust 
against the glass. 

§ xvu. Thus far we have considered the plan of the tracery 
only : we have lastly to note the conditions under which the 
glass is to be attached to the bars ; and the sections of the 
bars themselves. 

These bars we have seen, in the perfect form, are to become 
shafts ; but, supposing the object to be the admission of as 
much light as possible, it is clear that the thickness of the bar 
ought to be chiefly in the depth of the window, and that by 
increasing the depth of the bar we may diminish its breadth : 
clearly, therefore, we should employ the double group of 
shafts, b, of Fig. XIV., setting it edgeways in the window: 
but as the glass would then come between the two shafts, we 
must add a member into which it is to be fit- 
ted, as at a, Fig. XLVII, and uniting these 
three members together in the simplest way, 
with a curved instead of a sharp recess behind 
the shafts, we have the section b, the perfect, : 
but simplest type of the main tracery bars in 
good Gothic. In triforium and cloister tracery, which has no 
glass to hold, the central member is omitted, and we have 
either the pure double shaft, always the most graceful, or a 
single and more massy shaft, which is the simpler and more 
usual form. 

§ xvur. Finally: there is an intermediate arrangement be 
tween the glazed and the open tracery, that of the domestie 


Fie, XLVII. 


FILLING OF APERTURE. 194 


traceries of Venice. Peculiar conditions, hereafter to be de- 
seribed, require the shafts of these traceries to become the 
main vertical supports of the floors and walls. Their thick- 
ness is therefore enormous ; and yet free egress is required 
between them (into balconies) which is obtained by doors in 
their lattice glazing. To prevent the inconvenience and ueli- 
ness of driving the hinges and fastenings of them into the 
shafts, and having the play of the doors in the intervals, the 
entire glazing is thrown behind the pillars, and attached 
to their abaci and bases with iron. It is thus securely sus- 
tained by their massy bulk, and leaves their symmetry and 
shade undisturbed. 

§ xix. The depth at which the glass should be placed, in 
windows without traceries, will generally be fixed by the 
forms of their bevelling, the glass occupying the narrowest 
interval; but when its position is not thus fixed, as in many 
London houses, it is to be remembered that the deeper the 
glass is set (the wall being of given thickness), the more light 
will enter, and the clearer the prospect will be to a person 
sitting quietly in the centre of the room ; on the contrary, 
the farther out the glass is set, the more convenient the win- 
dow wil! be for a person rising and looking out of it. The 
one, therefore, is an arrangement for the idle and curious, 
who care only about what is going on upon the earth: the — 
other for those who are willing to remain at rest, so that they 
have free admission of the light of Heaven. This might be 
noted as a curious expressional reason for the necessity (of 
which no man of ordinary feeling would doubt for a moment) 
of a deep recess in the window, on the outside, to all good or 
architectural effect: still, as there is no reason why people 
should be made idle by having it in their power to look out 
of window, and as the slight increase of light or clearness of 
view in the centre of a room is more than balanced by the 
loss of space, and the greater chill of the nearer glass and 
outside air, we can, I fear, allege no other structural reason 
for the picturesque external recess, than the expediency of a 
certain degree of protection, for the glass, from the brightes\ 
glare of sunshine, and heaviest rush of rain. 


196 2HE STONES OF VENICE. 


CHAPTER XVIII. 
PROTECTION OF APERTURE. 


§ 1. We have hitherto considered the aperture as merely 
pierced in the thickness of the walls ; and when its masonry 
is simple and the fillings of the aperture are unimportant, it 
may well remain so. But when the fillings are delicate and 
of value, as in the case of colored glass, finely wrought 
tracery, or sculpture, such as we shall often find occupying 
the tympanum of doorways, some protection becomes neces- 
sary against the run of the rain down the walls, and back by 
the bevel of the aperture to the ‘joints or surface of the fill- 
ings. 

§ u. The first and simplest mode of obtaining this is by 
channelling the jambs and arch head; and this is the chief 
practical service of aperture mouldings, which are otherwise 
entirely decorative. But as this very decorative character 
renders them unfit to be made channels for rain water, it is 
well to add some external roofing to the aperture, which may 
protect it from the run of all the rain, except that which 
necessarily beats into its own area. This protection, in its 
most usual form, is a mere dripstone moulding carried over 
or round the head of the aperture. But this is, in reality, 
only a contracted form of a true roof, projecting from the wall 
over the aperture; and all protections of apertures whatso- 
ever are to be conceived as portions of small roofs, attached 
to the wall behind ; and supported by it, so long as their scale 
admits of their being so with safety, and afterwards in such 
manner as may be most expedient. The proper forms of | 
these, and modes of their support, are to be the subject of 
our final enquiry. 

§ m. Respecting their proper form we need not stay long 
in doubt. A deep gable is evidently the best for throwing off 
rain; even alow gable being better than a high arch. Flat 
roofs, therefore, may only be used when the nature of the 
building renders the gable unsightly ; as when there is not 
room for it between the stories ; or when the object is rather 


PROTECTION OF APERTURE. 197 


shade than protection from rain, as often in verandahs and 
balconies. But for general service the gable IRS, 

is the proper and natural form, and may be 
taken as representative of the rest. Then 
this gable may either project unsupported 
from the wall, a, Fig. XLVIIL., or be carried 
by brackets or spurs, }, or by walls or shafts, 
c, which shafts or walls may themselves be, 
in windows, carried on a sill; and this, in its 
turn, supported by brackets or spurs. . We 
shall glance at the applications of each of 
these forms in order. 

§1v. There is not much variety in the 
case of the first, a, Fig. XLVI. In the 
‘Cumberland and border cottages the door 
is generally protected by two pieces of slate 
arranged in a gable, giving the purest pos- 
sible type of the first form. In elaborate 
architecture such a projection hardly ever 
occurs, and in large architecture cannot with 
safety occur, without brackets ; but by cut- * 
ting away the greater part of the projection, 
we shall arrive at the idea of a 
plain gabled cornice, of which a 
perfect example will be found 
in Plate VII. of the folio series. 
With this first complete form 
we may associate the rude, 
single, projecting, pent-house 
roof; imperfect, because either 
it must be level and the water 
lodge lazily upon it, or throw 
off the drip upon the persons 
entering. 

§ v. 2.6, Fig. XLVI. This 
is a most beautiful and natura] 
type, and is found in all good architecture, from the highest 
to the most humble: it is a frequent form of cottage door, 


Fie, XLIX. 


198 THE SV!ONES OF VENICE. 


more especially when carried on spurs, being of peculiarly 
easy construction in wood: as applied to large architecture, 
ji can evidently be built, in its boldest and simplest form, 
either of wood only, or on a scale which will admit of its 
sides being each a single slab of stone. If so large as to re- 
quire jointed masonry, the gabled sides will evidently require 
support, and an arch must be thrown across under them, as 
in Fig. XLIX., from Fiesole. 

If we cut the projection gradually down, we arrive at the 
common Gothic gable dripstone carried on small brackets, 
carved into bosses, heads, or some other ornamental form ; 
the sub-arch in such case being useless, is removed or coin- 
cides with the arch head of the aperture. 

§ vi. 3. ¢, Fig. XLVI. Substituting walls or pillars for 
the brackets, we may carry the projection as far out as we- 
choose, and form the perfect porch, either of the cottage or 
village church, or of the cathedral. As we enlarge the struct- 
ure, however, certain modifications of form become neces-. 
sary, owing to the increased boldness of the required sup 


Fie. L. 


porting arch. For, as the lower end of the gabled roof ad 
of the arch cannot coincide, we have necessarily above ite 
shafts one of the two forms a or 6, in Fig. L., of which the 
latter is clearly the best, requiring less masonry and shorter 
roofing ; and when the arch becomes so large as to cause a 
heavy lateral thrust, it may become necessary to provide for 
its farther safety by pinnacles, ec. 

This last is the perfect type of aperture protection. None 
other can ever be invented so good. It is that once employed 


PROTECTION OF APHRTURE. 199 


by Giotto in the cathedral of Florence, and torn down by 
the proveditore, Benedetto Uguccione, to erect a Renaissance 
front instead ; and another such has been destroyed, not long 
since, in Venice, the porch of the church of St. Apollinare, 
also to put up some Renaissance upholstery : for Renaissance, 
as if it were not nuisance enough in the mere fact of its own 
existence, appears invariably as a beast of prey, and founds 
itself on the ruin of all that is best and noblest. Many such 
porches, however, happily still exist in Italy, and are among 
its principal glories. 

§ vi. When porches of this kind, carried by walls, are placed 
elose together,as in cases where there are many and large 
entrances to a cathedral front, they would, in their general form, 
leave deep and uncomfortable intervals, in which damp would 
lodge and grags grow ; and there would be a painful feeling 
in approaching the door in the midst of a crowd, as if some 
of them might miss the real doors, and be driven into the 
intervals, and embayed there. Clearly it will be a natural 
and right expedient, in sucl cases, to open the walls of the 
porch wider, so that they may correspond in slope, or nearly 
so, with the bevel of the doorway, and either meet each other 
in the intervals, or have the said intervals closed up with an 
intermediate wall, so that nobody may get embayed in them, 
The porches will thus be united, and form one range of great 
open guiphs or caverns, ready to receive all comers, and di- 
rect the current of the crowd into the narrower entrances, 
As the lateral thrust of the arches is now met by each other, 
the pinnacles, if there were any, must be removed, and water- 
spouts placed between each arch to discharge the double 
drainage of the gables. This is the form of all the noble 
northern porches, without exception, best represented by that 
of Rheims. 

§ vir. Contracted conditions of the pinnacle porch are 
beautifully used in the doors of the cathedral of Florence ; 
and the entire arrangement, in its most perfect form, as 
adapted to window protection and decoration, is applied by 
Giotto with inconceivable exquisiteness in the windows of the 
campanile ; those of the cathedral itself being all of the same 


200 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


type. Various singular and delightful conditions of it are 
applied in Italian domestic architecture (in the Broletto of 
Monza very quaintly), being associated with balconies for 
speaking to the people, and passing into pulpits. In the 
north we glaze the sides of such projections, and they become 
bow-windows, the shape of roofing being then nearly imma- 
terial and very fantastic, often a conical cap. All these con- 
ditions of window protection, being for real service, are end- 
lessly delightful (and I believe the beauty of the balcony, pro- 
tected by an open canopy supported by light shafts, never yet 
to have been properly worked out). But the Renaissance 
architects destroyed all of them, and introduced the magnifi- 
cent and witty Roman invention of a model of a Greek pedi- 
ment, with its cornices of monstrous thickness, bracketed 
up above the window. The horizontal cornice of the pedi- 
ment is thus useless, and of course, therefore, retained ; the 
protection to the head of the window being constructed on 
the principle of a hat with its crown sewn up. But the deep 
and dark triangular cavity thus obtained affords farther op- 
portunity for putting ornament out of sight, of which the 
Renaissance architects are not slow to avail themselves. 

A more rational condition is the complete pediment with 
a couple of shafts, or pilasters, carried on a bracketed sill ; 
and the windows of this kind, which have been well designed, 
are perhaps the best things which the Renaissance schools 
have produced: those of Whitehall are, in their way, ex- 
ceedingly beautiful ; and those of the Palazzo Ricardi at 
Florence, in their simplicity and sublimity, are scarcely un- 
worthy of their reputed designer, Michael Angelo. 


CHAPTER XIX. 
SUPERIMPOSITION, 


§ 1. Tue reader has now some knowledge of every feature 
of all possible architecture. Whatever the nature of the 
building which may be submitted to his criticism, if it be an 
edifice at all, if it be anything else than a mere heap of stones 


_ SUPERIMPOSITION. 201 


fike a pyramid or breakwater, or than a large stone hewn inte 
shape, like an obelisk, it will be instantly and easily resolvable 
into some of the parts which we have been hitherto consider- 
ing: its pinnacles will separate themselves into their small 
shafts and roofs; its supporting members into shafts and 
arches, or walls penetrated by apertures of various shape, and 
supported by various kinds of buttresses. Respecting each 
of these several features I am certain that the reader feels 
himself prepared, by understanding their plain function, to 
form something like a reasonable and definite judgment, 
whether they be good or bad ;‘and this right judgment of 
parts will, in most cases, lead him to just reverence or con- 
demnation of the whole. 

§ u. The various modes in which these parts are capable 
of combination, and the merits of buildings of different form 
and expression, are evidently not reducible into lists, nor to 
be estimated by general laws. The nobility of each building 
depends on its special fitness for its own purposes ; and these 
purposes vary with every climate, every soil, and every national 
custom : nay, there were never, probably, two edifices erected 
in which some accidental difference of condition did not 
require some difference of plan or of structure; so that, 
respecting plan and distribution of parts, I do not hope to 
collect any universal law of right ; but there are a few points 
necessary to be noticed respecting the means by which height 
is attained in buildings of various plans, and the expediency 
and methods of superimposition of one story or tier of archi- 
tecture above another. 

§ m. For, in the preceding inquiry, I have always sup- 
posed either that a single shaft would reach to the top of the 
building, or that the farther height required might be added 
in plain wall above the heads of the arches ; whereas it may 
often be rather expedient to complete the entire lower series 
of arches, or finish the lower wall, with a bold string course 
or cornice, and build another series of shafts, or another wall, 
on the top of it. 

§ 1v. This superimposition is seen in its simplest form in 
the interior shafts of a Greek temple ; and it has been largelt 


202 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


used in nearly all countries where buildings have been meant 
for real service. Outcry has often been raised against it, but 
the thing is so sternly necessary that it has always forced it- 
self into acceptance ; and it would, therefore, be merely losing 
time to refute the arguments of those who have attempted its 
disparagement. “Thus far, however, they have reason on their 
side, that if a building can be kept in one grand mass, with- 
out sacrificing either its visible or real adaptation to its ob. 
jects, it is not well to divide it into stories until it has reached 
proportions too large to be justly measured by the eye. It 
ought then to be divided in order to mark its bulk; and 
decorative divisions are often possible, which rather increase 
than destroy the expression of general unity. 

§ v. Superimposition, wisely practised, is of two kinds, di- 
rectly contrary to each other, of weight on lightness, and of 
lightness on weight; while the superimposition of weight on 
weight, or lightness on lightness, is nearly always wrong. 

1. Weight on lightness: I do not say weight on weakness. 
The superimposition of the human body on its limbs I call 
weight on lightness : the superimposition of the branches on 
a tree trunk I call lightness on weight: in both cases the 
support is fully adequate to the work, the form of support 
being regulated by the differences of requirement. Nothing 
in architecture is half so painful as the apparent want of suf- 
ficient support when the weight above is visibly passive : for 
all buildings are not passive ; some seem to rise by their own 
strength, or float by their own buoyancy ; a dome requires no 
visibility of support, one fancies it supported by the air. But 
passive architecture without help for its passiveness is unen- 
durable. In a lately built house, No. 86, in Oxford Street, 
three huge stone pillars in the second story are carried ap- 
parently by the edges of three sheets of plate glass in the 
first. I hardly know anything to match the painfulness of 
this and some other of our shop structures, in which the 
iron-work is concealed ; nor, even when it is apparent, can 
the eye ever feel satisfied of their security, when built, as at 
present, with fifty or sixty feet of wall above a rod of iron nof 
the width of this page, 


SUPERIMPOSITION. 203 


§ v1. The proper forms of this superimposition of weight 
on lightness have arisen, for the most part, from the neces- 
sity or desirableness, in many situations, of elevating the in- 
habited portions of buildings considerably above the ground 
level, especially those exposed to damp or inundation, and 
the consequent abandonment of the ground story as un- 
serviceable, or else the surrender of it to public purposes. 
Thus, in many market and town houses, the ground story is 
left open as a general place of sheltered resort, and the en- 
closed apartments raised on pillars. In almost all warm 
countries the luxury, almost the necessity, of arcades to pro- 
tect the passengers from the sun, and the desirableness of 
large space in the rooms above, lead to the same construc- 
tion. Throughout the Venetian islet group,.the houses seem 
to have been thus, in the first instance, universally built, all 
the older palaces appearing to have had the rez de chaussée 
perfectly open, the upper parts of the palace being sustained 
on magnificent arches, and ths smaller houses sustained in the 
game manner on wooden piers, still retained in many of the 
cortiles, and exhibited characteristically throughout the main 
street of Murano. As ground became more valuable and 
house-room more scarce, these ground-floors were enclosed 
with wall veiis between the original shafts, and so remain ; 
but the type of the structure of the entire city is given in the 
Ducal Palace. | 

§$ vu. To this kind of superimposition we owe the most 
picturesque street effects throughout the world, and the most 
graceful, as well as the most grotesque, buildings, from the 
many-shafted fantasy of the Alhambra (a building as beautiful 
in disposition as it is base in ornamentation) to the four-legged 
stolidity of the Swiss Chalet: * nor these only, but great part 
of the effect of our cathedrals, in which, necessarily, the close 


*T have spent much of my life among the Alps; but I never pass, with- 
out some feeling of new surprise, the Chalet, standing on its four pegs 
(each topped with a flat stone), balanced in the fury of Alpine winds. It is 
nut, perhaps, generally known that the chief use of the arrangement is not 
so much to raise the building above the snow, as to get a draught of wind 
beneath it, which may prevent the drilt from rising against its sides. 


204 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


triforium and clerestory walls are superimposed on the nava 
piers ; perhaps with most majesty where with greatest sim- 
plicity, as in the old basilican types, and the noble cathedral 
of Pisa. 

§ vm. In order to the delightfulness and security of all 
such arrangements, this law must be observed :—that in pro- 
portion to the height of wall above them, the shafts are to 
be short. You may take your given height of wall, and turn 
any quantity of that wall into shaft that you like; but you 
must not turn it all into tall shafts, and then put more wall 
above. Thus, having a house five stories high, you may turn 
the lower story into shafts, and leave the four stories in wall ; 
or the two lower stories into shafts, and leave three in wall ; 
but, whatever you add to the shaft, you must take from the 
wall. Then also, of course, the shorter the shaft the thicker 
will be its proportionate, if not its actual, diameter. In the 
Ducal Palace of Venice the shortest shafts are always the 
thickest.* 

§ 1x. The second kind of superimposition, lightness on 
weight, is, in its most necessary use, of stories of houses one 
upon another, where, of course, wall veil is required in the 
lower ones, and has to support wall veil above, aided by as 
much of shaft structure as is attainable within the given 
limits. The greatest, if not the only, merit of the Roman 
and Renaissance Venetian architects is their graceful manage- 
ment of this kind of superimposition ; sometimes of complete 
courses of external arches and shafts one above the other ; 
sometimes of apertures with intermediate cornices at the levels 
of the floors, and large shafts from top to bottom of the build- 
ing ; always observing that the upper stories shall be at once 
lighter and richer than the lower ones. The entire value of 
such buildings depends upon the perfect and easy expression 
of the relative strength of the stories, and the unity obtained 
by the varieties of their proportions, while yet the fact of 
superimposition and separation by floors is frankly told. 

§ x. In churches and other buildings in which there is na 
separation by floors, another kind of pure shaft superimposition 

* Appendix 20, ‘‘ Shafts of the Ducal Palace.” 


SUPERIMPOSI119ON. : 205 


is often used, in order to enable the builder to avail himself of 
short and slender shafts. It has been noted that these are 
often easily attainable, and of precious materials, when shafts 
large enough and strong enough to do the work at once, could 
not be obtained except at unjustifiable expense, and of coarse 
stone. The architect has then no choice but to arrange his 
work in successive stories ; either frankly completing the arch 
work and cornice of each, and beginning a new story above it, 
which is the honester and nobler way, or else tying the stories 
together by supplementary shafts from floor to roof,—the 
general practice of the Nothern Gothic, and one which, unless 
most gracefully managed, gives the look of ascaffolding, with 
cross-poles tied to its uprights, to the whole clerestory wail. 
The best method is that which avoids all chance of the upright 
shafts being supposed continuous, by increasing their number 
and changing their places in the upper stories, so that the 
whole work branches from the ground like a tree. This is the 
superimposition of the Byzantine and the Pisan Romanesque ; 
the most beautiful examples of it being, I think, the Southern 
portico of St. Mark’s, the church of S. Giovanni at Pistoja, 
and the apse of the cathedral of Pisa. In Renaissance work 
the two principles are equally distinct, though the shafts are 
(I think) always one above the other. The reader may see one 
of the best examples of the separately superimposed story in 
Whitehall (and another far inferior in St. Paul’s), and by turn- 
ing himself round at Whitehall may compare with it the sys- 
tem of connecting shafts in the Treasury ; though this is a 
singularly bad example, the window cornices of the first floor 
being like shelves in a cupboard, and cutting the mass of the 
building in two, in spite of the pillars. 

§ x1. But this superimposition of lightness on weight is 
still more distinctly the system of many buildings of the kind 
which I have above called Architecture of Position, that is to 
say, architecture of which the greater part is intended merely 
to keep something in a peculiar position ; as in light-houses, 
and many towers and belfries. The subject of spire and tower 
architecture, however, is so interesting and extensive, that I 
uaave thoughts of writing a detached essay upon it, and, at alJ 


906 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


events, cannot enter upon it here: but this much is enough 
for the reader to note for our present purpose, that, although 
many towers do in reality stand on piers or shafts, as the cen- 
tral towers of cathedrals, yet the expression of all of them, 
and the real structure of the best and strongest, are the eleva- 
tion of gradually diminishing weight on massy or even solid 
foundation. Nevertheless, since the tower is in its origin a 
building for strength of defence, and faithfulness of watch, 
rather than splendor of aspect, its true expression is of just so 
much diminution of weight upwards as may be necessary to 
its fully balanced strength, not a jot more. There must be 
no light-headedness in your noble tower : impregnable founda- 
tion, wrathful crest, with the vizor down, and the dark vigil- 
ance seen through the clefts of it ; not the filigree crown or 
embroidered cap. No towers are so grand as the square- 
browed ones, with massy cornices and rent battlements: next 
to these come the fantastic towers, with their various forms 
of steep roof; the best, not the cone, but the plain gable 
thrown very high; last of all in my mind (of good towers), 
those with spires or crowns, though these, of course, are fittest 
for ecclesiastical purposes, and capable of the richest orna- 
ment. The paltry four or eight pinnacled things we call 
towers in England (as in York Minster), are mere confec- 
tioner’s Gothic, and not worth classing. 

§ xu. But, in all of them, this I believe to be a point of 
chief necessity,—that they shall seem to stand, and shall verily 
stand, in their own strength; not by help of buttresses nor 
artful balancings on this side and on that. Your noble tower 
must need no help, must be sustained by no crutches, must 
give place to no suspicion of decrepitude. Its office may be 
to withstand war, look forth for tidings, or to point to heaven : 
but it must have in its own walls the strength to do this ; it is 
to be itself a bulwark, not to be sustained by other bulwarks ; 
to rise and look forth, ‘the tower of Lebanon that looketh 
toward Damascus,” like a stern sentinel, not like a child held 
up in its nurse’s arms. A tower may, indeed, have a kind of 
buttress, a projection, or subordinate tower at each of its 
angles ; but these are to its main body like the sateilites to a 


Ne 


aim gee bum: 
awe 


{it 
Be 


PLATE VI.—Typrs or Towmrs 


SUPERIMPOSITION. 204 


shaft, joined with its strength, and associated in its upright. 
ness, part of the tower itself: exactly in the proportion in 
which they lose their massive unity with its body and assume 
the form of true buttress walls set on its angles, the tower 
loses its dignity. 

§ xu. These two characters, hon are common io all noble 
towers, however otherwise different in purpose or feature,— 
the first, that they rise from massy foundation to lighter sum- 
mits, frowning with battlements perhaps, but yet evidently 
more pierced and thinner in wall than beneath, and, in most 
ecclesiastical examples, divided into rich open work : the sec- 
ond, that whatever the form of the tower, it shall not appear 
to stand by help of buttresses. It follows from the first con- 
dition, as indeed it would have followed from ordinary esthetic 
requirements, that we shall have continual variation in the 
arrangements of the stories, and the larger number of aper- 
tures towards the top,—a condition exquisitely carried out in 
the old Lombardic towers, in which, however small they may 
be, the number of apertures is always regularly increased to- 
wards the summit; generally one window in the lowest stories, 
two in the second, then three, five, and six ; often, also, one, 
two, four, and six, with beautiful symmetries of placing, not 
at present to our purpose. We may sufficiently exemplify the 
general laws of tower building by placing side by side, drawn 
to the same scale, a medizval tower, in which most of them 
are simply and unaffectedly observed, and one of our own 
modern towers, in which every one of them is violated, in 
small space, convenient for comparison. (Plate VL) 

§ xiv. The old tower is that of St. Mark’s at Venice, not a 
very perfect example, for its top is Renaissance, but as good 
Renaissance as there is in Venice ; and it is fit for our present 
purpose, because it owes none of its effect to ornament. It is 
built as simply as it well can be to answer its purpose: no 
buttresses ; no external features whatever, except some huts 
at the base, and the loggia, afterwards built, which, on pur 
pose, I have not drawn ; one bold square mass of brickwork ; 
double walls, with an ascending inclined plane between them, 
with apertures as small as possible, and these only in neces 


208 THE SVONES OF VENICE. 


sary places, giving just the light required for ascending the 
stair or slope, not a ray more; and the weight of the whole 
relieved only by the double pilasters on the sides, sustaining 
small arches at the top of the mass, each decorated with the 
scallop or cockle shell, presently to be noticed as frequent in 
Renaissance ornament, and here, for once, thoroughly well 
applied. Then, when the necessary height is reached, the 
belfry is left open, as in the ordinary Romanesque campanile, 
only the shafts more slender, but severe and simple, and the 
whole crowned by as much spire as the tower would carry, 
to render it more serviceable asa landmark. The arrange- 
ment is repeated in numberless campaniles throughout 
Italy. 

§ xv. The one beside it is one of those of the lately built 
college at Edinburgh. I have not taken it as worse than many 
others (just as I have not taken the St. Mark’s tower as better 
than many others) ; but it happens to compress our British 
system of tower building into small space. The Venetian 
tower rises 350 feet,* and has no buttresses, though built of 
brick ; the British tower rises 121 feet, and is built of stone, 
but is supposed to be incapable of standing without two huge 
buttresses on each angle. The St. Mark’s tower has a high 
sloping roof, but carries it simply, requiring no pinnacles at 
its angles ; the British tower has no visible roof, but has four 
pinnacles for mere ornament. The Venetian tower has its 
lightest part at the top, and is massy at the base ; the British 
tower has its lightest part at the base, and shuts up its win- 
dows into a mere arrowslit at the top. What the tower was 
built for at all must therefore, it seems to me, remain a mys- 
tery to every beholder ; for surely no studious inhabitant of 
its upper chambers will be conceived to be pursuing his em- 
ployments by the light of the single chink on each side ; and, 
had it been intended for a belfry, the sound of its bells would 


*Thave taken Professor Willis’s estimate; there being discrepancy 
among various statements. I did not take the trouble to measure the 
height myself, the building being one which does not come within the 
range of our future inquiries ; and its exact dimensions, even here, arg 
of no importance as respects the question at issue. 


SUPERIMPOSITION. 209 


have been as effectually prevented from getting out, as the 
light from getting in. 

§ xvi. In connexion with the subject of towers and of su- 
perimposition, one other feature, not conveniently to be 
omitted from our house-building, requires a moment’s notice, 
—the staircase. 

In modern houses it can hardly be considered an architect. 
ural feature, and is nearly always an ugly one, from its being 
apparently without support. And here I may not unfitly note 
the important distinction, which perhaps ought to have been 
dwelt upon in some places before now, between the marvellous 
and the perilous in apparent construction. There are many 
edifices which are awful or admirable in their height, and 
lightness, and boldness of form, respecting which, neverthe-: 
less, we have no fear that they should fall. Many a mighty 
dome and aerial aisle and arch may seem to stand, as I said, 
by miracle, but by steadfast miracle notwithstanding ; there 
is no fear that the miracle should cease. We have a sense of 
inherent power in them, or, at all events, of concealed and 
mysterious provision for their safety. But in leaning towers, 
as of Pisa or Bologna, and in much minor architecture, pas- 
sive architecture, of modern times, we feel that there is but a 
chance between the building and destruction ; that there is no 
miraculous life in it, which animates it into security, but an 
obstinate, perhaps vain, resistance to immediate danger. The 
appearance of this is often as strong in small things as in 
large ; in the sounding-boards of pulpits, for instance, when 
sustained by a single pillar behind them, so that one is in 
dread, during the whole sermon, of the preacher being crushed 
if a single nail should give way ; and again, the modern geo- 
metrical unsupported staircase. There is great disadvantage, 
also, in the arrangement of this latter, when room is of value ; 
and excessive ungracefulness in its awkward divisions of the 
passage walls, or windows. In medieval architecture, where 
there was need of room, the staircase was spiral, and enclosed 
generally in an exterior tower, which added infinitely to the 
picturesque effect of the building; nor was the stair itself 
steeper nor less commodious than the ordinary compressed 

Vou. I.—14 


210 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


straight staircase of a modern dwelling-house. Many of the 
richest towers of domestic architecture owe their origin to 
this arrangement. In Italy the staircase is often in the open 
air, surrounding the interior court of the house, and giving 
access to its various galleries or loggias: in this case it is al. 
most always supported by bold shafts and arches, and forms 
a most interesting additional feature of the cortile, but pre- 
sents no peculiarity of construction requiring our present ex- 
amination. 

We may here, therefore, close our inquiries into the sub- 
ject of construction ; nor must the reader be dissatisfied with 
the simplicity or apparent barrenness of their present results. 
He will find, when he begins to apply them, that they are of 
more value than they now seem ; but I have studiously avoided 
letting myself be drawn into any intricate question, because I 
wished to ask from the reader only so much attention as it 
seemed that even the most indifferent would not be unwilling 
to pay to a subject which is hourly becoming of greater prac- 
tical interest. Evidently it would have been altogether beside 
the purpose of this essay to have entered deeply into the ab- 
stract science, or closely into the mechanical detail, of con- 
struction : both have been illustrated by writers far more 
capable of doing so than I, and may be studied at the reader’s 
discretion ; all that has been here endeavored was the leading 
him to appeal to something like definite principle, and refer 
to the easily intelligible laws of convenience and necessity, 
whenever he found his judgment likely to be overborne by 
authority on the one hand, or dazzled by novelty on the other, 
If he has time to do more, and to follow out in all their brill- 
iancy the mechanical inventions of the great engineers and 
architects of the day, I, in some sort, envy him, but must part 
company with him: for my way lies not along the viaduct, 
but down the quiet valley which its arches cross, nor through 
the tunnel, but up the hill-side which its cavern darkens, to 
see what gifts Nature will give us, and with what imagery she 
will fill our thoughts, that the stones we have ranged in rude 
order may now be touched with life ; nor lose for ever, in 
their hewn nakedness, the voices they had of old, when the 


THH MATERIAL OF ORNAMENT. 211 


valley streamlet eddied round them in palpitating light, and 
the winds of the hill-side shook over them the shadows of the 
fern. 


CHAPTER XX. 
THE MATERIAL OF ORNAMENT. 


§ 1. Ws enter now on the second division of our subject. 
We have no more to do with heavy stones and hard lines ; we 
are going to be happy: to look round in the world and dis- 
cover (in a serious manner always, however, and under a sense 
of responsibility) what we like best in it, and to enjoy the same 
at our leisure : to gather it, examine it, fasten all we can of it 
into imperishable forms, and put it where we may see it for 
ever. . 

This is to decorate architecture. 

§ u. There are, therefore, three steps in the process : first, 
to find out ina grave manner what we like best; secondly, 
to put as much of this as we can (which is little enough) into 
form ; thirdly, to put this formed abstraction into a proper 
place. 

And we have now, therefore, to make these three inquiries 
in succession first, what we like, or what is the right material 
of ornament ; then how we are to present it, or its right treat- 
ment; then, where we are to put it, or its right place. I think 
I can answer that first inquiry in this Chapter, the second in- 
quiry in the next Chapter, and the third I shall answer in a 
more diffusive manner, by taking up in succession the several 
parts of architecture above distinguished, and rapidly noting 
the kind of ornament fittest for each. 

§ m. I said in chapter IL § x1v., that all noble ornamenta- 
tion was the expression of man’s delight in God’s work. This 
implied that there was an ignoble ornamentation, which was 
the expression of man’s delight in his own. There is such a 
school, chiefly degraded classic and Renaissance, in which the 
ornament is composed of imitations of things made by man. I 
think, before inquiring what we like best of God’s work, we 

Stones of Venice--Vol. LW 


212 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


had better get rid of all this imitation of man’s, and be quite 
sure we do not like that. 

§ 1v. We shall rapidly glance, then, at the material of deco- 

‘ration hence derived. And now I cannot, as I before have 
done respecting construction, convince the reader of one thing 
being wrong, and another right. Ihave confessed as much 
again and again; I am now only to make appeal to him, and 
cross-question him, whether he really does like things or not. 
If he likes the ornament on the base of the column of the Place 
Vendédme, composed of Wellington boots and laced frock coats, 
I cannot help it ; I can only say I differ from him, and don’t 
like it. And if, therefore, I speak dictatorially, and say this 
is base, or degraded, or ugly, Imean only that I believe men 
of the longest experience in the matter would either think it 
so, or would be prevented from thinking it so only by some 
morbid condition of their minds ; and I believe that the reader, 
if he examine himself candidly, will usually agree in my 
statements. 

§ v. The subjects of ornament found in man’s work may 
properly fallinto four heads : 1. Instruments of art, agriculture, 
and war; armor, and dress; 2. Drapery; 3. Shipping; 4. 
Architecture itself. 

1. Instruments, armor, and dress. 

The custom of raising trophies on pillars, and of dedicating 
arms in temples, appears to have first suggested the idea of 
employing them as the subjects of sculptural ornament : 
thenceforward, this abuse has been chiefly characteristic of 
classical architecture, whether true or Renaissance. Armor is 
a noble thing in its proper service and subordination to the 
body ; so is an animal’s hide on its back ; but a heap of cast 
skins, or of shed armor, is alike unworthy of all regard or imi- 
tation. We owe much true sublimity, and more of delightful 
picturesqueness, to the introduction of armor both in painting 
and sculpture : in poetry it is better still,—Homer’s undressed 
Achilles is less grand than his crested and shielded Achilles, 
though Phidias would rather have had him naked ; in all medi- 
eval painting, arms, like all other parts of costume, are treated 
with exquisite care and delight ; in the designs of Leonardg 


THE MATERIAL OF ORNAMENT. 213 


Raffaelle, and Perugino, the armor sometimes becomes almost 


' _ too conspicuous from the rich and endless invention bestowed 


upon it; while Titian and Rubens seek in its flash what the 
Milanese and Perugian sought in its form, sometimes subordi- 
nating heroism to the light of the steel, while the great 
designers wearied themselves in its elaborate fancy. 

But all this labor was given to the living, not the dead 
armor ; to the shell with its animal in it, not the cast shell of 
the beach ; and even so, it was introduced more sparingly by 
the good sculptors than the good painters ; for the former 
felt, and with justice, that the painter had the power of con- 
quering the over prominence of costume by the expression 
and color of the countenance, and that by the darkness of the 
eye, and glowof the cheek, he could always conquer the gloom 
and the flash of the mail; but they could hardly, by any 
boldness or energy of the marble features, conquer the for- 
wardness and conspicuousness of the sharp armorial forms. 
Their armed figures were therefore almost always subordi- 
nate, their principal figures draped or naked, and their choice 
of subject was much influenced by this feeling of necessity. 
But the Renaissance sculptors displayed the love of a Camilla 
for the mere crest and plume. | Paltry and false alike in every 
feeling of their narrowed minds, they attached themselves, not 
only to costume without the person, but to the pettiest de- 
tails of the costume itself. They could not describe Achilles, 
but they could describe his shield; a shield like those of 
dedicated spoil, without a handle, never to be waved in the 
face of war. And then we have helmets and lances, bannera. 
and swords,. sometimes with men to hold them, sometimes 
without ; but always chiselled with a tailor-like love of the 
-Chasing or the embroidery,—show helmets of the stage, no 
Vulcan work on them, no heavy hammer strokes, no Etna fire 
in the metal of them, nothing but pasteboard crests and high 
feathers. And these, cast together in disorderly heaps, or 
grinning vacantly over key-stones, form one of the leading 
decorations of Renaissance architecture, and that one of the 
best ; for helmets and lances, however loosely laid, are better 
than violins, and pipes, and books of music, which were 


214 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


another of the Palladian and Sansovinian sources of orna. 
ment. Supported by ancient authority, the abuse soon be- 
came a matter of pride, and since it was easy to copy a heap 
of cast clothes, but difficult to manage an arranged design of 
human figures, the indolence of architects came to the aid of 
their affectation, until by the moderns we find the practice 
carried out to its most interesting results, and, as above 
noted, a large pair of boots occupying the principal place in 
the bas-reliefs on the base of the Colonne Vendome. 

§ vi. A less offensive, because singularly grotesque, ex- 
ample of the abuse at its height, occurs in the Hotel des In- 
valides, where the dormer windows are suits of armor down 
to the bottom of the corselet, crowned by the helmet, and 
with the window in the middle of the breast. 

Instruments of agricultnre and the arts are of less frequent 
occurrence, except in hieroglyphics, and other work, where 
they are not employed as ornaments, but represented for the 
sake of accurate knowledge, or as symbols. Wherever they 
have purpose of this kind, they are of course perfectly right ; 
but they are then part of the building’s conversation, not con- 
ducive to its beauty. The French have managed, with great 
dexterity, the representation of the machinery for the eleva- 
tion of their Luxor obelisk, now sculptured on its base. 

§ vu. 2. Drapery. I have already spoken of the error of’ 
introducing drapery, as such, for ornament, in the “Seven 
Lamps.” I may here note a curious instance of the abuse in 
the church of the Jesuiti at Venice (Renaissance). On first 
entering you suppose that the church, being in a poor quarter 
of the city, has been somewhat meanly decorated by heavy 
green and white curtains of an ordinary upholsterer’s pat- 
tern : on looking closer, they are discovered to be of marble, — 
with the green pattern inlaid. Another remarkable instance 
is in a piece of not altogether unworthy architecture at Paris 
(Rue Rivoli), where the columns are supposed to be decorated 
with images of handkerchiefs tied in a stout knot round the 
middle of them. This shrewd invention bids fair to become g 
new order. Multitudes of massy curtains and various uphok 
etery, more or less in itnitation of that of the drawing-room,’ 


THE MATERIAL OF ORNAMENT. 215 


are carved and gilt, in wood or stone, about the altars and 
other theatrical portions of Romanist. churches ; but from 
these coarse and senseless vulgarities we may well turn, in all 
haste, to note, with respect as well as regret, one of the errors 
of the great school of Niccolo Pisano,—an error so full of 
feeling as to be sometimes all but redgemed, and altogether 
forgiven,—the sculpture, namely, of curtains around the re- 
cumbent statues upon tombs, curtains which angels are rep- 
resented as withdrawing, to gaze upon the faces of those who 
are at rest. For some time the idea was simply and slightly 
expressed, and though there was always a painfulness in find- 
ing the shafts of stone, which were felt to be the real support- 
ers of the canopy, represented as of yielding drapery, yet the 
beauty of the angelic figures, and the tenderness of the 
thought, disarmed all animadversion. But the scholars of the 
Pisani, as usual, caricatured when they were unable to invent ; 
and the quiet curtained canopy became a huge marble tent, 
with a pole in the centre of it. Thus vulgarised, the idea 
itself soon disappeared, to make room for urns, torches, and 
weepers, and the other modern paraphernalia of the church- 
yard. 

§ vin. 3. Shipping. I have allowed this kind of subject to 
form a separate head, owing to the importance of rostra in 
Roman decoration, and to the continual occurrence of naval 
subjects in modern monumental bas-relief. Mr. Fergusson 
says, somewhat doubtfully, that he perceives a “kind of 
beauty ” in a ship: I say, without any manner of doubt, that 
a ship is one of the loveliest things man ever made, and one of 
the noblest ; nor do I know any lines, out of divine work, so 
lovely as those of the head of a ship, or even as the sweep of 
the timbers of a smali boat, not a race boat, a mere floating 
chisel, but a broad, strong, sea boat, able to breast a wave and 
break it: and yet, with all this beauty, ships cannot be made 
subjects of sculpture. No one pauses in particular delight 
beneath the pediments of the Admiralty ; nor does scenery of 
shipping ever become prominent in bas-relief without destroy: 
ing it: witness the base of the Nelson pillar. It may be, and 
must be sometimes, introduced in severe subordination to the 


216 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


figure subject, but just enough to indicate the scene ; sketched 
in the lightest lines on the background ; never with any at- 
tempt at realisation, never with any equality to the force of 
the figures, unless the whole purpose of the subject be pictu- 
resque. I shall explain this exception presently, in speaking 
of imitative architecture. 

§ rx. There is one piece of a ship’s fittings, however, which 
may be thought to have obtained acceptance as a constant 
element of architectural ornament,—the cable: it isnot, how- 
ever, the cable itself, but its abstract form, a group of twisted 
lines (which a cable only exhibits in common with many natu- 
ral objects), which is indeed beautiful as an ornament. ' Make 
the resemblance complete, give to the stone the threads and 
character-of the cable, and you may, perhaps, regard the 
sculpture with curiosity, but never more with admiration. 
Consider the effect of the base of the statue of King William 
IV. at the end of London Bridge. 

§ x. 4. Architecture itself. The erroneous use of armor, or 
dress, or instruments, or shipping, as decorative subject, is 
almost exclusively confined to bad architecture—Roman or 
Renaissance. But the false use of architecture itself, as an 
ornament of architecture, is conspicuous even in the mediseval 
work of the best times, and is a grievous fault in some of its 
noblest examples. 

It is, therefore, of great importance to note exactly at what 
point this abuse begins, and in what it consists. 

§ x1. In all bas-relief, architecture may be introduced as an 
explanation of the scene in which the figures act; but with 
more or less prominence in the inverse ratio of the importance 
of the figures. 

The metaphysical reason of this is, that where the figures 
are of great value and beauty, the mind is supposed to be en- 
gaged wholly with them ; and it is an impertinence to disturb 
its contemplation of them by any minor features whatever, 
As the ures become of less value, and are regarded with less 
intensity, accessory subjects may be introduced, such as the 
thoughts may have leisure for. 

Thus, if the figures be as large as life, and complete statues, 


THE MATERIAL OF ORNAMENT. 917 


it is gross vulgarity to carve a temple above them, or distribute 
them over sculptured rocks, or lead them up steps into pyra- 
mids: I need hardly instance Canova’s works,* and the Dutch 
pulpit groups, with fishermen, boats, and nets, in the midst 
of church naves. 

If the figures be in bas-relief, though as large as life, the 
scene may be explained by lightly traced outlines : this is ad- 
mirably done in the Ninevite marbles. 

If the figures be in bas-relief, or even alto-relievo, but less 
than life, and if their purpose is rather to enrich a space and 
produce picturesque shadows, than to draw the thoughts en- 
tirely to themselves, the scenery in which they act may become 
prominent. The most exquisite examples of this treatment are 
the gates of Ghiberti. What would that Madonna of the An- 
nunciation be, without the little shrine into which she shrinks 
back? But all medieval work is full of delightful examples 
of the same kind of treatment : the gates of hell and of para- 
dise are important pieces, both of explanation and effect, in 
all early representations of the last judgment, or of the de- 
scent into Hades. The keys of St. Peter, and the crushing 
flat of the devil under his own door, when it is beaten in, 
would hardly be understood without the respective gateways 
above. The best of all the later capitals of the Ducal Palace 
of Venice depends for great part of its value on the richness 
of a small campanile, which is pointed to proudly by a small | 
emperor in a turned-up hat, who, the legend informs us, is 
“Numa Pompilio, imperador, edifichador di tempi e chiese.” 

§ xu. Shipping may be introduced, or rich fancy of vest- 
ments, crowns, and ornaments, exactly on the same conditions 
as architecture ; and if the reader will look back to my defi- 
nition of the picturesque in the “Seven Lamps,” he will see 
why I said, above, that they might only be prominent when the 
purpose of the subject was partly picturesque ; that is to say, 
when the mind is intended to derive part of its enjoyment 
from the parasitical qualities and accidents of the thing, not 
from the heart of the thing itself. 


* The admiration of Canoval hold to be one of the most deadly symp 
toms in the’ civilisation of the upper classes in the present century. 


918 THE STONES OF VENICZ. 


And thus, while we must regret the flapping sails in the 
death of Nelson in Trafalgar Square, we may yet most heartily 
enjoy the sculpture of a storm in one of the bas-reliefs of the 
tomb of St. Pietro Martire in the church of St. Eustorgio at 
Milan, where the grouping of the figures is most fancifully 
complicated by the under-cut cordage of the vessel. 

§ xm. In all these instances, however, observe that the per- 
mission to represent the human work as an ornament, is con» 
ditional on its being necessary to the representation of a 
scene, or explanation of an action. On no terms whatever 
could any such subject be independently admissible. 

Observe, therefore, the use of manufacture as ornament is— 


1, With heroic figure sculpture, not admissible at all. 

2. With picturesque figure sculpture, admissible in the de- 
eree of its picturesqueness. 

3. Without figure sculpture, not admissible at all. 


So also in painting: Michael Angelo, in the Sistine Chapel, 
would not have willingly painted a dress of figured damask or 
of watered satin ; his was heroic painting, not admitting ac- 
cessories. 

Tintoret, Titian, Veronese, Rubens, and Vandyck, would 
be very sorry to part with their figured stuffs and lustrous 
_ silks; and sorry, observe, exactly in the degree of their pict- 
uresque feeling. Should not we also be sorry to have Bishop 
Ambrose without his vest, in that picture of the National Gal- 
lery? 

But I think Vandyck would not have liked, on the other 
hand, the vest without the bishop. I much doubt if Titian or © 
Veronese would have enjoyed going into Waterloo House, and 
making studies of dresses upon the counter. 

§ xiv. So, therefore, finally, neither architecture nor any 
other human work is admissible as an ornament, except in 
subordination to figure subject. And this law is grossly and 
painfully violated by those curious examples of Gothic, both 
early and late, in the north, (but late, I think, exclusively, in 
Italy,) in which the minor features of the architecture wer¢ 


THE MATHRIAL OF ORNAMENT. 218 


cv aposed of small models of the larger : examples which led 
the way to a series of abuses materially affecting the life, 
strength, and nobleness of the Northern Gothic,—abuses 
which no Ninevite, nor Egyptian, nor Greek, nor Byzantine, 
nor Italian of the earlier ages would have endured for an in- 
stant, and which strike me with renewed surprise whenever 
I pass beneath a portal of thirteenth century Northern 
Gothic, associated as they are with manifestations of exqui- 
site feeling and power in other directions. The porches of 
Bourges, Amiens, Notre Dame of Paris, and Notre Dame of 
Dijon, may be noted as conspicuous in error: small models 
of feudal towers with diminutive windows and battlements, 
of cathedral spires with scaly pinnacles, mixed with temple 
pediments and nondescript edifices of every kind, are crowded 
together over the recess of the niche into a confused fool’s 
cap for the saint below. Italian Gothic is almost entirely 
free from the taint of this barbarism until the Renaissance 
period, when it becomes rampant in the cathedral of Como 
and Certosa of Pavia ; and at Venice we find the Renaissance 
churches decorated with models of fortifications like those in 
the repository at Woolwich, or inlaid with mock arcades in 
pseudo-perspective, copied from gardeners’ paintings at the 
ends of conservatories. 

§ xv. I conclude, then, with the reader’s leave, that all 
ornament is base which takes for its subject human work, 
that it is utterly base,—painful to every rightly-toned mind, 
without perhaps immediate sense of the reason, but for a 
reason palpable enough when we do think of it. For to carve 
our own work, and set it up for admiration, is a miserable 
self-complacency, a contentment in our own wretched doings, 
when we might have been looking at God’s doings. And all 
noble ornament is the exact reverse of this. It is the expres- 
sion of man’s delight in God’s work. 

§ xvi. For observe, the function of ornament is to make 
you happy. Now in what are you rightly happy? Not in 
thinking of what you have done yourself; not in your own 
pride, not your own birth ; not in your own ‘being, or your 
own will, but in looking at God; watching what He does 


220 THE STONES OF VENICB. 


what He is; and obeying His law, and yielding yourself te 
His will. 

You are to be made happy by ornaments ; therefore they 
must be the expression of all this. Not copies of your own 
handiwork ; not boastingsof your own grandeur ; not herald- 
ries ; not king’s arms, nor any creature’s arms, but God’s arm, 
seen in His work. Not manifestation of your delight in your 
own laws, or your own liberties, or your own inventions ; but 
_ in divine laws, constant, daily, common laws ;—not Composite 
laws, nor Doric laws, nor laws of the five orders, but of the 
Ten Commandments. 

'§ xvi. Then the proper material of ornament will be what- 
ever God has created ; and its proper treatment, that which 
seems in accordance with or symbolical of His laws. And, for 
material, we shall therefore have, first, the abstract lines 
which are most frequent in nature ; and then, from lower to 
higher, the whole range of systematised inorganic and organic 
forms. We shall rapidly glance in order at their kinds ; and, 
however absurd the elemental division of inorganic matter by 
the ancients may seem to the modern chemist, it is one so 
grand and simple for arrangements of external appearances, 
that I shall here follow it ; noticing first, after abstract lines, 
the imitable forms of the four elements, of Earth, Water, 
Fire, and Air, and then those of animal organisms. It may 
be convenient to the reader to have the order stated in a 
clear succession at first, thus :-— 


. Abstract lines. 

. Forms of Earth (Crystals). 

. Forms of Water (Waves). 

. Forms of Fire (Flames and Rays). 
. Forms of Air (Clouds). 

. (Organic forms.) Shells. 

Fish. 

. Reptiles and insects. 

. Vegetation (A.) Stems and Trunks, 
19. Vegetation (B.) Foliage. 

11. Birds. 

42. Mammalian animals and Man. 


OAIBAPR wpe 


Le) 


THE MAVERIAL OF ORNAMENT. 224 


It may be objected that clouds are a form of moisture, not 
of air. ‘hey are, however, a perfect expression of aérial states 
and currents, and may sufficiently well stand for the element 
they move in. And I have put vegetation apparently some- 
what out of its place, owing to its vast importance as a means 
of decoration, and its constant association with birds and men. 

§xvm. 1. Abstract lines. I have not with lines named 
also shades and colors, for this evident reason, that there are + 
no such things as abstract shadows, irrespective of the forms 
which exhibit them, and distinguished in their own nature 
from each other; and that the arrangement of shadows, in 
greater or less quantity, or in certain harmonical successions, 
is an affair of treatment, not of selection. And when we use 
abstract colors, we are in fact using a part of nature herself, 
—using a quality of her light, correspondent with that of the 
air, to carry sound ; and the arrangement of color in harmo- 
nious masses is again a matter of treatment, not selection. 
Yet even in this separate art of coloring, as referred to archi- 
tecture, it is very notable that the best tints are always those 
of natural stones. These can hardly be wrong; I think I 
never yet saw an offensive introduction of the natural colors of 
marble and precious stones, unless in small mosaics, and in one 
or two glaring instances of the resolute determination to pro- 
duce something ugly at any cost. On the other hand, I have 
most assuredly never yet seen a painted building, ancient or 
modern, which seemed to me quite right. 

§ xrx. Our first constituents of ornament will therefore be 
abstract lines, that is to say, the most frequent contours of 
natural objects, transferred to architectural forms when it is 
not right or possible to render such forms distinctly imitative. 
For instance, the line or curve of the edge of a leaf may be 
accurately given to the edge of a stone, without rendering the 
stone in the least like a leaf, or suggestive of a leaf; and this 
the more fully, because the lines of nature are alike in all her 
works ; simpler or richer in combination, but the same in 
character ; and when they are taken out of their combinations 
it is impossible to say from which of her works they have been 
borrowed, their universal property being that of ever-varying 


222 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


curvature in the most subtle and subdued transitions, with 
peculiar expressions of motion, elasticity, or dependence, which 
I have already insisted upon at some length in the chapters on 
typical beauty in “Modern Painters.” But, that the reader 
may here be able to compare them for himself as deduced from 
different sources, I have drawn, as accurately as I can, on the 
opposite plate, some ten or eleven lines from natural forms of 
‘very different substances and scale : the first, a 6, is in the orig- 
inal, I think, the most beautiful simple curve I have ever seen 
in my life ; it is a curve about three quarters of a mile long, 
formed by the surface of a small glacier of the second order, 
on aspur of the Aiguille de Blaitiére (Chamouni). I have 
merely outlined the crags on the right of it, to show theiz 
sympathy and united action with the curve of the glacier, 
which is of course entirely dependent on their opposition te 
its descent ; softened, however, into unity by the snow, which 
rarely melts on this high glacier surface. 

The line d cis some mile and a half or two miles long ; it is 
part of the flank of the chain of the Dent d’Oche above the 
lake of Geneva, one or two of the lines of the higher and more 
distant ranges being given in combination with it. 

h is a line about four feet long, a branch of spruce fir. I 
have taken this tree because it is commonly supposed to be 
stiff and ungraceful ; its outer sprays are, however, more noble 
in their sweep than almost any that I know: but this fragment 
is seen at great disadvantage, because placed upside down, in 
order that the reader may compare its curvatures with c d, eg, 
and 7 &, which are ali mountain lines ; e g, about five hundred 
feet of the southern edge of the Matterhorn ; 2 &, the entire 
slope of the Aiguille Bouchard, from its summit into the yalley 
of Chamouni, a line some three miles long ; J m is the line of 
the side of a willow leaf traced by laying the leaf on the paper ; 
no, one of the innumerable groups of curves at the lip of a 
paper Nautilus ; p, a spiral, traced on the paper round a Ser- 
pula; q7, the leaf of the Alisma Plantago with its interior 
ribs, reul size ; s ¢, the side of a bay-leaf; wu w, of a salvia leaf: 
and it is to be carefully noted that these last curves, being 
never intended by nature to be seen singly, are more heavy 


THE MATERIAL OF YRNAMENT, 293 


and less agreeable than any of the others which would be seen 
as independent lines. But ell agree in their character of 
changeful curvature, the wovntain and glacier lines only ex- 
celling the rest in delicacy and richness of transition. 

§ xx. Why lines of this kind are beautiful, I endeavored to 
show in the “Modern Painters ;” but one point, there omitted, 
may be mentioned here,—that almost all these lines are ex: 
pressive of action of force of some kind, while the circle is a 
line of limitation or support. In leafage they mark the forces 
of its growth and expansion, but some among the most beau- 
tiful of them are described by bedies variously in motion, or 
subjected to force ; as by projectiles in the air, by the par- 
ticles of water in a gentle current, by planets in motion in an 
orbit, by their satellites, if the actual path of the satellite in 
space be considered instead cf its relation to the planet; by 
boats, or birds, turning in the water or air, by clouds in vari- 
ous action upon the wind, by sails in the curvatures they as- 
sume under its force, and by thousands of other objects moy- 
ing or bearing force. Zn the Alisma leaf, q r, the lines through 
its body, which are of peculiar beauty, mark the different ex- 
pansions of its fibres, and are, I think, exactly the same as 
those which would be traced by the currents of a river enter- 
ing a lake of the shape of the leaf, at the end where the stalk 
is, and passing out at its point. Circular curves, on the con- 
trary, are always, I think, curves of limitation or support ; that 
is to say, curves of perfect rest. The cylindrical curve round 
the stem of a plant binds its fibres together ; while the ascent 
of the stem is in lines of various curvature : so the curve of the 
horizon and of the apparent heaven, of the rainbow, etc.: and 
though the reader might imagine that the circular orbit of any 
moving body, or the curve described by a sling, was a curve 
of motion, he should observe that the circular character is 
given to the curve not by the motion, but by the confinement : 
the circle is the consequence not of the energy of the body, 
but of its being forbidden to leave the ceatre ; and whenever 
the whirling or circular motion can be fully impressed on it 
we obtain instant balance and rest with respect to the centre 
of the circle, 


994 THR STONES OF VENICE. 


Hence the peculiar fitness of the circular curve as a sign Of 
rest, and security of support, in arches ; while the other curves, 
belonging especially to action, are to be used in the more ac- 
tive architectural features—the hand and foot (the capital and 
base), and in all minor ornaments ; more freely in proportion 
to their independence of structural conditions. 

§ xxi. We need not, however, hope to be able to imitate, in 
general work, any of the subtly combined curvatures of nat- 
ure’s highest designing : on the contrary, their extreme re- 
finement renders them unfit for coarse service or material. 
Lines which are lovely in the pearly film of the Nautilus shell, 
are lost in the grey roughness of stone ; and those which are 
sublime in the blue of far away hills, are weak in the sub- 
stance of incumbent marble. Of all the graceful lines assem- 
bled on Plate VIL, we shall do well to be content with two of 
the simplest. We shall take one mountain line (e g) and one 
leaf line (u w), or rather fragments of them, for we shall per- 
haps not want them all. I will mark off from wu w the little 
bit a y, and from e g the piece ef; both which appear to me 
likely to be serviceable: and if hereafter we need the help of 
any abstract lines, we will see what we can do with these only. 

§ xxu. 2. Forms of Karth (Crystals). It may be asked why 
I do not say rocks or mountains? Simply, because the no- 
bility of these depends, first, on their scale, and, secondly, on 
accident. Their scale cannot be represented, nor their acci- 
dent systematised. No sculptor can in the least imitate the 
peculiar character of accidental fracture : he can obey or ex- 
hibit the laws of nature, but he cannot copy the felicity of 
her fancies, nor follow the steps of her fury. The very glory 
of a mountain is in the revolutions which raised it into power, . 
and the forces which are striking it into ruin. But we want 
no cold and careful imitation of catastrophe ; no calculated 
mockery of convulsion ; no delicate recommendation of ruin. 
We are to follow the labor of Nature, but not her disturb- 
ance; to imitate what she has deliberately ordained,* not 

* Thus above, I adduced for the architect’s imitation the appointed 


stories and beds of the Matterhorn, not its irregular forms of crag or fis 
gure. 


THE MATERIAL OF ORNAMENT. 225 


what she has violently suffered, or strangely permitted. The 
only uses, therefore, of rock form which are wise in the archi- 
tect, are its actual introduction (by leaving untouched such 
blocks as are meant for rough service), and that noble use of 
the general examples of mountain structure of which I have 
often heretofore spoken. Imitations of rock form have, for 
the most part, been confined to periods of degraded feeling and 
to architectural toys or pieces of dramatic effect,—the Calva- 
ries and holy sepulchres of Romanism, or the grottoes and 
fountains of English gardens. They were, however, not un- 
frequent in medizeval bas-reliefs ; very curiously and elaborately 
treated by Ghiberti on the doors of Florence, and in religious 
sculpture necessarily introduced wherever the life of the anch- 
orite was to be expressed. They were rarely introduced as 
of ornamental character, but for particular service and expres- 
sion ; we shall see an interesting example in the Ducal Palace 
at Venice. 

§ xxuz But against crystalline form, which is the com- 
pletely systematised natural structure of the earth, none of 
these objections hold good, and, accordingly, it is an endless 
element of decoration, where higher conditions of structure 
cannot be represented. The four-sided pyramid, perhaps the 
most frequent of all natural crystals, is called in architecture 
a dogtooth ; its use is quite limitless, and always beautiful : 
the cube and rhomb are almost equally frequent in chequers 
and dentils ; and all mouldings of the middle Gothic are little 
more than representations of the canaliculated crystals of the 
beryl, and such other minerals : 

§ xxiv. Not knowingly. I do not suppose a single hint 
was ever actually taken from mineral form ; not even by ths 
Arabs in their stalactite pendants and vaults: all that I mean 
to allege is, that beautiful ornament, wherever found, or how- 
ever invented, is always either an intentional or unintentional 
copy of some constant natural form ; and that in this particu- 
lar instance, the pleasure we have in these geometrical figures 
of our own invention, is dependent for all its acuteness on the 
natural tendency impressed on us by our Creator to love the 
forms into which the earth He gave us to tread, aud out of 

Vou. I.—15 


226 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


which He formed our bodies, knit itself as it was separated 
from the deep. 

§ xxv. 3. Forms of Water (Waves). 

The reasons which prevent rocks from being used for orna- 
ment repress still more forcibly the portraiture of the sea. 
Yet the constant necessity of introducing some representation 
of water in order to explain the scene of events, or as a sacred © 
symbol, has forced the sculptors of all ages to the invention of 
some type or letter for it, if not an actual imitation. We 
find every degree of conventionalism or of naturalism in these 
types, the earlier being, for the most part, thoughtful sym- 
bols; the latter, awkward attempts at portraiture.* The 
most conventional of all types is the Egyptian zigzag, pre- 
served inthe astronomical sign of Aquarius; but every na- 
tion, with any capacities of thought, has given, in some of its 
work, the same great definition of open water, as ‘“‘an undula- 
tory thing with fish in it.” Isay open water, because inland 
nations have a totally different conception of the element. 
Imagine for an instant the different feelings of an husband- 
man whose hut is built by the Rhine or the Po, and who 
sees, day by day, the same giddy succession of silent power, 
the same opaque, thick, whirling, irresistible labyrinth of 
rushing lines and twisted eddies, coiling themselves into ser- 
pentine race by the reedy banks, in omne volubilis evum,— 
and the image of the sea in the mind of the fisher upon the 
rocks of Ithaca, or by the Straits of Sicily, who sees how, day 
by day, the morning winds come coursing to the shore, every 
breath of them with a green wave rearing before it; clear, 
erisp, ringing, merry-minded waves, that fall over and over 
each other, laughing like children as they near the beach, and © 
at last clash themselves all into dust of crystal over the daz- 
zling sweeps of sand. Fancy the difference of the image of 
water in those two minds, and then compare the sculpture of 
the coiling eddies of the Tigris and its reedy branches in 
those slabs of Nineveh, with the crested curls of the Greek 
sea on the coins of Camerina or Tarentum. But both agree 
in the undulatory lines, either of the currents or the surface, 

* Appendix 21, ‘ Ancient Representations of Water.” 


THE MATERIAL OF ORNAMENT. 997 


and in the introduction of fish as explanatory of the meaning 
of those lines (so also the Egyptians in their frescoes, with 
most elaborate realisation of the fish). There is a very curi- 
ous instance on a Greek mirror in the British Museum, rep- 
resenting Orion on the Sea; and multitudes of examples with 
dolphins on the Greek vases : the type is: preserved without 
alteration in medieval painting and sculpture. The sea in 
that Greek mirror (at least 400 B.c.), in the mosaics of Tor- 
cello and St. Mark’s, on the front of St. Frediano at Lucca, on 
the gate of the fortress of St. Michael’s Mount in Normandy, 
on the Bayeux tapestry, and on’ the capitals of the Ducal 
Palace at Venice (under Arion on his Dolphin), is represented 
in a manner absolutely identical. Giotto, in the frescoes of 
Avignon, has, with his usual strong feeling for naturalism, 
given the best example I remember, in painting, of the unity 
of the conventional system with direct imitation, and that 
both in sea and river; giving in pure blue color the coiling 
whirlpool of the stream, and the curled crest of the breaker. 
But in all early sculptural examples, both imitation and dec- 
orative effect are subordinate to easily understood symbolical 
language ; the undulatory lines are often valuable as an en- 
richment of surface, but are rarely of any studied graceful- 
ness. One of the best examples I know of their expressive 
arrangement is around some figures in a spandril at Bourges, 
representing figures sinking in deep sea (the deluge): the 
waved lines yield beneath the bodies and wildly lave the edge 
of the moulding, two birds, as if to mark the reverse of all 
order of nature, lowest of all sunk in the depth of them. In 
later times of debasement, water began to be represented with 
its waves, foam, etc., as on the Vendramin tomb at Venice, 
above cited ; but even there, without any definite ornamental 
purpose, the sculptor meant partly to explain a story, partly 
to display dexterity of chiselling, but not to produce beauti- 
ful forms pleasant to the eye. The imitation is vapid and 
joyless, and it has often been matter of surprise to me that 
sculptors, so fond of exhibiting their skill, should have suf- 
fered this imitation to fall so short, and remain so cold,— 
should not have takex more pains te curl the waves clearly, to 


998 THR STONBS OF VENICR. 


edge them sharply, and to express, by drillholes or other ar- 
tifices, the character of foam. I think in one of the Antwerp 
churches something of this kind is done in wood, but in gen- 
eral it is rare. 

§ xxvi. 4. Forms of Fire (Flames and Rays). If neither the 
sea nor the rock can be imagined, still less the devouring fire. 
It has been symbolised by radiation both in painting and 
sculpture, for the most part in the latter very unsuccessfully. 
It was suggested to me, not long ago,* that zigzag decorations 
of Norman architects were typical of light springing from the 
half-set orb of the sun ; the resemblance to the ordinary sun 
type is indeed remarkable, but I believe accidental. I shall 
give you, in my large plates, two curious instances of radiation 
in brick ornament above arches, but I think these also without 
any very luminous intention. The imitations of fire in the 
torches of Cupids and genii, and burning in tops of urns, which 
attest and represent the mephitic inspirations of the seven- 
teenth century in most London churches, and in monuments 
all over civilised Europe, together with the gilded rays of Ro- 
manist altars, may be left to such mercy as the reader is in- 
clined to show them. 

§ xxvu. 5. Forms of Air (Clouds). Hardly more manage- 
able than flames, and of no ornamental use, their majesty being 
in seale and color, and inimitable in marble. They are lightly 
traced in much of the cinque cento sculpture ; very boldly and 
grandly in the strange Last Judgment in the porch of St. 
Maclou at Rouen, described in the “Seven Lamps.” But the 
most elaborate imitations are altogether of recent date, ar: 
ranged in concretions like flattened sacks, forty or fifty feet 
above the altars of continental churches, mixed with the gilded — 
truncheons intended for sunbeams above alluded to. 

§ xxv. 6. Shells. I place these lowest in the scale (after 
inorganic forms) as being moulds or coats of organism ; not 
themselves organic. The sense of this, and of their being 
mere emptiness and deserted houses, must always prevent 
them, however beautiful in their lines, from being largely used 
in ornamentation. It is better to take the line and leave the 

* By the friend to whom I owe Appendix 21, 


‘THE MATERIAL OF ORNAMENT. 229 


shell. One form, indeed, that of the cockle, has been in all 
ages used as the decoration of half domes, which were named 
edi dhes from their shell form : and I believe the wrinkled lip 
of the cockle, so used, to have been the origin, in some parts 
of Europe at least, of the exuberant foliation of the round 
arch. The scallop also is a pretty radiant form, and mingles 
well with other symbols when itis needed. The crab is always 
as delightful as a grotesque, for here we suppose the beast in- 
side the shell; and he sustains his part in a lively manner 
among the other signs of the zodiac, with the scorpion ; or 
scattered upon sculptured shores, as beside the Bronze Boar 
of Florence. We shall find him in a basket at Venice, at the 
base of one of the Piazzetta shafts. 

§ xxix. 7. Fish. These, as beautiful in their forms as they 
are familiar to our sight, while their interest is increased by 
their symbolic meaning, are of great value as material of orna- 
ment. Loveof the picturesque has generally induced a choice 
of some supple form with scaly body and lashing tail, but the 
simplest fish form is largely employed in medieval work. We 
shall find the plain oval body and sharp head of the Thunny 
constantly at Venice ; and the fish used in the expression of 
sea-water, or water generally, are always plain bodied creat- 
ures in the best medieval sculpture. The Greek type of the 
dolphin, however, sometimes but slightly exaggerated from 
the real outline of the Delphinus Delphis,* is one of the most 
picturesque of animal forms ; and the action of its slow revoly- 
ing plunge is admirabiy caught upon the surface sea repre- 
sented in Greek vases. 

§ xxx. 8. Reptiles and Insects. The forms of the serpent 
and lizard exhibit almost every element of beauty and horror 
in strange combination ; the horror, which in an imitation is 
felt only as a pleasurable excitement, has rendered them fayor- 
ite subjects in all periods of art ; and the unity of both lizard 


* One is glad to hear from Cuvier, that though dolphins in general are 
“les plus carnassiers, et proportion gardée avec leur taille, les plus cruels 
de l’ordre;” yet that in the Delphinus Delphis, ‘‘ tout organisation de 
son cerveau annonce gu’il ne dow pus étre eee de ba docilité qu ilg 
(les anciens) lui attribuaient.” 


250 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


and serpent in the ideal dragon, the most picturesque and 
powerful of all animal forms, and of peculiar symbolical in- 
terest to the Christian mind, is perhaps the principal of all the 
materials of medieval picturesque sculpture. By the best 
sculptors it is always used with this symbolic meaning, by the 
cinque cento sculptors as an ornament merely. The best and 
most natural representations of mere viper or snake are to be 
found interlaced among their confused groups of meaningless 
objects. The real power and horror of the snake-head has, 
however, been rarely reached. I shall give one example from 
Verona of the twelfth century. 

Other less powerful reptile forms are not unfrequent. 
Small frogs, lizards, and snails almost always enliven the fore- 
grounds and leafage of good sculpture. The tortoise is less 
usually employed in groups. Beetles are chiefly mystic and 
colossal. Various insects, like everything eise in the world, 
occur in cinque cento work ; grasshoppers most frequently. 
We shall see on the Ducal Palace at Venice an interesting use 
of the bee. 

§ xxxi 9. Branches and stems of Trees. I arrange these 
under a separate head ; because, while the forms of leafage 
belong to all architecture, and ought to be employed in it 
always, those of the branch and stem belong to a peculiar 
imitative and luxuriant architecture, and are only applicable 
attimes, Pagan sculptors seem to have perceived little beauty 
in the stems of trees; they were little else than timber to 
them ; and they preferred the rigid and monstrous triglyph, 
or the fluted column, to a broken bough or gnarled trunk. 
But with Christian knowledge came a peculiar regard for the _ 
forms of vegetation, from the root upwards. The actual rep- 
resentation of the entire trees required in many scripture sub- 
jects,—as in the most frequent of Old Testament subjects, the 
Fall; and again in the Drunkenness of Noah, the Garden 
Agony, and many others, familiarised the sculptors of bas- 
relief to the beauty of forms before unknown ; while the sym- 
bolical name given to Christ by the Prophets, ‘‘the Branch,” 
and the frequent expressions referring to this image through- 
out every scriptural description of conversion, gave an especial 


THE MATERIAL OF ORNAMENT. 931 


interest to the Christian mind to this portion of vegetative 
structure. For some time, nevertheless, the sculpture of trees 
was confined to bas-relief ; but it at last affected even the treat- 
ment of the main shafts in Lombard Gothic buildings,—as in 
the western fagade of Genoa, where two of the shafts are rep- 
resented as gnarled trunks: and as bas-relief itself became 
more boldly introduced, so did tree sculpture, until we find 
the writhed and knotted stems of the vine and fig used for 
angle shafts on the Doge’s Palace, and entire oaks and apple- 
trees forming, roots and all, the principal decorative sculp- 
tures of the Scala tombs at Verona. It was then discovered 
to be more easy to carve branches than leaves; and, much 
helped by the frequent employment in later Gothic of the 
“Tree of Jesse,” for traceries and other purposes, the system 
reached full development in a perfect thicket of twigs, which 
form the richest portion of the decoration of the porches of 
Beauvais. It had now been carried to its richest extreme: 
men wearied of it and abandoned it, and like all other natural 
and beautiful things, it was ostracised by the mob of Renais- 
sance architects. But it is interesting to observe how the 
human mind, in its acceptance of this feature of ornament, 
proceeded from the ground, and followed, as it were, the nat- 
ural growth of the tree. It began with the rude and solid 
trunk, as at Genoa ; then the branches shot out, and became 
loaded leaves; autumn came, the leaves were shed, and the 
eye was directed to the extremities of the delicate branches ; 
—the Renaissance frosts came, and all perished. 

§ xxxu. 10. Foliage, Flowers, and Fruit. It is necessary 
to consider these as separated from the stems; not only, as 
above noted, because their separate use marks another school 
of architecture, but because they are the only organic struct- 
ures which are capable of being so treated, and intended to be 
so, without strong effort of imagination. To pull animals to 
pieces, and use their paws for feet of furniture, or their heads 
for terminations of rods and shafts, is usually the characteris- 
tic of feelingless schools ; the greatest men like their animals 
whole. The head may, indeed, be so managed as to look 
emergent from the stone, rather than fastened to it; and 


© 


989 THE STONERS OF VENICR. 


wherever there is throughout the architecture any expression 
of sternness or severity (severity in its literal sense, as in 
Romans, x1. 22), such divisions of the living form may be per- 
mitted ; still, you cannot cut an animal to pieces as you can 
gather a flower or a leaf. These were intended for our gath. 
ering, and for our constant delight: wherever men exist in a 
perfectly civilised and healthy state, they have vegetation 
around them ; wherever their state approaches that of inno- 
cence or perfectness, it approaches that of Paradise, —it is a 
dressing of garden. And, therefore, where nothing else can 
be used for ornament, vegetation may; vegetation in any 
form, however fragmentary, however abstracted. A single 
leaf laid upon the angle of a stone, or the mere form or frame- 
_ work of the leaf drawn upon it, or the mere shadow and ghost 
of the leaf,—the hollow “foil” cut out of it,—possesses ¢ 
charm which nothing else can replace ; a charm not exciting, 
nor demanding laborious thought or sympathy, but perfectly 
simple, peaceful, and satisfying. 

§ xxxm. The full recognition of leaf forms, as the general 
source of subordinate decoration, is one of the chief charac- 
teristics of. Christian architecture; but the two roots of 
leaf ornament are the Greek acanthus, and the Egyptian 
lotus.* 

The dry land and the river thus each contributed their part ; 
and all the florid capitals of the richest Northern Gothic on 
the one hand, and the arrowy lines of the severe Lombardic 
capitals on the other, are founded on these two gifts of the 
dust of Greece and the waves of the Nile. The leaf which is, 
I believe, called the Persepolitan water-leaf, is to be associated 
with the lotus flower and stem, as the origin of our noblest 
types of simple capital ; and it is to be noted that the florid 
leaves of the dry land are used most by the Northern archi- 


* Vide Wilkinson, vol. v., woodcut No. 478, fig. 8. The tamarisk ap- 
pears afterwards to have given the idea of a subdivision of leaf more 
pure and quaint than that of the acanthus. Of late our botanists have 
discovered, in the ‘ Victoria regia ” (supposing its blossom reversed), an- 
othor strangely beautiful type of what we may perhaps hereafter find if 
semvenient to call Lily capitals. 


THE MATERIAL OF ORNAMENT. 233 


tects, while the water leaves are gathered for their ornaments 
by the parched builders of the Desert. 

§ xxxiv. Fruit is, for the most part, more valuable in color 
than form ; nothing is more beautiful asa subject of sculpture 
on a tree ; but, gathered and put in baskets, it is quite possible 
to have too much of it. We shall find it so used very dex- 
terously on the Ducal Palace of Venice, there with a meaning 
which rendered it right necessary ; but the Renaissance archi- 
tects address themselves to spectators who care for nothing 
but feasting, and suppose that clusters of pears and pineapples 
are visions of which their imagination can never weary, and 
above which it will never care to rise. Iam no advocate for 
imageworship, as I believo the reader will elsewhere suffi- 
ciently find ; but I am very sure that the Protestantism of 
London would have found itself quite as secure in a cathedral 
decorated with statues of good men, asin one hung round 
with bunches of ribston pippins. 

§ xxxyv. 11. Birds. The perfect and simple grace of bird 
form, in general, has rendered it a favorite subject with early 
sculptors, and with those schools which loved form more than 
action ; but the difficulty of expressing action, where the mus- 
cular markings are concealed, has limited the use of it in later 
art. Half the ornament, at least, in Byzantine architecture, 
and a third of that of Lombardic, is composed of birds, either 
pecking at fruit or flowers, or standing on either side of a 
flower or vase, or alone, as generally the symbolical peacock. 
But how much of our general sense of grace or power of 
motion, of serenity, peacefulness, and spirituality, we owe to 
these creatures, it is impossible to conceive ; their wings sup- 
plying us with almost the only means of representation of spir- 
itual motion which we possess, and with an ornamental form of 
which the eye is never weary, however meaninglessly or end- 
lessly repeated ; whether in utter isolation, or associated with 
the bodies of the lizard, the horse, the lion, or the man. The 
heads of the birds of prey are always beautiful, and used ag 
the richest ornaments in all ages. 

§ xxxvi. 12. Quadrupeds and Men. Of quadrupeds the 
horse has received an elevation into the primal rank of sculp 


934 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


tural subject, owing to his association with men. The full 
value of other quadruped forms has hardly been perceived, or 
worked for, in late sculpture ; and the want of science is more 
felt in these subjects than in any other branches of early work. 
The greatest richness of quadruped ornament is found in the 
hunting sculpture of the Lombards ; but rudely treated (the 
most noble examples of treatment being the lions of Egypt, 
the Ninevite bulls, and the medieval griffins). Quadrupeds 
of course form the noblest subjects of ornament next to the 
human form ; this latter, the chief subject of sculpture, being 
sometimes the end of architecture rather than its decoration. 
We have thus completed the list of the materials of archi- 
tectural decoration, and the reader may be assured that no 
effort has ever been successful to draw elements of beauty from 
any other sources than these. Such an effort was once reso- 
jutely made. It was contrary to the religion of the Arab to 
introduce any animal form into his ornament; but although 
all the radiance of color, all the refinements of proportion, and 
all the intricacies of geometrical design were open to him, he 
could not produce any noble work without an abstraction of 
the forms of leafage, to be used in his capitals, and made the 
ground plan of his chased ornament. But I have above noted 
that coloring is an entirely distinct and independent art; and 
in the “Seven Lamps” we saw that this art had most power 
when practised in arrangements of simple geometrical form. 
the Arab, therefore, lay under no disadvantage in coloring. 
and he had all the noble elements of constructive and propor- 
tional beauty at his command: he might not imitate the sea- 
shell, but he could build the dome. The imitation of radiance 
by the variegated voussoir, the expression of the sweep of the 
desert by the barred red lines upon the wall, the starred in- 
shedding of light through his vaulted roof, and all the endless 
fantasy of abstract line,* were still in the power of his ardent 
and fantastic spirit. Much he achieved ; and yet in the effort 
of his overtaxed invention, restrained from its proper food, he 
made his architecture a glittering vacillation of undisciplined 


* Appendix 22, ‘‘ Arabian Ornamentation.” 


TREATMENT OF ORNAMENT. 233 


enchantment, and left the lustre of its edifices to wither like a 
startling dream, whose beauty we may indeed feel, and whose 
instruction we may receive, but must smile at its inconsistency, 
and mourn over its evanescence. 


CHAPTER XXL 
TREATMENT OF ORNAMENT, 


§ x We now know where we are to look for subjects of 
decoration. The next question is, as the reader must remem= 
ber, how to treat or express these subjects. 

There are evidently two branches of treatment: the first 
being the expression, or rendering to the eye and mind, of 
the thing itself; and the second, the arrangement of the 
thing so expressed: both of these being quite distinct from 
the placing of the ornament in proper parts of the building. 
For instance, suppose we take a vine-leaf for our subject. 
The first question is, how to cut the vine-leaf? Shall we cut 
its ribs and notches on the edge, or only its general cutline? 
and so on. Then, how to arrange the vine-leaves when we 
have them ; whether symmetrically, or at random ; or unsym- 
metrically, yet within certain limits? All these I call ques- 
tions of treatment. Then, whether the vine-leaves so arranged 
are to be set on the capital of a pillar or on its shaft, I call a 
question of place. 

§ m. So, then, the questions of mere treatment are twofold, 
now to express, and how to arrange. And expression is to 
the mind or the sight. Therefore, the inquiry becomes really 
threefold :— 


1. How ornament is to be expressed with reference to the 
mind. 

2. How ornament is to be arranged with reference to the 
sight. 

3. How ornament is to be arranged with reference to both 


236 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


§ m. (1.) How is ornament to be treated with reference ta 
the mind? 

If, to produce a good or beautiful ornament, it were only 
necessary to produce a perfect piece of sculpture, and if a well 
cut group of flowers or animals were indeed an ornament 
wherever it might be placed, the work of the architect would 
be comparatively easy. Sculpture and architecture would be- 
come separate arts; and the architect would order so many 
pieces of such subject and size as he needed, without troub- 
ling himself with any questions but those of disposition and 
proportion. But this is not so. No perfect piece either of 
painting or sculpture is an architectural ornament at all, except 
in that vague sense in which any beautiful thing is said to 
ornament the place it is in. Thus we say that pictures orna- 
ment a room ; but we should not thank an architect who told 
us that his design, to be complete, required a Titian to be 
put in one corner of it, and a Velasquez in the other ; and it 
is just as unreasonable to call perfect sculpture, niched in, or 
encrusted on a building, a portion of the ornament of that 
building, as it would be to hang pictures by the way of orna- 
ment on the outside of it. It is very possible that the sculp- 
tured work may be harmoniously associated with the build- 
ing, or the building executed with reference to it ; but in this 
latter case the architecture is subordinate to the sculpture, as 
in the Medicean chapel, and I believe also in the Parthenon. 
And so far from the perfection of the work conducing to its 
ornamental purpose, we may say, with entire security, that its 
perfection, in some degree, unfits it for its purpose, and that 
no absolutely complete sculpture can be decoratively right. 
We have a familiar instance in the flower-work of St. Paul’s, 
which is probably, in the abstract, as perfect flower sculpture 
as could be produced at the time; and which is just as ra- 
tional an ornament of the building as so many valuable Van 
Huysums, framed and glazed and hung up over each window. 

§ iv. The especial condition of true ornament is, that it be 
beautiful in its place, and nowhere else, and that it aid the 
effect of every portion of the building over which it has infiu- 
ence ; that it does not, by its richness, make other parts bald, 


, 


TREATMENT OF ORNAMENT. 237 


or, by its delicacy, make other parts coarse. Every one of its 
qualities has reference to its place and use: and it 1s filled for 
its service by what would be faults and deficiencies vf it had no 
especial duty. Ornament, the servant, is often formal, where 
sculpture, the master, would have been free ; the servant is 
often silent where the master would have been eloquent ; or 
hurried, where the master would have been serene. 

§ vy. How far this subordination is in different situations to 
be expressed, or how far it may be surrendered, and ornament, 
the servant, be permitted to have independent will; and by 
what means the subordination is best to be expressed when it 
is required, are by far the most difficult questions I have ever 
tried to work out respecting any branch of art ; for, in many 
of the examples to which I look as authoritative in their majesty 
of effect, it is almost impossible to say whether the abstraction 
or imperfection of the sculpture was owing to the choice, or 
the incapacity of the workman ; and if to the latter, how far 
the result of fortunate incapacity can be imitated by prudent 
self-restraint. “The reader, I think, will understand this at 
once by considering the effect of the illuminations of an old 
missal. In their bold rejection of all principles of perspective, 
light and shade, and drawing, they are infinitely more orna- 
mental to the page, owing to the vivid opposition of their 
bright colors and quaint lines, than if they had been drawn 
by Da Vinci himself: and so the Arena chapel is far more 
brightly decorated by the archaic frescoes of Giotti, than the 
Stanze of the Vatican are by those of Raffaelle. But how far 
it is possible to recur to such archaicism, or to make up for it 
by any voluntary abandonment of power, I cannot as yet vent- 
ure in any wise to determine. 

§ vi. So, on the other hand, in many instances of finished 
work in which I find most to regret or to reprobate, I can 
hardly distinguish what is erroneous in principle from what 
is vulgar in execution. For instance, in most Romanesque 
churches of Italy, the porches are guarded by gigantic animals, 
lions or griffins, of admirable severity of design ; yet, in many 
cases, of so rude workmanship, that it can hardly be deter- 
mined how much of 4his severity was intentional,—how much 


238 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


involuntary : in the cathedral of Genoa two modern lions have, 
in imitation of this ancient custom, been placed on the steps 
of its west front ; and the Italian sculptor, thinking himself a 
marvellous great man because he knew what lions were really 
like, has copied them, in the menagerie, with great success, 
and produced two hairy and well-whiskered beasts, as like to 
real lions as he could possibly cut them. One wishes them 
back in the menagerie for his pains ; but it is impossible to 
say how far the offence of their presence is owing to the mere 
stupidity and vulgarity of the sculptor, and how far we 
might have been delighted with a realisation, carried to nearly 
the same leneth by Ghiberti or Michael Angelo. (I say nearly, 
because neither Ghiberti nor Michael Angelo would ever have 
attempted, or permitted, entire realisation, even in independ- 
ent sculpture. 

§ vu. In spite of these embarrassments, however, some few 
certainties may be marked in the treatment of past architect- 
ure, and secure conclusions deduced for future practice. 
There is first, for instance, the assuredly intended and resolute 
abstraction of the Ninevite and Egyptian sculptors. The men 
who cut those granite lions in the Egyptian room of the Brit- 
ish Museum, and who carved the calm faces of those Ninevite 
kings, knew much more, both of lions and kings, than they 
chose to express. Then there is the Greek system, in which 
the human sculpture is perfect, the architecture and animal 
sculpture is subordinate to it, and the architectural ornament 
severely subordinated to this again, so as to be composed of 
little more than abstract lines : and, finally, there is the pecul- 
iarly medizval system, in which the inferior details are carried 
to as great or greater imitative perfection as the higher sculp- 
ture ; and the subordination is chiefly effected by symmetries 
of arrangement, and quaintnesses of treatment, respecting 
which it is difficult to say how far they resulted from inten- 
tion, and how far from incapacity. 

§ vut. Now of these systems, the Ninevite and Egyptian 
are altogether opposed to modern habits of thought and 
action ; they are sculptures evidently executed under absolute 
authorities, physical and mental, such as cannot at present ex. 


TREATMENT OF ORNAMENT. 239 | 


ist. The Greek system presupposes the possession of 4 
Phidias ; it is ridiculous to talk of building in the Greek 
manner ; you may build a Greek shell or box, such as the 
Greek intended to contain sculpture, but you have not the 
sculpture to put init. Find your Phidias first, and your new 
Phidias will very soon settle all your architectural difficulties 
in very unexpected ways indeed ; but until you find him, do 
not think yourselves architects while you go on copying those 
poor subordinations, and secondary and tertiary orders of or- 
nament, which the Greek put on the shell of his sculpture. 
Some of them, beads, and dentils, and such like, are as good 
as they can be for their work, and you may use them for sub- 
ordinate work still; but they are nothing to be proud of, 
especially when you did not invent them : and others of them 
are mistakes and impertinences in the Greek himself, such ag 
his so-called honeysuckle ornaments and others, in which there 
isa starched and dull suggestion of vegetable form, and yet no 
real resemblance nor life, for the conditions of them result 
from his own conceit of himself, and ignorance of the physical 
sciences, and want of relish for common nature, and vain 
fancy that he could improve everything he touched, and that 
he honored it by taking it into his service: by freedom from 
which conceits the true Christian architecture is distinguished 
—not by points to its arches. 

§ mx. There remains, therefore, only the medizval system, 
in which I think, generally, more completion is permitted 
(though this often because more was possible) in the inferior 
than in the higher portions of ornamental subject. Leaves, 
and birds, and lizards are realised, or nearly so; men and 
quadrupeds formalised. For observe, the smaller and inferior 
subject remains subordinate, however richly finished ; but the 
human sculpture can only be subordinate by being imperfect. 
The realisation is, however, in all cases, dangerous except 
under most skilful management, and the abstraction, if true 
and noble, is almost always more delightful.* 

§ x. What, then, is noble abstraction? It is taking firs‘ 


* Vide ‘‘Seven Lamps,” Chap. IV. § 34. 


240 THE STONHS OF VENICE. 


the essential elements of the thing to be represented, then the 
rest in the order of importance (so that wherever we pause we 
shall always have obtained more than we leave behind), and 
using any expedient to impress what we want upon the mind, 
without caring about the mere literal accuracy of such expe- 
dient. Suppose, for instance, we have to represent a peacock: 
now a peacock has a graceful neck, so has a swan ; it has a 
high crest, so has a cockatoo ; it has a long tail, so has a bird 
of Paradise. But the whole spirit and power of peacock is in 
those eyes of the tail. It is true, the argus pheasant, and one 
or two more birds, have something like them, but nothing for 
amoment comparable to them in brilliancy: express the 
gleaming of the blue eyes through the plumage, and you have 
nearly all you want of peacock, but without this, nothing ; and 
yet those eyes are not in relief; a rigidly true sculpture of a 
peacock’s form could have no eyes,—nothing but feathers. 
Here, then, enters the stratagem of sculpture ; you must cut 
the eyes.in relief, somehow or another; see how it is done in 
the peacock on the opposite page ; it is so done by nearly all 
the Byzantine sculptors: this particular peacock is meant to 
be seen at some distance (how far off I know not, for it is an 
interpolation in the building where it occurs, of which more 
hereafter), but at all events at a distance of thirty or forty 
feet ; I have put it close to you that you may see plainly the 
rude rings and rods which stand for the eyes and quills, but 
at the just distance their effect is perfect. 

§ xz And the simplicity of the means here employed may 
help us, both to some clear understanding of the spirit of 
Ninevite and Egyptian work, and to some perception of the. 
kind of enfantillage or archaicism to which it may be possible, 
even in days of advanced science, legitimately to return. The 
architect has no right, as we said before, to require of us a 
picture of Titian’s in order to complete his design ; neither 
has he the right to calculate on the co-operation of perfect 
sculptors, in subordinate capacities. Far from this; his 
business is to dispense with such aid altogether, and to de- 
vise such a system of ornament as shall be capable of execu- 
tion by uninventive and even unintelligent workmen ; for 


TREATMENT OF ORNAMENT. 241 


supposing that he required noble sculpture for his ornament, 
how far would this at once limit the number and the scale of 
possible buildings? Architecture is the work of nations; but 
we cannot have nations of great sculptors. Every house in 
every street of every city ought to be good architecture, but 
we cannot have Flaxman or Thorwaldsen at work upon it: 
nor, even if we chose only to devote ourselves to our public 
buildings, could the mass and majesty of them be great, if we 
required all to be executed by great men; greatness is not to 
be had in the required quantity. Giotto may design a cam- 
panile, but he cannot carve it; he can only carve one or two 
of the bas-reliefs at the base of it. And with every increase 
of your fastidiousness in the execution of your ornament, you 
diminish the possible number and grandeur of your buildings. 
Do not think you can educate your workmen, or that the de- 
mand for perfection will increase the supply: educated imbe- 
cility and finessed foolishness are the worst of all imbecilities 
and foolishnesses ; and there is no free-trade measure, which 
will ever lower the price of brains,—there is no California of 
common sense. Jixactly in the degree in which you require 
your decoration to be wrought by thoughtful men, you dimin- 
ish the extent and number of architectural works. Your 
business as an architect, is to calculate only on the co-opera-. 
tion of inferior men, to think for them, and to indicate for 
them such expressions of your thoughts as the weakest capac- 
ity can comprehend and the feeblest hand can execute. This 
is the definition of the purest architectural abstractions. They 
are the deep and laborious thoughts of the greatest men, put 
into such easy lettet’s that they can be written by the simplest. 
They ure expressions of the mind of manhood by the hands of 
childhood. 

§ xu. And now suppose one of those old Ninevite or 
Egyptian builders, with a couple of thousand men—mud- 
bred, onion-eating creatures—under him, to be set to work, 
like so many ants, on his temple sculptures. What is he to do 
with them? He can put them through a granitic exercise of 
current hand; he can teach them all how to curl hair thor- 
oughly into croche-cceurs, as you teach a bench of school-boys 

Vou. I.—16 


242 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


how to shape pothooks ; he can teach them all how to draw 
jong eyes and straight noses, and how to copy accurately cer- 
tain well-defined lines. Then he fits his own great design ta 
their capacities ; he takes out of king, or lion, or god, as much 
as was expressible by croche-cceurs and granitic pothooks ; 
he throws this into noble forms of his own imagining, and 
having mapped out their lines so that there can be no possi- 
bility of error, sets his two thousand men to work upon them, 
with a will, and so many onions a day. 

§ xm. I said those times cannot now return. We have, 
with Christianity, recognised the individual value of every 
soul ; and there is no intelligence so feeble but that its single 
ray may in some sort contribute to the general light. This is 
the glory of Gothic architecture, that every jot and tittle, 
every point and niche of it, affords room, fuel, and focus for 
individual fire. But you cease to acknowledge this, and you 
refuse to accept the help of the lesser mind, if you require 
the work to be all executed in a great manner. Your busi- 
ness is to think out all of it nobly, to dictate the expression 
of it as far as your dictation can assist the less elevated intel- 
ligence: then to leave this, aided and taught as far as may 
be, to its own simple act and effort ; and to rejoice in its sim- 
plicity if not in its power, and in its vitality if not in its 
science. 

§ xiv. We have, then, three orders of ornament, classed 
according to the degrees of correspondence of the executive 
and conceptive minds. We have the servile ornament, in 
which the executive is absolutely subjected to the inventive, 
—the ornament of the great Eastern nations, more especially 
Hamite, and all pre-Christian, yet thoroughly noble in its 
submissiveness. Then we have the medieval system, in which 
the mind of the inferior workman is recognised, and has full 
room for action, but is guided and ennobled by the ruling 
mind. This is the truly Christian and only perfect system. 
Hinally, we have ornaments expressing the endeavor to 
equalise the executive and inventive,—endeavor which is 
Renaissance and hb pein oe and destructive of all noble 
architecture. 


TREATMENT OF ORNAMENT, 243 


§ xv. Thus far, then, of the incompleteness or simplicity 
of execution necessary in architectural ornament, as referred 
to the mind. Next we have to consider that which is re- 
quired when it is referred to the sight, and the various modi- 
fications of treatment which are rendered necessary by the 
variation of its distance from the eye. I say necessary: not 
merely expedient or economical. It is foolish to carve what 
is to be seen forty feet off with the delicacy which the eye de- 
mands within two yards ; not merely because such delicacy is 
lost in the distance, but because it is a great deal worse than 
lost :—the delicate work has actually worse effect in the 
distance than rough work. This is a fact well known to 
painters, and, for the most part, acknowledged by the critics 
of painters, namely, that there is a certain distance for which 
a picture is painted ; and that the finish, which is delightful 
if that distance be small, is actually injurious if the distance 
be great: and, moreover, that there is a particular method of 
handling which none but consummate artists reach, which has 
its effects at the intended distance, and is altogether hiero- 
glyphical and unintelligible at any other. This, I say, is ac- 
knowledged in vrainting, but it is not practically acknowl- 
edged in architecture ; nor until my attention was espe- 
cially directed to it, had I myself any idea of the care with 
which this great question was studied by the medizeval archi- 
tects. On my first careful examination of the capitals of 
the upper arcade of the Ducal Palace at Venice, I was in- 
duced, by their singular inferiority of workmanship, to sup- 
pose them posterior to those of the lower arcade. It was not 
till I discovered that some of those which I thought the 
worst above, were the best when seen from below, that I ob- 
tained the key to this marvellous system of adaptation ; a 
system which I afterwards found carried out in every build- 
ing of the great times which I had opportunity of examin- 
ing. 

§ xvt. There are two distinct modes in which this adapta- 
tion is effected. In the first, the same designs which are deli- 
cately worked when near the eye, are rudely ent, and have far 
fewer details when they are removed from it. In this method 


244 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


it is not always easy to distinguish economy from skill, or 
slovenliness from science. But, in the second method, a dif- 
ferent design is adopted, composed of fewer parts and of sim- 
pler lines, and this is cut with exquisite precision, This is of 
course the higher method, and the more satisfactory proof of 
purpose ; but an equal degree of imperfection isfound in both 
kinds when they are seen close ; in the first, a bald execution 
of a perfect design; the second, a baldness of design with 
perfect execution. And in these very imperfections lies the 
admirableness of the ornament. 

§ xvu. It may be asked whether, in advocating this adap, 
tation to the distance of the eye, I obey my adopted rule of 
observance of natural law. Are not all natural things, it may 
be asked, as lovely near as far away? Nay, not so. Look at 
the clouds, and watch the delicate sculpture of their alabaster 
sides, and the rounded lustre of their magnificent rolling. 
They are meant to be beheld far away ; they were shaped for 
their place, high above your head ; approach them, and they 
fuse into vague mists, or whirl away in fierce fragments of 
thunderous vapor. Look at the crest of the Alp, from the 
far-away plains over which its light is cast, whence human 
souls have communion with it by their myriads. The child 
looks up to itin the dawn, and the husbandman in the burden 
and heat of the day, and the old man in the going down of the 
sun, and it is to them all as the celestial city on the world’s 
horizon ; dyed with the depth of heaven, and clothed with 
the calm of eternity. There was it set, for holy dominion, 
by Him who marked for the sun his journey, and bade the 
moon know her going down. It was built for its place in 
the far-off sky ; approach it, and as the sound of the voice 
of man dies away about its foundations, and the tide of 
human life shallowed upon the vast aérial shore, is at last 
met by the Eternal “Here shall thy waves be stayed,” the 
glory of its aspect fades into blanched fearfulness ; its pur- 
ple walls are rent into grisly rocks, its silver fretwork sad- 
dened into wasting snow, the storm-brands of ages are on 
its breast, the ashes of its own ruin lie solemnly on its white 
raiment. 


TREATMENT OF ORNAMENT. Q45 


Nor in such instances as these alone, though strangely 
enough, the discrepancy between apparent and actual beauty 
is greater in proportion to the unapproachableness of the 
object, is the law observed. For every distance from the eye 
there is a peculiar kind of beauty, or a different system of 
lines of form; the sight of that beauty is reserved for that 
distance, and for that alone. If you approach nearer, that 
kind of beauty is lost, and another succeeds, to be disorgan- 
ised and reduced to strange and incomprehensible means and 
appliances in its turn. If you desire to perceive the great 
harmonies of the form of a recky mountain, you must not 
ascend upon its sides. Allis there disorder and accident, or 
seems so; sudden starts of its shattered beds hither and 
thither ; ugly struggles of unexpected strength from under 
the ground ; fallen fragments, toppling one over another into 
more helpless fall. Retire from it, and, as your eye commands 
it more and more, as you see the ruined mountain world with 
a wider glance, behold! dim sympathies begin to busy them- 
selves in the disjointed mass; line binds itself into stealthy 
fellowship with line ; group by group, the helpless fragments 
gather themselves into ordered companies; new captains of 
hosts and masses of battalions become visible, one by one, and 
far away answers of foot to foot, and of bone to bone, until 
the powerless chaos is seen risen up with girded loins, and 
not one piece of all the unregarded heap could now be spared 
from the mystic whole. 

§ xvuz Now it is indeed true that where nature loses one 
kind of beauty, as you approach it, she substitutes another ; 
this is worthy of her infinite power: and, as we shall see, art 
can sometimes follow her even in doing this; but all I insist 
upon at present is, that the several effects of nature are each 
worked with means referred to a particular distance, and pro- 
ducing their effect at that distance only. Take a singular and 
marked instance : When the sun rises behind a ridge of pines, 
and those pines are seen from a distance of a mile or two, 
against his light, the whole form of the tree, trunk, branches, 
and all, becomes one frostwork of intensely brilliant silver, 
which is relieved against the clear sky like a burning fringe, 


946 THRE STONES OF VENICR. 


for some distance on either side of the sun.* Now suppose 
that a person who had never seen pines were, for the first time 
in his life, to see them under this strange aspect, and, reason- 
ing as to the means by which such effect could be produced, 
laboriously to approach the eastern ridge, how would he be 
amazed to find that the fiery spectres had been produced by 
trees with swarthy and grey trunks, and dark green leaves! 
We, in our simplicity, if we had been required to produce such 
an appearance, should have built up trees of chased silver, with 
trunks of glass, and then been grievously amazed to find that, 
at two miles off, neither silver nor glass were any more visible; 
but nature knew better, and prepared for her fairy work with 
the strong branches-and dark leaves, in her own mysterious 
way. 

§ xrx. Now this is exactly what you have to do with your 
good ornament. It may be that it is capable of being ap- 
proached, as well as likely to be seen far away, and then it 
ought to have microscopic qualities, as the pine leaves have, 
which will bear approach. But your calculation of its pur- 
pose is for a glory to be produced at a given distance ; it may 
be here, or may be there, but it is a given distance ; and the 
excellence of the ornament depends upon its fitting that dis- 
tance, and being seen better there than anywhere else, and 
having a particular function and form which it can only dis- 
charge and assume there. You are never to say that ornament 
has great merit because “ you cannot see the beauty. of it 
here ;” but, it has great merit because “ you can see its beauty 
here only.” And to give it this merit is just about as difficult 
a task as I could well set you. I have above noted the two 


*Shakspeare and Wordsworth (I think they only) have noticed this 
Shakspeare, in Richard IT. :— 
** But when, from under this terrestrial ball, 
He fires the proud tops of the eastern pines.” 


And Wordsworth, in one of his minor poems, on leaving Italy: 
‘“ My thoughts become bright like yon edging of pines 
On the steep’s lofty verge—how it blackened the air! 
But, touched from behind by the sun, it now shines 
With threads that seem part of his own silver hair,” 


TREATMENT OF ORNAMENT. 247 


ways in which it is done: the one, being merely rough cut- 
ting, may be passed over; the other, which is scientific alter 
ation of design, falls, itself, into two great branches, Simplifi- 
cation and Emphasis. 

A word or two is necessary on each of these heads. 

§ xx. When an ornamental work is intended to be seen 
near, if its composition be indeed fine, the subdued and deli- 
cate portions of the design lead to, and unite, the energetic 
parts, and those energetic parts form with the rest a whole, in 
which their own immediate relations to each other are not per- 
ceived. Remove this design to a distance, and the connecting 
delicacies vanish, the energies alone remain, now either dis- 
connected altogether, or assuming with each other new rela- 
tions, which, not having been intended by the designer, will 
probably be painful. There is a like, and a more palpable, 
effect, in the retirement of a band of music in which the in- 
struments are of very unequal powers ; the fluting and fifeing 
expire, the drumming remains, and that in a painful arrange- 
ment, as demanding something which is unheard. In like 

manner, as the designer at arm’s length removes or elevates 
his work, fine gradations, and roundings, and incidents, vanish, 
and a totally unexpected arrangement is established between 
the remainder of the markings, certainly confused, and in all 
probability painful. 

§ xx. The art of architectural design is therefore, first, tiie 
preparation for this beforehand, the rejection of all the delicate 
passages as worse than useless, and the fixing the thought upon 
the arrangement of the features which will remain visible far’ 
away. Nor does this always imply a diminution of resource ; 
for, while it may be assumed as a law that fine modulation of 
surface in light becomes quickly invisible as the object retires, 
there are a softness and mystery given to the harder markings, 
which enable them to be safely used as media of expression, 
There is an exquisite example of this use, in the head of the 
Adam of the Ducal Palace. It is only at the height of 17 or 
18 feet above the eye ; nevertheless, the sculptor felt it was no 
use to trouble himself about drawing the corners of the mouth, 
or the lines of the lips, delicately, at that distance ; his object 


248 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


has been to mark them clearly, and to prevent accidental 
shadows from concealing them, or altering their expression. 
The lips are cut thin and sharp, so that their line cannot be 
mistaken, and a good deep drill-hole struck into the angle of 
the mouth; the eye is anxious and questioning, and one is 
surprised, from below, to perceive a kind of darkness in the 
iris of it, neither like color, nor like a circular furrow. The 
expedient can only be discovered by ascending to the level of 
the head ; it is one which would have been quite inadmissible 
except in distant work, six drill-holes cut into the iris, round 
a central one for the pupil. 

§ xxu. By just calculation, like this, of the means at our 
disposal, by beautiful arrangement of the prominent features, 
and by choice of different subjects for different places, choos- 
ing the broadest forms for the farthest distance, it is possible 
to give the impression, not only of perfection, but of an ex- 
quisite delicacy, to the most distant ornament. And this is 
the true sign of the right having been done, and the utmost 
possible power attained :—The spectator should be satisfied 
to stay in his place, feeling the decoration, wherever it may 
be, equally rich, full, and lovely: not desiring to climb the 
steeples in order to examine it, but sure that he has it all; 
where he is. Perhaps the capitals of the cathedral of Genoa 
are the best instances of absolute perfection in this kind: 
seen from below, they appear as rich as the frosted silver of 
the Strada degli Orefici; and the nearer you approach them, 
the less delicate they seem. 

§ xxi. This is, however, not the only mode, though the 
best, in which ornament is adapted for distance. The other 
is emphasis,—the unnatural insisting upon explanatory lines, 
where the subject would otherwise become unintelligible. It 
is to be remembered that, by a deep and narrow incision, an 
architect. has the power, at least in sunshine, of drawing a 
black line on stone, just as vigorously as it can be drawn with 
chalk on grey paper; and that he may thus, wherever and 
in the degree that he chooses, substitute chalk sketching for 
sculpture. They are curiously mingled by the Romans. The 
bas-reliefs of the Arc d’Orange are small, and would be com 


TREATMENT OF ORNAMENT. IAD 


fused, though in bold relief, if they depended for intelligibility 
on the relief only ; but each figure is outlined by a strong 
incision at its.edge into the background, and all the ornaments 
on the armor are simply drawn with incised lines, and not cut 
out atall. A similar use of lines is made by the Gothic na- 
tions in all their early sculpture, and with delicious effect. 
Now, to draw a mere pattern—as, for instance, the bearings 
of a shield—with these simple incisions, would, I suppose, 
occupy an able sculptor twenty minutes or half an hour ; and 
the pattern is then clearly seen, under all circumstances of 
light and shade ; there can be no mistake about it, and no 
missing it. To carve out the bearings in due and finished 
relief would occupy a long summer’s day, and the results 
would be feeble and indecipherable in the best lights, and in 
some lights totally and hopelessly invisible, ignored, non- 
existent. Now the Renaissance architects, and our modern 
ones, despise the simple expedient of the rough Roman oi 
barbarian. They do not care to be understood. They care 
only to speak finely, and be thought great orators, if one 
could only hear them. So I leave you to choose between the 
old men, who took minutes to tell things plainly, and the 
modern men, who take days to tell them unintelligibly. 

§ xxiv. All expedients of this kind, both of simplification 
and energy, for the expression of details at a distance where 
their actual forms would have been invisible, but more es- 
pecially this linear method, I shall call Proutism ; for the 
ereatest master of the art in modern times has been Samuel 
Prout. He actually takes up buildings of the later times in 
which the ornament has been too refined for its place, and 
translates it into the energised linear ornament of earlier art : 
and to this power of taking the life and essence of decoration, 
and putting it into a perfectly intelligible form, when its own 
fulness would have been confused, is owing the especial power 
of his drawings. Nothing can be more closely analogous than 
the method with which an old Lombard uses his chisel, and 
that with which Prout uses the reed-pen ; and we shall see 
presently farther correspondence in their feeling about the 
enrichment of luminous surfaces, 


250 THE STONES OF VENICR. 


§ xxv. Now, all that has been hitherto said refers to orna 
ment whose distance is fixed, or nearly so; as when it is at 
any considerable height from the ground, supposing the spec- 
tator to desire to see it, and to get as near it as he can. But 
the distance of ornament is never fixed to the general specta- 
tor. The tower of acathedral is bound to look well, ten miles 
off, or five miles, or half a mile, or within fifty yards. The 
ornaments of its top have fixed distances, compared with those 
of its base ; but quite unfixed distances in their relation to the 
ereat world: and the ornaments of the base have no fixed dis- 
tance at all. They are bound to look well from the other side 
of the cathedral close, and to look equally well, or better, as 
we enter the cathedral door. How are we to manage this? 

§ xxvr. As nature manages it. I said above, § xvu., that 
for every distance from the eye there was a different system 
of form in all natural objects: this is to be so then in archi- 
tecture. The lesser ornament is to be grafted on the greater, 
and third or fourth orders of ornaments upon this again, as 
need may be, until we reach the limits of possible sight ; each 
order of ornament being adapted for a different distance: 
first, for example, the great masses,—the buttresses and stories 
and black windows and broad cornices of the tower, which 
give it make, and organism, as it rises over the horizon, half a 
score of miles away: then the traceries and shafts and pinna- 
cles, which give it richness as we approach: then the niches 
and statues and knobs and flowers, which we can only see 
when we stand beneath it. At this third order of ornament, 
we may pause, in the upper portions ; but on the roofs of the 
niches, and the robes of the statues, and the rolls of the 
mouldings, comes a fourth order of ornament, as delicate as the 
eye can follow, when any of these features may be approached. 

§ xxv. All good ornamentation is thus arborescent, as it 
were, one class of it branching out of another and sustained 
by it; and its nobility consists in this, that whatever order or 
class of it we may be contemplating, we shall find it subor- 
dinated to a greater, simpler, and more powerful ; and if we 
then contemplate the greater order, we shall find it again sub- 
ordinated to a greater still; until the greatest can only be 


TREATMENT OF ORNAMENT. Qi 


quite grasped by retiring to the limits of distance command: 
ing it. 

And if this subordination be not complete, the ornament is 
bad : if the ficurings and chasings and borderings of a dress 
be not subordinated to the folds of it,—if the folds are not 
subordinate to the action and mass of the figure,—if this 
action and mass not to the divisions of the recesses and shafts 
among which it stands,—if these not to the shadows of the 
ereat arches and buttresses of the whole building, in each 
case there is error ; much more if all be contending with each 
other and striving for attention at the same time. 

§ xxvuz It is nevertheless evident, that, however perfect 
this distribution, there cannot be orders adapted to every dis- 
tance of the spectator. Between the ranks of ornament there 
must always be a bold separation ; and there must be many 
intermediate distances, where we are too far off to see the 
lesser rank clearly, and yet too near to grasp the next higher 
rank wholly : and at all these distances the spectator will feel 
himself ill-placed, and will desire to go nearer or farther away. 
This must be the case in all noble work, natural or artificial. 
It is exactly the same with respect to Rouen cathedral or the 
Mont Blane. We like to see them from the other side of the 
Seine, or of the lake of Geneva; from the Marché aux Fleurs, 
or the Valley of Chamouni; from the parapets of the apse, or 
the crags of the Montagne de la Cote: but there are interme- 
diate distances which dissatisfy us in either case, and from 
which one is in haste either to advance or to retire. 

§ xxrx. Directly opposed to this ordered, disciplined, well 
officered and variously ranked ornament, this type of divine, 
and therefore of all good human government, is the demo- 
cratic ornament, in which all is equally influential, and has 
equal office and authority ; that is to say, none of it any office 
nor authority, but a life of continual struggle for independence 
and notoriety, or of gambling for chance regards. The Eng- 
lish perpendicular work is by far the worst of this kind that 
I know ; its main idea, or decimal fraction of an idea, being 
to cover its walls with dull, successive, eternity of reticulation, 
to till with equal foils the equal interstices between the equal 


952 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


bars, and charge the interminable blanks with statues and 
rosettes, invisible at a distance, and uninteresting near. 

The early Lombardic, Veronese, and Norman work is the 
exact reverse of this ; being divided first into large masses, 
and these masses covered with minute chasing and surface 
work, which fill them with interest, and yet do not disturb 
nor divide their greatness. The lights are kept broad and 
bright, and yet are found on near approach to be charged 
with intricate design. This, again, is a part of the great sys- 
tem of treatment which I shall hereafter call ‘‘ Proutism ;” 
much of what is thought mannerism and imperfection in 
Prout’s work, being the result of his determined resolution 
that minor details shall never break up his large masses of 
light. 

§ xxx. Such are the main principles to be observed in the 
adaptation of ornament to the sight. We have lastly to in- 
quire by what method, and in what quantities, the ornament, 
thus adapted to mental comtemplation, and prepared for its, 
physical position, may most wisely be arranged. I think the 
method ought first to be considered, and the quantity last ; 
for the advisable quantity depends upon the method. 

§ xxx. It was said above, that the proper treatment or ar- 
rangement of ornament was that which expressed the laws 
and ways of Deity. Now, the subordination of visible orders 
to each other, just noted, is one expression ofthese. But there 
may also—must also—be a subordination and obedience of 
the parts of each order to some visible law, out of itself, but 
having reference to itself only (not to any upper order): 
some law which shall not oppress, but guide, limit, and sus- 
tain. 

In the tenth chapter of the second volume of ‘Modern 
Painters,” the reader will find that I traced’one part of the 
beauty of God’s creation to the expression of a se/f-restrained 
hberty: that is to say, the image of that perfection of divine 
action, which, though free to work in arbitrary methods, works 
always in consistent methods, called by us Laws. 

Now, correspondingly, we find that when these natural ob 
jects are to become subjects of the art of man, their perfect 


TREATMENT OF ORNAMENT. 258 


treatment is an image of the perfection of human action: a 
voluntary submission to divine law. 

It was suggested to me but lately by the friend to whose 
originality of thought I have before expressed my obligations, 
Mr. Newton, that the Greek pediment, with its enclosed sculpt- 
ures, represented to the Greek mind the law of Fate, con- 
fining human action within limits not to be overpassed. Ido 
not believe the Greeks ever distinctly thought of this; but 
the instinct of all the human race, since the world began, 
agrees in some expression of such limitation as one of the first 
necessities of good ornament.* And this expression is height- 
ened, rather than diminished, when some portion of the design 
slightly breaks the law to which the rest is subjected ; it is 
like expressing the use of miracles in the divine government; 
or, perhaps, in slighter degrees, the relaxing of a law, gener- 
ally imperative, in compliance with some more imperative 
need—the hungering of David. How eagerly this special in- 
fringement ofa general law was sometimes sought by the 
medieval workmen, I shall be frequently able to point out tu 
the reader ; but I remember just now a most curious instance, 
in an archivolt of a house in the Corte del Remer close to the 
Rialto at Venice. It is composed of a wreath of flower-work 
—a constant Byzantine design—with an animal in each coil ; 
the whole enclosed between two fillets. Each animal, leaping 
or eating, scratching or biting, is kept nevertheless strictly 
within its coil, and between the fillets. Not the shake of an 
ear, not the tip of a tail, overpasses this appointed line, through 
a series of some five-and-twenty or thirty animals ; until, on a 
sudden, and by mutual consent, two little beasts (not looking, 
for the rest, more rampant than the others), one on each side, 
lay their small paws across the enclosing fillet at exactly the 
same point of its course, and thus break the continuity of its 
line. ‘Two ears of corn, or leaves, do the same thing in the 


* Some valuable remarks on this subject will be found in a notice of 
the ‘‘Seven Lamps ’ in the British Quarterly for August, 1849. I think, 
however. the writer attaches too great importance to one owt of many or 
namental necessities, 


254 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


mouldings round the northern door of the Baptistery at Flor 
ence. 

§ xxx. Observe, however, and this is of the utmost pos 
sible importance, that the value of this type does not consist 
in the mere shutting of the ornament into a certain space, but 
in the acknowledgment by the ornament of the fitness of the 
limitation—of its own perfect willingness to submit to it; nay, 
of a predisposition in itself to fall into the ordained form, 
without any direct expression. of the command to do so; an 
anticipation of the authority, and an instant and willing sub- 
mission to it, in every fibre and spray: not merely willing, 
but happy submission, as being pleased rather than vexed to 
have so beautiful a law suggested to it, and one which to fol- 
low is so justly in accordance with its own nature. You must 
not cut out a branch of hawthorn as it grows, and rule a tri- 
angle round it, and suppose that it is then submitted to law. 
Not a bit of it. It is only put in a cage, and will look as if it 
must get out, for its life, or wither in the confinement. But 
the spirit of triangle must be put into the hawthorn. It must 
suck in isoscelesism with its sap. Thorn and blossom, leaf 
and spray, must grow with an awful sense of triangular neces- 
sity upon them, for the guidance of which they are to be 
thankful, and to grow all the stronger and more gloriously. 
And though there may be a transgression here and there, and 
an adaptation to some other need, or a reaching forth to some 
other end greater even than the triangle, yet this liberty is to 
be always accepted under a solemn sense of special permis- 
gion ; and when the full form is reached and the entire sub- 
mission expressed, and every blossom has a thrilling sense of 
its reponsibility down into its tiniest stamen, you may take - 
your terminal line away if you will. No need for it any more. 
The commandment is written on the heart of the thing. 

§ xxx. Then, besides this obedience to external law, there 
is the obedience to internal headship, which constitutes the 
unity of ornament, of which I think enough has been said for 
my present purpose in the chapter on Unity in the second 
vol. of “Modern Painters.” But T hardly know whether ta 
arrange as an expression of a divine jaw, or a representation 


TREATMENT OF ORNAMENT. 255 


of a physical fact, the alternation of shade with light which, 
in equal succession, forms one of the chief elements of contin- 
uous ornament, and in some peculiar ones, such as dentils and 
billet mouldings, is the source of their only charm. The op- 
position of good and evil, the antagonism of the entire human 
system (so ably worked out by Lord Lindsay), the alternation 
of labor with rest, the mingling of life with death, or the 
actual physical fact of the division of light from darkness, and 
of the falling and rising of night and day, are all typified or 
represented by these chains of shade and light of which the 
eye never wearies, though their true meaning may never occur 
to the thoughts. 

§ xxxiv. The next question respecting the arrangement of 
ornament is one closely connected also with its quantity. The 
system of creation is one in which ‘ God’s creatures leap not, 
but express a feast, where all the guests sit close, and nothing 
wants.” It is also a feast, where there is nothing redundant. 
So, then, in distributing our ornament, there must never be 
any sense of gap or blank, neither any sense of there being a 
single member, or fragment of a member, which could be 
spared. Whatever has nothing to do, whatever could go with- 
out being missed, is not ornament; it is deformity and en- 
cumbrance. Away with it. And, on the other hand, care 
must be taken either to diffuse the ornament which we permit, | 
in due relation over the whole building, or so to concentrate 
it, as never to leave a sense of its having got into knots, and 
curdied upon some points, and left the rest of the building 
whey. It is very difficult to give the rules, or analyse the 
feelings, which should direct us in this matter: for some 
shafts may be carved and others left unfinished, and that with 
advantage ; some windows may be jewelled like Aladdin’s, 
and one left plain, and still with advantage ; the door or doors, 
or a single turret, or the whole western facade of a church, 
or the apse or transept, may be made special subjects of de- 
coration, and the rest left plain, and still sometimes with ad- 
vantage. But in all such cases there is either sign of that 
feeling which I advocated in the First Chapter of the “Seven 
Lamps,” the desire of rather dping some portion of the build. 


256 THE STONES OF VENICKH. 


ing as we would have it, and leaving the rest plain, than doing 
the whole imperfectly ; or else there is choice mide of some 
important feature, to which, as more honorable thén the rest, 
the decoration is confined. The evil is when, without system, 
and without preference of the nobler members, the @rnament 
alternates between sickly luxuriance and sudden blaikness. 
In many of our Scotch and English abbeys, especially Me?'rose, 
this is painfully felt ; but the worst instance I have ever s 2€0 
is the window in the side of the arch under the Wellingtd>n 
statue, pext St. George’s Hospital. In the first place, a win- 

dow has no business there at all; in the second, the bars of 

the window are not the proper place for decoration, especially 

wavy decoration, which one instantly fancies of cast iron; in 

the third, the richness of the ornament is a mere patch and 

eruption upon the wall, and one hardly knows whether to be 

most irritated at the affectation of severity in the rest, or at 

the vain luxuriance of the dissolute parallelogram. 

§ xxxv. Finally, as regards quantity of ornament I have 
already said, again and again, you cannot have too much if it 
be good ; that is, if it be thoroughly united and harmonised by 
the laws hitherto insisted upon. But you may easily have too 
much if you have more than you have sense to manage. For 
with every added order of ornament increases the difficulty of 
discipline. It is exactly the same as in war: you cannot, as 
an abstract law, have too many soldiers, but you may easily 
have more than the country is able to sustain, or than your 
generalship is competent to command, And every regiment 
which you cannot manage will, on the day of battle, be in 
your way, and encumber the movements it is not in disposi- * 
tion to sustain. 

§ xxxvr. As an architect, therefore, you are modestly to 
measure your capacity of governing ornament. Remember, 
its essence,—its being ornament at all, consists in its being 
governed. Lose your authority over it, let it command you, 
or lead you, or dictate to you in any wise, and it is an offence, 
an incumbrance, and a dishonor. And it is always ready to 
do this ; wild to get the bit in its teeth, and rush forth on its 
own devices, Measure, therefore, your strength ; and as long 


‘THE ANGLE. 259 


as there is no chance of mutiny, add soldier to soldier, bat- 
talion to battalion ; but be assured that all are heartily in the 
cause, and that there is not one of whose position you are ig- 
norant, or whose service you could spare. 


CHAPTER XXIL 


THE ANGLE. 


§1. We have now examined the treatment and specific 
kinds of ornament at our command. We have lastly to note 
the fittest places for their disposal. Not but that all kinds of 
ornament are used in all places; but there are some parts of 
the building, which, without ornament, are more painful than 
others, and some which wear ornament more gracefully than 
others ; so that, although an able architect will always be find- 
ing out some new and unexpected modes of decoration, and 
fitting his ornament into wonderful places where it is least ex- 
pected, there are, nevertheless, one or two general laws which 
may be noted respecting every one of the parts of a building, 
laws not (except a few) imperative like those of construction, 
hut yet generally expedient, and good to be understood, if it 
were only that we might enjoy the brilliant methods in which 
they are sometimes broken. I shall note, however, only a few 
of the simplest; to trace them into their ramifications, and 
class in due order the known or possible methods of decoration 
for each part of a building, would alone require a large vol- 
ume, and be, I think, a somewhat useless work ; for there is 
often a high pleasure in the very unexpectedness of the orna- 
ment, which would be destroyed by too elaborate an arrange- 
ment of its kinds. 

§ u. I think that the reader must, by this time, so thor- 
oughly understand the connection of the parts of a building, 
that I may class together, in treating of decoration, several 
parts which I kept separate in speaking of construction. Thus 
I shail put under one head (a) the base of the wall and of the 
suuft; then (z) the wall veil and shaft itself; then (c) the 
cornice and eapital ; then (p) the jamb and archivolt, includ 

Stones of Venice--Vol. L—18 © 


258 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


ing the arches both over shafts and apertures, and the jambs 
of apertures, which are closely connected with their archivolts ; 
finally (z) the roof, including the real roof, and the minor roofs 
or gables of pinnacles and arches. I think, under these divis- 
ions, all may be arranged which is necessary to be generally 
stated; for tracery decorations or aperture fillings are but 
smaller forms of application of the arch, and the cusps are 
merely smaller spandrils, while buttresses have, as far as I 
know, no specific ornament. The best are those which have 
least ; and the little they have resolves itself into pinnacles, . 
which are common to other portions of the building, or into 
small shafts, arches, and niches, of still more general applica- 
bility. We shall therefore have only five divisions to examine 
in succession, from foundation to roof. 

§ m. But in the decoration of these several parts, certain 


minor conditions of ornament occur which are of perfectly 
general application. For instance, whether, in archivolts, 
jambs, or buttresses, or in square piers, or at the extremity 
of the entire building, we necessarily have the awkward 
(moral or architectural) feature, the corner. How to turn a 
corner gracefully becomes, therefore, a perfectly general ques- 
tion ; to be examined without reference to any particular part 
of the edifice. 

§ rv. Again, the furrows and ridges by which bars of paral- — 
iel light and shade are obtained, whether these are employed 
in arches, or jambs, or bases, or cornices, must of necessity 
present one or more of six forms: square projection, a (Fig. 
LI), or square recess, b, sharp projection, ¢, or sharp recess, d, 
curved projection, e, or curved recess, f. What odd curves the 
projection or recess may assume, or how these different condi- 
tions may be mixed and run into one another, is not our pres- 
ent business We note only the six distinct kinds or types. 


THE ANGLE. 259 


Now, when these ridges or furrows are on a small scale they 
often themselves constitute all the ornament required for 
larger features, and are left smooth cut; but on a very large 
scale they are apt to become insipid, and they require a sub- 
ornament of their own, the consideration of which is, of course, 
in great part, general, and irrespective of the place held by the 
mouldings in the building itself: which consideration I think 
we had better undertake first of all. 

§ v. But before we come to particular examination of these 
minor forms, let us see how far we can simplify it. Look 
back to Fig. LL, above. There are distinguished in it six 
forms of moulding. Of these, ¢ is nothing but a small corner ; 
but, for convenience sake, it is better to call it an edge, and to 
consider its decoration together with that of the member a, 
which is called a fillet ; while e, which I shall call a roll (be- 
cause I do not choose to assume that it shall be only of the 
semicircular section here given), is also best considered to- 
gether with its relative recess, f; and because the shape of a 
recess is of no great consequence, I shall class all the three 
recesses together, and we shall thus have only three subjects 
for separate consideration :— 


1. The Angle. 
2. The Edge and Fillet. 
3. The Roll and Recess. 


§ vi. There are two other general forms which may prob- 
ably occur to the reader’s mind, namely, the ridge (as of a 
roof), which is a corner laid on its back, or sloping,—a supine 
corner, decorated in a very different manner from a, stiff up- 
right corner: and the point, which is a concentrated corner, 
and has wonderfully elaborate decorations all to its insignifi- 
cant self, finials, and spikes, and I know not what more. 
But both these conditions are so closely connected with roofs 
(even the cusp finial being a.kind of pendant to a small roof), 
that I think it better to class them and their ornament under 
the head of roof decoration, together with the whole tribe of 
crockets and bosses ; so that we shall be here concerned only 


260 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


with the three subjects above distinguished: and, first, the 
corner or Angle. 

§ vm. The mathematician knows there are many kinds of 
angles ; but the one we have principally to deal with now, is 
that which the reader may very easily conceive as the corner 
of a square house, or square anything. it is of course the 
one of most frequent occurrence ; and its treatment, once 
understood, may, with slight modification, be referred tc 
other corners, sharper or blunter, or with curved sides. 

§ vin. Evidently the first and roughest idea which would 
occur to any one who found a 
corner troublesome, would be 
to cut itoff. This is a very sum- 
mary and tyrannical proceed- 
ing, somewhat barbarous, yet 
advisable if nothing else can be 
done: an amputated corner is 
said to be chamfered. It can, however, evidently be cut off 
in three ways: 1. with a concave cut, a; 2. with a straight 
cut, b; 8. with a convex cut, c, Fig. LIL. 

The first two methods, the most violent and summary, have 
the apparent disadvantage that we get by them,—two corners 
instead of one; much milder corners, however, and with a 
different light and shade between them ; so that both meth- 
ods are often very expedient. You may see the straight 
chamfer (b) on most lamp posts, and pillars at railway sta- 
tions, it being the easiest tio cut : the concave chamfer requires 
more care, and occurs generally in well-finished but simple 
architecture—very beautifully in the small arches of the Bro- 
letto of Como, Plate V.; and the straight chamfer in archi- 
tecture of every kind, very constantly in Norman cornices and 
arches, as in Fig. 2, Plate IV., at Sens. 

§ ix. The third, or convex chamfer, as it is the gentlest 
mode of treatment, so (as in medicine and morals) it is very 
generally the best. ‘or while the two other methods produce 
two corners instead of one, this gentle chamfer does verily 
get rid of the corner altogether, and substitutes a soft curve in 
its place, 


Fie. LIT. 


THE ANGLE. 261 


But it has, in the form above given, this grave disadvantage, 
that it looks as if the corner had been rubbed or worn off, 
blunted by time and weather, and in want of sharpening again. 
A great deal often depends, and in such a case as this, every- 
thing depends, on the Voluntariness of the ornament. The 
work of time is beautiful on surfaces, but not on edges intended 
to be sharp. Even if we needed them blunt, we should not 
like them blunt on compulsion ; so, to show that the bluntness 
is our own ordaining, we will put a slight incised line to mark 
off the rounding, and show that it goes no farther than we 


Fia@. LIT. 


choose. We shall thus have the section a, Fig. LUI. ; and 
this mode of turning an angle is one of the very best ever in- 
vented. By enlarging and deepening the incision, we get in 
succession the forms b, c, d ; and by describing a small equa: 
arc on each of the sloping lines of these figures, we get e, 7, 
g, h. 

_§ x. Ido not know whether these mouldings are called by 
architects chamfers or beads; but I think bead a bad word for 
a continuous moulding, and the proper sense of the word 
chamfer is fixed by Spenser as descriptive not merely of trun. 
cation, but of trench or furrow :— 


262 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


** Tho gin you, fond flies, the cold to scorn, 
And, crowing in pipes made of green corn, 
You thinken to be lords of the year ; 

But eft when ye count you freed from fear, 
Comes the breme winter with chamfred brows, 
Full of wrinkles and frosty furrows.” 


So I shall call the above mouldings beaded chamfers, when 
there is any chance of confusion with the plain chamfer, a, or 
6, of Fig. LI. : and when there is no such chance, I shall use 
the word chamfer only. 

§ x1. Of those above given, b is the constant chamfer of 
Venice, and a of Verona: 
a being the grandest and 
best, and having a pecu- 
liar precision and quaint- 
ness of effect about it. I 
found it twice in Venice, 
used on the sharp angle, 
as ataand b, Fig. LIV., a 
being from the angle of a 
house on the Rio San 
Zulian, and b from the 
windows of the church of 
San Stefano. 

§ xm. There is, how- 
ever, evidently another 
variety of the chamfers, 
fand g, Fig. LOL, form- 
ed by an unbroken curve 

Fra. LIV. instead of two curves, as. 

e, Fig. LIV. ; and when 

this, or the chamfer d, Fig. LUL, is large, it is impossible to say 
whether they have been devised from the incised angle, or from 
small shafts set in a nook, as at e, Fig. LIV., or in the hollow 
of the curved chamfer, as d, Fig. LIV. In general, however, the 
shallow chamfers, a, b, e, and f, Fig. LIL, are peculiar to south- 
ern work ; and may be assumed to have been derived from the 
incised angle, while the deep chamfers, c, d, g, h, are charac 


THE ANGLE. 268 


teristic of northern work, and may be partly derived or imi- 
tated from the angle shaft; while, with the usual extrava- 
gance of the northern architects, they are cut deeper and 
deeper until we arrive at the condition f, Fig. LIV., which 
is the favorite chamfer at Bourges and Bayeux, and in other 
good French work. 

Ihave placed in the Appendix* a figure belonging to this 
subject, but which cannot interest the general reader, show- 
ing the number of possible chamfers with a roll moulding of 
given size. 

§ xm. If we take the plain chamfer, 6, of Fig. LIL, on a 
large scale, as at a, Fig. LV., and bead both its edges, cutting 
away the parts there shaded, we shall have a form much used 
in richly decorated Gothic, both in England and Italy. It 
might be more simply described as the chamfer a of Fig. LIL, 
with an incision on each edge; but the part here shaded is 
often worked into ornamental forms, not being entirely cut 
away. 

§ xiv. Many other mouldings, which at first sight appear 
very elaborate, are 
nothing more than a 
chamfer, with a series 
of small echoes of it 
on each side, dying 
away with a ripple on 
the surface of the wall, 
as in b, Fig. LV., from 
Coutances (observe, 
here the white part is the solid stone, the shade is cut away.) 

Chamfers of this kind are used on a small scale and in deli- 
cate work ; the coarse chamfers are found on all scales: / and 
g, Fig. LII., in Venice, form the great angles of almost every 
Gothie palace ; the roll being a foot or a foot and a half round, 
and treated as a shaft, with a capital and fresh base at every 
story, while the stones of which it is composed form alternate 
quoins in the brick-work beyond the chamfer curve, I need 


Fie. LV. 


* Appendix 23: ‘Varieties of Chamfer,”’ 


264 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


hardly say how much nobler this arrangement is than a com- 
" mon quoined angle; it gives a finish to the aspect of the 
whole pile attainable in no other way. And thus much may 
serve concerning angle decoration by chamfer, 


CHAPTER XXIIL 
‘THE EDGE AND FILLET. 


§ 1 Tue decoration of the angle by various forms of cham- 
fer and bead, as above described, is the quietest method we 
can employ ; too quiet, when great energy is to be given to 
the moulding, and impossible, when, instead of a bold angle, 
we have to deal with a small projecting edge, like cin Fig. LL 
In such cases we may employ a decoration, far ruder and 
easier in its simplest conditions than the bead, far more effec- 
tive when not used in too great profusion ; and of which the 
complete developments are the source of mouldings at once 
the most picturesque and most serviceable which the Gothic 
builders invented. 

§ u. The gunwales of the Venetian heavy barges being 
liable to somewhat rough collision with each other, and with 
the walls of the streets, are generally protected by a piece of 
timber, which projects in the form of the fillet, a, Fig. LI. ; 
but which, like all other fillets, may, if we so choose, be con- 
sidered as composed of two angles or edges, which the natural 
and most wholesome love of the Venetian boatmen for orna- 
ment, otherwise strikingly evidenced by their painted sails 
and glittering flag-vanes, will not suffer to remain wholly — 
undecorated. The rough service of these timbers, however, 
will not admit of rich ornament, and the boatbuilder usually 
contents himself with cutting a series of notches in each edge, 
one series alternating with the other, as represented at 1, 
Plate IX. 

§ m. In that simple ornament, not as confined to Venetian 
boats, but as representative of a general human instinct to 
hack at an edge, demonstrated by all school-boys and all idle 


THE EDGH AND FILLET. 268 


possessors of penknives or other cutting instruments on both 
sides of the Atlantic ;—in that rude Venetian gunwale, I say, 
is the germ of all the ornament which has touched, with its 
rich successions of angular shadow, the portals and archivolts 
ot nearly every early building of importance, from the Nortk 
Cape to the Straits of Messina. Nor are the modifications of 
the first suggestion intricate. All that is generic in their 
character may be seen on Plate IX. at a glance. 

§ 1. Taking a piece of stone instead of timber, and se 
ing the rolcbark until they meet each other, we have the con- 
aio, 2, which is a moulding from the tomb of the Doge 
Andrea Dandolo, in St. Mark’s. Now, considering this mould- 
ing as composed of two decorated edges, each edge will be 
reduced, by the meeting of the notches, to a series of four- 
sided pyramids (as marked off by the dotted lines), which, 
the notches here being shallow, will be shallow pyramids ; 
but by deepening the notches, we get them as at 3, witha 
profile a, more or less steep. This moulding I shall always 
call “the plain dogtooth ;” it is used in profusion in the Ve- 
netian and Veronese Gothic, generally set with its front to the 
spectator, as here at 3; but its effect may be much varied by 
placing it obliquely (4, and profile as at 6); or with one side 
horizontal (5, and profile c). Of these three conditions, 3 and 
5 are exactly the same in reality, only differently placed ; but 
in 4 the pyramid is obtuse, and the inclination of its base va- 
riable, the upper side of it being always kept vertical. It is 
comparatively rare. Of the three, the last, 5, is far the most 
brilliant in effect, giving in the distance a zigzag form to the 
high light on it, and a full sharp shadow below. The use of 
this shadow is sufficiently seen by fig. 7 in this plate (the arch . 
on the left, the number beneath it), in which these levelled 
dogteeth, with a small interval between each, are employed to 
set off by their vigor the delicacy of floral ornament above, 
This arch is the side of a niche from the tomb of Can Signoria 
della Scala, at Verona; and the value, as well as the distant 
expression of its dogtooth, may be seen by referring to Prout’s 
‘beautiful drawing of this tomb in his “Sketches in France 
and Italy.” Ihave before observed that thig artist never fails 


2966 THE STONES OF VENICEH. 


of seizing the true and leading expression of whatever he 
touches: he has made this ornament the leading feature of the 
niche, expressing it, as in distance it is only expressible, by a 
zigzag. 

§ v. The reader may perhaps be surprised at my speaking 
so highly of this drawing, if he take the pains to compare 
Prout’s symbolism of the work on the niche with the facts as 
they stand here in Plate IX. But the truth is that Prout has 
rendered the effect of the monument on the mind of the passer- 
by ;—the effect it was intended to have on every man who 
turned the corner of the street beneath it: and in this sense 
there is actually more truth and likeness * in Prout’s transla- 
tion than in my fac-simile, made diligently by peering into the 
details from a ladder. Ido not say that all the symbolism in 
Prout’s Sketch is the best possible ; but it is the best which 
any architectural draughtsman has yet invented ; and in its 
application to special subjects it always shows curious internal 
evidence that the sketch has been made on the spot, and that 
the artist tried to draw what he saw, not to invent an attrac- 
tive subject. I shall notice other instances of this hereafter. 

§ vi The dogtooth, employed in this simple form, is, how- 
ever, rather a foil for other ornament, than itself a satisfactory 
or generally available decoration. It is, however, easy to en- 
rich it as we choose: taking up its simple form at 3, and de- 
scribing the arcs marked by the dotted lines upon its sides, 
and cutting a small triangular cavity between them, we shall 
leave its ridges somewhat rudely representative of four leaves, 
as at 8, which is the section and front view of one of the Ve- 
netian stone cornices described above, Chap. XIV., § 1v., the _ 
- figure 8 being here put in the hollow of the gutter. The dog- 
tooth is put on the outer lower truncation, and is actually in 
position as fig. 5; but being always looked up to, is to the 
spectator as 3, and always rich and effective. The dogteeth 
are perhaps most frequently expanded to the width of fig. 9. 


* I do not here speak of artistical merits, but the play of the ligh: 
among the lower shafts is also singularly beautiful in this sketch of 
Prout’s, and the character of the wild and broken leaves, half dead, ox 
the stone of the foreground. 


THE EDGE AND FILLET. 267 


§ vu. As in nearly all other ornaments previously described, 
so in this,—we have only to deepen the Italian cutting, and 
we shall get the Northern type. Ifwe make the original pyra- 
mid somewhat steeper, and instead of lightly incising, cut it 
through, so as to have the leaves held only by their points to 
the base, we shall have the English dogtooth ; somewhat vul- 
gar in its piquancy, when compared with French mouldings 
of a similar kind.* It occurs, I think, on one house in Venice, 
in the Campo St. Polo; but the ordinary moulding, with light 
incisions, is frequent in archivolts and architraves, as well as 
in the roof cornices. 

§ vit. This being the simplest treatment of the pyramid, 
fig. 10, from the refectory of Wenlock Abbey, is an example 
of the simplest decoration of the recesses or inward angles 
between the pyramids ; that is to say, of a simple hacked edge 
like one of those in fig. 2, the cuts being taken up ard decorated 
instcad of the points. Each is worked into a small trefoiled 
arch, with an incision round it to mark its outline, and another 
slight incision above expressing the angle of the first cutting. 
I said that the teeth in fig. 7 had in distance the effect of a 
zigzag: in fig. 10 this zigzag effect is seized upon and de- 
veloped, but with the easiest and roughest work ; the angular 
incision being a mere limiting line, like that described in § rx. 
of the last chapter. But hence the farther steps to every con-. 
dition of Norman ornament are self evident. I do not say 
that all of them arose from development of the dogtooth in 
this manner, many being quite independent inventions and 
uses of zigzag lines ; still, they may all be referred to this 
simple type as their root and representative, that is to say, the 
mere hack of the Venetian gunwale, with a limiting line fol- 
lowing the resultant zigzag. 

§ ix. Fig. 11 is a singular and much more artificial condi- 
tion, cast in brick, from the church of the Frari, and given 
here only for future reference. Tig. 12, resulting from a fillet 
with the cuts on each of its edges interrupted by a bar, is a 
frequent Venetian moulding, and of great value ; but the plain 


* Vide the ‘* Seven Lamps,’ p. 128, 


268 THE STGCNES OF VENIOZ. 


or leaved dogteeth have been the favorites, and that to such a 
deg”ee, that even the Renaissance architects took them up ; 
and the best bit of Renaissance design in Venice, the side of 
the Ducal Palace next the Bridge of Sighs, owes great part of 
its ‘splendor to its foundation, faced with large flat dogteeth, 
each about a foot wide in the base, with their points truncated, 
and alternating with cavities which are their own negatives or 
casts. : 

§ x. One other form of the dogtooth is of great impor- 

, _ tance in northern architecture, that produced by 
oblique cuts slightly curved, as in the margin, 
Fig. LVI. It is susceptible of the most fantastic 
and endless decoration; each of the resulting 
leaves being, in the early porches of Rouen and 
Lisieux, hollowed out and worked into branching 
tracery: and at Bourges, for distant effect, 
worked into plain leaves, or bold bony processes 
with knobs at the points, and ‘near the spectator, 
into crouching demons and broad winged owls, 
and other fancies and intricacies, innumerable 
and inexpressible. 

§ x1. Thus much is enough to be noted respect- 
ing edge decoration. We were next to con- 
sider the fillet. Professor Willis has noticed an ornament, 
which he has called the Venetian dentil, ‘‘ as the most universa! 
ornament in its own district that ever I met with ;” but has 
not noticed the reason for its frequency. It is nevertheless 
highly interesting. 

The whole early architecture of Venice is architecture o} 
incrustation : this has not been enough noticed in its peculiar 
relation to that of the rest of Italy. There is, indeed, muck 
incrusted architecture throughout Italy, in elaborate ecclesi- 
astical work, but there is more which is frankly of brick, or 
thoroughly of stone. But the Venetian habitually incrusted 
his work with macre ; he built his houses, even the meanest, 
as if he had been a shell-fish,—roughly inside, mother-of: 
pearl on the surface : he was content, perforce, to gather the 
elay of the Brenta banks, and bake it into brick for his sub. 


THE EDGE AND FILLET. 269 


stance of wall; but he overlaid it with the wealth of ocean, 
with the most precious foreign marbles. You might fancy 
early Venice one wilderness of brick, which a petrifying sea 
had beaten upon till it coated it with marble: at first a dark 
city—-washed white by the sea foam. And I told you before 
that it was also a city-of shafts and arches, and that its dwell- 
ings were raised upon continuous arcades, among which the 
sea waves wandered. Hence the thoughts of its builders 
were early and constantly directed to the incrustation cf 
arches. 

§ xm. In Fig. LVIL I have given two of these Byzantine 
stilted arches: the one on 
the right, a, as they now too 
often appear, in its bare 
brickwork ; that on the left, 
with its alabaster covering, 
literally marble defensive 
armor, riveted together in 
pieces, which follow the con- 
tours of the building. Now, 
on the wall, these pieces are mere flat slabs cut to the 
arch outline ; but under the soffit of the arch the marble mail 
is curved, often cut singularly thin, like bent tiles, and fitted 
together so that the pieces would sustain each other even 
without rivets. It is of course desirable that this thin sub- 
arch of marble should project enough to sustain the facing of 
the wall; and the reader will see, in Fig. LVII., that its edge 
forms a kind of narrow band round the arch (6), a band which 
the least enrichment would render a valuable decorative feat- 
ure. Now this band is, of course, if the soffit-pieces project 
a little beyond the face of the wall-pieces, a mere fillet, like 
the wooden gunwale in Plate IX. ; andthe question is, how to 
enrich it most wisely. It might easily have been dog-toothed, 
but the Byzantine architects had not invented the dogtooth, 
and would not have used it here, if they had ; for the dogtooth 
cannot be employed alone, especially on so principal an angle 
as this of the main arches, without giving to the whole build- 
ing a peculiar look, which E can no otherwise describe than as 


Fie. XVII. 


270 THE STUNES OF VENICE. 


being to the eye, exactly what untempered acid is to the 
tongue. The mere dogtooth is an acid moulding, and can 
only be used in certain mingling with others, to give them 
piquancy ; never alone. What, then, will be the next easiest 
method of giving interest to the fillet ? 

§ xu. Simply to make the incisions square instead of sharp, 
and to leave equal intervals of the square edge between them. 
Fig. LVIUI. is one of the curved pieces of arch armor, with its 
edge thus treated; one side only being done 
at the bottom, to show the simplicity and ease 
of the work. This ornament gives force ana 
interest to the edge of the arch, without in the 
least diminishing its quietness. Nothing was 
ever, nor could be ever invented, fitter for its 
purpose, or more easily cut. From the arch it 
therefore found its way into every position 
where the edge of a piece of stone projected, 
and became, from its constancy of occurrence 
in the latest Gothic as well as the earliest Byzan- 
tine, most truly deserving of the name of the 
“Venetian Dentil.” Its complete intention is 
now, however, only to be seen in the pictures 
of Gentile Bellini and Vittor Carpaccio ; for, 
like most of the rest of the mouldings of Vene- 
tian buildings, it was always either gilded or 
painted—often both, gold being laid on the 
faces of the dentils, and their recesses colored 
alternately red and blue. 

§ x1v. Observe, however, that the reason above 
given for the wniversality of this ornament was by . 
no means the reason of its invention. The Venetian dentil isa 
particular application (consequent on the incrusted character 
of Venetian architecture) of the general idea of dentil, which 
had been originally given by the Greeks, and realised both by 
them and by the Byzantines in many laborious forms, long be- 
fore there was need of them for arch armor; and the lower 
half of Piate IX. will give some idea of the conditions which 
secur in the Romanesque of Venice, distinctly derived from the 


Fie. LVIII. 


THE EDGE AND FILLET. 271 


classical dentil; and of the gradual transition to the more 
convenient and simple type, the running-hand dentil, which 
afterwards became the characteristic of Venetian Gothic, 
No. 18* is the common dentiled cornice, which occurs re- 
peatedly in St. Mark’s ; and, as late as the thirteenth century, 
a reduplication of it, forming the abaci of the capitals of the 
Piazzetta shafts. Fig. 15 is perhaps an earlier type; per- 
haps only one of more careless workmanship, from a Byzan- 
tine ruin in the Rio di Ca’ Foscari: and it is interesting to 
compare it- with fig. 14 from the Cathedral of Vienne, in 
South France. Fig. 17, from St. Mark’s, and 18, from the 
apse of Murano, are two very early examples in which the 
future true Venetian dentil is already developed in method 
of execution, though the object is still only to imitate the 
classical one ; and a rude imitation of the bead is joined with 
it in fig. 17. No. 16 indicates two examples of experimental 
forms: the uppermost from the tomb of Mastino della Scala, 
at Verona; the lower from a door in Venice, I believe, of the 
thirteenth century: 19 is a more frequent arrangement, 
chiefly found in cast brick, and connecting the dentils with 
the dogteeth: 20 is a form introduced richly in the later 
Gothic, but of rare occurrence until the latter half of the 
thirteenth century. I shall call it the gabled dontil. It is 
found in the greatest profusion in sepulchral Gothic, associ- 
ated with several slight variations from the usual dentil type, 
of which No. 21, from the tomb of Pietro Cornaro, may serve 
as an example. 

§ xv. All the forms given in Plate IX. are of not unfrequent 
occurrence: varying much in size and depth, according to the 
expression of the work in which they occur ; generally in- 
creasing in size in late work (the earliest dentils are seldom 
more than an inch or an inch and a half long: the fully de- 
veloped dentil of the later Gothic is often as much as four or 
five in length, by one and a half in breadth) ; but they are all 
xyomewhat rare, compared to the true or armor dentil, above 


* The sections of all the mouldings are given on the right of each; 
the part which is constantly solid being shaded, and that which is cut 
into dentils left. 


e 


972 YHE STONES OF VENICZ. 


described. On the other hand, there are one or two unique 
conditions, which will be noted in the buildings where they 
occur.* The Ducal Palace furnishes three anomalies in the 
arch, dogtooth, and dentil: it has a hyperbolic arch, as noted 
above, Chap. X., § xv. ; it has a double-fanged dogtooth in the 
rings of the spiral shafts on its angles ; and, finally, it has a 
dentil with concave sides, of which the section and two of the 
blocks, real size, are given in Plate XIV. The labor of ob- 
taining this difficult profile has, however, been thrown away ; 
for the effect of the dentil at ten feet distance is exactly the 
same as that of the usual form : and the reader may consider 
the dogtooth and dentil in that plate as fairly representing 
the common use of them in the Venetian Gothic. 

§ xvi. Iam aware of no other form of fillet decoration re- 
quiring notice : in the Northern Gothic, the fillet is employed 
chiefly to give severity or flatness to mouldings sypposed to 
be too much rounded, and is therefore generally plain. It is 
itself an ugly moulding, and, when thus employed, is merely 
a foil for others, of which, however, it at last usurped the 
place, and became one of the most painful features in the de 
based Gothic both of Italy and the North. 


CHAPTER XXIV. 
THE ROLL AND RECESS, 


§ 1 I nave classed these two means of architectural effect 
together, because the one is in most cases the negative of the 
other, and is used to relieve it exactly as shadow relieves light ; 
recess alternating with roll, not only in lateral, but in succes- 
sive order ; not merely side by side with each other, but inter- 
rupted the one by the other in their own lines. A recess itself 


* As, however, we shall not probably be led either to Bergamo or 
Bologna, I may mention here a curiously rich use of the dentil, entirely 
covering the foliation and tracery of a niche on the outside of the 
duomo of Bergamo; and a roll, entirely incrusted, as the handle of a 
mace often is with nails, with massy dogteeth or nail-heads, on the 
door of the Pepoli palace of Bologna. 


THE ROLL AND RECASS. 273 


has properly no decoration ; but its depth gives value to the 
decoration which flanks, encloses, or interrupts it, and the 
form which interrupts it best is the roll. 

§ m. I use the word roll generally for any mouldings which 
present to the eye somewhat the appearance of being cylindri- 
cal, and look like round rods. When upright, they are in ap- 
pearance, if not in fact, small shafts; and are a kind of bent 
shaft, even when used in archivolts and traceries ;—when hori- 
zontal, they confuse themselves with cornices, and are, in fact, 
generally to be considered as the best means of drawing an 
architectural line in any direction, the soft curve of their side 
obtaining some shadow at nearly all times of the day, and that 
more tender and grateful to the eye than can be obtained 
either by an incision or by any other form of projection. 

§ m. Their decorative power is, however, too slight for rich 
work, and they frequently require, like the angle and the fillet, 
to be rendered interesting by subdivision or minor ornament 
of their own. When the roll is small, this is effected, exactly 
as in the case of the fillet, by cutting pieces out of it; giving 
in the simplest results what is called the Norman billet mould- 
ing: and when the cuts are given in couples, and the pieces 
rounded into spheres and almonds, we have the ordinary 
Greek bead, both of them too well known to require illustra- 
tion. The’ Norman billet we shall not meet with in Venice ; 
the bead constantly occurs in Byzantine, and of course in 
Renaissance work. In Plate IX., Fig. 17, there is a remarka- 
ble example of its early treatment, where the cuts in it are seft 
sharp. 

§ 1v. But the roll, if it be of any size, deserves better treat. 
ment. Its rounded surface is too beautiful to be cut away in 
notches ; and it is rather to be covered with flat chasing or in- 
laid patterns. Thus ornamented, it gradually blends itself 
with the true shaft, both in the Romanesque work of the 
North, and in the Italian connected schools; and the patterns 
used for it are those used for shaft decoration in general. 

& v. But, as alternating with the recess, it has a decoration 
peculiar to itself. We have often, in the preceding chapters, 
noted the fondness of the Northern builders for deep shade 

Vou. I.—18 


274 VHE STONES OF VENICE. 


and hollowness in their mouldings ; and in the second chapter 
of the “Seven Lamps,” the changes are described which re- 
duced the massive roll mouldings of the early Gothic to a 
series of recesses, separated by bars of light. The shape of 
these recesses is at present a matter of no importance to us: 
it was, indeed, endlessly varied ; but needlessly, for the value 
of a recess is in its darkness, and its darkness disguises its 
form. But it was not in mere wanton indulgence of their love 
of shade that the Flamboyant builders deepened the furrows 
of their mouldings: they had found a means of decorating 
those furrows as rich as it was expressive, and the entire 
framework of their architecture was designed with a view to 
the effect of this decoration ; where the ornament ceases, the 
framework is meagre and mean: but the ornament is, in the 
best examples cf the style, unceasing. 

§ vi. It is, in fact, an ornament formed by the ghosts or 
anatomies of the old shafts, left in the furrows which had 
taken their place. Every here and there, a fragment of a ro.{ 
or shaft,is left in the recess or furrow : a billet-moulding on a 
huge scale, but a billet-moulding reduced to a skeleton ; for 
the fragments of roll are cut hollow, and worked into mere 
entanglement of stony fibres, with the gloom of the recess 
shown through them. These ghost rolls, forming sometimes 
pedestals, sometimes canopies, sometimes covering the whole 
recess with an arch of tracery, beneath which it runs like o 
tunnel, are the peculiar decorations of the Flamboyant Gothic. 

§ vu. Now observe, in all kinds of decoration, we must 
keep carefully under separate heads, the consideration of the 
changes wrought in the mere physical form, and in the intel- 
lectual purpose of ornament. The relations of the canopy to 
ihe statue it shelters, are to be considered altogether distinctly 
from those of the canopy to the building which it decorates 
In its earliest conditions the canopy is partly confused with 
representations of miniature architecture : it is sometimes a 
small temple or gateway, sometimes a honorary addition to 
the pomp of a saint, a covering to his throne, or to his shrine ; 
and this canopy is often expressed in bas-relief (as in painting), 
without much reference to the great requirements of the builds 


THE ROLL AND RECESS. 275 


mg. At other times it is a real protection to the statue, and ig 
enlarged into a complete pinnacle, carried on proper shafts, 
and boldly roofed. But in the late northern system the cano- 
pies are neither expressive nor protective. They area kind 
of stone lace-work, required for the ornamentation of the build- 
ing, for which the statues are often little more than an excuse, 
and of which the physical character is, as above described, that 
of ghosts of departed shafts. 

§ vin. There is, of course, much rich tabernacle work which 
will not come literally under this head, much which is strag- 
gling or flat in its plan, connecting itself gradually with the 
ordinary forms of independent shrines and tombs ; but the 
general idea of all tabernacle work is marked in the common 
phrase of a “niche,” that is to say a hollow intended for a 
statue, and crowned by a canopy ; and this niche decoration 
only reaches its full development when the Flamboyant hol- 
lows are cut deepest, and when the manner and spirit of sculpt- 
ure had so much lost their purity and intensity that it became 
desirable to draw the eye away from the statue to its cover- 
ing, so that at last the canopy became the more important of 
the two, and is itself so beautiful that we are often contented 
with architecture from which profanity has struck the statues, 
if only the canopies are left ; and consequently, in our modern 
ingenuity, even set up canopies where we have no intention 
of setting statues. 

§ 1x. It is a pity that thus we have no really noble example 
of the effect of the statue in the recesses of architecture: for 
the Flamboyant recess was not so much a preparation for it 
as a gulf which swallowed it up. When statues. were most 
earnestly designed, they were thrust forward in all kinds of 
places, often in front of the pillars, as at Amiens, awkwardly 
enough, but with manly respect to the purpose of the figures. 
The Flamboyant hollows yawned at their sides, the statues 
fell back into them, and nearly disappeared, and a flash of 
flame in the shape of a canopy rose as they expired. 

§ x. I do not feel myself capable at present of speaking 
with perfect justice of this niche ornament of the north, my 
late studies in Italy having somewhat destroyed my sympa 


276 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


thies with it. But I once loved it intensely, and will not say 
anything to depreciate it now, save only this, that while 1 
have studied long at Abbeville, without in the least finding 
that it made me care less for Verona, I never remained long 
in Verona without feeling some doubt of the nobility of Abbe- 
ville. 

§ x1. Recess decoration by leaf mouldings is constantly 
and beautifully associated in the north with niche decoration, 
but requires no special notice, the recess in such cases being 
used merely to give value to the leafaye by its gloom, and the 
difference between such conditions and those of the south 
being merely that in the one the leaves are laid across a hol- 
low, and in the other over a solid surface ; but in neither of 
the schools exclusively so, each in some degree intermingling 
the method of the other. 

§ xu. Finally the recess decoration by the ball flower is 
very definite and characteristic, found, I believe, chiefly in 
English work. It consists merely in leaving a small boss 
or sphere, fixed, as it were, at intervals in the hollows; such 
bosses being afterwards carved into roses, or other ornamental 
forms, and sometimes lifted quite up out of the hollow, on 
projecting processes, like vertebrae, so as to make them more 
conspicuous, as throughout the decoration of the cathedral of 
Bourges. 

The value of this ornament is chiefly in the spotted char- 
acter which it gives to the lines of mouldings seen from a dis- 
tance. It is very rich and delightful when not used in excess ; 
but it would satiate and weary the eye if it were ever used in 
general architecture. The spire of Salisbury, and of St. 
Mary’s at Oxford, are agreeable as isolated masses ; but if an 
entire street were built with this spotty decoration at every 
casement, we could not traverse it to the end without disgust. 
It is only another example of the constant aim at piquancy of 
effect which characterised the northern builders ; an ingenious 
out somewhat vulgar effort to give interest to their grey 
masses of coarse stone, without overtaking their powers either 
of invention or execution. We will thank them for it without 
blame or praise, and pass on. 


THR BASH. 272 


CHAPTER XXV. 
THE BASE. 


§ 1. We know now as much as is needful respecting the 
methods of minor and universal decorations, which were dis- 
tinguished in Chapter XXII., § ut, from the ornament which 
has-special relation to particular parts. This local ornament, 
which, it will be remembered, we arranged in § u. of the same 
chapter under five heads, we have next, under those heads, to 
consider. And, first, the ornament of the bases, both of walls 
and shafts. — 

It was noticed in our account of the divisions of a wall, that 
there are something in those divisions like the beginning, the 
several courses, and the close of a human life. And as, in all 
well-conducted lives, the hard work, and roughing, and gain- 
ing of strength come first, the honor or decoration in certain 
intervals during their course, but most of all in their close, so, 
in general, the base of the wall, which is its beginning of labor, 
will bear least decoration, its body more, especially those 
epochs of rest called its string courses ; but its crown or cor- 
nice most of all. Still, in some buildings, all these are dec- 
orated richly, though the last most; and in others, when the 
base is well protected and yet conspicuous, it may probably. 
receive even more decoration than other parts. 

§ u. Now, the main things to be expressed in a base are its 
levelness and evenness. We cannot do better than construct 
the several members of the base, as developed in Fig. IL., p. 
56, each of a different colored marble, so as to produce 
marked level bars of color all along the foundation. This is 
4xquisitely done in all the Italian elaborate wall bases ; that 
of St. Anastasia at Verona is one of the most perfect existing, 
tor play of color; that of Giotto’s campanile is on the whole 
the most beautifully finished. Then, on the vertical portions, 
a, b, c, we may put what patterns in mosaic we please, so that 
they be not too rich ; but if we choose rather to have sculpture 
(or must: have it for want of stones to inlay), then observe that 
all sculpture on bases must be in panels, or it will soon be 


$78 THE STONES OF VENICi, 


worn away, and that a plain panelling is of sn good without 
any other ornament. ‘The member 6, whick in St. Mark’s is 
subordinate, and c, which is expanded into a seat, are both of 
them decorated with simple but exquisitely-finished panelling, 
in red and white or green and white marble; and the mem: 
ber e is in bases of this kind very valuable, as an expression 
of a firm beginning of the substance of the wall itself. This 
member has been of no service to us hitherto, and was unno- 
ticed in the chapters on construction ; but it was expressed 
in the figure of the wall base, on account of its great value 
when the foundation is of stone and the wall of brick (coated 
or not). In such cases it is always better to add the course e, 
above the slope of the base, than abruptly to begin the com- 
mon masonry of the wall. 

§ ut. It is, however, with the member d, or Xb, that we are 
most seriously concerned ; for this being the essential feature 
of all bases, and the true preparation for the wall or shaft, 
it is most necessary that here, if anywhere, we should have 
full expression of levelness and precision ; and farther, that, 
if possible, the eye should not be suffered to rest on the 
points of junction of the stones, which would give an effect ol 
instability. Both these objects are accomplished by attracting 
the eye to two rolls, separated by a deep hollow, in the mem- 
ber d itself. The bold projections of their mouldings entirely 
prevent the attention from being drawn to the joints of the 
masonry, and besides form a simple but beautifully connected 

“group of bars of shadow, which express, in their perfect paral- 
lelism, the absolute levelness of the foundation. 

§ rv. I need hardly give any perspective drawing of an ar- 
rangement which must be perfectly familiar to the reader, as 
occurring under nearly every column of the too numerous 
classical buildings all over Europe. But I may name the base 
of the Bank of England as furnishing a very simple instance 

' of the group, with a square instead of a rounded hollow, both 
forming the base of the wall, and gathering into that of the 
shafts as they occur; while the bases of the pillars of the 
fagade of the British Museum are as good examples as the 
reader can study on » ‘arger scale, 


THE BASE. 279 

8 v. I believe this group of mouldings was first invented 
by the Greeks, and it has never been materially improved, as 
far as its peculiar purpose is concerned ; * the classical at- 
tempts at its variation being the ugliest: one, the using a 
single roll of larger size, as may be seen in the Duke of York’s 
column, which therefore looks as if it stood on a large saus- 
age (the Monument has the same base, but more concealed 
by pedestal decoration) : another, the using two rolls without 
the intermediate cavetto,—a condition hardly less awkward, 
and which may be studied to advantage in the wall and shaft- 
bases of the Athenzum Club-house: and another, the intro- 
duction of what are called fillets between the rolls, as may be 
seen in the pillars of Hanover Chapel, Regent Street, which 
look, in consequence, as if they were standing upon a pile of 
pewter collection plates. But the only successful changes 
have been medieval ; and their nature will be at once under- 
stood by a glance at the varieties given on the opposite page. 
It will be well first to give the buildings in which they occur, 
in order. ' 


. Ca’ Giustiniani, Venice. 
. Byzantine fragment, Venice. 


1. Santa Fosca, Torcello. 
2. North transept, St. Mark’s, 


Venice. 16. St. Mark’s, upper Colonnade, 
3. Nave, Torcello. 17. Ducal Palace, Venice (wins 
4. Nave, Torcello. dows). } 
5. South transept, St. Mark’s. 18. Ca’ Falier, Venice. 
6. Northern portico, upper shafts, | 19, St. Zeno, Verona. 


St. Mark’s. 20. San Stefano, Venice. 
%. Another of the same group. 21. Ducal Palace, Venice(windows}, 
8. Cortile of St. Ambrogio, Milan. | 22. Nave, Salisbury. 
9. Nave shafts, St. Michele, Pavia. | 23. Santa Fosca, Torcello. 
10. Outside wall base, St. Mark’s,| 24. Nave, Lyons Cathedral. 
Venice. 25. Notre Dame, Dijon. 
11. Fondaco de’ Turchi, Venice. 26. Nave, Bourges Cathedral. 
12. Nave, Vienne, France. 27. Nave, Mortain (Normandy), 
18. Fondaco de’ Turchi, Venice. | 28. Nave, Rouen Cathedral. 


* Another most important reason for the peculiar sufficiency and 
value of this base, especially as opposed to the bulging forms of the sin- 
gie or double roll, without the cavetto, has been suggested by the writer 


980) THE STONES OF VENICE. 


§ vi. Highteen out of the twenty-eight varieties are Vene. 
tian, being bases to which I shall have need of future refer: 
ence ; but the interspersed examples, 8, 9, 12, and 19, from 
Milan, Pavia, Vienne (France), and Verona, show the exactly 
correspondent conditions of the Romanesque base at the 
period, throughout the centre of Europe. The last five ex- 
amples show the changes effected by the French Gothic archi- 
tects: the Salisbury base (22) I have only introduced to show 
its dulness and vulgarity beside them ; and 23, from Torcello, 

_for a special reason, in that place. 

§ vu. The reader will observe that the two bases, 8 and 9, 
from the two most important Lombardic churches of Italy, 
St. Ambrogio of Milan and St. Michele of Pavia, mark the 
character of the barburic base founded on pure Roman 
models, sometimes approximating to such models very closely ; 
and the varieties 10, 11, 13,16 are Byzantine types, also 
founded on Roman models. But in the bases 1 to 7 inclus- 
ive, and, still more characteristically, in 23 below, there is 
evidently an original element, a tendency to use the fillet and 
hollow instead of the roll, which is eminently Gothic ; which 
in the base 3 reminds one even of Flamboyant conditions, 
and is excessively remarkable as occurring in Italian work cer- 
tainly not later than the tenth century, taking even the date 
of the last rebuilding of the Duomo of Torcello, though I am 
strongly inclined to consider these bases portions of the orig- 
inal church. And I have therefore put.the base 23 among 
the Gothic group to which it has so strong relationship, 
though, on the last supposition, five centuries older than the 
earliest of the five terminal examples ; and it is still more re- 
markable because it reverses the usual treatment of the lower . 
roll, which is in general a tolerably accurate test of the age of 
a base, in the degree of its projection. Thus, in the ex- 
amples 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, 10, 12, the lower roll is hardly rounded 
at all, and diametrically opposed to the late Gothic conditions, 
24 to 28, in which it advances gradually, like a wave preparing 
of the Essay on the Aisthetics of Gothic Architecture in the British 
Quarterly for August, 1849:—‘*' The Attic base vecedes at the point 
where, if it suffered from superincumbent weight, it would bulge out,” 


THE BASE, 281 


to break, and at last is actually seen curling over with the long: 
backed rush of surf upon the shore. Yet the Torcello base 
resembles these Gothic ones both in expansion beneath and 
in depth of cavetto above. 

§ vit. There can be no question of the ineffable superiority 
of these Gothic bases, in grace of profile, to any ever invented 
by the ancients. But they have all two great faults: They 
seem, in the first place, to have been designed without suffi- 
cient reference to the necessity of their being usually seen 
from above ; their grace of profile cannot be estimated when 
so seen, and their excessive expansion gives them an appear- 
ance of flatness and separation from the shaft, as if they had 
splashed out under its pressure: in the second place their 
cavetto is so deeply cut that it has the appearance of a black 
fissure between the members of the base; and in the Lyons 
_ and Bourges shafts, 24 and 26, it is impossible to conquer the 
idea suggested by it, that the two stones above and below have 
been intended to join close, but that some pebbles have got in 
and kept them from fitting; one is always expecting the 
pebbles to be crushed, aud the shaft to settle into its place 
with a thunder-clap. 

§ 1x. For these reasons, I said that the profile of the pure 
classic base had hardly been materially improved ; but the 
various conditions of it are beautiful or commonplace, in pro- 
portion to the variety of proportion among their lines and the 
delicacy of their curvatures ; that is to say, the expression of 
characters like those of the abstract lines in Plate VIL. 

The five best profiles in Plate X. are 10, 17, 19, 20, 21; 10 
is peculiarly beautiful in the opposition between the bold pro- 
jection of its upper roll, and the delicate leafy curvature of its 
lower ; and this and 21 may be taken as nearly perfect types, 
the one of the steep, the other of the expansive basic profiles. 
The characters of all, however, are so dependent upon their 
place and expression, that it is unfair to judge them thus sepa- 
rately ; and the precision of curvature is a matter of so small 
consequence in general effect, that we need not here pursue 
the subject farther. 

§ x. We have thus far, however, considered only the lines, 


382 THR STONES OF VENICH. 


of moulding in the member X b, whether of wall or shaft base. 
But the reader will remember that in our best shaft base, in 
Hig. XII. (p. 87), certain props or spurs were applied to the 
slope of Xb; but now 
that X b is divitiea into 
these delicate mouldings, 
we cannot conveniently 
apply the spur to its ir- 
regular profile ; we must 
be content to set it against 
the lower roll. Let the 
upper edge of this lower 
roll be the curved line 
here, a, d, e, b, Fig. LIX., 
and ¢ the angle of the 
square plinth projecting 
beneath it. Then the spur, 
applied as we saw in Chap, 
VIL, will be of some such form as the triangle c¢ ed, Fig. 
LIX. 

§ x1. Now it has just been stated that it is of small impor- 
tance whether the abstract lines of the profile of a base mould- — 
ing be fine or not, because we rarely stoop down to look at 
them. But this triangular spur is nearly always seen from 
above, and the eye is drawn to it as one of the most important 
features of the whole base ; therefore it is a point of immediate 
necessity to substitute for its harsh right lines (c d, ¢ e) some 
curve of noble abstract character. 

§ xu. I mentioned, in speaking of the line of the salvia leaf 
at p. 224, that I had marked off the portion of it, 7 y, because © 
I thought it likely to be generally useful to usafterwards ; and 
I promised the reader that as he had built, so he should deco- 
rate his edifice at his own free will. If, therefore, he likes the 
above triangular spur, c d e, by all means let him keep it ; but 
if he be on the whole dissatisfied with it, I may be permitted, 
_ perhaps, to advise him to set to work like a tapestry bee, to cut 
off the little bit of line of salvia leaf w y, and try how he can 
best substitute it for the awkward lines cdce. He may try 


Fia. LIX. 


THE BASE. 283 


it any way that he likes; but if he puts the salvia curvature 
inside the present lines, he will find the spur looks weak, and I 
think he will determine at last on placing it as I have done at 
cd,ce, Fig. LX. (I the reader will be at the pains to trans- 
fer the salvia leaf line with tracing paper, he will find it accu- 
rately used in this figure.) Then I merely add an outer circular 
line to represent the outer swell of the roll against which the 
spur is set, and I put another such spur to the opposite corner 
of the square, and we have the half base, Fig. LX., which is a 
general type of the best Gothic bases in existence, being very 
nearly that of the upper shafts of the Ducal Palace of Venice. 


Fie, LX. 


In those shafts the quadrant a b, or the upper edge of the lower 
roll, is 2 feet 12 inches round, and the base of the spur d e, is 
10 inches ; the line d ¢ being therefore to a b as 10 to 253. In 
Fig. LX. it is as 10 to 24, the measurement being easier and 
the type somewhat more generally representative of the best, 
t. €. broadest, spurs of Italian Gothic. 

§ x1. Now, the reader is to remember, there is nothing 
magical in salvia leaves: the line I take from them happened 
merely to fall conveniently on the page, and might as well 
have been taken from anything else ; it is simply its character 
of gradated curvature which fitsit for our use. On Plate XL, 
opposite, I have given plans of the spurs and quadrants of 


284 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


twelve Italian and three Northern bases; these latter (13), 
from Bourges, (14) from Lyons, (15) from Rouen, are given 
merely to show the Northern disposition to break up bound- 
ing lines, and lose breadth in picturesqueness. These North- 
ern bases look the prettiest in this plate, because this varia- 
tion of the outline is nearly all the ornament they have, 
being cut very rudely ; but the Italian bases above them are 
merely prepared by their simple outlines for far richer decora- 
tion at the next step, as we shall see presently. The Northern 
bases are to be noted also for another grand. error: the pro- 
jection of the roll beyond the square plinth, of which the cor- 
ner is seen, in various degrees of advancement, in the three 
examples. 13 is the base whose profile is No. 26 in Plate X.; 
14 is 24 in the same plate ; and 15 is 28. 

§ xiv. The Italian bases are the following ; all, except 7 and 
10, being Venetian : 1 and 2, upper colonnade, St. Mark’s ; 3, 
Ca’ Falier ; 4, lower colonnade, and 5, transept, St. Mark’s ; 
6, from the Church of St. John and Paul ; 7, from the tomb 
near St. Anastasia, Verona, described above (p. 147); 8 and 
9, Fon daco de’ Turchi, Venice; 10, tomb of Can Mastino 
della Scala, Verona; 11, San Stefano, Venice; 12, Ducal 
Palace, Venice, upper colonnade. The Nos. 3, 8, 9, 11 are the 
bases whose profiles are respectively Nos. 18, 11, 13, and 20 
in Plate X. The flat surfaces of the basic plinths are here 
shaded ; and in the lower corner of the square occupied by 
each quadrant is put, also shaded, the central profile of each 
spur, from its root at the roll of the base to its point ; those 
of Nos. 1 and 2 being conjectural, for their spurs were so rude 
and ugly, that I took no note of their profiles ; but they would 
probably be as here given. As these bases, though here, for 
the sake of comparison, reduced within squares of equal size, 
in reality belong to shafts of very different size, 9 being some 
six or seven inches in diameter, and 6, three or four feet, the 
proportionate size of the roll varies accordingly, being largest, 
as in 9, where the base is smallest, and in 6 and 12 the leaf 
profile is given on a larger scale than the plan, or its character 
could not have been exhibited. 

§ xv. Now, in all. these spurs, the reader will observe, that 


THE BASH. 288 


the narrowest are for the most part the earliest. No. 2, from 
the upper colonnade of St. Mark’s, is the only instance I ever 
saw of the double spur, as transitive between the square and 
octagon plinth ; the truncated form, 1, is also rare and very 
ugly. Nos. 3, 4, 5, 7, and 9 are the general conditions of the 
Byzantine spur ; 8 is a very rare form of plan in Byzantine 
work, but proved to be so by its rude level profile; while 7, 
on the contrary, Byzantine in plan, is eminently Gothic in the 
profile. 9to12 are from formed Gothic buildings, equally 
refined in their profile and plan. 

§ xvi. The character of the profile is indeed much altered 
by the accidental nature of the surface decoration ; but the 
inportance of the broad difference between the raised and flat 
profile will be felt on glancing at the examples 1 to 6 in Plate 
XI. The three upper examples are the Romanesque types, 
which occur as parallels with the Byzantine types, 1 to 3 of 
Plate XI. Their plans would be nearly the same ; but instead 
of resembling flat leaves, they are literally spurs, or claws, as 
high as they are broad; and the third, from St. Michele of 
Pavia, appears to be intended to have its resemblance toa 
claw enforced by the transverse fillet. 1is from St. Ambrogio, 
Milan ; 2 from Vienne, France. The 4th type, Plate XIL, 
almost like the extremity of a man’s foot, is a Byzantine form 
(perhaps worn on the edges), from the nave of St. Mark’s; — 
and the two next show the unity of the two principles, form- 
ing the perfect Italian Gothic types,—5, from tomb of Can 
Signorio della Scala, Verona; 6, from San Stefano, Venice (the 
base 11 of Plate XL, in perspective). The two other bases, 
10 and 12 of Plate XI, are conditions of the same. kind, 
showing the varieties of rise and fall in exquisite modulation ; 
the 10th, a type more frequent at Verona than Venice, in 
which the spur profile overlaps the roll, instead of rising out 
of it, and seems to hold it down, as if it were a ring held by 
sockets. This is a character found both in early and late 
work ; a kind of band, or fillet, appears to hold, and even 
compress, the centre of the roll in the base of one of the crypt 
shafts of St. Peter’s, Oxford, which has also spurs at its 
angles; and long bands flow over the base of the angle 


286 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


shaft of the Ducal Palace of Venice, next the Porta dells 
Carta. 

§ xviz. When the main contours of the base are once deter- 
mined, its decoration is as easy as it is infinite. I have merely 
given, in Plate XIL, three examples to which I shall need to 
refer, hereafter. No. 9 is a very early and curious one ; the 
decoration of the base 6 in Plate XI, representing a leaf 
turned over and flattened down; or, rather, the idea of the 
turned leaf, worked as well as could be imagined on the flat 
contour of the spur. Then 10 is the perfect, but simplest 
possible development of the same idea, from the earliest 
bases of the upper colonnade of the Ducal Palace, that is to 
say, the bases of the sea fagade; and 7 and 8 are its lateral 
profile and transverse section. Finally, 11 and 12 are two of 
the spurs of the later shafts of the same colonnade on the 
Piazzetta side (No. 12 of Plate XL). No. 11 occurs on one 
of these shafts only, and is singularly beautiful. I suspect it 
to be earlier than the other, which is the characteristic base 
of the rest of the series, and already shows the loose, sensual, 
ungoverned character of fifteenth century ornament in the 
dissoluteness of its rolling. 

§ xvm. I merely give these as examples ready to my hand, 
and necessary for future reference ; not as in anywise repre- 
sentative of the variety of the Italian treatment of the general 
contour, far less of the endless caprices of the North. The 
most beautiful base I ever saw, on the whole, is a Byzantine 
one in the Baptistery of St. Mark’s, in which the spur profile 
approximates to that of No. 10 in Plate XL; but it is formed 
ky a cherub, who sweeps downwards on the wing. His two _ 
wings, as they half close, form the upper part of the spur, 
and the rise of it in the front is formed by exactly the action 
of Alichino, swooping on the pitch lake: “quei drizzo, 
volando, suso il petto.” But it requires noble management 
to confine such a fancy within such limits. The greater 
number of the best. bases are formed of leaves; and the 
reader may amuse himself as he will by endless inventions of 
them, from types which he may gather among the weeds at 
the nearest roadside. The value of the vegetable form is es 


THE BASE. 287 


pecially here, as above noted, Chap. XX., § xxx, its capa 
bility of unity with the mass of the base, and of being sug. 
gested by few lines; none but the Northern Gothic archi- 
tects are able to introduce entire animal forms in this posi- 
tion with perfect success. There is a beautiful instance ax 
the north door of the west front of Rouen ; a lizard pausing 
and curling himself round a little in the angle ; one expects 
him the next instant to lash round the shaft and vanish : and 
we may with advantage compare this base with those of 
Renaissance Scuola di San Rocca* at Venice, in which the 
architect, imitating the medizeval bases, which he did not un- 
derstand, has put an elephant, four inches higher, in the same 
position. 

§ xrx. I have not in this chapter spoken at all of the prv- 
files which are given in Northern architecture to the projec- 
tions of the lower members of the base, b and c in Fig. IL, 
nor of the methods in which both these, and the rolls of the 
mouldings in Plate X., are decorated, especially in Roman 
architecture, with superadded chainwork or chasing of vari- 
ous patterns. Of the first I have not spoken, because I shall 
have no occasion to allude to them in the following essay ; 
nor of the second, because I consider them barbarisms. 
Decorated rolls and decorated ogee profiles, such, for in- 
stance, as the base of the Arc de l’Etoile at Paris, are among 
the richest and farthest refinements of decorative appliances ; 
and they ought always to be reserved for jambs, cornices, 
and archivolts : if you begin with them in the base, you have 
no power of refining your decorations as you ascend, and, 
which is still worse, you put your most delicate work on the 
jutting portions of the foundation,—the very portions which 
are most exposed to abrasion. ‘The best expression of a base 
is that of stern endurance,—the look of being able to bear 
roughing ; or, if the whole building is so delicate that no one 


*T have put in Appendix 24, ‘‘ Renaissance Bases,” my memorandum 
written respecting this building on the spot. But the reader had better 
delay referring to it, until we have completed our examination of ori 
ments in shafts and capitals. 


ORS. THE STONES OF VENIOE. 


can be expected to treat even its base with unkindness,* then 
xt least the expression of quiet, prefatory simplicity. The 
angle spur may receive such decoration as we have seen, be- 
cause it is one of the most important features in the whole 
building ; and the eye is always so attracted to it that it can- 
not be in rich architecture left altogether blank ; the eye is 
stayed upon it by its position, but glides, and ought to glide, 
along the basic rolls to take measurement of their length: 
and even with all this added fitness, the ornament of the 
basic spur is best, in the long run, when it is boldest and sim- 
plest. The base above described, § xvu., as the most beau- 
tiful I ever saw, was not for that reason the best I ever saw: 
beautiful in its place, in a quiet corner of a Baptistery sheeted 
with jasper and alabaster, it would have been utterly wrong, 
nay, even offensive, if used in sterner work, or repeated along 
a whole colonnade. The base No. 10 of Plate XII. is the 
richest with which I was ever perfectly satisfied for general 
service ; and the basic spurs of the building which I have 
named as the best Gothic monument in the world (p. 147), 
have no ornament upon them whatever. The adaptation, 
therefore, of rich cornice and roll mouldings to the level and 
ordinary lines of bases, whether of walls or shafts, I hold to 
be one of the worst barbarisms which the Roman and Renais- 
sance architects ever committed ; and that nothing can after- 
wards redeem the effeminacy and vulgarity of the buildings 
in which it prominently takes place. 

§ xx. I have also passed over, without present notice, the 
fantastic bases formed by couchant animals, which sustain 
many Lombardic shafts. The pillars they support have inde- 
pendent bases of the ordinary kind ; and the animal form be- 
neath is less to be considered as a true base (though often 
exquisitely combined with it, as in the shaft on the south. 
west angle of the cathedral of Genoa) than as a piece of sculpt- 
ure, otherwise necessary to the nobility of the building, and 
deriving its value from its special positive fulfilment of ex- 
yressional purposes, with which we have here no concern 


* Appencix 25, ‘‘ Romanist Decoration of Bases,” 


THE WALL VEIL AND SHAFY. 288 


As the embodiment of a wild superstition, and the represen- 
tation of supernatural powers, their appeal to the imagina- 
tion sets at utter defiance all judgment based on ordinary 
canons of law; and the magnificence of their treatment 
atones, in nearly every case, for the extravagance of their 
conceptinn. I should not admit this appeal to the imagina- 
tion, if it had been made by a nation in whom the powers of 
body and mind had been languid ; but by the Lombard, 
strong in all the realities of human life, we need not fear 
being led astray : the visions of a distempered fancy are not 
indeed permitted to replace the truth, or set aside the laws of 
science: but the imagination which is thoroughly under the 
command of the intelligent will,* has a dominion indiscerni- 
ble by science, and illimitable by law; and we may acknowl- 
edge the authority of the Lombardic gryphons in the mere 
splendor of their presence, without thinking idolatry an ex- 
cuse for mechanical misconstruction, or dreading to be called 
upon, in other cases, to admire a systemless architecture, be- 
cause it may happen to have sprung from an irrational relig- 
ton. 


CHAPTER XXVI. 
THE WALL VEIL AND SHAFT, 


81. No subject has been more open ground of dispute 
among architects than the decoration of the wall veil, because 
no decoration appeared naturally to grow out of its construc. 
tion ; nor could any curvatures be given to its surface large 
enough to produce much impression on the eye. It has be- 
come, therefore, a kind of general field for experiments of 
various effects of surface ornament, or has been altogether 
abandoned to the mosaicist and fresco painter. But we may 
perhaps conclude, from what was advanced in the Fifth Chap- 


* In all the wildness of the Lombardic fancy (described in Appendiz 
8), this command of the will over its action is as distinct as it is stern. 
The fancy is, in th2 early work of the nation, visibly diseased ; but 
aever the will, nor the reason. 


Vou, I,—19 


290 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


ter, that there is one kind of decoration which will, indeed 
naturally follow on its construction. For it is perfectly natu- 
ral that the different kinds of stone used in its successive 
courses should be of different colors ; and there are many as- 
sociations and analogies which metaphysically justify the in- 
troduction of horizontal bands of color, or of light and shade. 
They are, in the first place, a kind of expression of the growth 
or age of the wall, like the rings in the wood of a tree; then 
they are a farther symbol of the alternation of light and dark- 
ness, which was above noted as the source of the charm of 
many inferior mouldings: again, they are valuable as an ex- 
pression of horizontal space to the imagination, space of which 
the conception is opposed, and gives more effect by its oppo- 
sition, to the enclosing power of the wall itself (this I spoke 
of as probably the great charm of these horizontal bars to the 
Arabian mind) : and again they are valuable in their sugges- 
tion of the natural courses of rocks, and beds of the earth it- 
self. And to all these powerful imaginative reasons we have 
to add the merely ocular charm of interlineal opposition of 
color ; » charm so great, that all the best colorists, without a 
single exception, depend upon it for the most piquant of their 
pictorial effects, some vigorous mass of alternate stripes or 
bars of color being made central in all their richest arrange- 
ments. The whole system of Tintoret’s great picture of the 
Miracle of St. Mark is poised on the bars of blue, which cross 
the white turban of the executioner. 

§ u. There are, therefore, no ornaments more deeply sug 
gestive in their simplicity than these alternate bars of horizon- 
tal colors ; nor do I know any buildings more noble than those 
of the Pisan Romanesque, in which they are habitually em. ° 
ployed ; and certainly none so graceful, so attractive, so endur. 
ingly delightful in their nobleness. Yet, of this pure and 
graceful ornamentation, Professor Willis says, “‘a practice more 
destructive of architectural grandeur can hardly be conceived :” 
and modern architects have substituted for it the ingenious 
ornament of which the reader has had one specimen above, 
Fig. IIL, p. 72, and with which half the large buildings in 
London are disfigured, or else traversed by mere straight lines, 


THE ‘WALL VEIL AND SHAFT. 29) 


as, for instance, the back of the Bank. The lines on the Bank 
may, perhaps, be considered typical of accounts; but in 
general the walls, if left destitute of them, would have been as 
much fairer than the walls charged with them, as a sheet of 
white paper is than the leaf of a ledger. But that the reader 
may have free liberty of judgment in this matter, I place two 
examples of the old and the Renaissance ornament side by 
side on the opposite page. That on the right is Romanesque, 
from St. Pietro of Pistoja; that on the left, modern English, 
from the Arthur Club-house, St. James’s Street. 

§ m. But why, it will be asked, should the lines which mark 
the division of the stones be wrong when they are chiselled, 
and right when they are marked by color? First, because 
the color separation is anatural one. You build with different , 
kinds of stone, of which, probably, one is more costly than 
another ; which latter, as you cannot construct your building 
of it entirely, you arrange in conspicuous bars. But the chis- 
elling of the stones is a wilful throwing away of time and labor 
in defacing the building: it costs much to hew one of those 
monstrous blocks into shape ; and, when it is done, the build- 
ing is weaker than it was before, by just as much stone as has 
been cut away from its joints. And, secondly, because, as I 
have repeatedly urged, straight lines are ugly things as lines, 
but admirable as limits of colored spaces; and the joints of 
the stones, which are painful in proportion to their regularity, 
if drawn as lines, are perfectly agreeable when marked by 
variations of hue. 

§1v. What is true of the divisions of stone by chiselling, 
is equally true of divisions of bricks by pointing. Nor, of 
course, is the mere horizontal bar the only arrangement in 
which the colors of brickwork or masonry can be gracefully 
disposed. It is rather one which can only be employed with 
advantage when the courses of stone are deep and bold. When 
the masonry is small, it is better to throw its colors into cheq- 
uered patterns. We shall have several interesting examples 
to study in Venice besides the well-known one of the Duca 
Palace. The town of Moulins, in France, is one of the most 
remarkable on this side the Alps for its chequered patterns in 


292 THE STONES OF VENICE, 


bricks. The church of Christchurch, Streatham, lately built 
though spoiled by many grievous errors (the iron work in 
the campanile being the grossest), yet affords the inhabitants 
of the district a means of obtaining some idea of the variety 
of effects which are possible with no other material than 
brick. 

§ v. We have yet to notice another effort of the Renais- 
sance architects to adorn the blank spaces of their walls by 
what is called Rustication. There is sometimes an obscure 
trace of the remains of the imitation of something organic in 
this kind of work. In some of the better French eighteenth 
century buildings it has a distinctly floral character, like a final 
degradation of Flamboyant leafage ; and some of our modern 
English architects appear to have taken the decayed teeth of 
elephants for their type ; but, for the most part, it resembles 
nothing so much as worm casts ; nor these with any precision 
If it did, it would not bring it within the sphere of our prop- 
erly imitative ornamentation. I thought it unnecessary to 
warn the reader that he was not to copy forms of refuse or 
corruption ; and that, while he might legitimately take the 
worm or the reptile for a subject of imitation, he was not to 
study the worm cast or coprolite. 

§ vi. It is, however, I believe, sometimes supposed that rus- 
tication gives an appearance of solidity to foundation stones. 
Not so; at least to any one who knows the look of a hard 
stone. You may, by rustication, make your good marble or 
granite look like wet slime, honeycombed by sand-eels, or like 
half-baked tufo covered with slow exudation of stalactite, or 
like rotten claystone coated with concretions of its own mud ;_ 
but not like the stones of which the hard world is built. Do 
not think that nature rusticates her foundations. Smooth 
sheets of rock, glistening like sea waves, and that ring under 
the hammer like a brazen bell,—that is her preparation for 
first stories. She does rusticate sometimes: crumbly sand- 
stones, with their ripple-marks filled with red mud; dusty 
lime-stones, which the rains wash into labyrinthine cavities ; 
spongy lavas, which the volcano blast drags hither and thither 
into ropy coils and bubbling hollows ;—these she rusticates, 


THE WALL VEIL AND SHAFT. 295 


indeed, when she wants to make oyster-shells and magnesia 
of them; but not when she needs to lay foundations with 
them. ‘Then she seeks the polished surface and iron heart, 
not rough looks and incoherent substance. 

§ vi. Of the richer modes of wall decoration it is impossi- 
ble to institute any general comparison ; they are quite in- 
finite, from mere inlaid geometrical figures up to incrustations 
of elaborate bas-relief. The architect has perhaps more li- 
cense in them, and more power of producing good effect with 
rude design than in any other features of the building ; the 
chequer and hatchet work of the Normans and the rude bas- 
reliefs of the Lombards being almost as satisfactory as the 
delicate panelling and mosaic of the Duomo of Florence. 
But this is to be noted of all good wall ornament, that it re- 
tains the expression of firm and massive substance, and of 
-broad surface, and that architecture instantly declined when 
linear design was substituted for massive, and the sense of 
weight of wall was lost in a wilderness of upright or undulat- 
ing rods. Of the richest and most delicate wall veil decora- 
tion by inlaid work, as practised in Italy from the twelfth to 
the fifteenth century, I have given the reader two characteris- 
tic examples in Plates XX. and XXI. 

§ vir. There are, however, three spaces in which the wal! 
veil, peculiarly limited in shape, was always felt to be fitted 
for surface decoration of the most elaborate. kind ;.and in 
these spaces are found the most majestic instances of its 
treatment, even to late periods. One of these is the spandril 
space, or the filling be- 
tween any two arches, 
commonly of the shape 
a, Fig. LXI. ; the half 
of which, or the flank 
filling of any arch, is a A C 
called a spandril. In Fre. LXL 
Chapter XVIL, on Fill- 

‘ng of Apertures, the reader will find another of these spaces 
noted, called the tympanum, and commonly of the form 8, 
Fig. LXL: and finally, in Chapter XVII, he will find the 


294. THE STONHS OF VENICE. 


third space described, that between an arch and its protecting 
gable, approximating generally to the form c, Fig. LXL 

§ 1x. The methods of treating these spaces might alone fur- 
nish subject for three very interesting essays ; but I shall 
only note the most essential points respecting them. 

(1.) The Spandril. It was observed in Chapter XIL, that 
this portion of the arch load might frequently be lightened 
with great advantage by piercing it with a circle, or with a 
group of circles ; and the roof of the Euston Square railroad 
station was adduced as an example. One of the spandril 
decorations of Bayeux Cathedral is given in the “Seven 
Lamps,” Plate VII. fig. 4. It is little more than one of these 
Euston Square spandrils, with its circles foliated. 

Sometimes the circle is entirely pierced ; at other times it 
is merely suggested by a mosaic or light tracery on the wall 
surface, as in the plate opposite, which is one of the spandrils . 
of the Ducal Palace at Venice. It was evidently intended 
that all the spandrils of this building should be decorated in 
this manner, but only two of them seem to have been com- 
pleted.* 

§ x. The other modes of spandril filling may be broadly 
reduced to four heads. 1. Free figure sculpture, as in the 
Chapter-house of Salisbury, and very superbly along the west 
front of Bourges, the best Gothic spandrils I know. 2. Radi- 
ated foliage, more or less referred to the centre, or to the bot- 
tom of the spandril for its origin ; single figures with expanded 
wings often answering the same purpose. 3. Trefoils; and 4, 
ordinary wall decoration continued into the spandril space, as 
in Plate XIII, above, from St. Pietro at Pistoja, and in West- 
minster Abbey. ‘The Renaissance architects introduced span- . 
dril fillings composed of colossal human figures reclining on 
the sides of the arch, in precarious lassitude ; but these can- 
not come under the head of wall veil decoration. 

§ xr (2.) The Tympanum. It was noted that, in Gothic 
architecture, this is for the most part a detached slab of stone, 
having no constructional relation to the rest of the building. 
The plan of its sculpture is therefore quite arbitrary ; and, as 

* Vide end of Appendix 20, 


THE WALL VEIL AND SHAFT. 295 


it is generally in a conspicuous position, near the eye, and 
above the entrance, it is almost always charged with a series 
of rich figure sculptures, solemn in feeling and consecutive in 
subject. It occupies in Christian sacred edifices very nearly 
the position of the pediment in Greek sculpture. This latter 
is itself a kind of tympanum, and charged with sculpture in 
the same manner. 

§ xu. (3.) The Gable. The same principles apply to it 
which have been noted respecting the spandril, with one more 
of some importance. The chief difficulty in treating a gable 
lies in the excessive sharpness of its upper point. It may, in- 
deed, on its outside apex, receive a finial ; but the meeting 
of the inside lines of its terminal mouldings is necessarily 
both harsh and conspicuous, unless artificially concealed. The 
most beautiful victory I have ever seen obtained over this dif- 
ficulty was by placing a sharp shield, its point, as usual, 
downwards, at the apex of the gable, which exactly reversed 
the offensive lines, yet without actually breaking them ; the 
gable being completed behind the shield. The same thing is 
done in the Northern and Southern Gothic: in the porches of 
Abbeville and the tombs of Verona. 

§ xu. I believe there is little else to be noted of general 
laws of ornament respecting the wall veil. We have next to 
consider its concentration in the shaft. 

Now the principal beauty of a shaft is its perfect proportion 
to its work,—its exact expression of necessary strength. If 
this has been truly attained, it will hardly need, in some cases 
hardly bear, more decoration than is given to it by its own 
rounding and taper curvatures ; for, if we cut ornaments in 
intaglio on its surface, we weaken it; if we leave them in 
relief, we overcharge it, and the sweep of the line from its 
base to its summit, though deduced in Chapter VIIL, from 
necessities of construction, is already one of gradated curva- 
ture, and of high decorative value. 

§ xiv. It is, however, carefully to be noted, that decorations 
are admissible on colossal and on diminutive shafts, which are 
wrong upon those of middle size. For, when the shaft is 
enormous, incisions or sculpture on its sides (unless colossal 


296 THE STONHS OF VENICE. 


also), do not materially interfere with the sweep of its curve, 
nor diminish the efficiency of its sustaining mass. And if it 
be diminutive, its sustaining function is comparatively of so 
small importance, the injurious results of failure so much less, 
and the relative strength and cohesion of its mass so much 
greater, that it may be suffered in the extravagance of orna. 
ment or outline which would be unendurable in a shaft of 
middle size, and impossible in one of colossal. Thus, the 
shafts drawn in Plate XIIL, of the “Seven Lamps,” though 
given as examples of extravagance, are yet pleasing in the gen- 
eral effect of the arcade they support ; being each some six or 
seven feet high. But they would have been monstrous, as 
well as unsafe, if they had been sixty or seventy. 

§ xv. Therefore, to determine the general rule for shaft 
decoration, we must ascertain the proportions representative 
of the mean bulk of shafts: they might easily be calculated 
from a sufficient number of examples, but it may perhaps be 
assumed, for our present general purpose, that the mean 
standard would be of some twenty feet in height, by eight or 
nine in circumference: then this will be the size on which 
decoration is most difficult and dangerous: and shafts become 
more and more fit subjects for decoration, as they rise farther 
above, or fall farther beneath it, until very small and very vast 
shafts will both be found to look blank unless they receive 
some chasing or imagery ; blank, whether they support a chair 
or table on the one side, or sustain a village on the ridge of 
an Egyptian architrave on the other. 

§ xvi. Of the various ornamentation of colossal shafts, there 
are no examples so noble as the Egyptian; these the reader 
can study in Mr. Roberts’ work on Egypt nearly as well, I - 
imagine, as if he were beneath their shadow, one of their chief 
merits, as examples of method, being the perfect decision and 
visibility of their designs at the necessary distance: contrast 
with these the incrustations of bas-relief on the Trajan pillar, 
much interfering with the smooth lines of the shaft, and yet 
themselves untraceable, if not invisible. 

§ xvi. On shafts of middle size, the only ornament which 
has ever been accepted as right, is the Doric fluting, which, 


THE WALL VEIL AND SHAFT. 297 


indeed, gave the effect of a succession of unequal lines of 
shade, but lost much of the repose of the cylindrical gradation. 
The Corinthian fluting, which is a mean multiplication and 
deepening of the Doric, with a square instead of a sharp ridge 
between each hollow, destroyed the serenity of the shaft alto- 
gether, and is always rigid and meagre. Both are, in fact, 
wrong in principle ; they are an elaborate weakening * of the 
shaft, exactly opposed (as above shown) to the ribbed form, 
which is the result of a group of shafts bound together, and 
which is especially beautiful when special service is given to 
each member. 

§ xvuz. On shafts of inferior size, every species of decora- 
tion may be wisely lavished, and in any quantity, so only that 
the form of the shaft be clearly visible. This I hold to be 
absolutely essential, and that barbarism begins wherever the 
sculpture is either so bossy, or so deeply cut, as to break the 
contour of the shaft, or compromise its solidity. Thus, in 
Plate XXI. (Appendix 8), the richly sculptured shaft of the 
lower story has lost its dignity and definite function, and be- 
come a shapeless mass, injurious to the symmetry of the build- 
ing, though of some value as adding to its imaginative and 
fantastic character. Had all the shafts been like it, the facade 
would have been entirely spoiled ; the inlaid pattern, on the 
contrary, which is used on the shortest shaft of the upper 
story, adds to its preciousness without interfering with its 
purpose, and is every way delightful, as are all the inlaid shaft 
ornaments of this noble church (another example of them is 
given in Plate XII. of the “Seven Lamps”). The same rule 
would condemn the Caryatid ; which I entirely agree with Mr. 
Fergusson in thinking (both for this and other reasons) one 
of the chief errors of the Greek schools; and, more decisively 
still, the Renaissance inventions of shaft ornament, almost too 
absurd and too monstrous to be seriously noticed, which con- 
sist in leaving square blocks between the cylinder joints, as in 
the portico of No. 1, Regent Street, and many other buildings 
in London ; or in rusticating portions of the shafts, or wrap- 


* Vide, however, their defence in the Essay above quoted, p. 261. 


298 THE STONES OF VENTIOE. 


ping fleeces about them, as at the entrance of Burlington 
House, in Piccadilly ; or tying drapery round them in knots, 
as in the new buildings above noticed (Chap. 20, § vu.), at 
Paris. But, within the limits thus defined, there is no feature 
capable of richer decoration than the shaft; the most beauti- 
ful examples of all I have seen, are the slender pillars, encrusted 
with arabesques, which flank the portals of the Baptistery and 
Duomo at Pisa, and some others of the Pisan and Lucchese 
churches ; but the varieties of sculpture and inlaying, with 
which the small Romanesque shafts, whether Italian or North- 
ern, are adorned when they occupy important positions, are 
quite endless, and nearly all admirable. Mr. Digby Wyatt 
has given a beautiful example of inlaid work so employed, 
from the cloisters of the Lateran, in his work on early mosaic; 
an example which unites the surface decor..tion of the shaft 
with the adoption of the spiral contour. 
This latter is often all the decoration which 
is needed, and none can be more beautiful ; 
it has been spoken against, like many other 
good and lovely things, because it has been 
too often used in extravagant degrees, like 
the well-known twisting of the pillars in 
Raffaelle’s ‘Beautiful gate.” But that ex- 
travagant condition was a Renaissance bar- 
barism : the old Romanesque builders kept 
their spirals slight and pure ; often, as in the 
example from St. Zeno, in Plate XVIL below, 
giving only half a turn from the base of the 
Fie. LXII. shaft to its head, and nearly always observing 
what I hold to be an imperative law, that no 

twisted shaft shall be single, but composed of at least two 
distinct members, twined with each other. I suppose they 
followed their own right feeling in doing this, and had never 
studied natural shafts ; but the type they might have followed 
was caught by one of the few great painters who were not af- 
fected by the evil influence of the fifteenth century, Benozzo 
Gozzoli, who, in the frescoes of the Ricardi Palace, among 
stems of trees for the most part as vertical as stone shafts, has 


SSL S 


THE CORNICH AND CAPITAL. 299 


suddenly introduced one of the shape given in Fig. LXIL 
Many forest trees present, in their accidental contortions, 
types of most complicated spiral shafts, the plan being origi- 
nally of a grouped shaft rising from several roots; nor, 
indeed, will the reader ever find models for every kind of shaft 
decoration, so graceful or so gorgeous, as he will find in the 
great forest aisle, where the strength of the earth itself seems 
to rise from the roots into the vaulting ; but the.shaft surface, 
barred as it expands with rings of ebony and silver, is fretted 
with traceries of ivy, marbled with purple moss, veined with 
grey lichen, and tesselated, by the rays of the rolling heaven, 
with flitting fancies of blue shadow and burning gold. 


CHAPTER XXVIL 
THE CORNICE AND CAPITAL. 


§ 1. Tuere are no features to which the attention of archi- 
tects has been more laboriously directex., in all ages, than 
these crowning members of the wall and shaft ; and it would 
be vain to endeavor, within any moderate limits, to give the 
reader any idea of the various kinds of admirable decoration 
which have been invented for them. But, in proportion to 
the effort and straining of the fancy, have been the extrava- 
gances into which it has occasionally fallen ; and while it is 
utterly impossible severally to enumerate the instances either 
of its success or its error, it is very possible to note the limits 
of the one and the causes of the other. This is all that we 
shall attempt in the present chapter, tracing first for our- 
selves, as in previous instances, the natural channels by which 
invention is here to be directed or confined, and afterwards 
remarking tae places where, in real practice, it has broken 
bounds. 

§ u. The reader remembers, I hope, the main points respect- 
ing the cornice and capital, established above in the Chapters 
on Construction. Of these I must, however, recapitulate thus 
much :— 

Stones of Venice—Vol. 1.—14 


800 THE STONES Ch VENICE. 


1. That both the cornice and capital are, with reference te 
the slope of their profile or bell, to be divided into two great 
orders; in one of which the ornament is convex, and in the 
other concave. (Ch. VL, § v.) 

2. That the capital, with reference to the method of twist- 
ing the cornice round to construct it, and to unite the circular 
shaft with the square abacus, falls into five general forms, FoR 
resented in Fig. XXII, p. 117. 

3. That the most elaborate capitals were formed by true or 
simple capitals with a common cornice added above their aba- 
cus. (Ch. IX., § xxiv.) 

We have then, in considering decoration, first to observe 
the treatment of the two great orders. of the cornice ; then 
their gathering into the five of the capital; then the addition 
of the secondary cornice to the capital when formed. 

§ m. The two great orders or families of cornice were 
above distinguished in Fig. V., p. 75. ; and it was mentioned 
in the same place that a “third family arose from their com- 
bination. We must deal with the two great opposed zroups 
first. 

They were distinguished in Fig. V. by circular curves drawn 
on opposite sides of the same line. But we now know that 
in these smaller features the circle is usually the least inter- 
esting curve that we can use; and that it will be well, since 
the capital and cornice are both active in their expression, to 
use some of the more abstract natural lines. We will go 
back, therefore, to our old friend the salvia leaf ; and taking 
the same piece of it we had before, x y, Plate VII., we will 
apply it to the cornice line ; first within it, giving the concave 
cornice, then without, giving the convex cornice. In all the — 
figures, a, b, c, d, Plate XV., the dotted line is at the same 
slope, and represents an average profile of the root of cornices 
(a, Fig. V., p. 75) ; the curve of the salvia leaf is applied to it 
in each case, first with its roundest curvature up, then with 
its roundest curvature down ; and we have thus the two varie- 
ties, a and b, of the concave ini. and ¢ and d, of the convex 
family. 

§ iv. These four profiles will represent ali the simple cor: 


THE CORNICE AND CAPITAL. 301 


nices in the world ; represent them, I mean, as central types: 
for in any of the profiles an infinite number of slopes may be 
given to the dotted line of the root (which in these four fig. 
ures is always at the same angle) ; and on each of these innu- 
merable slopes an innumerable variety of curves may be fitted, 
from every leaf in the forest, and every shell on the shore, 
and every movement of the human fingers and fancy ; there- 
fore, if the reader wishes to obtain something like a numerical 
representation of the number of possible and beautiful cornices 
which may be based upon these four types or roots, and among 
which the architect has leave to choose according to the cir- 
cumstances of his building and the method of its composi- 
tion, let him set down a figure 1 to begin with, and write 
cyphers after it as fast as he can, without stopping, for an 
hour, 

§ v. None of the types are, however, found in perfection of 
curvature, except in the best work. Very often cornices are 
worked with circular segments (with a noble, massive effect, 
for instance, in St. Michele of Lucca), or with rude approxi- 
mation to finer curvature, especially a, Plate XV., which. oc- 
curs often so small as to render it useless to take much pains 
upon its curve. It occurs perfectly pure in the condition rep- 
resented by 1 of the series 1—6, in Plate XV., on many of 
the Byzantine and early Gothic buildings of Venice ; in more 
developed form it becomes the profile of the bell of the capital 
in the later Venetian Gothic, and in much of tho best North- 
ern Gothic. It also represents the Corinthian capital, in 
which the curvature is taken from the bell to be added in 
some excess to the nodding leaves. It is the most graceful of 
all simple profiles of cornice and capital. 

§ vi. 6 is a much rarer and less manageable type: for this 
evident reason, that while a is the natural condition of a line 
rooted and strong beneath, but bent out by superincumbent 
weight, or nodding over in freedom, b is yielding at the base 
and rigid at the summit. It has, however, some exquisite 
uses, especially in combination, as the reader may see by 
glancing in advance at the inner line of the profile 14 in Plate 
XY. 


302 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


§ vu. c is the leading convex or Doric type, as a is the lead- 
ing concave or Corinthian. Its relation to the best Greek 
Doric is exactly what the relation of a is to the Corinthian ; 
that is to say, the curvature must be taken from the straighter 
limb of the curve and added to the bolder bend, giving it a 
sudden turn inwards (as in the Corinthian a nod outwards), 
as the reader may see in the capital of the Parthenon in the 
British Museum, where the lower limb of the curve is all but a 
right line.* But these Doric and Corinthian lines are mere 
varieties of the great families which are represented by the 
central lines a and c, including not only the Doric capital, but 
all the small cornices formed by a slight increase of the curve 
ef c, which are of so frequent occurrence in Greek ornaments. 

§ vin. d is the Christian Doric, which I said (Chap. I, § xx.) 
was invented to replace the antique: it is the representative 
of the great Byzantine and Norman families of convex cornice 
and capital, and, next to the profile a, the most important of 
the four, being the best profile for the convex capital, as a is 
for the concave ; a being the best expression of an elastic line 
inserted vertically in the shaft, and d of an elastic line inserted 
horizontally and rising to meet vertical pressure. 

If the reader will glance at the arrangements of boughs of 
trees, he will find them commonly dividing into these two 
families, a and d: they rise out of the trunk and nod from it, 
as a, or they spring with sudden curvature out from it, 
and rise into sympathy with it, as at d ; but they only acci- 
dentally display tendencies to the lines b or c. Boughs which 
fall as they spring from the tree also describe the curve d in 
the plurality of instances, but reversed in arrangement ; their 
junction with the stem being at the top of it, their sprays 
bending out into rounder curvature. 

§ rx. These then being the two primal groups, we have 
next to note the combined group, formed by the concave and 
convex lines joined in various proportions of curvature, so as 
to form together the reversed or ogee curve, represented in 

* Tn very early Doric it was an absolute right line ; and that capita 


is therefore cerived from the pure cornice root, represented by the 
dotted line. 


THE CORNICE AND CAPITAL, 3038 


one of its most beautiful states by the glacier line a, on Plate 
VIL I would rather have taken this line than any other to 
have formed my third group of cornices by, but as it is too 
large, and almost too delicate, we will take instead that of the 
Matterhorn side, ef, Plate VIL. For uniformity’s sake I keep 
the slope of the dotted line the same as in the primal forms; 
and applying this Matterhorn curve in its four relative posi- 
tions to that line, I have the types of the four cornices or 
capitals of the third family, e, f, g, h, on Plate XV. 

These are, however, general types only thus far, that their 
line is composed of one short and one long curve, and that 
they represent the four conditions of treatment of every such 
fine ; namely, the longest curve concave in e and f, and con- 
vex ing and; and the point of contrary flexure set high in 
eand g, and lowin fandh. The relative depth of the arcs, 
or nature of their curvature, cannot be taken into considera- 
tion without a complexity of system which my space does not 
admit. 

Of the four types thus constituted, e and fare of great im- 
portance ; the other two are rarely used, having an appear- 
ance of weakness in consequence of the shortest curve being 
concave: the profiles e and f, when used for cornices, have 
usually a fuller sweep and somewhat greater equality between 
the branches of the curve ; but those here given are better 
representatives of the structure applicable to capitals and cor- 
nices indifferently. 

§ x. Very often, in the farther treatment of the profiles ¢ 
or f, another limb is added to their curve in order to join it to 
the upper or lower members of the cornice or capital. I do 
not consider this addition as forming another ‘amily of cor- 
nices, because the leading and effective part of the curve is in 
these, as in the others, the single ogee ; and the added bend 
is merely a less abrupt termination of it dbove or below : still 
this group 1s of so great importance in the richer kinds of 
ornamentation that we must have it sufficiently represented. 
‘We shall obtain a type of it by merely continuing the line of 
the Matterhorn side, of which before we took only a fragment 
The entire line e to g on Plate VIL, is evidently composed of 


804 THE STONES OF VHNIOR. 


three curves of unequal lengths, which if we call the shortest 
1, the intermediate one 2, and the longest 3, are there arranged 
in the order 1, 3, 2, counting upwards. But evidently we 
might also have had the arrangements 1, 2, 3, and 2, 1, 3, 
giving us three distinct lines, altogether independent of posi- 
tion, which being applied to one general dotted slope will each 
give four cornices, or twelve altogether. Of these the six 
most important are those which have the shortest curve con- 
vex: they are given in light relief from & to p, Plate XV., and, 
by turning the page upside down, the other six will be seen 
in dark relief, only the little upright bits of shadow at the 
bottom are not to be considered as parts of them, being only 
admitted in order to give the complete profile of the more 
important cornices in light. 

§ x1. In these types, as in e and f, the only general condi- 
tion is, that their line shall be composed of three curves of dif. 
ferent lengths and different arrangements (the depth of arcs 
and radius of curvatures being unconsidered). They are ar- 
ranged in three couples, each couple being two positions ot 
the same entire line ; so that numbering the component curves 
in order of magnitude and counting upwards, they will read—~ 


a) 


. . 


_ 
sd 


S 


Oo 
. 


v 


. 


ts o 8 2 we 
oo BD Po ew 
bE bet 09 CO BD DO 
bo 
“ 


rp 


> 


mand n, which are the Matterhorn line, are the most beauti- 
ful and important of all the twelve ; % and J the next ; o and 
pare used only for certain conditions of flower carving on 
the surface. The reverses (dark) of & and J are also of con- 
siderable service ; the other four hardly ever used in good 
work. 

§ xi. If we were to add a fourth curve to the component 
series, we should have forty-eight more cornices: but there 
is nO use in pursuing the system further, as such arrange 


THE CORNICH AND CAPITAL. 305 


ments are very rare and easily resolved into the simpler types 
with certain arbitrary additions fitted to their special place ; 
and, in most cases, distinctly separate from the main curve, as 
in the inner line of No. 14, which is a form of the type e, 
the longest curve, 2.¢., the lowest, having deepest curvature, 
and each limb opposed by a short contrary curve at its ex- 
tremities, the convex limb by a concave, the concave by a 
cc avex. 

§ xm. Such, then, are the great families of profile lines 
into which all cornices and. capitals may be divided ; but their 
best examples unite two such profiles in a mode which we 
cannot understand till we consider the further ornament with 
which the profiles are charged. And in doing this we must; 
for the sake of clearness, consider, first the nature of the de- 
signs themselves, and next the mode of cutting them. 

§ xrv. In Plate XVI, opposite, I have thrown together a 
few of the most characteristic medizeval examples of the treat- 
ment of the simplest cornice profiles: the uppermost, a, is the 
pure root of cornices from St. Mark’s. The second, d, is the 
Christian Doric cornice, here lettered d in order to avoid con- 
fusion, its profile being d of Plate XV. in bold development, 
and here seen on the left-hand side, truly drawn, though filled 
up with the ornament to show the mode in which the angle 
is turned. This is also from St. Mark’s. The third, 0, is 5 
of Plate XV., the pattern being inlaid in black because its 
office was in the interior of St. Mark’s, where it was too dark 
to see sculptured ornament at the required distance. (The 
other two simple profiles, a,and ¢ of Plate XV., would be dec- 
orated in the same manner, but require no example here, for 
the profile a is of so frequent occurrence that it will have a 
page to itself alone in the next volume ; and c may be seen 
over nearly every shop in London, being that of the common 
Greek egg cornice.) The fourth, ein Plate XVI., is a tran- 
sitional cornice, passing from Byzantine into Venetian Gothic : 
f is a fully developed Venetian Gothic cornice founded on 
Byzantine traditions ; and g the perfect Lombardic-Gothic 
cornice, founded on the Pisan Romanesque traditions, and 
strongly marked with the noblest Northern element, the Lom: 

wax, T.—20 


806 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


bardic vitality restrained by classical models. I consider it a 
pertect cornice, and of the highest order. . 

§ xv. Now in the design of this series of ornaments there 
are twa main points to be noted; the first, that they all, ex- 
cept b, are distinctly rooted in the lower part of the cornice, 
and spring to the top. This arrangement is constant in all 
the best cornices and capitals ; and it is essential to the ex- 
pression of the supporting power of both. It is exactly op- 
posed to the system of running cornices and banded * capitals, 
in which the ornament flows along them horizontally, or is 
twined round them, as the mouldings are in the early English 
capital, and the foliage in many decorated ones. Such cor- 
nices have arisen from a mistaken appliance of the running 
ornaments, which are proper to archivolts, jambs, &c., to the 
features which have definite functions of support. A tendril 
may nobly follow the outline of an arch, but must not creep 
along a cornice, nor swathe or bandage a capital; it is essen- 
tial to the expression of these features that their ornament 
should have an elastic and upward spring ; and as the proper 
profile fur the curve is that of a tree bough, as we saw above, 
so the preper arrangement of its farther ornament is that 
which best expresses rooted and ascendant strength like that 
of foliage. 

There are certai.a very interesting exceptions to the rule (we 
shall see a curious one presently) ; and in the carrying out of 
the rule itself, we may see constant licenses taken by the great 
designers, and momentary violations of it, like those above 
spoken of, respecting other ornamental laws—violations which 
are for our refreshment, and for increase of delight in the 
general observance ; and this is one of the peculiar beauties 
of the cornice g, which, rooting itself in strong central clus- 
ters, suffers some of its leaves to fall languidly aside, as the 
drooping outer leaves of a natural cluster do so often ; but at 
the very instant that it does this, in order that it may not 


* The word banded is used by Professor Willis in a different sense ; 
which I would respect, by applying it in his sense always to the Impost, 
and in mine to the capital itself. (This note is not for the genera) 
reader, who need not trouble himself about the matter.) 


THE CORNICE AND CAPITAL. 807 


fose any of its expression of strength, a fruit-stalk is thrown 
up above the languid leaves, absolutely vertical, as much stiffer 
and stronger than the rest of the plant as the falling leaves 
are weaker. Cover this with your finger, and the cornice falls 
to pieces, like a bouquet which has been untied. 

§ xvi. There are some instances in which, though the real 
arrangement is that of a running stem, throwing off leaves up 
and down, the positions of the leaves give nearly as much 
elasticity and organisation to the cornice, as if they had been 
rightly rooted ; and others, like 6, where the reversed portion 
of the ornament is lost in the shade, and the general expres- 
sion of strength is got by the lower member. This cornice 
will, nevertheless, be felt at once to be inferior to the rest; 
and though we may often be called upon to admire designs 
of these kinds, which would have been exquisite if not thus 
misplaced, the reader will find that they are both of rare oc- 
currence, and significative of declining style; while the greater 
mass of the banded capitals are heavy and valueless, mere ag- 
oregations of confused sculpture, swathed round the extremity 
of the shaft, as if she had dipped it into a mass of melted or- 
nament, as the glass-blower does his blow-pipe into the metal, 
and brought up a quantity adhering glutinously to its ex- 
tremity. We have many capitals of this kind in England : 
some of the worst and heaviest in the choir of York. The 
later capitals of the Italian Gothic have the same kind of ef- 
fect, but owing to another cause : for their structure is quite 
pure, and based on the Corinthian type: and it is the branch- 
ing form of the heads of the leaves which destroys the effect 
of their organisation. On the other hand, some of the Italian 
cornices which are actually composed by running tendrils, 
throwing off leaves into oval interstices, are so massive in their 
treatment, and so marked and firm in their vertical and arched 
lines, that they are nearly as suggestive of support as if they 
had been arranged on the rooted system. A cornice of this 
kind is used in St. Michele of Lucca (Plate VI. in the “ Seven 
Lamps,” and XXI. here), and with exquisite propriety ; for 
that cornice is at once a crown to the story beneath it and e 
foundation to that which is above it, and therefore unites the 


808 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


' strength and elasticity of the lines proper to the cornice witt 
the submission and prostration of those proper to the founda- 
tion. . 
' § xvm. This, then, is the first point needing general notics 
in the designs in Plate XVI. The second is the difference 
between the freedom of the Northern and the sophistication 
of the classical cornices, in connection with what has been 
advanced in Appendix 8. The cornices, a, d, and b, are of 
the same date, but they show a singular difference in the 
workman’s temper: that at b isa single copy of a classical 
mosaic; and many carved cornices occur, associated with it, 
which are, in like manner, mere copies of the Greek and 
Roman egg and arrow mouldings. But the cornices a and d 
are copies of nothing of the kind: the idea of them has in- 
deed been taken from the Greek honeysuckle ornament, but 
the chiselling of them is in no wise either Greek, or Byzan- 
tine, in temper. The Byzantines were languid copyists: this 
work is as energetic as its original; energetic, not in the 
quantity of work, but in the spirit of it: an indolent man, 
forced into toil, may cover large spaces with evidence of his 
feeble action, or accumulate his dulness into rich aggregation 
of trouble, but it is gathered weariness still. The man wha 
cut those two uppermost cornices had no time to spare: did 
as much cornice as he could in half an hour; but would not 
endure the slightest trace of error in a curve, or of bluntness 
in an edge. His work is absolutely unreprovable ; keen, and 
true, as Nature’s own; his entire force is in it, and fixed on 
seeing that every line of it shall be sharp and right: the 
faithful energy is in him: we shall see something come of 
that cornice: The fellow who inlaid the other (6), will. stay 
where he is for ever ; aid when he has inlaid one leaf up, 
will inlay another down,—and so undulate up and down to 
all eternity : but the man of a and d will cut his way forward, 
or there is no truth in handicrafts, nor stubbornness in stone. 
§ xvi. But there is something else noticeable in those two 
cornices, besides the energy of them: as opposed either to 8, 
or the Greek honeysuckle or egg patterns, they are natura. 
designs. The Greek egg and arrow cornice is a nonsense 


THE CORNICH AND CAPITAL. 80$ 


cornice, very noble in its lines, but utterly absurd in mean- 
ing. Arrows have had nothing to do with eggs (at least since 
Leda’s time), neither are the so-called arrows like arrows, nor 
the eggs like eggs, nor the honeysuckles like honeysuckles ; 
they are all conventionalised into a monotonous successiveness 
of nothing,—-pleasant to the eye, useless to the thought. But 
those Christian cornices are, as far as may be, suggestive ; 
there is not the tenth of the work in them that there is in the 
Greek arrows, but, as far as that work will go, it has consistent 
intention ; with the fewest possible incisions, and those of the 
easiest shape, they suggest the true image, of clusters of 
leaves, each leaf with its central depression from root to 
point, and that distinctly visible at almost any distance from 
the eye, and in almost any light. 

§ xix. Here, then, are two great new elements visible , 
energy and naturalism :—Life, with submission to the laws of 
God, and love of his works ; this is Christianity, dealing with 
her classical models. Now look back to what 1 said in Chap. 
L § xx. of this dealing of hers, and invention of the new Doric 
line ; then to what is above stated (§ vu.) respecting that new 
Doric, and the boughs of trees; and now to the evidence in 
the cutting of the leaves on the same Doric section, and see 
how the whole is beginning to come together. 

§ xx. We said that something would come of these two 
cornices, a and d. In e and /f we see that something has come 
of them: eis also from St. Mark’s, and one of the earliest 
examples in Venice of the transition from the Byzantine to 
the Gothic cornice. Jt is already singularly developed ; flow- 
ers have been added between the clusters of leaves, and the 
leaves themselves curled over: and observe the well-directed 
thought of the sculptor in this curling ;—the old incisions are 
retained below, and their excessive rigidity is one of’ the 
proofs of the earliness of the cornice ; but those incisions now 
stand for the under surface of the leaf; and behold, when it 
turns over, on the top of it you see true ribs. Look at the 
upper and under surface of a cabbage-leaf, and see what quick 
ateps we are making. 

§ xxi. The fifth example (/') was cut in 1347; it is from 


810 THR STONES OF VENICE. 


the tomb of Marco Giustiniani, in the church of St. John and 
Paul, and it exhibits the character of the central Venetian 
Gothic fully developed. The lines are all now soft and undu- 
latory, though elastic ; the sharp incisions have become deeply- 
gathered folds ; the hollow of the leaf is expressed completely 
beneath, and its edges are touched with light, and incised into 
several lobes, and their ribs delicately drawn above. (The 
flower between is only accidentally absent ; it occurs in most 
cornices of the time.) 

But in both these cornices the reader will notice that while 
the naturalism of the sculpture is steadily on the increase, the 
classical formalism is still retained. The leaves are accurately 
numbered, and sternly set in their places; they are leaves in 
office, and dare not stir nor wave. They have the shapes of 
leaves, but not the functions, “having the form of knowledge, 
but denying the power thereof.” What is the meaning of 
this? . 

§ xxu. Look back to paragraph xxxu. of the first chapter, 
and you will see the meaning of it. These cornices are the 
Venetian Ecclesiastical Gothic ; the Christian element strug- 
gling with the Formalism of the Papacy,—the Papacy being 
entirely heathen in all its principles. That officialism of the 
leaves and their ribs means Apostolic succession, and I don’t 
know how much more, and is already preparing for the transi- 

ion to old Heathenism again, and the Renaissance.* 

§ xxur. Now look to the last cornice (g). That is Protestant- 


* The Renaissance period being one of return to fermalism on the 
one side, of utter licentiousness on the other, so that sometimes, as here, 
I have to declare its lifelessness, at other times (Chap. XXV., § xvi.) 
its lasciviousness. There is, of course, no contradiction in this: but 
the reader might well ask how I knew the change from the base 11 to 
the base 12, in Plate XII., to be one from temperance to luxury ; and 
from the cornice f to the cornice g, in Plate XVI., to be one from form- 
alism to vitality. I know it, both by certain internal evidences, on 
which I shall have to dwell at length hereafter, and by the context of 
the works of the time. But the outward signs might in both ornaments 
be the same, distinguishable only as signs of opposite tendencies by the 
event of both. The blush of shame capnot always be told from the 
blush of indignation. 


THE CORNICE AND CAPITAL. 81) 


ism,---a slight touch of Dissent, hardly amounting to schism, 
in those falling leaves, but true life in the whole of it. The 
forms all broken through, and sent heaven knows where, but 
the root held fast ; and the strong sap in the branches; and, 
best of all, good fruit ripening and opening straight towards 
heaven, and in the face of it, even though some of the leaves 
lie in the dust. 

Now, observe. The cornice f represents Heathenism and 
Papistry, animated by the mingling of Christianity and nature. 
The good in it, the life of it, the veracity and liberty of it, 
such as it has, are Protestantism in its heart ; the rigidity and 
saplessness are the Romanism of it. It is the mind of Fra 
Angelico in the monk’s dress, —Christianity betare the Refor- 
mation. The cornice g has the Lombardic life element in its 
fulness, with only some color and shape of Cilassicalism min- 
gled with it—the good of classicalism ; as much method and 
Formalism as are consistent with life, and fittmg for it: The 
continence within certain border lines, the unity at the root, 
the simplicity of the great profile,—all these are the healthy 
classical elements retained: the rest is reformation, new 
strength, and recovered liberty. 

§ xxiv. There is one more point about it especially notice- 
able. The leaves are thoroughly natural in their general char- 
acter, but they are of no particular species: and after being 
something like cabbage-leaves in the beginning, one of them 
suddenly becomes an ivy-leaf in the end. Now I don’t know 
what to say of this. I know it, indeed, to be a classical char- 
acter ;—it is eminently characteristic of Southern work , and 
markedly distinctive of it from the Northern ornament, which 
would have been oak, or ivy, or apple, but not anything, nor 
two things in one. It is, I repeat, a clearly classical element ; 
but whether a good or bad element, I am not sure ;—whether 
it is the last trace of Centaurism and other monstrosity dying 
away ; or waether it has a figurative purpose, legitimate in 
architecture (though never in painting), and has been rightly 
retained by the Christian sculptor, to express the working of 
that spirit which grafts one nature upon another, and discerag 
a law in its members warring against the law of its mind. 


812 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


§ xxv. These, then, being the points most noticeable in the 
spirit both of the designs and the chiselling, we have now to 
return to the question proposed in § xm, and observe the 
modifications of form of profile which resulted from the 
changing contours of the leafage ; for wp to § xim., we had, as 
usual, considered the possible conditions of form in the ab: 
stract ;—the modes in which they have been derived from 
each other in actual practice require to be followed in their 
turn. How the Greek Doric or Greek ogee cornices were 
invented is not easy to determine, and, fortunately, is little to 
our present purpose ; for the medizeval ogee cornices have an 
independent development of their own, from the first type of 
the concave cornice a in Plate XV. 

§ xxvi. That cornice occurs, in the simplest work, perfectly 
pure, but in finished work it 
was quickly felt that there 
was a@ meagreness in its junc- 
tion with the wall beneath it, 
where it was set as here at a, 

+ Fig. LXUL, which could only 
im =be conquered by concealing 
e such junction in a bar of 

shadow. There were two ‘vays 

of getting this bar: one bya 
projecting roll at the foot of the cornice (b, Fig. LXIIZL), the 
other by slipping the whole cornice a little forward (c. Fig. 
LXIII.). From these two methods arise two groups of cor- 
nices and capitals, which we shall pursue in succession. 

§ xxvu. First group. With the roll at the base (6, Fig. 
LXIIL.). The chain of its succession is represented from it - 
to 6, in Plate XV.: 1 and 2 are the steps already gained, as in 
Fig. LXII. ; and in them the profile of cornice used is a of 
Plate XV., or a refined condition of b of Fig. V., p. 75 above 
Now, keeping the same refined profile, substitute the condition 
of it, fof Fig. V. (and there accounted for), above the roll 
here, and you have 3, Plate XV. This superadded abacus 
was instantly felt to be harsh in its . projecting angle ; but you 
know what to do with an angle when it is harsh. Use your 


THE CORNICE AND CAPITAL, 313 


simplest chamfer on it (a or 0, Fig. LIIL, page 261, above), 
but on the visible side only, and you have fig. 4, Plate XV. 
(the top stone being made deeper that you may have room ‘to 
chamfer it). Now this fig. 4 is the profile of Lombardic and 
Venetian early capitals and cornices, by tens of thousands ; 
and it continues into the late Venetian Gothic, with this only 
difference, that as time advances, the vertical line at the top 
of the original cornice begins to slope outwards, and through 
a series of years rises like the hazel wand in the hand of a 
diviner :—but how slowly! a stone dial which marches but 45 
degrees in three centuries, and through the intermediate con- 
dition 5 arrives at 6, and so stays. 

In tracing this chain I have kept all the profiles of the same 
height in order to make the comparison more easy; the depth 
chosen is about intermediate between that which is customary 
in cornices on the one hand, which are often a little shorter, 
and capitals on the other, which are often a little deeper.* 
And it is to be noted that the profiles 5 and 6 establish them- 
selves in capitals chiefly, while 4 is retained in cornices to the 
latest times. 

§ xxv. Second group (¢, Fig. LXIII.). If the lower angle, 
which was quickly felt to be hard, be rounded off, we have 
the form a, Fig. LXIV. The front of the curved line is then 
ilecorated, as we have seen ; and the termination of the deco- 
rated surface marked by an incision, as in an ordinary cham- 
fer, as at b here. This I believe to have been the simple ori- 


* The reader must always remember that a cornice, in becoming a 
capital, must, if not originally bold and deep, have depth added to its 
profile, in order to reach the just proportion of the lower member of the 
shaft head ; and that therefore the small Greek egg cornices are utterly 
incapable of becoming caritals till they have totally changed their form 
and depth. The Renaissance architects, who never obtained hold of a 
right principle but they made it worse than a wrong one by misapplica- 
tion, caught the idea of turning the cornice into a capital, but did not 
comprehend the necessity of the accompanying change of depth. Hence 
we have pilaster heads formed of small egg cornices, and that meanest 
of all mean heads of shafts, the coarse Roman Doric protile chopped 
into a small egg and arrow moulding, both which may be seen disfiguy 
ing half the buildings in London. 


314 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


gin of most of the Venetian ogee cornices ; but they are farther 
complicated by the curves given to the leafage which flows 
over them. In the ordinary Greek cornices, and in aand d 
of Plate XVL, the decoration is incised from the outside pro- 
file, without any suggestion of an interior surface of a differ- 
ent contour. But in the leaf cornices which follow, the 
decoration is represented as overlaid on one of the early 
profiles, and has another outside contour of its own ; whick 
is, indeed, the true profile of the cornice, but beneath which, 
more or less, the simpler profile is seen or suggested, which 
terminates all the incisions of the chisel. This under pro- 
file will often be found to be some condition of the type a or 
b, Fig. LXIV. ; and the leaf profile to be another ogee with 
its fullest curve up instead of down, lapping over the cornice 
edge above, so that the entire pro- 
file might be considered as made 
up of two ogee curves laid, like 
packed herrings, head to tail. 
Figures 8 and 9 of Plate XV. ex- 
a 3 emplify this arrangement. Fig. 
Ot aie a 7 is a heavier contour, doubtless 
composed in the same manner, 
but of which I had not marked the innermost profile, and 
which I have given here only to complete the series 
which, from 7 to 12 inclusive, exemplifies the gradual restric- 
tion of the leaf outline, from its boldest projection in the 
cornice to its most modest service in the capital. This change, 
however, is not one which indicates difference of age, but 
merely of office and position: the cornice 7 is from the 
tomb of the Doge Andrea Dandolo (1350) in St. Mark’s, 8 
from a canopy over a door of about the same period, 9 from 
the tomb of the Dogaressa Agnese Venier (1411), 10 from that 
of Pietro Cornaro (1361),* and 11 from that of Andrea Moro- 
sini (1347), all in the church of San Giov. and Paola, all there 
being cornice profiles ; and, finally, 12 from a capital of the 
Ducal Palace, of fourteenth century work. 
* T have taken these dates roughly from Selvatico ; their avsolute ae 
puracy to within a year or two, is here of no importance. 


CONCAVE GROUP. 


-—CAPITALS. 


PLATE XVII 


: THE CORNICE AND CAPITAL. 815 


§ xxix. Now the reader will doubtless notice that in the 
three examples, 10 to 12, the leaf has a different contour trom 
that of 7, 8, or 9. This difference is peculiarly significant. I 
have always desired that the reader should theoretically con 
sider the capital as a concentration of the cornice; but in 
practice it.often happens that the cornice is, on the contrary, 
an unrolled capital; and one of the richest early forms of the 
Byzantine cornice (not given in Plate XV., because its sepa- 
rate character and importance require examination apart) is 
nothing more than an unrolled continuation of the lower range 
of acanthus leaves on the Corinthian capital. From this cor- 
nice others appear to have been derived, like e in Plate XVL., 
in which the acanthus outline has become confused with that 
of the honeysuckle, and the rosette of the centre of the Co- 
rinthian capital introduced between them ; and thus their 
forms approach more and more to those derived from the cor- — 
nice itself. Now if the leaf has the contour of 10, 11, or 12, 
Plate XV., the profile is either actually of a capital, or ofa 
cornice derived from a capital ; while, if the leaf have the con- 
tour of 7 or 8, the profile is either actually of a cornice or of 
a capital derived from a cornice. Where the Byzantines use 
the acanthus, the Lombards use the Persepolitan water-leaf ; 
but the connection of the cornices and capitals is exactly the 
same. . 

§ xxx. Thus far, however, we have considered the charac- 
ters of profile which are common to the cornice and capital 
both. We have now to note what farther decorative features 
or peculiarities belong to the capital itself, or result from the 
theoretical gathering of the one into the other. 

Look back to Fig. XXII, p. 117. The five types there 
given, represented the five different methods of concentration 
of the root of cornices, a of Fig. V. Now, as many profiles 
of cornices as were developed in Plate XV. from this cornice 
root, there represented by the dotted slope, so many may be 
applied to each of the five types in Fig. XXIL,—applied sim- 
ply in a and 6, but with farther modifications, necessitated by 
their truncations or spurs, in ¢, d, and e. 

Then, these cornice profiles having been so applied in such 


B16 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


length and slope as is proper for capitals, the farther condition 
comes into effect described in Chapter IX. § xxiv., and any 
one of the cornices in Plate XV. may become the abacus of a 
capital formed out of any other, or out of itself. The infinity 
of forms thus resultant cannot, as may well be supposed, be 
exhibited or catalogued in the space at present permitted to 
us: but the reader, once master of the principle, will easily be 
able to investigate for himself the syntax of all examples that 
may occur to him, and I shall only here, as a kind of exercise, 
put before him a few of those which he will meet with most 
frequently in his Venetian inquiries, or which illustrate points, 
_ not hitherto touched upon, in the disposition of the abacus. 

§ xxxr. In Plate XVIL the capital at the top, on the left 
hand, is the rudest possible gathering of the plain Christian 
Doric cornice, d of Plate XV. The shaft is octagonal, and 
the capital is not cut to fit it, but is square at the base ; and 
the curve of its profile projects on two of its sides more than 
on the other two, so as to make the abacus oblong, in order to 
carry an oblong mass of brickwork, dividing one of the upper 
lights of a Lombard campanile at Milan. The awkward 
stretching of the brickwork, to do what the capital ought to 
have done, is very remarkable. There is here no second su- 
perimposed abacus. 

§ xxx. The figure on the right hand, at the top, shows the 
simple but perfect fulfilment of all the requirements in which 
the first example fails. The mass of brickwork to be carried 
is exactly the same in size and shape ; but instead of being 
trusted toa single shaft, it has two of smaller area (compare 
Chap. VIII, § xmz.), and all the expansion necessary is now 
gracefully attained by their united capitals, hewn out of one’ 
stone. Take the section of these capitals through their angle, 
and nothing can be simpler or purer ; it is composed of 2, in 
Plate XV., used for the capital itself, with ¢ of Fig. LXIIL 
used for the abacus; the reader could hardly have a neater 
little bit of syntax for a first lesson. If the section be taken 
through the side of the bell, the capital profile is the root ot 
cornices, a of Fig. V., with the added roll. This capital is 
somewhat remarkable in having its sides perfectly straight 


THE CORNICH AND CAPITAL. 817 


some slight curvature being usual on so bold a scale ; but it +s 
all the better asa first example, the method of reduction being 
of order d, in Fig. XXIL, p. 117, and with a concave cut, as 
in Fig. XXI., p. 116. These two capitals are from the cloister 
of the duomo of Verona. 

§ xxxmz. The lowermost figure in Plate XVII. represents 
an exquisitely finished example of the same type, from St. 
Zeno of Verona. Above, at 2, in Plate IL, the plan of the 
shafts was given, but J inadvertently reversed their position: 
in comparing that plan with Plate XVII., Plate II must be 
held upside down. The capitals, with the band connecting 
them, are all cut out of one block ; their profile is an adapta- 
tion of 4 of Plate XV., with a plain headstone superimposed. 
This method of reduction is that of order din Fig. XXIT.. 


Fic. LXV. 


but the peculiarity of treatment of their truncation is highly 
interesting. Fig. LXV. represents the plans of the capitals 
at the base, the shaded parts being the bells; the open line, 
the roll with its connecting band. The bell of the one, it will 
be seen, is the exact reverse of that of the other: the angle 
truncations are, in both, curved horizontally as well as up- 
rightly ; but their curve is convex in the one, and in the other 
concave. Plate XVII. will show the effect of both, with the 
farther incisions, to the same depth, on the flank of the one 
with the concave truncation, which join with the rest of its 


818 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


singularly bold and keen execution in giving the impression 
of its rather having been cloven into its form by the sweeps of 
a sword, than by the dull travail of a chisel. Its workman 
was proud of it, as well he might be: he has written his name 
upon its front (I would that more of his fellows had been as 
kindly vain), and the goodly stone proclaims for ever, apa- 
MINUS DE SANCTO GIORGIO ME FECIT. 

§ xxxiv. The reader will easily understand that the grace. 
fulness of this kind of truncation, as he sees it in Plate XVIL, 
soon suggested the idea of reducing it to a vegetable outline, 
and laying four healing leaves, as it were, upon the wounds 
which the sword had made. These four leaves, on the trun- 
cations of the capital, correspond to the four leaves which we 
saw, in iike manner, extend themselves over the spurs of the 
base, and, as they increase in delicacy of execution, form one 
of the most lovely groups of capitals which the Gothic work- 
men ever invented ; represented by two perfect types in the 
capitals of the Piazzetta columns of Venice. But this pure 
group isan isolated one ; it remains in the first simplicity of its 
conception far into the thirteenth century, while around it rise 
up a crowd of other forms, imitative of the old Corinthian, 
and in which other and younger leaves spring up in luxuriant 
growth among the primal four. The varieties of their group- 
ing we shall enumerate hereafter: one general characteristic 
of them all must be noted here, 

§ xxxv. The reader has been told repeatedly * that thera 
are two, and only two, real orders of capitals, originally repre- 
sented by the Corinthian and the Doric ; and distinguished by 
the concave or convex contours of their bells, as shown by the 
dotted lines at e, Fig. V., p. 75. And hitherto, respecting the ° 
capital, we have been exclusively concerned with the methods 
in which these two families of simple contours have gathered 
themselves together, and obtained reconciliation to the abacus 
above, and the shaft below. But the last paragraph introduces 
us to the surface ornament disposed upon these, in the chisel 
ling of which the characters described above, § xxvu., which 


“Chap. I. § x1x., Appendix 7: and Chap. VI. § v. 


THH CORNICE AND CAPITAL. 319 


are but feebly marked in the cornice, boldly distinguished and 
divide the families of the capital. 

§ xxxvi Whatever the nature of the ornament be, it must 
clearly have relief of some kind, and must present projecting 
surfaces separated by incisions. Butit is a very material ques- 
tion whether the contour, hitherto broadly considered as that 
of the entire bell, shall be that of the outside of the project 
ing and relieved ornaments, or of the bottoms of the incisions 
which divide them ; whether, that is to say, we shall first cut 
out the bell of our capital quite smooth, and then cut farther 
into it, with incisions, which shall leave ornamental forms in 
relief, or whether, in originally cutting the contour of the bell, 
we shall leave projecting bits of stone, which we may after- 
wards work into the relieved ornament. 

§ xxxvu. Now, look back to Fig. V., p. 75. Clearly, if to 
ornament the already hollowed profile, b, we cut deep incisions 
into it, we shall so far weaken it at'the top, that it will nearly 
lose all its supporting power. Clearly, also, if to ornament 
the already bulging profile c we were to leave projecting pieces 
of stone outside of it, we should nearly destroy all its relation 
to the original sloping line X, and produce an unseemly and 
ponderous mass, hardly recognizable as a cornice profile. It is 
evident, on the other hand, that we can afford to cut into this 
profile without fear of destroying its strength, and that we can. 
afford to leave projections outside of the other, without fear of 
destroying its lightness. Such is, accordingly, the natural dis- 
position of the sculpture, and the two great families of capitals 
are therefore distinguished, not merely by their concave and 
convex contours, but by the ornamentation being left outside 
the bell of the one, and cut into the bell of the other ; so that, 
in either case, the ornamental portions will fall between the . 
dotted lines at e, Fig. V., and the pointed oval, or vesica piscis, 
which is traced by them, may be called the Limit of ornamen- 
tation. 

§ xxxvi. Several distinctions in the quantity and style of 
the ornament must instantly follow from this great distinction 
in its position. First, in its quantity. For, observe: since in 
the Doric profile, ¢ of Fig. V., the contour itself is to be com: 


& 


320 THE STONES OF VENIOE. 


posed of the surface of the ornamentation, this ornamentation 
must be close and united enough to form, or at least suggest, a 
continuous surface ; it must, therefore, be rich in quantity and 
close in aggregation ; otherwise it will destroy the massy char- 
acter of the profile it adorns, and approximate it to its opposite, 
the concave. On the other hand, the ornament left projecting 
from the concave, must be sparing enough, and dispersed 
enough, to allow the conzave bell to be clearly seen beneath it ; 
otherwise it will choke up the concave profile, and approximate 
it to its opposite, the convex. — 

§ xxxix. And, secondly, in its style. For, clearly, as the 
sculptor of the concave profile must leave masses of rough 
stone prepared for his outer ornament, and cannot finish them 
at once, but must complete the cutting of the smooth bell 
beneath first, and then return to the projecting masses (for if 
he were to finish these latter first, they would assuredly, if 
delicate or sharp, be broken as he worked on ; since, I say, he 
must work in this foreseeing and predetermined method, he is 
sure to reduce the system of his ornaments to some definite 
symmetrical order before he begins) ; and the habit of conceiv- 
ing beforehand all that he has to do, will probably render him 
not only more orderly in its arrangement, but more skilful 
and accurate in its execution, than if he could finish all as he 
worked on. On the other hand, the sculptor of the convex 
profile has its smooth surface laid before him, as a piece of 
paper on which he can sketch at his pleasure ; the incisions he 
makes in it are like touches of a dark pencil; and he is at 
liberty to roam over the surface in perfect freedom, with light 
incisions or with deep ; finishing here, suggesting there, or 
perhaps in places leaving the surface altogether smooth. Itis— 
ten to one, therefore, but that, if he yield to the temptation, 
he becomes irregular in design, and rude in handling ; and we 
shall assuredly find the two families of capitals distinguished, 
the one by its symmetrical, thoroughly organised, and exqui 
sitely executed ornament, the other by its rambling, confused, 
and rudely chiselled ornament : But, on the other hand, while 
we shall often have to admire the disciplined precision of the 
one, and as often to regret the irregular rudeness of the other, 


THH CORNICH AND CAPITAL. 321 


we shall not fail to find balancing qualities in both. The 
severity of the disciplinarian capital represses the power of the 
imagination ; it gradually degenerates into Formalism ; and 
the indolence which cannot escape from its stern demand of 
accurate workmanship, seeks refuge in copyism of established 
forms, and loses itself at last in lifeless mechanism. The license 
of the other, though often abused, permits full exercise to the 
imagination: the mind of the sculptor, unshackled by the 
niceties of chiselling, wanders over its orbed field in endless 
fantasy ; and, when generous as well as powerful, repays the 
liberty which has been granted to it with interest, by develop- 
ing through the utmost wildness and fulness of its thoughts, 
an order as much more noble than the mechanical symmetry 
of the opponent school, as the domain which it regulates is 
vaster. 

§ xt. And now the reader shall judge whether I had not 
reason to cast aside the so-called Five orders of the Renaissance 
architects, with their volutes and fillets, and to tell him that 
there were only two real orders, and that there could never be 
more.* For we now find that these two great and real orders 
are representative of the two great influences which must for 
ever divide the heart of man: the one of Lawful Discipline, 
with its perfection and order, but its danger of degeneracy 
into Formalism ; the other of Lawful Freedom, with its vigor 
and variety, but its danger of degeneracy into Licentiousness. 

§ xu I shall not attempt to give any illustrations here of 
the most elaborate developments of either order ; they will be 
better given on a larger scale: but the examples in Plate 
XVIL and XVIULI. represent the two methods of ornament in 
their earliest appliance. The two lower capitals in Plate 
XVIL are a pure type of the concave school ; the two in the 
centre of Plate XVIII, of the convex. At the top of Plate 
XVUL aretwo Lombardic capitals ; that on the left from Sta. 
Sofia at Padua, that on the right from the cortile of St. Am- 
brogio at Milan. They both have the concave angle truncation ; 
but being of date prior to the time when the idea of the con- 
cave bell was developed, they are otherwise left square, and 

* Chap. I., § xrx. 
Stones of Venice-—Vol. L.—16 


322 THE STONES OF VHNICEH. 


decorated with the surface ornament characteristic of the con. 
vex school. The relation of the designs to each other is m- 
teresting ; the cross being prominent in the centre of each, but 
more richly relieved in that from St. Ambrogio. The two 
beneath are from the southern portico of St. Mark’s ; the 
shafts having been of different lengths, and neither, in all 
probability, originally intended for their present place, they 
have double abaci, of which the uppermost is the cornice run- 
ning round the whole facade. The zigzagged capital is highly 
curious, and in its place very effective and beautiful ; although 
one of the exceptions which it was above noticed that we 
should sometimes find to the law stated in § xv. above. 

§ xru. The lower capital, which is also of the true convex 
school, exhibits one of the conditions of the spurred type, e 
of Fig. XXIL, respecting which one or two points must be 
noticed. 

If we were to take up the plan of the simple spur, repre- 
sented at e in Fig. XXIL, p. 
117, and treat it, with the salvia 
| leaf, as we did the spur of the 
E} base, we should have for the 
head of our capital a plan like 
Fig. LXVI., which is actually 
} that of one of the capitals of the 
Fondaco de’ Turchi at Venice ; 
with this only difference, that 
the intermediate curves between 
| the spurs would have been cir- 
cular: the reason they are not so, 
here, is that the decoration, in- ° 
stead of being confined to the 
spur, is now spread over the whole mass, and contours are 
therefore given to the intermediate curves which fit them for 
this ornament ; the inside shaded space being the head of the 
shaft, and the outer, the abacus. The reader has in Fig, 
LXVI. acharacteristic type of the plans of the spurred capitals, 
generally preferred by the sculptors of the convex school, but 
treated with infinite variety, the spurs often being cut into 


— 


= 
2 
=, 
a 


PuatE XVIII.—Carirats. CoNvExX 


THE CORNICH AND CAPITAL. 323 


animal forms, or the incisions between them multiplied, for 
richer effect ; and in our own Norman capital the type c of 
Fig. XXII. is variously subdivided by incisions on its slope, 
approximating in general effect to many conditions of the real 
spurred type, e, but totally differing from them in principle. 

§ xt. The treatment of the spur in the concave school is 
far more complicated, being borrowed in nearly every case 
from the original Corinthian. Its plan may be generally 
represented by Fig. LXVIL The spur itself is carved into 


Fic. LXVIL : Fie. LXVIII. 


a curling tendril or concave leaf, which supports the project- 
ing angle of a four-sided abacus, whose hollow sides fall back 
behind the bell, and have generally a rosette or other orna- 
ment in their centres. The medizval architects often put 
another square abacus above all, as represented by the shaded 
portion of Fig. LXVIL. and some massy conditions of this 
form, elaborately ornamented, are very beautiful ; but it is 
apt to become rigid and effeminate, as assuredly it is in the 
original Corinthian, which is thoroughly mean and meagre in 
its upper tendrils and abacus. 

§ xuv. The lowest capital in Plate XVIII. is from St. 
Mark’s, and singular in having double spurs ; it is therefore 
to be compared with the doubly spurred base, also from St. 
Mark’s, in Plate XI. In other respects it isa good example 
of the union of breadth of mass with subtlety of curvature, 


824 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


which characterises nearly all the spurred capitals of the com 
vex school. Its plan is given in Fig. LXVIIL: the inner 
shaded circle is the head of the shaft; the white cross, the 
bottom of the capital, which expands itself into the external 
shaded portions at the top. Each spur, thus formed, is cut 
like a ship’s bow, with the Doric profile ; the surfaces so ob 
tained are then charged with arborescent ornament. 

§ xty. I shall not here farther exemplify the conditions of 
the treatment of the spur, because I am afraid of confusing 
the reader’s mind, and diminishing the distinctness of his 
conception of the differences between the two great orders, 
which it has been my principal object to develope through- 
out this chapter. If all my readers lived in London, I could 
at once fix this difference in their minds by a simple, yet 
somewhat curious illustration. In many parts of the west 
end of London, as, for instance, at the corners of Belgrave 
Square, and the north side of Grosvenor Square, the Corin- 
thian capitals of newly-built houses are put into cages of wire. 
The wire cage is the exact form of the typical capital of the 
convex school; the Corinthian capital, within, is a finished 
and highly decorated example of the concave. The space be: 
tween the cage and capital is the limit of ornamentation. 

§ xtv1. Those of my readers, however, to whom this illus 
tration is inaccessible, must be content with the two profiles, 
13 and 14, on Plate XV. If they will glance along the line 
of sections from 1 to 6, they will see that the profile 13 is their 
final development, with a superadded cornice for its abacus. 
It is taken from a capital in a very important ruin of a palace, 
near the Rialto of Venice, and hereafter to be described ; the 


projection, outside of its principal curve, is the profile of its 


superadded leaf ornamentation ; it may be taken as one of the 
simplest, yet a perfect type of the concave group. 

§ xvi. The profile 14 is that of the capital of the main 
shaft of the northern portico of St. Mark’s, the most finished 
example I ever met with of the convex family, to which, in 
spite of the central inward bend of its profile, it is marked as 
distinctly belonging, by the bold convex curve at its root, 
springing from the shaft in the line of the Christian Dorie 


THE CGRNICH AND CAPITAL. 32% 


cornice, and exactly reversing the structure of the other pro: 
file, which rises from the shaft, like a palm leaf from its stem. 
Farther, in the profile 13, the innermost line is that of the 
bell ; but in the profile 14, the outermost line is that of the 
bell, and the inner line is the limit of the incisions of the 
chisel, in undercutting a reticulated veil of ornament, sur- 
rounding a flower like a lily ; most ingeniously, and, I hope, 
justly, conjectured by the Marchese Selvatico to have been 
intended for an imitation of the capitals of the temple of 
Solomon, which Hiram made, with ‘“ nets of checker work, 
and wreaths of chain work for the chapiters that were on the 
top of the pillars . . . and the chapiters that were upon the 
top of the pillars were of lily work in the porch,” (1 Kings, 
vii. 17, 19.) 

§ xtvin. On this exquisite capital there is imposed an 
abacus of the profile with which we began our investigation 
long ago, the profile a of Fig. V. This abacus is formed by 
the cornice already given, a, of Plate XVI: and therefore we 
have, in this lovely Venetian capital, the summary of the re- 
sults of our investigation, from its beginning to its close: the 
type of the first cornice; the decoration of it, in its emer- 
gence from the classical models ; the gathering into the capi- 
tal ; the superimposition of the secondary cornice, and the 
refinement of the bell of the capital by triple curvature in the 
two limits of chiselling. I cannot express the exquisite refine- 
ments of the curves on the small scale of Plate XV. ; I will 
give them more accurately in a larger engraving ; but the 
scale on which they are here given will not prevent the reader 
from perceiving, and let him note it thoughtfully, that the 
outer curve of the noble capital is the one which was our first 
example of associated curves; that I have had no need, 
throughout the whole of our inquiry, to refer to any other 
ornamental line than the three which I at first chose, the sim- 
plest of those which Nature set by chance before me ; and 
that this lily, of the delicate Venetian marble, has but been 
wrought, by the highest human art, into the same line which 
the clouds disclose, when they break from the rough rocks of 
the flank of the Matterhorn. - 


326 YHE STONES OF VENICH. 


CHAPTER XXVIIL 
THE ARCHIVOLT AND APERTURE 


§ i, Iv the windows and doors of some of our best northerv 
Gothic buildings were built up, and the ornament of their 
archivolts concealed, there would often remain little but masses 
of dead wall and unsightly buttress ; the whole vitality of the 
building consisting in the graceful proportions or rich mould- 
ings of its apertures. It is not so in the south, where, fre- 
quently, the aperture is a mere dark spot on the variegated 
wall; but there the column, with its horizontal or curved 
architrave, assumes an importance of another kind, equally 
dependent upon the methods of lintel and archivolt decora- 
tion. These, though in their richness of minor variety they 
defy all exemplification, may be very broadly 
generalized. 

Of the mere lintel, indeed, there is no spe- 
cific decoration, nor can be ; it has no organ- 
ism to direct its ornament, and therefore may 
receive any kind and degree of ornament, ac- 
cording to its position. In a Greek temple, 
it has meagre horizontal lines; in a Roman- 
esque church, it becomes a row of upright 
niches, with an apostle in each; and may 
become anything else at the architect's will. 
But the arch head has a natural organism, 
which separates its ornament into distinct 
families, broadly definable, : 

§ m. In speaking of the arch-line and arch 
masonry, we considered the arch to be cut 
straight through the wall; so that, if half’ 
= built, it would have the appearance at a, 

Fre, LXIX, Fig. LXIX. But in the chapter on Form 

of Apertures, we found that the side of the 

arch, or jamb of the aperture, might often require to be 
bevelled, so as to give the section b, Fig. LXIX. It is easily 


ATION. 


ARCHIVOLT DECOR 


AT VERONA. 


THR ARCHIVOLU AND APERTURE. 32% 


conceivable that when two ranges of voussoirs were used, 
one over another, it would be easier to leave those beneath, 
of a smaller diameter, than to bevel them to accurate junc- 
tion with those outside. Whether influenced by this facility, 
or by decorative instinct, the early northern builders often 
substitute for the bevel the third condition, ¢, of Fig. LXIX.; 
so that, of the three forms in that figure; a belongs Seitveiselly 
to the south, ¢ to the north, and 6 indifferently to both. 

§ m. If the arch in the northern building be very deep, its 
depth will probably be attained by a succession of steps, like 
that in ¢ ; and the richest results of northern archivolt deco- 
ration are entirely based on the aggregation of the ornament 
of these several steps ; while those of the south ‘are only the 
complete finish and perfection of the ornament of one. In 
this ornament of the single arch, the points for general note 
are very few. 

§ rv. It was, in the first instance, derived from the classical 
architrave,* and the early Romanesque arches are nothing but 
such an architrave, bent round. The horizontal lines of the 
latter become semicircular, but their importanco and value re- 
main exactly the same ; their continuity is preserved across all 
the voussoirs, and the joints and functions of the latter are 
studiously concealed. As the builders get accustomed to the 
arch, and love it better, they cease to be ashamed of its struct- - 
ure: the voussoirs begin to show themselves confidently, and 
fight for precedence with the architrave lines; and there is an 
entanglement of the two structures, in consequence, like the cir- 
cular and radiating lines of a cobweb, until at last the architrave 
lines get worsted, and driven away outside of the voussoirs ; be- 
ing permitted to stay at all only on condition of their dressing 
themselves in medieval costume, as in the plate opposite. 

§ v. In other cases, however, before the entire discomfiture 
of the architrave, a treaty of peace is signed between the ad- 
verse parties on these terms: That the architrave shall en- 


* The architrave is properly the horizontal piece of stone laid across 
the tops of the pillars in Greek buildings, and commonly marked with 
horizontal lines, obtained by slight projections of its surface, while it ig 
protected above in the richer orders, by a small cornice, 


828 THE STONES OF VENICR. 


tirely dismiss its inner three meagre lines, and leave the spaca 
of them to the voussoirs, to display themselves after their 
manner ; but that, in return for this concession, the architrave 
shall have leave to expand the small cornice which usually 
terminates it (the reader had better look at the original form 
in that of the Erechtheum, in the middle of the Elgin room 
of the British Museum) into bolder prominence, and even to 
put brackets under it, as if it were a roof cornice, and thus 
mark with a bold shadow the terminal line of the voussoirs. 
This condition is seen in the arch from St. Pietro of Pistoja, 
Plate XIII, above. 

§ vi. If the Gothic spirit of the building be thoroughly de- 
termined, and victorious, the architrave cornice is compelled 
to relinquish its classical form, and take the profile of a Gothic 
cornice or dripstone ; while, in other cases, as in much of the 
Gothic of Verona, it is forced to disappear altogether. But 
the voussoirs then concede, on the other hand, so much of 
their dignity as to receive a running ornament of foliage or 
animals, like a classical frieze, and continuous round the arch. 
In fact, the contest between the adversaries may be seen ruu- 
ning through all the early architecture of Italy: success in- 
clining sometimes to the one, sometimes to the other, and 
various kinds of truce or reconciliation being effected between 
them: sometimes merely formal, sometimes honest and affee-— 
tionate, but with no regular succession in time. The greatest 
victory of the voussoir is to annihilate the cornice, and receive 
an ornament of its own outline, and entirely limited by its own 
joints : and yet this may be seen in the very early apse of Murano, 

§ vn. The most usual condition, however, is that unity of | 
the two members above described, § v., and which may be 
generally represented by the archivolt section a, Fig. LXX. ; 
and from this descend a family of Gothic archivolts of the 
highest importance. For the cornice, thus attached to the 
arch, suffers exactly the same changes as the level cornice, or 
capital ; receives, in due time, its elaborate ogee profile and 
leaf ornaments, like Fig. 8 or 9 of Plate XV. ; and, when the 
shaft loses its shape, and is lost in the later Gothic jamb, the 
archivolt has influence enough to introduce this ogee profile 


THE ARCHIVOLT AND APERTURE. 328 


in the jamb also, through the banded impost: and we im. 
mediately find ourselves involved in deep successions of ogee 
mouldings in sides of doors and windows, which never would 
have been thought of, but for the obstinate resistance of the 
classical architrave to the attempts of the voussoir at its degra- 
dation or banishment. 

§ vi. This, then, will be the first great head under which 
we shall in future find it convenient to arrange a large num- 
ber of archivolt decorations. It is the distinctively Southern 
and Byzantine form, and typically represented by the section 
a, of Fig. LXX.; and it is susceptible of almost every species 
of surface ornament, respecting which only 
this general law may be asserted: that, 
while the outside or vertical surface may 
properly be decorated, and yet the soffit or 
under surface left plain, the soffit is never 
to be decorated, and the outer surface left 
plain. Much beautiful sculpture is, in the 
best Byzantine buildings, half lost by be- 
ing put under soffits ; but the eye is led 
to discover it, and even to demand it, by 
the rich chasing of the outside of the vous- 
soirs. It would have been an hypocrisy to 
carve them externally only. But there 
is not the smallest excuse for carving the soffit, and not the 
outside ; for, in that case, we approach the building under the 
idea of its being perfectly plain ; we do not look for the soffit 
decoration, and, of course, do not see it: or, if we do, it is 
merely to regret that it should not be in a better place. In 
the Renaissance architects, it may, perhaps, for once, be con- 
sidered a merit, that they put their bad decorations systemat- 
ically in the places where we should least expect it, and can 
seldomest see it :—Approaching the Scuola di San Rocco, you 
probably will regret the extreme plainness and barrenness of 
the window traceries ; but, if you will go very close to the 
wall beneath the windows, you may, on sunny days, discover 
a quantity of panel decorations which the ingenious architect 
has concealed under the soffits. 


330 TH’ STONES OF VENIOR. 


The custom of decorating the arch soffit with panelling is 4 
Roman application of the Greek roof ornament, which, what 
ever its intrinsic merit (compare Chap. XXIX. § w.), may 
rationally be applied to waggon vaults, as of St. Peter's, and 
to arch soffits under which one walks. But the Renaissance 
architects had not wit enough to reflect that people usually 
do not walk through windows. 

§ 1x. So far, then, of the Southern archivolt: In Fig. 
LXIX., above, it will be remembered that ¢ represents the 
simplest form of the Northern. In the farther development 
of this, which we have next to consider, the voussoirs, in con- 
sequence of their own negligence or over-confidence, sustain a 
total and irrecoverable defeat. That archivolt is in its earliest 
conditions perfectly pure and undecorated,—the simplest and 
rudest of Gothic forms. Necessarily, when it falls on the 
pier, and meets that. of the opposite arch, the entire section 
of masonry is in the shape of a cross, and is carried by the 
erosslet shaft, which we above stated to be distinctive of 
Northern design. Iam more at a loss to account for the sud- 
den and fixed development of this type of archivolt than for 
any other architectural transition with which I am acquainted. 
But there it is, pure and firmly established, as early as the 
building of St. Michele of Pavia; and we have thenceforward 
only to observe what comes of it. 

§ x. We find it first, as I said, perfectly barren ; cornice 
and architrave altogether ignored, the existence of such things 
practically denied, and a plain, deep-cut recess with a single 
mighty shadow occupying their place. The voussoirs, think- 
ing their great adversary utterly defeated, are at no trouble 
to show themselves ; visible enough in both the upper and — 
under archivolts, they are content to wait the time when, as 
might have been hoped, they should receive a new decoration 
peculiar to themselves. 

§ xt In this state of paralysis, or expectation, their flank is 
turned by an insidious chamfer. The edges of the two great 
blank archivolts are felt to be painfully conspicuous ; all the 
four are at once beaded or chamfered, as at b, Fig. LXX.; a 
rich group of deep lines, running concentrically with the arch, 


THH ARCHIVOLT AND APERTURE. 331 


is the result on the instant, and the fate of the voussoirs is 
sealed. They surrender at once without a struggle, and un- 
conditionally ; the chamfers deepen and multiply themselves, 
cover the soffit, ally themselves with other forms resulting from 
grouped shafts or traceries, and settle into the inextricable 
richness of the fully developed Gothic jamb and arch; farther 
complicated in the end by the addition of niches to their re- 
cesses, as above described. 

§ xu. The voussoirs, in despair, go over to the classical 
camp, in hope of receiving some help or tolerance from their 
former enemies. They receive it indeed: but as traitors 
should, to their own eternal dishonor. They are sharply 
chiselled at the joints, or rusticated, or cut into masks and 
satyrs’ heads, and so set forth and pilloried in the various de- 
testable forms of which the simplest is given above in Plate 
XIII. (on the left): and others may be seen in nearly every 
large building in London, more especially in the bridges ; and, 
as if in pure spite at the treatment they had received from 
the archivolt, they are now not content with vigorously show- 
ing their lateral joints, but shape themselves into right-angled 
steps at their heads, cutting to pieces their limiting line, 
which otherwise would have had sympathy with that of the 
arch, and fitting themselves to their new friend, the Renais- 
sance Ruled Copy-book wall. It had been better they had. 
died ten times over, in their own ancient cause, than thus pro- 
longed their existence. 

§ xm. We bid them farewell in their dishonor, to return 
to our victorious chamfer. It had not, we said, obtained so 
sasy a conquest, unless by the help of certain forms of the 
grouped shaft. The chamfer was quite enough to decorate 
the archivolts, if there were no more than two; but if, as 
above noticed in § ut, the archivolt was very deep, and com- 
posed of a succession of such steps, the multitude of chamfer- 
ings were felt to be weak and insipid, and instead of dealing 
with the outside edges of the archivolts, the group was soft- 
ened by introducing solid shafts in their dark inner angles, 
This, the manliest and best condition of the early northern 
jamb and archivolt, is represented in section at fig. 12 of Plate 


332 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


IL. ; and its simplest aspect in Plate V., from the Broletto of 
Como,—an interesting example, because there the voussoirs 
being in the midst of their above-described southern contest 
with the architrave, were better prepared for the flank at- 
tack upon them by the shaft and chamfer, and make a noble 
resistance, with the help of color, in which even the shaft itself 
gets slightly worsted, and cut across in several places, like 
General Zach’s column at Marengo. 

§ x1v. The shaft, however, rapidly rallies, and brings up its 
own peculiar decorations to its aid; and the intermediate 
archivolts receive running or panelled ornaments, also, until we 
reach the exquisitely rich conditions of our own Norman archi- 
volts, and of the parallel Lombardic designs, such as the en- 
trance of the Duomo, and of San Fermo, at Verona. This 
change, however, occupies little time, and takes place princi- 
pally in doorways, owing to the greater thickness of wall, 
and depth of archivolt ; so that we find the rich shafted sue- 
cession of ornament, in the doorway and window aperture, 
associated with the earliest and rudest double archivolt, in 
the nave arches, at St. Michele of Pavia. The nave arches, 
therefore, are most usually treated by the chamfer, and the 
voussoirs are there defeated much sooner than by the shafted 
arrangements, which they resist,as we saw, in the south by 
color ; and even in the north, though forced out of their own 
shape, they take that of birds’ or monsters’ heads, which for 
some time peck and pinch the rolls of the archivolt to theix 
hearts’ content; while the Norman zigzag ornament allies itself 
with them, each zigzag often restraining itself amicably be- 
tween the joints of each voussoir in the ruder work, and even in . 
the highly finished arches, distinctly presenting a concentric 
or sunlike arrangement of lines ; so much so, as to prompt the 
conjecture, above stated, Chap. XX. § xxv, that all such 
ornaments were intended to be typical of light issuing from 
the orb of the arch. Idoubt the intention, but acknowledge 
the resemblance ; which perhaps goes far to account for the 
never-failing delightfulness of this zigzag decoration. The 
diminution of the zigzag, as it gradually shares the defeat, of 
the voussoir, and is at last overwhelmed by the complicated, 


THE ARCHIVOLT AND APERTURE. 333 


railroad-like fluc::ey of the later Gothic mouldings, is to me 
one of the saddest sights in the draima of architecture. 

§ xv. One farther circumstance is deserving of especial 
note in Plate V., the greater depth of the voussoirs at the top 
of the arch. This has been above alluded to as a feature of 
good construction, Chap. XI. § m1; it is to be noted now as 
one still more valuable in decoration: for when we arrive 
at the deep succession of concentric archivolts, with whick 
northern portals, and many of the associated windows, are 
headed, we immediately find a difficulty in reconciling the 
outer curve with the inner. If, as is sometimes the case, the 
width of the group of archivolts be twice or three times that 
of the inner aperture, the inner arch may be distinctly 
pointed, and the outer one, if drawn with concentric arcs, ap- 
proximate very nearly to a round arch. This is actually tho 
case in the later Gothic of Verona; the outer line of the 
archivolt having a hardly perceptible point, and every inner 
arch of course forming the point more distinctly, till the in- 
nermost becomes a lancet. By far the nobler method, how- 
ever, is that of the pure early Italian Gothic; to make every 
outer arch a magnified fac-simile of the innermost one, every 
arc including the same number of degrees, but degrees of a 
larger circle. The result is the condition represented in 
Plate V., often found in far bolder development ; exquisitely 
springy and elastic in its expression, and entirely free from 
the heaviness and monotony of the deep northern archivolts, 

§ xvi. We have not spoken of the intermediate form, b, of 
Fig. LXIX. (which its convenience for admission of light has 
rendered common in nearly all architectures), because it has 
no transitions peculiar to itself: in the north it sometimes 
shares the fate of the outer architrave, and is channelled into 
longitudinal mouldings ; sometimes remainssmooth and massy, 
as in military architecture, or in the simpler forms of domestic 
and ecclesiastical. In Italy it receives surface decoration like 
the architrave, but has, perhaps, something of peculiar expres- 
sion in being placed between the tracery of the window within, 
and its shafts and tabernacle work without, as in the Duoma 
of Florence: in this position it is always kept smooth in sur 


334 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


face, and inlaid (or painted) with delicate arabesques ; while 
the tracery and the tabernacle work are richly sculptured. 
The example of its treatment by colored voussoirs, given in 
Plate XIX., may be useful to the reader as a kind of central 
expression of the aperture decoration of the pure Italian 
Gothic ;—aperture decoration proper ; applying no shaft work 
to the jambs, but leaving the bevelled opening unenriched ; 
asing on the outer archivolt the voussoirs and concentric 
architrave in reconcilement (the latter having, however, some 
connection with the Norman zigzag) ; and beneath them, the 
pure Italian two-pieced and mid-cusped arch, with rich cusp 
decoration. {t is a Veronese arch, probably of the thirteenth 
century, and fnished with extreme care ; the red portions are 
all in brick, del-cately cast: and the most remarkable feature 
of the whole is the small piece of brick inlaid on the angle of 
each stone voussoir, with a most just feeling, which every 
artist will at once understand, that the color ought not to be 
let go all at once. 

§ xvu. We have traced the various conditions of treatment 
in the archivolt alone ; but, except in what has been said of 
the peculiar expression of the voussoirs, we might throughout 
have spoken in the same terms of the jamb. Even a parallel 
to the expression of the voussoir may be found in the Lom- 
bardic and Norman divisions of the shafts, by zigzags and 
other transverse ornamentation, which in the end are all swept 
away by the canaliculated mouldings. Then, in the recesses 
of these and of the archivolts alike, the niche and statue deco- 
ration develops itself ; and the vaulted and cavernous apertures 
are covered with incrustations of fretwork, and with every 
various application of foliage to their fantastic mouldings. 

§ xvur. I have kept, the inquiry into the proper ornament 
of the archivolt wholly free from all confusion with the ques- 
tions of beauty in tracery ; for, in fact, all tracery is a mere 
multiplication and entanglement of small archivolts, and its 
cusp ornament is a minor condition of that proper to the span- 
dril. It does not reach its completely defined form until the 
jamb and archivolt have been divided into longitudinal mould- 
ings ; and then the tracery is formed by the innermost group 


Trt ROOF. 835 


of the shafts or fillets, bent into whatever forms or foliations 
the designer may choose ; but this with a delicacy of adapta- 
tion which I rather choose to illustrate by particular examples, 
of which we shall meet with many in the course of our inquiry, 
than to delay the reader by specifying here. As for the con- 
ditions of beauty in the disposition of the tracery bars, I see 
no hope of dealing with the subject fairly but by devoting, if 
Ican find time, a separate essay to it—which, in itself, need 
not be long, but would involve, before it could be completed, 
the examination of the whole mass of materials lately collected 
by the indefatigable industry of the English architects who 
- have devoted their special attention to this subject, and which 
are of the highest value as illustrating the chronological suc- 
cession or mechanical structure of tracery, but which, in most 
cases, touch on their esthetic merits incidentally only. Of 
works of this kind, by far the best I have met with is Mr. » 
Edmund Sharpe’s, on Decorated Windows, which seems to 
me, as far as a cursory glance can enable me to judge, to ex- 
haust the subject as respects English Gothic ; and which may 
be recommended to the readers who are interested of the 
subject, as containing a clear and masterly enunciation of the 
general principles by which the design of tracery has been 
regulated, from its first development to its final degradation. 


CHAPTER XXIX. 
THE ROOF. 


§ 1. THe modes of decoration hitherto considered, have 
been common to the exteriors and interiors of all noble build- 
ings; and we have taken no notice of the various kinds of 
ornament which require protection from weather, and are 
necessarily confined to interior work. But in the case of the 
roof, the exterior and interior treatments become, as we saw 
in construction, so also in decoration, separated by broad and 
bold distinctions. One side of a wall is, in most cases, the 
same as another, and if its structure be concealed, it is mostly 


336 THE STONES OF VENICK. 


on the inside ; but, in the roof, the anatomical structure, out 
of which decoration should naturally spring, is visible, if at 
all, in the interior only : so that the subject of internal orna- 
ment becomes both wide and important, and that of external, 
comparatively subordinate. 

§ u. Now, so long as we were concerned principally with 
the outside of buildings, we might with safety leave expres- 
sional character out of the question for the time, because it is 
not to be expected that all persons who pass the building, or 
see it from a distance, shall be in the temper which the build- 
ing is properly intended to induce ; so that ornaments some- 
what at variance with this temper may often be employed 
externally without painful effect. But these ornaments would 
be inadmissible in the interior, for those who enter will for the 
most part either be in the proper temper which the building 
requires, or desirous of acquiring it. (The distinction is not 
rigidly observed by the medieval builders, and grotesqiaes, or 
profane subjects, occur in the interior of churches, in bosses, 
crockets, capitals, brackets, and such other portions of minor 
ornament : but we do not find the interior wall covered with 
hunting and battle pieces, as often the Lombardic exteriors.) 
And thus the interior expression of the roof or ceiling becomes 
necessarily so various, and the kind and degree of fitting dec- 
oration so dependent upon particular circumstances, that it is 
nearly impossible to classify its methods, or limit its applica 
tion. . 

§ ut. I have little, therefore, to say here, and that touching 
rather the omission than the selection of decoration, as far as 
regards interior roofing. Whether of timber or stone, roofs 
are necessarily divided into surfaces, and ribs or beams ;— .- 
surfaces, flat or carved ; ribs, traversing these in the direc- 
tions where main strength is required ; or beams, filling the 
hollow of the dark gable with the intricate roof-tree, or sup- 
porting the flat ceiling. Wherever the ribs and beams are 
simply and unaffectedly arranged, there is no difficulty about 
decoration ; the beams may be carved, the ribs moulded, and 
the eye is satisfied at once ; but when the vaulting is unribbed, 
as in plain waggon vaults and much excellent early Gothic, of 


THE ROOF. B57 


when the ceiling is flat, it becomes a difficult question how 
far their services may receive ornamentation independent of 
their structure. .I have never myself seen a flat ceiling satis- 
factorily decorated, except by painting: there is much good 
and fanciful panelling in old English domestic architecture, 
but it always is in some degree meaningless and mean. The 
flat ceilings of Venice, as in the Scuola di San Rocco and 
Ducal Palace, have in their vast panellings some of the noblest 
paintings (on stretched canvas) which the world possesses : 
and this is all very well for the ceiling ; but one would rather 
- have the painting in a better place, especially when the rain 
soaks through its canvas, as I have seen it doing through 
many a noble Tintoret. On the whole, flat ceilings are as 
much to be avoided as possible ; and, when necessary, per- 
haps a panelled ornamentation with rich colored patterns is 
the most satisfying, and loses least of valuable labor. - But I 
leave the question to the reader’s thought, being myself ex- 
ceedingly undecided respecting it: except only touching one 
point—that a blank ceiling is not to be redeemed by a deco- 
rated ventilator. 

§ tv. I have a more confirmed opinion, however, respecting 
the decoration of curved surfaces. The majesty of a roof is 
never, I think, so great, as when the eye can pass undisturbed 
over the course of all its curvatures, and trace the dying of the 
shadows along its smooth and sweeping vaults. And I would 
rather, myself, have a plain ridged Gothic vault, with all its 
rough stones visible, to keep the sleet and wind out of a cathe- 
dral aisle, than all the fanning and pendanting and foliation 
that ever bewildered Tudor wight. But mosaic or frescy 
may of course be used as far as we can afford or obtain them ; 
for these do not break the curvature. Perhaps the most 
solemn roofs in the world are the apse conchas of the Roman- 
esque basilicas, with their golden ground and severe figures. 
Exactly opposed to these are the decorations which disturb the 
serenity of the curve without giving it interest, like the vulgar 
panelling of St. Peter's and the Pantheon ; both, I think, in 
the last degree detestable. 

§ v. As roofs internally may be divided into saint and 


838 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


ribs, externally they may be divided into surfaces, and points 
or ridges ; these latter often receiving very bold and distine- 
tive ornament. The outside surface is of small importance in 
central Europe, being almost universally low in slope, and 
tiled throughout Spain, South France, and North Italy : of 
still less importance where it is flat, as a terrace ; as often in 
South Italy and the East, mingled with low domes: but the 
larger Eastern and Arabian domes become elaborate in orna- 
mentation : I cannot speak of them with confidence ; to the 
mind of an inhabitant of the north, a roof is a guard against 
wild weather ; not a surface which is forever to bask in serene - 
heat, and gleam across deserts like arising moon. I can only 
say, that I have never seen any drawing of a richly decorated 
Eastern dome that made me desire to see the original. 

§ vr. Our own northern roof decoration is necessarily sim- 
ple. Colored tiles are used in some cases with quaint effect ; 
but I believe the dignity of the building is always greater 
when the roof is kept in an undisturbed mass, opposing itself 
to the variegation and richness of the walls. The Italian 
round tile is itself decoration enough, a deep and rich fluting, 
which all artists delight in ; this, however, is fitted exclusively 
for low pitch of roofs. On steep domestic roofs, there is no 
ornament better than may be obtained by merely rounding, 
or cutting to an angle, the lower extremities of the flat tiles 
or shingles, as in Switzerland: thus the whole surface is 
covered with an appearance of scales, a fish-like defence 
against water, at once perfectly simple, natural, and effective 
at any. distance ; and the best decoration of sloping stone 
roofs, as of spires, is a mere copy of this scale armor ; it en- 
riches every one of the spires and pinnacles of the cathedral 
of Coutances, and of many Norman and early Gothic build- 
ings. Roofs covered or edged with lead have often patterns 
designed upon the lead, gilded and relieved with some dark 
colur, as on the house of Jaques Coeur at Bourges; and I 
imagine the effect of this must have been singularly delicate 
and beautiful, but only traces of it now remain. The north- 
ern roofs, however, generally stand in little need of surface 
decoration, the eye being drawn to the fantastic ranges of 


THE ROOF. 389 


their dormer windows, and to the finials and fringes on their 
points and ridges. 

§ vu. Whether dormer windows are legitimately to be 
classed as decorative features, seems to me to admit of doubt. 
The northern spire system is evidently a mere elevation and 
exaggeration of the domestic turret with its look-out windows, 
and one can hardly part with the grotesque lines of the projec- 
tions, though nobody is to be expected to live in the spire: 
but, at all events, such windows are never to be allowed in 
places visibly inaccessible, or on less than a natural and ser- 
viceable scale. 

§ vit. Under the general head of roof-ridge and point 
decoration, we may include, as above noted, the entire race 
of fringes, finials, and crockets. As there is no use in any of 
these things, and as they are visible additions and parasitical 
portions of the structure, more caution is required in their use 
than in any other features of ornament, and the architect and 
spectator must both be in felicitous humor before they can be 
well designed or thoroughly enjoyed. They are generally 
most admirable where the grotesque Northern spirit has most 
power ; and I think there is almost always a certain spirit of 
playfulness in them, adverse to the grandest architectural 
effects, or at least to be kept in severe subordination to the 
serener character of the prevalent lines. But as they are op- 
posed to the seriousness of majesty on the one hand, so they 
are to the weight of dulness on the other ; andI know not any 
features which make the contrast between continental domestic 
architecture, and our own, more humiliatingly felt, or which 
give so sudden a feeling of new life and delight, when we pass 
from the streets of London to those of Abbeville or Rouen, as 
the quaint points and pinnacles of the roof gables and turrets. 
The commonest and heaviest roof may be redeemed by a spike 
at the end of it, if it is set on with any spirit ; but the foreign 
builders have (or had, at least) a peculiar feeling in this, and 
gave animation to the whole roof by the fringe of its back, 
and the spike on its forehead, so that all goes together, like 
the dorsal fins and spines of a fish ; but our spikes have a dull, 
screwed on, look ; a far-off relationship to the nuts of machin 


840 THE STONES OF VANICE. 


ery ; and our roof fringes are sure to look like fenders, as if 
they were meant to catch ashes out of the London smoke- 
clouds. 

§ rx. Stone finials and crockets are, I think, to be considered 
in architecture, what points and flashes of light are in the 
color of painting, or of nature. There are some landscapes 
whose best character is sparkling, and there is a possibility of 
repose in the midst of brilliancy, or embracing it,—as on the 
fields of summer sea, or summer land : 


‘¢Calm, and deep peace, on this high wold, 
And on the dews that drench the furze, 
And on the silvery gossamers, 

That twinkle into green and gold.” 


And there are colorists who can keep their quiet in the midst 
of a jewellery of light; but, for the most part, it is better to 
avoid breaking up either lines or masses by too many points, 
and to make the few points used exceedingly precious. So 
the best crockets and finials are set, like stars, along the lines, 
and at the points, which they adorn, with considerable inter- 
vals between them, and exquisite delicacy and fancy of sculpt- 
ure in their own designs; if very small, they may become 
more frequent, and describe lines by a chain of points ;; but 
their whole value is lost if they are gathered into bunches or 
clustered into tassels and knots ; and an over-indulgence in 
them always marks lowness of school. In Venice, the addi- 
tion of the finial to the arch-head is the first sign of degrada- 
tion ; all her best architecture is entirely without either crock« 
ets or finials ; and her ecclesiastical architecture may be classed, ~ 
with fearless accuracy, as better or worse, in proportion to the 
diminution or expansion of the crocket. The absolutely per- 
fect use of the crocket is found, I think, in the tower of Giotto, 
and in some other buildings of the Pisan school. In the North 
they generally err on one side or other, and are either florid 
and huge, or mean in outline, looking as if they had been 
pinched out of the stone-work, as throughout the entire cathe. 
dral of Amiens ; and are besides connected with the generally 


THE VESTIBULE. 341 


spotty system which has been spoken of under the head of 
archivolt decoration. 

§ x. Employed, however, in moderation, they are among the 
most delightful means of delicate expression ; and the archi- 
tect has more liberty in their individual treatment than in any 
other feature of the building. Separated entirely from the 
structural system, they are subjected to no shadow of any 
other laws than those of grace and chastity ; and the fancy 
may range without rebuke, for materials of their design, 
through the whole field of the visible or imaginable creation. 


CHAPTER XXX. 
THE VESTIBULE. 


§1. I navz hardly kept my promise. The reader has deco- 
rated but little for himself as yet ; but I have not, at least, 
attempted to bias hisjudgment. Of the simple forms of deco- 
ration which have been set before him, he has always been 
left free to choose ; and the stated restrictions in the methods 
of applying them have been only those which followed on the 
necessities of construction previously determined. These hay- 
ing been now defined, I do indeed leave my reader free to 
build ; and with what a freedom! All the lovely forms of the 
universe set before him, whence to choose, and all the lovely 
lines that bound their substance or guide their motion ; and 
of all these lines, —- and there are myriads of myriads in every 
bank of grass and every tuft of forest ; and groups of them 
divinely harmonized, in the bell of every flower, and in every 
several member of bird and beast,—of all these lines, for the 
principal forms of the most important members of architect- 
ure, I have ased but Three! What, therefore, must be the 
infinity of the treasure in them all! There is material enough 
in a single flower for the ornament of a score of cathedrals, 
but suppose we were satisfied with less exhaustive appliance, 
and built a score of cathedrals, each to illustrate a single 
flower? that would be better than trying to invent new 


842 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


styles, I think. There is quite difference of style enough, be: 
tween a violet and a harebell, for all reasonable purposes. 

' §u. Perhaps, however, even more strange than the strug: 
gle of our architects to invent new styles, is the way they com- 
monly speak of this treasure of natural infinity. Let us take 
our patience to us for an instant, and hear one of them, not 
among the least intelligent :— 


“Tt is not true that all natural forms are beautiful. We 
may hardly be able to detect this in Nature herself ; but when 
the forms are separated from the things, and exhibited alone 
(by sculpture or carving), we then see that they are not ali 
fitted for ornamental purposes ; and indeed that very few, per- 
haps none, are so fitted without correction. Yes, I say cor- 
rection, for though it is the highest aim of every art to imitate 
nature, this is not to be done by imitating any natural form, 
but by criticising and correcting it,—criticising it by Nature’s 
rules gathered from all her works, but never completely car- 
ried out by her in any one work ; correcting it, by rendering 
it more natural, 7. e. more conformable to the general tendency 
of Nature, according to that noble maxim recorded of Raffaelle, 
‘that. the artist's object was to make things not as Nature 
makes them, but as she woutp make them ;’ as she ever trieg 
to make them, but never succeeds, though her aim may be de- 
duced from a comparison of her efforts ; just as if a number 
of archers had aimed unsuccessfully at a mark upon a wall, 
and this mark were then removed, we could by. the examina- 
tion of their arrow marks point out the most probable position 
of the spot aimed at, with a certainty of being nearer to it than 
any of their shots.” * 


§ um. I had thought that, by this time, we had done with 
that stale, second-hand, one-sided, and misunderstood saying - 
of Raffaelle’s; or that at least, in these days of purer Christian 
light, men might have begun to get some insight into the 
meaning of it: Raffaelle was a painter of humanity, and as- 
suredly there is something the matter with humanity, a few 
dovrebbe’s, more or less, wanting in it. We have most of us 
heard of original sin, and may perhaps, in our modest moments, 
conjecture that we are not quite what God, or nature, would 


* Garbett on Design, p. 74. 


tHH VESTIBULE. 343 


have us tobe. Ratffaelle had something to mend in Humanity : 
lshould have liked to have seen him mending a daisy !-—or a 
pease-blossom, or a moth, or a mustard seed, or any other of 
God’s slightest works. If he had accomplished that, one 
might have found for him more respectable employment,— 
to set the stars in better order, perhaps (they seem grievously 
scattered as they are, and to be of all manner of shapes and 
sizes, —except the ideal shape, and the proper size) ; or to give 
us a corrected view of the ocean ; that, at least, seems a very 
irregular and improveable thing; the very fishermen do not 
know, this day, how far it will reach, driven up before the 
west wind :—perhaps Some One else does, but that is not our 
business. Let us go down and stand by the beach of it,—of 
the great irregular sea, and count whether the thunder of it is 
not out of time. One,—two :—here comes a well-formed wave 
at last, trembling a little at the top, but, on the whole, orderly. 
So, crash among the shingle, and up as far as this grey pebble ; 
now stand byand watch! Another :—A<Ah, careless wave ! why 
couldn’t you have kept your crest on ? it is all gone away into 
spray, striking up against the cliffs there—I thought as much 
—umissed the mark by a couple of feet ! Another :—How now, 
impatient one! couldn’t you have waited till your friend's re- 
flux was done with, instead of rolling yourself up with it in 
that unseemly manner? You go for nothing. A fourth, and 
a goodly one at last. What think we of yonder slow rise, and 
crystalline hollow, without a flaw? Steady, good wave; not 
so fast ; not so fast ; where are you coming to ?—By our archi 
tectural word, this is too bad ; two yards over the mark, and 
ever so much of you in our face besides ; and a wave wuich we 
had some hope of, behind there, broken all to pieces out at sea, 
and laying a great white table-cloth of foam all the way to the 
shore, as if the marine gods were to dine off it! Alas, for 
these unhappy arrow shots of Nature ; she will never hit her 
mark with tlose unruly waves of hers, nor get one of them 
into the ideal shape, if we wait for a thousand years. Let us 
send for a Greek architect to do it for her. He comes—the 
great Greek architect, with measure and rule. Will he not 
also make the weight for the winds? and weigh out the waters 


344 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


by measure ? and make a decree for the rain, and a way for the 
lightning of the thunder? He sets himself orderly to his work, 
and behold! this is the mark of nature, and this is the thing 
into which the great Greek architect improves the sea— 


@dAarra, Od\arra: Was it this, then, that they wept to see 
from the sacred mountain—those wearied ones ? 

‘§ 1v. But the sea was meant to be irregular! Yes, and 
were not also the leaves, and the blades of grass; and, ina 
sort, as far as may be without mark of sin, even the counte- 
nance of man? Or would it be pleasanter and better to have 
us all alike, and numbered on our foreheads, that we might 
be known one from the other? 

§ v. Is there, then, nothing to be done by man’s art? Have 
we only to copy, and again copy, for ever, the imagery of the 
universe? Not so, We have work to do upon it; there is 
not any one of us so simple, nor so feeble, but he has work to 
do upon it. But the work is not to improve, but to explain. 
This infinite universe is unfathomable, inconceivable, in ita 
whole ; every human creature must slowly spell out, and long 
contemplate, such part of it as may be possible for him to 
reach ; then set forth what he has learned of it for those be- 
neath him ; extricating it from infinity, as one gathers a 
violet out of grass; one does not improve either violet or 
grass in gathering it, but one makes the flower visible; and. 
then the human being has to make its power upon his own 
heart visible also, and to give it the honor of the good 
thoughts it has raised up in him, and to write upon it the 
history of his own soul. And sometimes he may be able to 
do more than this, and to set it in strange lights, and display 
it in a thousand ways before unknown: ways specially di- 
rected to necessary and noble purposes, for which he had te 
choose instruments out of the wide armory of God. All thie 


THE VESTIBULE. 345 


he may do: and in this he is only doing what every Christian 
has to do with the written, as well as the created word, 
“rightly dividing the word of truth.” Out of the infinity of 
the written word, he has also to gather and set forth things 
new and old, to choose them for the season and the work that 
are before him, to explain and manifest them to others, with 
such illustration and enforcement as may be in his power, 
and to crown them with the history of what, by them, God 
has done for his soul. And, in doing this, is he improving 
the Word of God? Just such difference as there is between 
the sense in which a minister may be said to improve a text, 
to the people’s comfort, and the sense in which an atheist 
might declare that he could improve the Book, which, if any 
man shall add unto, there shall be added unto him the 
plagues that are written therein ; just such difference is there 
between that which, with respect to Nature, man is, in his 
humbleness, called upon to do, and that which, in his inso- 
lence, he imagines himself capable of doing. 

§ vi. Have no fear, therefore, reader, in judging between 
nature and art, so only that you love both. If you can love 
one only, then let it be Nature; you are safe with her: but 
do not then attempt to judge the art, to which you do not 
care to give thought, or time. But if you love both, you may 
judge between them fearlessly ; you may estimate the last, 
by its making — remember the first, and giving you the 
same kind of joy. ° If, in the square of the city, you can find 
a delight, finite, indeed, but pure and intense, like that which 
you have in a valley among the hills, then its art and archi- 
tecture are right; but if, after fair trial, you can find no de- 
light in them, nor any instruction like that of nature, I call 
on you fearlessly to condemn them. 

We are forced, for the sake of accumulating our power and 
knowledge, to live in cities ; but such advantage as we have 
in association with each other is in great part counterbalanced 
by our loss of fellowship ‘with nature. We cannot all have 
our gardens now, nor our pleasant fields to meditate in at 
eventide. Then the function of our architecture is, as far as 
may be, to replace these ; to tell us about nature ; to possess 

Stones of Venice— Vol. 1.—16 


346 THE STONES OF VENICE: 


us with memories of her quietness; to be solemn and full of 
tenderness, like her, and rich in portraitures of her ; full of 
delicate imagery of the flowers we can no more gather, and of 
the living creatures now far away from us in their own soli- 
tude. If ever you felt or found this in a London Street,—if 
ever it furnished you with one serious thought, or one ray of 
true and gentle pleasure,—if there is in your heart a true de- 
light in its grim railings and dark casements, and wasteful 
finery of shops, and feeble coxcombry of club-houses,—it is 
well: promote the building of more like them. But if they 
never taught you anything, and never made you happier as 
you passed beneath them, do not think they have any myste- 
rious goodness nor occult sublimity. Have done with the 
wretched affectation, the futile barbarism, of pretending to 
enjoy: for, as surely as you know that the meadow grass, 
meshed with fairy rings, is better than the wood pavement, 
cut into hexagons; and as surely as you know the fresh winds 
and sunshine of the upland are better than the choke-damp 
of the vault, or the gas-light of the ball-room, you may know, 
as I told you that you should, that the good architecture, 
which has life, and truth, and joy in it, is better than the bad 
architecture, which has death, dishonesty, and vexation of 
heaxt in it, from the beginning to the end of time. 

§ vi. And now come with me, for I have kept you too long 
from your gondola: come with me, on an autumnal morning, 
through the dark gates of Padua, and let us take the broad 
road leading towards the East. 

It lies level, for a league or two, between its elms, and vine 
festoons full laden, their thin leaves veined into scarlet hectic, 
and their clusters deepened into gloomy blue; then mounts 
an embankment above the Brenta, and runs between the river 
and the broad plain, which stretches to the north in endless 
lines of mulberry and maize. The Brenta flows slowly, buf 
strongly ; a muddy volume of yellowish-grey water, that 
neither hastens nor slackens, but glides heavily between its 
monotonous banks, with here and there a short, babbling 
eddy twisted for an instant into-its opaque surface, and van- 
ishing, as if something had been dragged into it and gone 


THE VESTIBULE. 347 


down. Dusty and shadeless, the road fares along the dyke 
on its northern side ; and the tall white tower of Dolo is seen 
trembling in the heat mist far away, and never seems nearer 
than it did at first. Presently you pass one of the much 
vaunted “villas on the Brenta:” a glaring, spectral shell of 
brick and stucco, its windows with painted architraves like 
picture-frames, and a court-yard paved with pebbles in front 
of it, all burning in the thick glow of the feverish sunshine, 
but fenced from the high road, for magnificence sake, with 
goodly posts and chains ; then another, of Kew Gothic, with 
Chinese variations, painted red and green ; a third composed 
for the greater part of dead-wall, with fictitious windows 
painted upon it, each with a pea-green blind, and a classical 
architrave in bad perspective ; and a fourth, with stucco fig- 
ures set on the top of its garden-wall : some antique, like the 
kind to be seen at the corner of the New Road, and some of 
clumsy grotesque dwarfs, with fat bodies and large boots. 
This is the architecture to which her studies of the Renais- 
sance have conducted modern Italy. 

§ via. The sun climbs steadily, and warms into intense 
white the walls of the little piazza of Dolo, where we change 
horses. Another dreary stage among the now divided 
branches of the Brenta, forming irregular and half-stagnant 
canals; with one or two more villas on the other side of them, 
but these of the old Venetian type, which we may have recog- 
nised before at Padua, and sinking fast into utter ruin, black, 
and rent, and lonely, set close to the edge of the dull water, 
with what were once small gardens beside them, kneaded into 
mud, and with blighted fragments of gnarled hedges and 
broken stakes for their fencing; and here and there a few 
fragments of marble steps, which have once given them grace- 
ful access from the water’s edge, now settling into the mud 
in broken joints, all aslope, and slippery with green weed. 
At last the road turns sharply to the north, and there is an 
open space, covered with bent grass, on the right of it: but 
do not look that way. 

§ x. Five minutes more, and we are in the upper room of 
the little inn at Mestre, glad of a moment’s rest in shade 


848 THE STONHS OF VENICE. 


The table is (always, I think) covered with a cloth of nominal 
white and perennial grey, with plates and glasses at due inter- 
vals, and small loaves of a peculiar white bread, made with 
oil, and more like knots of flour than bread. The view from 
its balcony is not cheerful: a narrow street, with a solitary 
brick church and barren campanile on the other side of it ; 
and some conventual buildings, with a few crimson remnants 
2f fresco about their windows; and, between them and the 
street, a ditch with some slow current in it, and one or two 
small houses beside it, one with an arbor of roses at its door, 
as in an English tea-garden ; the air, however, about us hav- 
ing in it nothing of roses, but a close smell of garlic and crabs, 
warmed by the smoke of various stands of hot chestnuts. 
There is much vociferation also going on beneath the window 
respecting certain wheelbarrows which are in rivalry for our 
baggage: we appease their rivalry with our best patience, and 
follow them down the narrow street. 

§ x. We have but walked some two hundred yards when 
we come to a low wharf or quay, at the extremity of a canal, 
with long steps on each side down to the water, which latter 
we fancy for an instant has become black with stagnation ; 
another glance undeceives us,—it is covered with the black 
boats of Venice. We enter one of them, rather to try if they 
be real boats or not, than with any definite purpose, and glide 
away ; at first feeling as if the water were yielding continually 
beneath the boat and letting her sink into soft vacancy. It is 
something clearer than any water we have seen lately, and of 
a pale green; the banks only two or three feet above it, of 
mud and rank grass, with here and there a stunted tree ; glid- 
ing swiftly past the small casement of the gondola, as if they 
were dragged by upon a painted scene. 

Stroke by stroke we count the plunges of the oar, each 
heaving up the side of the boat slightly as her silver beak 
shoots forward: We lose patience, and extricate ourselves 
from the cushions: the sea air blows keenly by, as we stand 
leaning on the roof of the floating cell. In front, nothing to 
be seen but long canal and level bank ; to the west, the tower 
of Mestre is lowering fast, and behind it there have risen pur- 


THE VESTIBULE. 349 


ple shapes, of the color of dead rose-leaves, all round the hori- 
zon, feebly defined against the afternoon sky,—the Alps of 
_ Bassano. Forward still: the endiess canal bends at last, and 
then breaks into intricate angles about some low bastions, now 
torn to pieces and staggering in ugly rents towards the water, 
—the bastions of the fort of Malghera. Another turn, and 
another perspective of canal; but not interminable. The 
silver beak cleaves it fast,—it widens: the rank grass of the 
banks sinks lower, and lower, and at last dies in tawny knots 
along an expanse of weedy shore. Over it, on the right, but 
a few years back, we might have seen the lagoon stretching to 
_ the horizon, and the warm southern sky bending over Mala- 
mocco to the sea. Now we can see nothing but what seems a 
low and monotonous dock-yard wall, with flat arches to let 
the tide through it ;—this is the railroad bridge, conspicuous 
above all things. But at the end of those dismal arches, there 
rises, out of the wide water, a straggling line of low and con- 
fused brick buildings, which, but for the many towers which 
are mingled among them, might be the suburbs of an English 
manufacturing town. Four or five domes, pale, and appar- 
ently at a greater distance, rise over the centre of the line ; 
but the object which first catches the eye is a sullen cloud of 
black smoke brooding over the northern half of it, and which 
issues from the belfry of a church. 
It is Venice. 


ermal ade vite ‘esotet agPs 
Rann goal dev abindd ‘Eset a beri bi 
. Whee Raa 
soted nel: Stina Hse Pbhoad tiv ett Fiscld We er 
baw rnd’ “aston © “aw sde Seba tae! Peet ott 4 wisi 
Bait ofhneberrtel Tite aap datanes- 43 ibe 
tes Noe iv as ak hist oat vie ge dio Seat a a Hae ainsi 
eda eal aT RE RNA Bry aowol Bie coho aati 
anh ae ots ee btn" ndtint yf pate Br Aa 
od yorker anh se “cwar SV haba nk ee 
soled ‘ites i calhicr Gat pay TENA inivor' nds fitta i" 
W seeioed deiby Bye.1 antler poatian & Sw wee ih 
bic sat cate buch aig ts ae eked soi bes i 


posse totes ‘oumaier ui is ald on ser cam 

Sy Hiker eel tev bully Uti aeie Wmdaw ohiw ost Yo dere, 
Soitlve etorercdiespenne inty vot dathGan awe aneithtied ite si 
HMRI DT nts 10 desi mL ‘Sebi vehgint’ teal R dant 
a th Rutter Senay" Aaa “ov wane dy 

: baser Fring oo idea sig “ai — he . 


vite fc rm yy ul iit al are ite 
1m uh : ena asa 


t the ent: 


in serene Liieh aun debe 
a By ran 7) Onis by a ag hee ‘" 4 * oN 
ware anal Pie THLs, ORY 
st we equirvantenet nt oan * ene 
Via & ae tah) WD ad ew sae 
cnt eh he praet ably é' 
wi “ Neneh cul aires one Pay 3 


sp aiegcce 
1 << 4 *. if ee 
Cin (aoe ¢ ihe +e 
Abe widens 

bya 


i zag Dah 
é 


Pherae heeds 


APPENDIX. 


1. FOUNDATION OF VENICE 


I rnp the chroniclers agree in fixing the year 421, if any: 
the following sentence from De Monaci may perhaps interest 
the reader. 

“God, who punishes the sins of men by war sorrows, and 
whose ways are past finding out, willing both to save the in- 
nocent blood, and that a great power, beneficial to the whole 
world, should arise in a spot strange beyond belief, moved 
the chief men of the cities of the Venetian province (which 
from the border of Pannonia, extended as far as the Adda, a 
river of Lombardy), both in memory of past, and in dread of 
future distress, to establish states upon the nearer islands of 
the inner gulphs of the Adriatic, to which, in the last neces-. 
sity, they might retreat for refuge. And first Galienus de 
Fontana, Simon de Glauconibus, and Antonius Calvus, or. 
as others have it, Adalburtus Falerius, Thomas Candiano, 
Comes Daulus, Consuls of Padua, by the command of their 
King and the desire of the citizens, laid the foundations of 
the new commonwealth, under good auspices, on the island 
of the Rialto, the highest and nearest to the mouth of the 
deep river now called the Brenta, in the year of Our Lord, 
as many writers assure us, four hundred and twenty-one, on 
the 25th day of March.” * 

It is matter also of very great <efiatachion to know that 
Venice was founded by good Christians: “La qual citade é 
stada hedificada da veri e boni Christiani:” which informa: 


* Ed, Venetis, 1758, Lib. I. 


852 THE STONES OF VENICRH. 


tion I found in the MS. copy of the Zancarol Chronicle, in 
the library of St. Mark’s. 

Finally the conjecture as to the origin of her name, re- 
corded by Sansovino, will be accepted willingly by all who 
love Venice: “Fu interpretato da aicuni, che questa voce 
Venetia voglia dire VENI ETIAM, cioé, vieni ancora, e an- 
cora, percioche quante volte verrai, sempre vedrai nuove cose, 
-enuove bellezze.” 


2. POWER OF THE DOGES. 


The best authorities agree in giving the year 697 as that oi 
the election of the first doge, Paul Luke Anafeste. He was 
elected in a general meeting of the commonalty, tribunes, and 
clergy, at Heraclea, “divinus rebus procuratis,” as usual, in 
all serious work, in those times. His authority is thus de- 
fined by Sabellico, who was not likely to have exaggerated 
it :—‘‘ Penes quem decus omne imperli ac majestas esset ; cui 
jus concilium cogendi quoties de republica aliquid referri 
oporteret ; qui tribunos annuos in singulas insulas legeret, a 
quibus ad Ducem esset provocatio. Czeterum, si quis digni- 
tatem, ecclesiam, sacerdotumve cleri populique suffragio esset 
adeptus, ita demum id ratum haberetur si dux ipse auctor 
factus esset.” (Lib. I.) The last clause is very important, 
indicating the subjection of the ecclesiastical to the popular 
and ducal (or patrician) powers, which, throughout her ca- 
reer, was one of the most remarkable features in the policy 
of Venice. The appeal from the tribunes to the doge is also 
important ; and the expression ‘“‘decus omne imperii,” if of 
aomewhat doubtful force, is at least as energetic as could 
have been expected from an historian under the influence of 
the Council of Ten. 


3. SERRAR DEL CONSIGLIO. 


The date of the decree which made the right of sitting in 
the grand council hereditary, is variously given ; the Venetian 
historians themselves saying as little as they can about it. 
The thing was evidently not accomplished at once, several de- 


APPENDIX: 358 


crees following in successive years: the Council of Ten was 
established without any doubt in 1310, in consequence of the 
conspiracy of Tiepolo. The Venetian verse, quoted by Muti- 
nelli (Annali Urbani di Venezia, p. 153), is worth remember- 
ing. 
““Del mille tresento e diese 

A mezzo el mese delle ceriese 

Bagiamonte passo el ponte 

E per esso fo fatto el Consegio di diese.” 


The reader cannot do better than take 1297 as the date of the 
beginning of the change of government, and this will enable 
him exactly to divide the 1100 years from the election of the 
first doge into 600 of monarchy and 500 of aristocracy. The 
coincidence of the numbers is somewhat curious; 697 the 
date of the establishment of the government, 1297 of its 
change, and 1797 of its fall. 


4. 8. PIETRO DI CASTELLO. 


It is credibly reported to have been founded in the seventh 
century, and (with somewhat less of credibility) in a place 
where the Trojans, conducted by Antenor, had, after the de- 
struction of Troy, built “un castello, chiamato prima Troja, 
poscia Olivolo, interpretato, luogo pieno.” It seems that St. 
Peter appeared in person to the Bishop of Heraclea, and com- 
manded him to found in his honor, a church in that spot of 
the rising city on the Rialto : ‘‘ove avesse veduto una mandra 
di buoi e di pecore pascolare unitamente. Questa fu la pro- 
digiosa origine della Chiesa di San Pietro, che poscia, o rino- 
vata, o ristaurata, da Orso Participazio IV Vescovo Olivolense, 
divenne la Cattedrale della Nuova citta.” (Notizie Storiche 
delle Chiese e Monasteri di Venezia. Padua, 1758.) What 
there was so vrodigious in oxen and sheep feeding together, 
we need St. Peter, I think, to tell us. The title of Bishop of 
Castello was first taken in 1091: St. Mark’s was not made the 
cathedral church till 1807. It may be thought hardly fair te 
conclude the small importance of the old St. Pietro di Castello 
from the appearance of the wretched modernisations of 1620. 

VoL. I.—-23 


354. THE STONES OF VENICE. 


But these modernisations are spoken of as improvements; 
and I find no notice of peculiar beauties in the older building, 
either in the work above quoted, or by Sansovino ; who only 
says that when it was destroyed by fire (as everything in 
Venice was, I think, about three times in a century), in the 
reign of Vital Michele, it was rebuilt “with good thick walls, 
maintaining, for all that, the order of its arrangement taken 
from the Greek mode of building.” This does not seem the 
description of a very enthusiastic effort to rebuild a highly 
ornate cathedral. The present church is among the least in- 
teresting in Venice ; a wooden bridge, something like that of 
Battersea on a small scale, connects its island, now almost de- 
serted, with a wretched suburb of the city behind the arsenal ; 
and a blank level of lifeless grass, rotted away in places rather 
than trodden, is extended before its mildewed fagade and soli- 
tary tower. 


5. PAPAL POWER IN VENICE. 


I may refer the reader to the eleventh chapter of the 
twenty-eighth book of Daru for some account of the restraints 
to which the Venetian clergy were subjected. I have not my- 
self been able to devote any time to the examination of the 
original documents bearing on this matter, but the following 
extract from a letter of a friend, who will not at present per- 
mit me to give his name, but who is certainly better con- 
versant with the records of the Venetian State than any 
other Englishman, will be of great value to the general 
reader :— 

‘‘In the year 1410, or perhaps at the close of the thirteenth 
century, churchmen were excluded from the Grand Council 
and declared ineligible to civil employment ; and in the same 
year, 1410, the Council of Ten, with the Giunta, decreed that 
whenever in the state’s councils matters concerning ecclesias- 
tical affairs were being treated, all the kinsfolk of Venetian 
beneficed clergymen were to be expelled ; and, in the year 
1434, the reLarions of churchmen were declared ineligible to 
the post of ambassador at Rome, 


APPENDIX. “358 


“The Venetians never gave possession of any see in their 
territories to bishops unless they had been proposed to the 
pope by the senate, which elected the patriarch, who was sup- 
posed, at the end of the sixteenth century, to be liable to ex. 
‘amination by his Holiness, as an act of confirmation of instal- 
lation ; but of course, everything depended on the relative 
power at any given time of Rome and Venice : for instance, a 
few days after the accession of Julius IL, in 1503, he requests 
the Signory, cap in hand, to attow him to confer the archbish- 
opric of Zara on a dependant of his, one Cipico the Bishop 
of Famagosta. Six years later, when Venice was overwhelmed 
by the leaguers of Cambrai, that furious pope would assuredly 
have conferred Zara on Cipico wrrnovut asking leave. In 1608, 
the rich Camaldolite Abbey of Vangadizza, in the Polesine, 
fell vacant through the death of Lionardo Loredano, in whose 
family it had been since some while. The Venetian ambassa- 
dor at Rome received the news on the night of the 28th De- 
cember ; and, on the morrow, requested Paul IV. not to dis- 
pose of this preferment until he heard from the senate. The 
pope talked of ‘ poor cardinals’ and of his nephew, but made 
no positive reply ; and, as Francesco Contarini was withdraw- 
ing, said to him: ‘My Lord ambassador, with this opportu- 
nity we will inform you that, to our very great regret, we un- 
derstand that the chiefs of the Ten mean to turn sacristans ; 
for they order the parish priests to close the church doors at 
the Ave Maria, and not to ring the bells at certain hours. This 
is precisely the sacristan’s office; we don’t know why their 
lordships, by printed edicts, which we have seen, choose to in-” 
terfere in this matter. This is pure and mere ecclesiastical 
jurisdiction ; and even, in case of any inconvenience arising, 
is there not the patriarch, who is at any rate your own ; why 
not apply to him, who could remedy these irregularities ? 
These are matters which cause us very notable displeasure ; 
we say so that they may be written and known: it is decided 
by the councils and canons, and not uttered by us, that who- 
soever forms any resolve against the ecclesiastical liberty, can- 
not do so without incurring censure : and in order that Father 
Pau! {Bacon’s correspondent] may not say hereafter, as he did 


856 THE STONES OF VENICH. 


in his past writings, that our predecessors assented eithet 
tacitly or by permission, we declare that we do not give our 
assent, nor do we approve it; nay, we blame it, and let this 
be announced in Venice, so that, for the rest, every one may 
take care of his own conscience. St. Thomas a Becket, whose 
festival is celebrated this very day, suffered martyrdom for the 
ecclesiastical liberty ; it is our duty likewise to support and 
defend it.’ Contarinisays: ‘ This remonstrance was delivered 
with some marks of anger, which induced me to tell him how 
the tribunal of the most excellent the Lords chiefs of the Ten is 
in our country supreme ; that it does not doits business unad- 
visedly, or condescend to unworthy matters; and that, there- 
fore, should those Lords have come to any public declaration of 
their will, it must be attributed to orders anterior, and to im- 
memorial custom and authority, recollecting that, on former 
occasions likewise, similar commissions were given to preven’ 
divers incongruities ; wherefore an upright intention, such as 
this, ought not to be taken in any other sense than its own, 
especially as the parishes of Venice were in her own gift,’ && 
‘&c. The pope persisted in bestowing the abbacy on hisnephevw, 
but the republic would not give possession, and a compromise 
was effected by its being conferred on the Venetian Matteo 
Priuli, who allowed the cardinal five thousand ducats per an- 
num out of its revenues. A few years before this, this very 
same pope excommunicated the State, because she had im- 
prisoned two churchmen for heinous crimes ; the strife lasted 
for more than a year, and ended through the mediation of 
“Henry IV., at whose suit the prisoners were delivered to the 
French ambassador, who made them over to a papal commis: 
sioner. ; 

“In January, 1484, a tournament was in preparation on St. 
Mark’s Square : some murmurs had been heard about the dis- 
tribution of the prizes having been pre-arranged, without re- 
gard to the ‘best man.’ One of the chiefs of the Ten was 
walking along Rialto on the 28th January, when a young 
priest, twenty-two years old, a sword-cutler’s son, and a Bo- 
lognese, and one of Perugia, both men-at-arms under Robert 
Sansoverino, fell upon a clothier with drawn weapons. The 


APPENDIX. 354 


chief of the Ten desired they might be seized, but at the mo- 
ment the priest escaped ; he was, however, subsequently re- 
- taken, and in that very evening hanged by torch-light between 
the columns with the two soldiers. Innocent VII. was less 
powerful than Paul IV.; Venice weaker in 1605 than in 1484. 

«* * * The exclusion from the Grand Council, whether at 
the end of the fourtenth or commencement of the following 
century, of the Venetian ecclesiastics, (as induced either by 
the republic’s acquisitions on the main land then made, and 
which, through the rich benefices they embraced, might have 
rendered an ambitious churchman as dangerous in the Grand 
Council as a victorious condottiere ; or from dread of their 
allegiance being divided between the church and their coun- 
try, it being acknowledged that no man can serve two masters,) 
did not render them hostile to their fatherland, whose in- 
terests were, with very few exceptions, eagerly fathered by 
the Venetian prelates at Rome, who, in their turn, received 
all honor at Venice, where state receptions given to cardinals 
of the houses of Correr, Grimani, Cornaro, Pisani, Contarini, 
Zeno, Delfino, and others, vouch for the good understanding 
that existed between the ‘ Papalists’ and their countrymen. 
The Cardinal Grimani was instrumental in detaching Julius 
IL from the league of Cambrai ; the. Cardinal Cornaro always 
aided the state to obtain anything required of Leo X. ; and, 
both before and after their times, all Venetians that had a 
seat in the Sacred College were patriots rather than pluralists ; 
I mean that they cared more for Venice than for their bene- 
fices, admitting thus the soundness of that policy which de- 
nied them admission into the Grand Council.” 

To this interesting statement, I shall add, from the twenty- 
eighth book of Daru, two passages, well deserving considera- 
tion by us English in present days: 

“Pour étre parfaitement assurée contre les envahissements 
de la puissance ecclésiastique, Venise commenga par lui Oter 
tout prétexte d’intervenir dans les affaires de l’Etat ; elle resta 
invariablement fidéle au dogme. Jamais aucune des opinions 
nouvelles n’y prit la moindre faveur ; jamais aucun hérésiarque 
ne sortit de Venise. Les conciles, les disputes, les guerres de 


358 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


religion, se passcrent sans qu’elle y prit jamais la moindre 
part. In¢branlable dans sa foi, elle ne fut pas moins invaria- 
ble dans son systéme de tolérance. Non seulement ses sujets 
de la religion grecque conservérent l’exercise de leur culte, 
leurs évéques et leurs prétres; mais les Protestantes, les 
Arméniens, les Mahomitans, les Juifs, toutes les religions, 
toutes les sectes qui se trouvaient dans Venise, avaient des 
temples, et la sépulture dans les églises n’était point refusé 
aux hérétiques. Une police vigilante s’appliquait avec le 
mime soin a éteindre les discordes, et 4 empécher les fana- 
tiques et les novateurs de troubler |’Etat.” 
* * * * * * % % 

“Si on considére que c’est dansun temps ot presque toutes 
les nations tremblaient devant la puissance pontificale, que 
les Vénitiens surent tenir leur clergé dans la dépendance, et 
braver souvent les censures ecclésiastiques et les interdits, 
sans encourir jamais aucun reproche sur la pureté de leur 
foi, on sera forcé de reconnaitre que cette république avait 
dévancé de loin les autres peuples dans cette partie de la 
science du gouvernement. La fameuse maxime, ‘Siamo yene- 
ziani, poi christiani,’ n’ctait qu’une formule énergique qui ne 
prouvait point quils voulussent placer Vintérét de la religion 
aprés celui de l’Etat, mais qui annongait leur invariable ré- 
solution de ne pas souffrir qu’un pouvoir ¢tranger portat 
atteinte aux droits de la république. 

“Dans toute la durée de son existence, au milieu des revers 
comme dans la prospérit¢, cet inebranlable gouvernement ne 
fit qu’une seule fois des concessions 4 la cour de Rome, et ce 
fut pour détacher le Pape Jules IL de la ligue de Cambrai. 

“Jamais il ne se relacha du soin de tenir le clergé dans une 
nullité absolue relativement aux affaires politiques; on peut 
en juger par la conduite qu'il tint avec lordre religieux le plus 
redoutable et le plus accoutumé 4 s’immiscer dans les Reprets 
de l’Etat et dans les intéréts temporels,” 

The main points, next stated, respecting the Jesuits are, 
that the decree which permitted their establishment in Venice 
required formal renewal every three years; that no Jesuit 
could stay in Venice more than three years ; that the slightest 


APPENDIX. 359 


disobedience to the authority of the government was instantly 
punished by imprisonment; that no Venetian could enter the 
order without express permission from the government; that 
the notaries were forbidden to sanction any testamentary dis- 
posal of property to the Jesuits; finally, that the heads of 
noble families were forbidden to permit their children to be 
educated in the Jesuits’ colleges, on pain of degradation from 
their rank. 

Now, let it be observed that the enforcement of absolute 
exclusion of the clergy from the councils of the state, dates 
exactly from the period which I have marked for the com- 
mencement of the decline of the Venetian power. The Ro- 
manist 1s welcome to his advantage in this fact, if advantage 
it be ; for I do not bring forward the conduct of the senate 
of Venice, as Daru does, by way of an example of the general 
science of government. The Venetians accomplished therein 
what we ridiculously call a separation of ‘‘ Church and State ” 
(as if the State were not, in all Christendom, necessarily also 
the Church*), but ought to call a separation of lay and clerical 
officers. I do not point out this separation as subject of 
praise, but.as the witness borne by the Venetians against the 
principles of the Papacy. If they were to blame, in yielding 
to their fear of the ambitious spirit of Rome so far as to de- 
prive their councils of all religious element, what excuse are 
we to offer for the state, which, with Lords Spiritual of her 
own faith already in her senate, permits the polity of Rome 
to be represented by lay members? To have sacrificed relig- 
ion to mistaken policy, or purchased security with ignominy, 
would have been no new thing in the world’s history ; but to 
be at once impious and impolitic, and seek for danger through 
dishonor, was reserved for the English parliament of 1829. 

I am glad to have this opportunity of referring to, and far- 
ther enforcing, the note on this subject which, not without 
deliberation, I appended to the “Seven Lamps ;” and of add- 
ing to it the following passage, written by my father in the 
year 1839, and published in one of the journals of that year; 


* Compare Appendix 12, 


860 THE STONES OF VENICR. 


—a passage remarkable as much for its intrinsic value, as for 
having stated, twelve years ago, truths to which the mind of 
Engiand seems but now, and that slowly, awakening. 

‘We hear it said, that it cannot be merely the Roman re- 
ligion that causes the difficulty [respecting Ireland], for we 
were once all Roman Catholics, and nations abroad of this 
faith are not as the Irish. It is totally overlooked, that when 
we were so, our government was despotic, and fit to cope with 
this dangerous religion, as most of the Continental govern- 
ments yet are. In what Roman Catholic state, or in what age 
of Roman Catholic England, did we ever hear of such agitation 
as now exists in Ireland by evil men taking advantage of an 
anomalous state of things—Roman Catholic ignorance in the 
people, Protestant toleration in the government? We have 
yet to feel the tremendous difficulty in which Roman Catholic 
emancipation has involved us. Too late we discover that a 
Roman Catholic is wholly incapable of being safely connected 
with the British constitution, as it now exists, in any near re- 
lation. The present constitution isno longer fit for Catholics. 
It is a creature essentially Protestant, growing with the growth, 
and strengthening with the strength, of Protestantism. So 
entirely is Protestantism interwoven with the whole frame of 
our constitution and laws, that I take my stand on this, against 
all agitators in existence, that the Roman religion is totally 
incompatible with the British constitution. We have, in try- 
ing to combine them, got into a maze of difficulties ; we are 
the worse, and Ireland none the better. It is idle to talk of 
_ maunicipal reform or popular Lords Lieutenant. The mild 
sway of a constitutional monarchy is not strong enough for a 
Roman Catholie population. The stern soul of a Republican’ 
would not shrink from sending half the misguided population 
and all the priests into exile, and planting in their place an 
industrious Protestant people. But you cannot do this, and 
you cannot convert the Irish, nor by other means make them 
fit to wear the mild restraints of a Protestant Government. 
It was, moreover, a strange logic that begot the idea of ad- 
mitting Catholics to administer any part of our laws or consti« 
tution, It was admitted by all that, by the very act of aban: 


APPENDIX. 861 


doning the Roman religion, we became a free and enlightened 
people. It was only by throwing off the yoke of that slavish 
religion that we attained to the freedom of thought which has 
advanced usin the scale of society. We are so much advanced 
by adopting and adhering to a reformed religion, that to prove 
our liberal and unprejudiced views, we throw down the bar- 
riers betwixt the two religions, of which the one is the ac- 
knowledged cause of light and knowledge, the other the cause 
of darkness and ignorance. We are so much altered to the 
better by leaving this people entirely, and giving them neither 
part nor lot amongst us, that it becomes proper to mingle 
again with them. We have found so much good in leaving 
them, that we deem it the best possible reason for returning 
to be among them. No fear of their Church again shaking 
us, with all our light and knowledge. It is true, the most 
enlightened nations fell under the spell of her enchantments, 
fell into total darkness and superstition ; but no fear of us— 
we are too well informed!. What miserable reasoning ! infat- 
uated presumption! I fear me, when the Roman religion . 
rolled her clouds of darkness over the earlier ages, that she 
quenched as much light, and knowledge, and judgment as 
our modern Liberals have ever displayed. I do not expecta 
statesman to discuss the point of Transubstantiation betwixt 
Protestant and Catholic, nor to trace the narrow lines which 
divide Protestant sectarians from each other; but can any 
statesman that shall have taken even a cursory glance at the 
face of Europe, hesitate a moment on the choice of the Prot- 
estant religion? If he unfortunately knew nothing of its be- 
ing the true one in regard to our eternal interests, he is at 
least bound to see whether it be not the best for the worldly 
prosperity of a people. He may be but moderately imbued 
with pious zeal for the salvation of a kingdom, but at, least he 
will be expected to weigh the comparative merits of religion, 
as of law or government ; and blind, indeed, must he be if he 
does not discern that, in neglecting to cherish the Protestant 
faith, or in too easily yielding to any encroachments on it, he 
is foregoing the use of a state engine more powerful than all 
the laws which the uninspired legislators of the earth have 


362 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


ever promulgated, in promoting the happiness, the peace, 
prosperity, and the order, the industry, and the wealth, of a 
people ; in forming every quality valuable or desirable in a 
subject or a citizen; in sustaining the public mind at that 
point of education and information that forms the best se- 
curity for the state, and the best preservative for the freedons 
of a people, whether religious or political.” 


6. RENAISSANCE ORNAMENTS. 


There having been three principal. styles of architecture in 
Venice,—the Greek or Byzantine, the Gothic, and the Renais- 
sance, it will be shown, in the sequel, that the Renaissance 
itself is divided into three correspondent families : Renaissance 
engrafted on Byzantine,-which is earliest and best; Renais- 
sance engrafted on Gothic, which is second, and second best ; 
Renaissance on Renaissance, which is double darkness, and 
worst of all. The palaces in which Renaissance is engrafted 
on Byzantine are those noticed by Commynes: they are char- 
acterized by an ornamentation very closely resembling, and 
in some cases identical with, early Byzantine work ; namely, 
groups of colored marble circles inclosed in interlacing bands. 
I have put on the opposite page one of these ornaments, from 
the Ca’ Trevisan, in which a most curious and delicate piece 
of inlaid design is introduced into a band which is almost ex- 
actly copied from the church of Theotocos at Constantinople, 
and correspondent with others in St. Mark’s. There is also 
much Byzantine feeling in the treatment of the animals, es- 
pecially in the two birds of the lower compartment, while the 
peculiar curves of the cinque cento leafage are visible in the - 
leaves above. The dove, alighted, with the olive-branch 
plucked off, is opposed to the raven with restless expanded 
wings. Beneath are evidently the two sacrifices “of every 
clean fowl and of every clean beast.” The color is given with 
green and white marbles, the dove relieved on a ground of 
grayish green, and all is exquisitely finished. 

In Plate L, p. 27, the upper figure is from the same palace 
(Ca’ Trevisan), and it is very interesting in its proportions. If 


“MVSIATAL («VQ “NOLLVHOOUG IWHA-TIVM— "XX BLVIg 


APPENDIX. 363 


we take five circles in geometrical proportion, each diameter 
being two-thirds of the diameter next above it, and arrange 
the circles so proportioned, in contact with each other, in the 
manner shown in the plate, we shall find that an increase quite 
imperceptible in the diameter of the circles in the angles, 
will enable us to inscribe the whole in asquare. The lines so 
described will then run in the centre of the white bands. I 
cannot be certain that this is the actual construction of the 
Trevisan design, because it is on a high wall surface, where I 
could not get at its measurements ; but I found this construc- 
tion exactly coincide with the lines of my eye sketch. The 
lower figure in Plate I. is from the front of the Ca’ Dario, and 
probably struck the eye of Commynes in its first brightness. 
Salvatico, indeed, considers both the Ca’ Trevisan (which once 
belonged to Bianca Cappello) and the Ca’ Dario, as buildings 
of the sixteenth century. I defer the discussion of the ques- 
tion at present, but have, I believe, sufficient reason for as- 
suming the Ca’ Dario to have been built about 1486, and the 
Ca’ Trevisan not much later. 


7. VARIETIES OF THE ORDERS. 


Of these phantasms and grotesques, one of some general im- 
portance is that commonly called Ionic, of which the idea was . 
taken (Vitruvius says) from a woman’s hair, curled; but its 
lateral processes look more like rams’ horns: be that as it may, 
it is a mere piece of agreeable extravagance, and if, instead of 
rams horns, you put ibex horns, or cows’ horns, or an ass’s 
head at once, you will have ibex orders, or ass orders, or any 
number of other orders, one for every head or horn. You 
may have heard of another order, the Composite, which is 
Jonic and Corinthian mixed, and is one of the worst of ten 
thousand forris referable to the Corinthian as their head: it 
may be described as a spoiled Corinthian. And you may have 
also heard of another order, called Tuscan (which is no order 

-at all, but a spoiled Doric): and of another called Roman 
Doric, which is Doric more spoiled, both which are simply 
among the most stupid variations ever invented upon forma 


364 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


already known. I find also in a French pamphlet upon archi 
tecture,* as applied to shops and dwelling houses, a sixth 
order, the “Ordre Francais,” at least as good as any of the 
three last, and to be hailed with acclamation, considering 
whence it comes, there being usually more tendency on the 
other side of the channel to the confusion of “orders” than 
their multiplication: but the reader will find in the end that 
there are in very deed only two orders, of which the Greek, 
Doric, and Corinthian are the first examples, and they not 
perfect, nor in anywise sufficiently representative of the vast 
families to which they belong; but being the first and the 
best known, they may properly be considered as the types of 
the rest. The essential distinctions of the two great orders 
he will find explained in §§ xxxv. and xxxvr. of Chap. XXVII., 
and in the passages there referred to; but I should rather de- 
sire that these passages might be read in the order in which 
they occur. 


8. THE NORTHERN FNERGY. 


I have sketched above, in the First Chapter, the great events 
of architectural history in the simplest and fewest words I 
could ; but this indraught of the Lombard energies upon the 
Byzantine rest, like a wild north wind descending into a space 
of rarified atmosphere, and encountered by an Arab simoom 
from the south, may well require from us some farther atten- 
tion ; for the differences in all these schools are more in the 
degrees of their impetuosity and refinement (these qualities 
being, in most cases, in inverse ratio, yet much united by the 
Arabs) than in the style of the ornaments they employ. The 
same leaves, the same animals, the same arrangements, are 
used by Scandinavians, ancient Britons, Saxons, Normans, 


* LArtiste en Batiments, par Louis Berteaux: Dijon, 1848. My 
printer writes at the side of the page a note, which I insert with thanks: 
—‘ This is not the first attempt at a French order. The writer has a 
Treatise by Sebastian Le Clerc, a great man in his generation which con- 
tains a Roman order, a Spanish order, which the inventor appears ta - 
think very grand, and a new French order nationalised by the Gallic 
cock crowing and clapping its wings in the capital.” 


APPENDIX. 865 


Lombards, Romans, Byzantines, and Arabians ; all being alike 
descended through classic Greece from Egypt and Assyria, 
and some from Pheenicia. The belts which encompass the 
Assyrian bulls, in the hall of the British Museum, are the 
same as the belts of the ornaments found in Scandinavian 
tumuli; their method of ornamentation is the same as that of 
the gate of Mycenz, and of the Lombard pulpit of St. Am- 
brogio of Milan, and of the church of Theotocos at Constanti- 
nople; the essential differences among the great schools are 
their differences of temper and treatment, and science of ex- 
pression; it is absurd to talk of Norman ornaments, and 
Lombard ornaments, and Byzantine ornaments, as formally 
distinguished ; but there is irreconcileable separation between 
Arab temper, and Lombard temper, and Byzantine temper. 
Now, as far as I have been able to compare the three 
schools, it appears to me that the Arab and Lombard are both 
distinguished from the Byzantine by their energy and love of 
excitement, but the Lombard stands alone in his love of jest: 
Neither an Arab nor Byzantine ever jests in his architecture ; 
the Lombard has great difficulty in ever being thoroughly 
serious ; thus they represent three conditions of humanity, 
one in perfect rest, the Byzantine, with exquisite perception 
of grace and dignity ; the Arab, with the same perception of 
grace, but with a restless fever in his blood ; the Lombard, 
equally energetic, but not burning himself away, capable of 
submitting to law, and of enjoying jest. But the Arabian 
feverishness infects even the Lombard in the South, showing 
itself, however, in endless invention, with a refreshing firmness 
and order directing the whole of it. The excitement is great- 
est in the earliest times, most of all shown in St. Michele of 
Pavia ; and I am strongly disposed to connect much of its 
peculiar manifestations with the Lombard’s habits of eating 
and drinking, especially his carnivorousness. The Lombard 
of early times seems to have been exactly what a tiger would 
be, if you could give him love of a joke, vigorous imagination, 
strong sense of justice, fear of hell, knowledge of northern 
mythology a stone den, and a mallet and chisel ; fancy him 
pacing up and down in the said den to digest his dinner, and 


566 THER STONES OF VENICE. 


striking on the wall, with a new fancy in his head, at every 
turn, and you have the Lombardic sculptor. As civilisation 
increases the supply of vegetables, and shortens that of wild 
beasts, the excitement diminishes; it is still strong in the 
thirteenth century at Lyons and Rouen ; it dies away gradu- 
ally in the later Gothic, and is quite extinct in the fifteenth 
century. 

I think I shall best illustrate this general idea by simply 
copying the entries in my diary which were written when, 
after six months’ close study of Byzantine work in Venice, I 
came again to the Lombard work of Veronaand Pavia. There 
are some other points alluded to in these entries not pertain- 
ing to the matter immediately in hand ; but I have left them, 
as they will be of use hereafter 

“(Verona.) Comparing the arabesque and sculpture of the 
Duomo here with St. Mark’s, the first thing that strikes one 
is the low relief, the second, the greater motion and spirit, 
with infinitely less grace and science. With the Byzantine, 
however rude the cutting, every line is lovely, and the animals 
or men are placed in any attitudes which secure ornamental 
effect, sometimes impossible ones, always severe, restrained, 
or languid. With the Romanesque workmen all the figures 
show the effort (often successful) to express energetic action ; 
hunting chiefly, much fighting, and both spirited ; some of the 
dogs running capitally, straining to it, and the knights hitting 
hard, while yet the faces and drawing are in the last degree 
barbarous. At Venice all is graceful, fixed, or languid ; the 
eastern torpor is in every line,—the mark of a school formed 
on severe traditions, and keeping to them, and never likely or 
desirous to rise beyond them, but with an exquisite sense of . 
beauty, and.much solemn religious faith. 

“Tf the Greek outer archivolt of St. Mark’s is Byzantine, the 
law is somewhat broken by its busy domesticity 5 figures en- 
gaged in every trade, and in the preparation of viands of all 
kinds; a crowded kind of London Christmas scene, inter- 
leaved (literally) by the superb balls of leafage, unique in 
sculpture ; but even this is strongly opposed to the wild war 
and chase passion of the Lomwbsrd Farther, the Lombard 


APPENDIX. 367 


duilding is as sharp, precise, and accurate, as that of St. 
Mark’s is careless. The Byzantines seem to have been too 
lazy to put their stones together ; and, in general, my first 
impression on coming to Verona, after four months in Venice, 
is of the exquisitely neat masonry and perfect feeling here; a 
style of Gothic formed by a combination of Lombard surface 
ornament with Pisan Gothic, than which nothing can possibly 
be more chaste, pure, or solemn.” 

I have said much of the shafts of the entrance to the crypt 
of St. Zeno ;* the following note of the sculptures on the 
archivolt above them is to our present purpose : 

“It is covered by very light but most effective bas-reliefs of 
jesting subject :—two cocks carrying on their shoulders a long 
staff to which a fox (?) is tied by the legs, hanging down be- 
tween them : the strut of the foremost cock, lifting one leg at 
right angles to the other, is delicious. Then a stag hunt, with 
a centaur horseman drawing a bow ; the arrow has gone clear 
through the stag’s throat, and is sticking there. Several capi- 
tal hunts with dogs, with fruit trees between, and birds in 
them ; the leaves, considering the early time, singularly well 
set, with the edges outwards, sharp, and deep cut: snails and 
frogs filling up the intervals, as if suspended in the air, with 
some saucy puppies on their hind legs, two or three nonde- 
script beasts ; and, finally, on the centre of one of the arches 
on the south side, an elephant and castle,—a very strange ele- 
phant, yet cut as if the carver had seen one. 

Observe this elephant and castle ; we shall meet with him 
farther north. 

«These sculptures of St. Zeno are, however, quite quiet and 
tame compared with those of St. Michele of Pavia, which are 
designed also in a somewhat gloomier mood ; significative, as I 
think, of indigestion. (Note that they are much earlier than 
St. Zeno ; of the seventh century at latest. There is more of 
nightmare, and less of wit in them.) Lord Lindsay has de- 
scribed them admirably, but has not said half enough ; the 
state of mind represented by the west front is more that of a 


* The lower group in Plate XVIL. 


868 YHE STONES OF VENICE. 


feverish dream, than resultant from any determined architects 
ural purpose, or even from any definite love and delight in 
the grotesque. One capital is covered with a mass of grinning 
heads, other heads grow out of two bodies, or out of and under 
feet ; the creatures are all fighting, or devouring, or struggling 
which shall be uppermost, and yet in an ineffectual way, as if 
they would fight for ever, and come to no decision. Neither 
sphinxes nor centaurs did I notice, nor a single peacock (I be- 
lieve peacocks to be purely Byzantine), but mermaids with two 
tails (the sculptor having perhaps seen double at the time), 
strange, large fish, apes, stags (bulls?), dogs, wolves, and 
horses, griffins, eagles, long-tailed birds (cocks ?), hawks, and 
dragons, without end, or with a dozen of ends, as the case may 
be ; smaller birds, with rabbits, and small nondescripts, filling 
the friezes. The actual leaf, which is used in the best Byzan- 
tine mouldings at Venice, occurs in parts of these Pavian dee. 
signs. But the Lombard animals are all alive, and fiercely 
alive too, all impatience and spring : the Byzantine birds peck 
idly at the fruit, and the animals hardly touch it with their 
noses. ‘The cinque cento birds in Venice hold it up daintily, 
like train-bearers ; the birds in the earlier Gothic peck at it 
hungrily and naturally ; but the Lombard beasts gripe at it 
like tigers, and tear it off with writhing lips and glaring eyes. 
They are exactly like Jip with the bit of geranium, wor- 
rying imaginary cats in it.” 

The notice of the leaf in the above extract is important,—it 
is the vine-leaf ; used constantly both by Byzantines and Lom- 
bards, but by the latter with especial frequency, though at 
this time they were hardly able to indicate what they meant. 
It forms the most remarkable generality of the St. Michele . 
decoration ; though, had it not luckily been carved on the 
fayade, twining round a stake, and with grapes, I should never 
have known what it was meant for, its general form being a 
succession of sharp lobes, with incised furrows to the point of 
each. But it is thrown about in endless change ; four or five 
varieties of it might be found on every cluster of capitals: and 
not content with this, the Lombards hint the same form even 
in their griffin wings. They love the vine very heartily. 


VEIL DECORATION. 


WALL 


PLatTE XXI.— 


a as 7 ae’ Pa ‘LS Vo LS welt Lee eee a 
1 wee re Te sae aaa a nf ba Mt 


: i, 5 bert 4 
eh | : : 
<r 

a ‘ 1 : 
> ek 7 
rs | 


+ 
ee 
- 
ut 
“A 
: “@ 
d hag : 
i net oe, rem] 
® PAR pies 
Re “ae ae Y a 


APPENDIX. 369 


In St. Michele of Lucca we have perhaps the noblest instance 
in Italy of the Lombard spirit in its later refinement. It is 
some four centuries later than St. Michele of Pavia, and the 
method of workmanship is altogether different. In the Pavian 
church, nearly all the ornament is cut in a coarse sandstone, 
in bold relief : a darker and harder stone (1 think, not serpen- 
tine, but its surface is so disguised by the lustre of ages that 
I could not be certain) is used for the capitals of the western 
door, which are especially elaborate in their sculpture ;—two 
devilish apes, or apish devils, I know not which, with bristly 
moustaches and edgy teeth, half-crouching, with their hands 
impertinently on their knees, ready for a spit or a spring if 
one goes near them ; but all is pure bossy sculpture ; there is 
no inlaying, except of some variegated tiles in the shape of 
saucers set concave (an ornament used also very gracefully in 
St. Jacopo of Bologna) : and the whole surface of the church 
is enriched with the massy reliefs, well preserved everywhere 
above the reach of human animals, but utterly destroyed to 
some five or six feet from the ground ; worn away into large 
cellular hollows and caverns, some almost deep enough to ren- 
der the walls unsafe, entirely owing to the uses to which the 
recesses of the church are dedicated by the refined and high- 
minded Italians. But St. Michele of Lucca is wrought en- 
tirely in white marble and green serpentine ; there is hardly 
any relieved sculpture except in the capitals of the shafts and 
cornices, and all the designs of wall ornament are inlaid with 
exquisite precision—white on dark ground ; the ground being 
cut out and filled with serpentine, the figures left in solid 
marble. The designs of the Pavian church are encrusted on 
the walls; of the Lucchese, incorporated with them; small 
portions of real sculpture being introduced exactly where the 
eye, after its rest on the flatness of the wall, will take most 
delight in th2 piece of substantial form, The entire arrange- 
ment is perfect beyond all praise, and the morbid restlessness 
of the old designs is now appeased.” Geometry seems to have 
acted as a febrifuge, for beautiful geometrical designs are in- 
troduced amidst the tumult of the hunt ; and there is no more 
seeing double, nor ghastly monstrosity of conception ; no more 

stores of Venice—Vol. I.—17 


370 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


ending of everything in something else ; no more disputing 
for spare legs among bewildered bodies ; no more setting on 
of heads wrong side foremost. The fragments have come 
together: we are out of the Inferno with its weeping dowa 
the spine ; we are in the fair hunting-fields of the Lucchese 
mountains (though they had their tears also),—with horse, 
and hound, and hawk; and merry blast of the truampet.—Very 
strange creatures to be hunted, in all truth ; but still creatures 
with a single head, and that on their shoulders, which is ex- 
actly the last place in the Pavian church where a head is to be 
looked for. 

My good friend Mr. Cockerell wonders, in one of his lect- 
ures, why I give so much praise to this “crazy front of 
Lucca.” Butit is not crazy; not by any means. Altogether 
sober, in comparison with the early Lombard work, or with 
our Norman. Crazy in one sense it is: utterly neglected, to 
the breaking of its old stout heart; the venomous nights and 
salt frosts of the Maremma winters have their way with it— 
“Poor Tom’s a cold!” The weeds that feed on the marsh 
air, have twisted themselves into its crannies ; the polished 
fragments of serpentine are split and rent out of their cells, 
and lie in green ruins along its ledges; the salt sea winds 
have eaten away the fair shafting of its star window into a 
skeleton of crumbling rays. It cannot stand much longer; 
may Heaven only, in its benignity, preserve it from restora 
tion, and the sands of the Serchio give it honcrable grave. 

In the “Seven Lamps,” Plate VI, I gave a faithful drawing 
of one of its upper arches, to which I must refer the reader ; 
for there is a marked piece of character in the figure of the _ 
horseman on the left of it. And in making this reference, J 
would say a few words about those much abused plates of the 
“Seven Lamps.” They are black, they are’ overbitten, they 
are hastily drawn, they are coarse and disagreeable ; how dis- 
agreeable to many readers I venture not to conceive. But 
their truth is carried to an extent never before attempted in 
architectural drawing. It does not in the least follow that 
because a drawing is delicate, or looks careful, it haa been 
varefully drawn from the thing represented ; in nine mstanceg 


APPENDI. 371 


put of ten, careful and delicate drawings are made at home. 
It is not so easy as the reader, perhaps, imagines, to finish a 
drawing altogether on the spot, especially of details seventy 
feet from the ground ; and any one who will try the position 
in which I have had to do some of my work—standing, 
namely, on a cornice or window sill, holding by one arm 
round a shaft, and hanging over the street (or canal, at Ven- 
icc), with my sketch-book supported against the wall from 
which I was drawing, by my breast, so as to leave my right 
hand free—will not thenceforward wonder that shadows 
should be occasionally carelessly laid in, or lines drawn with 
some unsteadiness. But, steady, or infirm, the sketches of 
which those plates in the “‘ Seven Lamps” are fac-similes, were 
made from the architecture itself, and represent that archi- 
tecture with its actual shadows at the time of day at which it 
was drawn, and with every fissure and line of it as they now 
exist ; so that when I am speaking of some new point, which 
perhaps the drawing was not intended to illustrate, I can yet 
turn back to it with perfect certainty that if anything be found 
in it bearing on matters now in hand, I may depend upon it 
just as securely as if Ihad gone back to look again at the 
building. nets 

It is necessary that my readers should understand this 
thoroughly, and I did not before sufficiently explain it ; but I 
believe I can show them the use of this kind of truth, now 
that we are again concerned with this front of Lucca. They 
will find a drawing of the entire front in Gally Knight’s “Ar. 
. chitecture of Italy.” It may serve to give them an idea of ita 
general disposition, and it looks very careful and accurate ; 
but every bit of the ornament on it is drawn out of the artist’s 
head. There is not one line of it that exists on the building. 
The reader will therefore, perhaps, think my ugly black plate 
of somewhat more value, upon the whole, in its rough veracity, 
than the other in its delicate fiction.* 


“One of the upper stories is also in Gally Knight’s plate represented 
as merely banded, and otherwise plain: it is, in reality, covered with 
as delicate inlaying as the rest. The whoie front is besides out of pro 
portion, ani ou: or perspective, at ouoy; and yet this work is referred 


872 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


As, however, I made a drawing of another part of the church 
somewhat more delicately, and asI do not choose that my 
favorite church should suffer in honor by my coarse work, I 
have had this, as far as might be, fac-similied by line engray- 
ing (Plate XXI.). It represents the southern side of the 
Jower arcade of the west front ; and may convey some idea o% 
the exquisite finish and grace of the whole ; but the old plate, 
in the ‘Seven Lamps,” gives a nearer view of one of the up- 
per arches, and a more faithful impression of the present 
aspect of the work, and especially of the seats of the horse- 
men ; the limb straight, and well down on the stirrup (the 
warrior’s seat, observe, not the jockey’s), with a single pointed 
spur on the heel, The bit of the lower cornice under thir 
arch I could not see, and therefore had not drawn ; it was 
supplied from beneath another arch. I am afraid, however, 
the reader has lost the thread of my story while I have been 
recommending my veracity to him. J was insisting upon the 
healthy tone of this Lucca work as compared with the old 
spectral Lombard friezes. The apes of the Pavian church ride 
without stirrups, but all is in good order and harness here: 
civilisation had done its work ; there was reaping of corn in 
the Val d’Arno, though rough hunting still upon its hills. But 
in the north, though a century or two later, we find the for- 
ests of the Rhone, and its rude limestone cotes, haunted by 
phantasms still (more meat-eating, then, I think). I do not 
know a more interesting group of cathedrals than that of 
Lyons, Vienne, and Valencia: a more interesting indeed, gen- 
erally, than beautiful ; but there is a row of niches on the 
west front of Lyons, and a course of panelled decoration about 
its doors, which is, without exception, the most exquisite . 
piece of Northern Gothic I ever beheld, and with which I 


to as of authority, by our architects. Well may our architecture fall 
from its place among the fine arts, as it ia doing rapidly ; nearly all our 
works of value being devoted to the Greek architecture, which is utterly 
useless 10 us—or worse. One most noble book, however has been ded 
jeated to our English abbeys,—Mr. E. Sharpe’s ‘‘ Architectural Paral. 
lels ‘— almost a model of what I should like to see done for the Gothis 
at all Huropa, 


APPENDIX. 373 


know nothing that is even comparable, except the work of the 
north transept of Rouen, described in the “Seven Lamps,” 
p. 164; work of about the same date, and exactly the same 


plan ; 


quatrefoils filled with grotesques, but somewhat less 


finished in execution, and somewhat less wild in imagination. 
I wrote down hastily, and in their own course, the subjects ot 
some of the quatrefoils of Lyons ; of which I here give the 
reader the sequence :— 


1. 


2. 


Elephant and castle; less graphic than the St. Zene 
one. 

A huge head walking on two legs, turned backwards, 
hoofed ; the head has a horn behind, with drapery 
over it, which ends in another head. 


. A boar hunt; the boar under a tree, very spirited. 
. A bird putting its head between its legs to bite its own 


tail, which ends in a head. 


. A dragon with a human head set on the wrong way. 
. St. Peter awakened by the angel in prison ; full of spirit, 


the prison picturesque, with a trefoiled arch, the an- 
gel eager, St. Peter startled, and full of motion, 


. St. Peter led out by the angel. 
. The miraculous draught of fishes; fish and all, in the 


small space. 


. A large loaf, with two snails rampant, coming out of 


nautilus shells, with grotesque faces, and eyes at the 
ends of their horns. 


. Aman with an axe striking at adog’s head, which comes 


out of a nautilus shell : the rim of the shell branches 
into a stem with two large leaves. 


. Martyrdom of St. Sebastian ; his body very full of ar- 


rows. 


. Beasts coming to ark ; Noah opening a kind of wicker 


cage. 


. Noah building the ark on shores. 
. A vineleaf with a dragon’s head and tail, the one biting 


the other, 


. A man riding a goat, catching a flying devil, 


874 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


16. An eel or muraena growing into a bunch of flowers, 
which turns into two wings. 

17. A sprig of hazel, with nuts, thrown all around the 
quatrefoils with a squirrel in centre, apparently at- 
tached to the tree only by its enormous tail, richly 
furrowed into hair, and nobly sweeping. 

18. Four hares fastened together by the ears, galloping in 
a circle. Mingled with these grotesques are many 
sword and buckler combats, the bucklers being 
round and conical like a hat; I thought the first I 
noticed, carried by a man at full gallop on horseback, 
had been a small umbrella. 


This list of subjects may sufficiently illustrate the feverish 
character of the Northern Energy ; but influencing the treat- 
ment of the whole there is also the Northern love of what is 
called the Grotesque, a feeling which I find myself, for the 
present, quite incapable either of analysing or defining, though 
we all have a distinct idea attached to the word : I shall try, 
however, in the next volume. 


9. WOODEN CHURCHES OF THE NORTH. 


I cannot pledge myself to this theory of the origin of the 
vaulting shaft, but the reader will find some interesting con- 
firmations of itin Dahl’s work on the wooden churches of Nor- 
way. The inside view of the church of Borgund shows the 
timber construction of one shaft run up through a crossing 
architrave, and continued into the clerestory; while the 
church of Urnes is in the exact form of a basilica; but the . 
wall above the arches is formed of planks, with a strong up- 
right above each capital. The passage quoted from Stephen 
Kddy’s Life of Bishop Wilfrid, at p. 86 of Churton’s “ Karly 
English Church,” gives us one of the transformations of petri- 
factions of the wooden Saxon churcies. “At Ripon he built 
a new church of polished stone, with columns variously orna- 
mented, and porches.” Mr. Churton adds: “It was perhaps 
in bad imitation of the marble buildings he had seen in Italy, 


APPENDIX. 875 


that he washed the walls of this original York Minster, and 
made them ‘whiter than snow.’” 


10. cHURCH OF ALEXANDRIA. 


The very cause which enabled the Venetians to possess 
themselves of the body of St. Mark, was the destruction of the 
church by the caliph for the sake of its marbies : the Arabs and 
Venetians, though bitter enemies, thus building on the same 
models; these in reverence for the destroyed church, and 
those with the very pieces of it. In the somewhat prolix ac- 
count of the matter given in the Notizie Storiche (above 
quoted) the main points are, that “il Califa de’ Saraceni, per 
_ fabbricars; un Palazzo presse di Babilonia, aveva ordinato che 
dalle Chiese d’ Cristiani si togliessero i pit scelti marmi ;” 
and that the Venetians, “videro sotto i loro occhi flagellarsi 
crudelinente un Cristiano per aver infranto un marmo.” I 
heartily wish that the same kind of punishment were enforced 
to this dy, for the same sin. 


11. RENAISSANCE LANDSCAPE. 


Iam glad here to re-assert opinions which it has grieved 
me to be suspected of having changed. The calmer tone of 
the second volume of ‘Modern Painters,” as compared with 
the first, induced, I believe, this suspicion, very justifiably, in 
the minds of many of its readers. The difference resulted, 
however, from the simple fact, that the first was written in 
great haste and indignation, for a special purpose and time ; 
—the second, after I had got engaged, almost unawares, in 
inquiries which could not be hastily nor indignantly pursued ; 
my opinions remaining then, and remaining now, altogether 
unchanged on the subject which led me into the discussion. 
And that no farther doubt of them may be entertained by any 
who may think them worth questioning, I shall here, once for 
all, express them in the plainest and fewest wordsI can. I 
think that J. M. W. Turner is not only the greatest (professed) 
landscape painter who ever lived, but that he has in him as 
much as would have furnished all the rest with such power as 
they had; and that if we put Nicolo Poussin, Salvator and 


376 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


our own Gainsborough out of the group, he would cut up inte 
Claudes, Cuyps, Ruysdaels, and such others, by uncounted 
bunches. I hope this is plainly and strongly enough stated. 
And farther, I like his later pictures, up to the year 1845, the 
best ; and believe that those persons who only like his early 
pictures do not, in fact, like him at all. They do not like that 
which is essentially his. They like that in which he resem- 
bles other men ; which he had learned from Loutherbourg, 
Claude, or Wilson ; that which is indeed his own, they do not 
care for. Not that there is not much of his own in his early 
works ; they are all invaluable in their way ; but those per- 
sons who can find no beauty in his strangest fantasy on the 
Academy walls, cannot distinguish the peculiarly Turneresque 
characters of the earlier pictures. And, therefore, I again 
state here, that I think his pictures painted between the years 
1830 and 1845 his phi and that his entire power is best 

represented by such pictures as the 


Turner. Tintoret. Temeraire, the Sun of Venice going to 
Massaccio. Sea, and others, painted exactly at the 
John Bellini. time when the public and the prese 
Albert Durer. were together loudest in abuse of him. 
Giorgione. I desire, however, the reader to ob- 
Paul Veronese. serve that I said, above, professed 
Titian. landscape painters, among whom, per- 
Rubens. haps, I should hardly have put Gains- 
Correggio. borough, The landscape of the great 
Orcagna. figure painters is cften majestic in the 
Benozzo Gozzoli. highest degree, and ‘Tintoret’s espe- 
Giotto. cially shows exactly the same power 
Raffaelle. and feeling as Turner’s. If with Turner 
Perugino. I were to rank the historical painters as 


landscapists, estimating rather the 
power they show, than the actual value of the landscape they 
produced, I should class those, whose landscapes I have 
studied, in some such order as this at the side of the page :— 
associating with the landscape of Perugino that of Francia and 
Angelico, and the other severe painters of religious subjects, 
i have put Turner and Tintoret side bv side. not knowing 


APPENDIX. 377 


which is, in landscape, the greater; I had nearly associated 
in the same manner the noble names of John Bellini and Albert 
Durer ; but Bellini must be put first, for his profound religious 
peace yet not separated from the other, if but that we might 
remember his kindness to him in Venice; and.it is well we 
should take note of it here, for it furnishes us with a most 
interesting confirmation of what was said in the text respect- 
ing the position of Bellini as the last of the religious painters 
of Venice. The following passage is quoted in Jackson’s 
“Essay on Wood-engraving,” from Albert Durev’s Diary : 

“T have many good friends among the Italians who warn 
me not to eat or drink with their painters, of whom several 
are my enemies, and copy my picture in the church, and 
others of mine, wherever they can find them, and yet they 
blame them, and say they are not according to ancient art, and 
therefore not good. Giovanni Bellini, however, has praised me 
highly to several gentlemen, and wishes to have something of 
my doing: he called on me himself, and requested that I 
would paint a picture for him, for which, he said, he would pay 
me well. People are all surprised that I should be so much 
thought of by a person of his reputation : he is very old, but 
is still the best painter of them all.” 

A choice little piece of description this, of the Renaissance 
painters, side by side with the good old Venetian, who was 
soon to leave them to their own ways. The Renaissance men 
are seen in perfection, envying, stealing, and lying, but with- 
out wit enough to lie to purpose. 


12. ROMANIST MODERN ART. 


It is of the highest importance, in these days, that Roman- 
ism should be deprived of the miserable influence which its 
pomp and picturesqueness have given it over the weak senti- 
mentalism of the English people ; I call it a miserable influ- 
ence, for of all motives to sympathy with the Church of Rome, 
this I unhesitatingly class as the basest : I can, in some meas- 
ure, respect the other feelings which have been the beginnings 
of apostasy ; I can respect the desire for unity which would 


B78 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


reclaim the Romanist by love, and the distrust of his own 
heart which subjects the proselyte to priestly power ; I say I 
can respect these feelings, though I cannot pardon unprinci- 
pled submission to them, nor enough wonder at the infinite 
fatuity of the unhappy persons whom they have betrayed :— 
Fatuity, self-inflicted, and stubborn in resistance to God’s 
Word and man’s reason!—to talk of the authority of the 
Church, as if the Church were anything else than the whole 
company of Christian men, or were ever spoken of in Scripture* 
as other than a company to be taught and fed, not to teach 
and feed.—Fatuity ! to talk of a separation of Church and 
State, as if a Christian state, and every officer therein, were 
not necessarily a part of the Church,t and as if any state 
officer could do his duty without endeavoring to aid and pro- 
mote religion, or any clerical officer do his duty without seek- 
ing for such aid and accepting it :—Fatuity! to seek for the 
unity of a living body of truth and trust in God, with a dead 
body of lies and trust in wood, and thence to expect anything 
else than plague, and consumption by worms undying, for 
both. Blasphemy as well as fatuity ! to ask for any better inter- 
preter of God’s Word than God, or to expect knowledge of it 
in any other way than the plainly ordered way: if any man 
will po he shall know. But of all these fatuities, the basest is 
the being lured into the Romanist Church by the glitter of it, 
like larks intoa trap by broken glass; to be blown into a 
change of religion by the whine of an organ-pipe ; stitched 
into a new creed by gold threads on priests’ petticoats ; jan- 
gled into a change of conscience by the chimes of a belfry. 


* Except in the single passage ‘‘tell it unto the Church,” which is | 
simply the extension of what had been commanded before, i.e., tell the 
fault first ‘* between thee and him,” then taking ‘‘ with thee one or two 
more,” then, to all Christian men capable of hearing the cause: if he 
refuse to hear their common voice, ‘‘ let him be unto thee as a heathen 
man and publican: ’? (But consider how Christ treated both.) 

+ One or two remarks on this subject, some of which I had intended 
to have inserted here, and others in Appendix 5, I have arranged ir 
more consistent order, and published in a separate pamphlet, ‘‘ Notes om 
the Construction of Sheep-folds,” for the convenience of readers inter 
ested in other architecture than that of Venetian palaces. 


APPENDIX. 379 


kh know nothing in the shape of error so dark as this, no 
tmbecility so absolute, no treachery so contemptible. I had 
hardly believed thatit wasa thing possible, though vague stories 
had been told me of the effect, on some minds, of mere scarlet 
and candles, until I came on this passage in Pugin’s “ Remarks 
on articles in the Rambler” :— 

“Those who have lived in want and privation are the best 
qualified to appreciate the blessinge of plenty ; thus, those 
who have been devout and sincere members of the separated 
portion of the English Church ; who have prayed, and hoped, 
and loved, through all the poverty of the maimed rites which 
it has retained—to them does the realisation of all their long- 
ing desires appear truly ravishing. * * * Oh! then, what 
delight ! what joy unspeakable! when one of the solemn piles 
is presented to them, in all its pristine life and glory !—the 
stoups are filled to the brim; the rood is raised on high ; the 
screen glows with sacred imagery and rich device ; the niches 
are filled ; the altar is replaced, sustained by sculptured shafts, 
the relics of the saints repose beneath, the body of Our Lord 
is enshrined on its consecrated stone ; the lamps of the sanc- 
tuary burn bright ; the saintly portraitures in the glass win- 
dows shine all gloriously ; and the albs hang in the oaken 
ambries, and the cope chests are filled with orphreyed baude- 
kins ; and pix and pax, and chrismatory are there, and thuri- 
ble, and cross.” 

One might have put this man under a pix, and left him, one 
should have thought ; but he has been brought forward, and 
partly received, as an example of the effect of ceremonial 
splendor on the mind of a great architect. It is very neces- 
sary, therefore, that all those who have felt sorrow at this 
should know at once that he is not a great architect, but one 
of the smallest possible or conceivable architects ; and that 
by his own account and setting forth of himself. -Hear 
him :— 

“T believe, as regards architecture, few men have been so 
unfortunate as myself. I have passed my life-in thinking of 
fine things, studying fine things; designing fine things, and 
realising very poor ones. I have never had the chance of pro 


480 THE STON#S OF VENICE. 


ducing a single fine ecclesiastical building, except my own 
church, where I am both paymaster and architect ; but every- 
thing else, either for want of adequate funds or injudicious in- 
terference and control, or some other contingency, is more or 
less a failure. * & ¥ 

“St. George’s was spoilt by the very instructions laid down 
by the committee, that it was to hold 3000 people on the: floor 
at a limited price ; in consequence, height, proportion, every-_ 
thing, was sacrificed to meet these conditions. Nottingham 
was spoilt by the style being restricted to lancet,—a period 
well suited to a Cistercian abbey in a secluded vale, but very 
unsuitable for the centre of a crowded town. ay Bod ae 

“Kirkham was spoilt through several hundred pounds being 
reduced on the original estimate ; to effect this, which was a 
great sum in proportion to the éntixe cost, the area of the 
church was contracted, the walls lowered, tower and spire re- 
duced, the thickness of walls diminished, and stone arches 
omitted.” (Remarks, &ec., by A. Welby Pugin : Dolman, 1850.) 

Is that so? Phidias can niche himself into the cornez of a 
pediment, and Raffaelle expatiate within the circumference of 
a clay platter ; but Pugin is inexpressible in less than a cathe- 
dral? Let his ineffableness be assured of this, once for all, 
that no difficulty or restraint ever happened to a man of real 
power, but his power was the more manifested in the contend- 
ing with, or conquering it ; and that there is no field so small, 
no cranny so contracted, but that a great spirit can house and 
manifest itself therein. The thunder that smites the Alp into 
dust, can gather itself into the width of a golden wire. What- 
ever greatness there was in you, had it been Buonarroti’s - 
own, you had room enough for it in a single niche: you 
might have put the whole power of it into two feet cube of 
Caen stone. St. George's was not high enough for want of 
money? But was. it want of money that made you put that 
blunt, overloaded, laborious ogee door into the side of it? 
Was it for lack of funds that you sunk the tracery of the par- 
apet in its clumsy zigzags? Was it in parsimony that. you 
buried its paltry pinnacles in that eruption of diseased 
crockets? or in pecuniary embarrassment that you set up the 


APPENDIX. 881 


Selfry foclscaps, with the mimicry of dormer windows, which 
nobody can ever reach nor look out of? Not so, but in mere 
incapability of better things. 

Iam sorry to have to speak thus of any living architect ; 
and there is much in this man, if he were rightly estimated, 
which one might both regard and profit by. He has a most 
sincere love for his profession, a heartily honest enthusiasm for 
pixes and piscinas ; and though he will never design so much 
as a pix or a piscina thoroughly well, yet. better than most of 
the experimental architects of the day. Emplcy him by all 
means, but on small work. Expect no cathedrals from him ; 
but no one, at present, can design a better finial. That is an ex- 
ceedingly beautiful one over the western door of St. George’s ; 
and there is some spirited impishness and switching of tails in 
the supporting figures at the imposts. Only do not allow his 
good designing of finials to be employed as an evidence in 
matters of divinity, nor thence deduce the incompatibility of 
Protestantism and art. I should have said all that I have said 
above, of artistical apostasy, if Giotto had been now living in 
Florence, and if art were still doing all that it did once for 
Rome. But the grossness of the error becomes incomprehen- 
sible as well as unpardonable, when we look to what level of 
degradation the human intellect has sunk at this instant in 
Italy.’ So far from Romanism now producing anything greater 
in art, it cannot even preserve what has been given to its keep- 
ing. I know no abuses of precious inheritance half so grievous, 
as the abuse of all that is best in art wherever the Romanist 
priesthood gets possession of it. It amounts to absolute in- 
fatuation. The noblest pieces of medizeval sculpture in North 
Italy, the two griffins at the central (west) door of the cathee 
dral of Verona, were daily permitted to be brought into ser- 
vice, when I was there in the autumn of 1849, by a washer- 
woman living in the Piazza, who tied her clothes-lines to their 
beaks: and the shafts of St. Mark’s at Venice were used by 
a salesman of common caricatures to fasten his prints upon 
(Compare Appendix 25) ; and this in the face of the continu. 
ally passing priests: while the quantity of noble art annually 
destroyed in altarpieces by candle-droppings, or perishing by 


382 Tun STONHS OF VENICE. 


pure brutality of neglect, passes all estimate. Ido not know, 
as I have repeatedly stated, how far the splendor of architect- 
ure, or other art, is compatible with the honesty and useful- 
ness of religious service. The longer I live, the more I incline 
to severe judgment in this matter, and the less I can trust the 
sentiments excited by painted glass and colored tiles. But if 
there be indeed value in such things, our plain duty is to direct 
our strength against the superstition which has dishonored 
them ; there are thousands who might possibly be benefited 
by them, to whom they are now merely an offence, owing to 
their association with idolatrous ceremonies. I have but this 
exhortation for all who love them,—not to regulate their 
creeds by their taste in colors, but to hold calmly to the right, 
at whatever present cost to their imaginative enjoyment ; sure 
that they will one day find in heavenly truth a brighter charm 
than in earthly imagery, and striving to gather stones for the 
etérnal building, whose walls shall be salvation, and whose 
gates shall be praise. 


13. MR. FERGUSSON’S SYSTEM. 


The reader may at first suppose this division of the attri- 
‘butes of buildings into action, voice, and beauty, to be the 
same division as Mr. Fergusson’s, now well known, of their 
merits, into technic, zesthetic and phonetic. . 

But there is no connection between the two systems ; mine, 
indeed, does not profess to bea system, it is a mere arrange- 
ment of my subject, for the sake of order and convenience in 
its treatment: but, as far as it goes, it differs altogether from ~ 
Mr. Fergusson’s in these two following respects :— 

The action of a building, that is to say its standing or con- 
sistence, depends on its good construction ; and the first part 
of the foregoing volume has been entirely occupied with the 
consideration of the constructive merit of buildings ; but con- 
struction is not their only technical merit. There is as much 
of technical merit in their expression, or in their beauty, as in 
their construction. There is no more mechanical or technical 
admirableness in the stroke of the painter who covers ther 


APPENDIX. 383 


with fresco, than in the dexterity of the mason who cements 
their stones: there is just as much of what is technical in 
their beauty, therefore, as in their construction ; and, on the 
other hand, there is often just as much intellect shown in 
their construction as there is in either their expression or 
decoration. Now Mr. Fergusson means by his “ Phonetic” 
division, whatever expresses intellect: my constructive divis- 
ion, therefore, includes part of his phonetic: and my ex- 
pressive and decorative divisions include part of his technical. 

Secondly, Mr. Fergusson tries to make the same divisions 
fit the subjects of art, and art itself; and therefore talks of 
technic, zesthetic, and phonetic, arts, (or, translating the Greek,) 
of artful arts, sensitive arts, and talkative arts; but I have 
nothing to do with any division of the arts, I have to deal only 
with the merits of buildings. As, however, I have been led 
into reference to Mr. Fergusson’s system, I would fain say a 
word or two to effect Mr. Fergusson’s extrication from it. I 
hope to find in him a noble ally, ready to join with me in war 
upon affectation, falsehood, and prejudice, of every kind; I 
have derived much instruction from his most interesting work, . 
and I hope for much more from its continuation ; but he must 
disentangle himself from his system, or he will be strangled 
by it ; never was anything so ingeniously and hopelessly wrong 
throughout ; the whole of it is founded on a confusion of the 
instruments of man with his capacities. 

Mr. Fergusson would have us take— 

“First, man’s muscular action or power.” (Technics.) 

“ Secondly, those developments of sense by which he does ! ! 

as much as by his muscles.” (Austhetics.) 
“Lastly, his intellect, or to confine this more correctly to its 
external action, his power of speech!!!” (Phonetics.) 

Granting “his division of humanity correct, or sufficient, the 
writer then most curiously supposes that he may arrange the 
arts as if there were some belonging to each division of man,— 
never observing that every art must be governed by, and ad- 
dressed to, one division, and executed by another ; executed 
by the muscular, addressed to the sensitive or intellectual ; 
and that, tobe an art at all, it must have in it work of the 


384 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


one, and guidance from the other. If, by any lucky accident, 
he had been led to arrange the arts, either by their objects, 
and the things to which they are addressed, or by their means, 
and the things by which they are executed, he would havs 
discovered his mistake in an instant. As thus :— 


These arts are addressed to the,—Muscles!! 
Senses, 
Intellect ; 
or executed by,—Muscles, 
Senses !! 
Intellect. 


Indeed it is true that some of the arts are in a sort addressed 
to the muscles, surgery for instance ; but this is not among 
Mr Fergusson’s technic, but his politic, arts! and all the arts 
may, in a sort, be said to be performed by the senses, as the 
senses guide both muscles and intellect in their work: but 
they guide them as they receive information, or are standards 
of accuracy, but not as in themselves capable of action. Mr. 
Fergusson is, I believe, the first person who has told us of 
senses that act or do, they having been hitherto supposed only 
to sustain or perceive. The weight of error, however, rests 
just as much in the original division of man, as in the en- 
deavor to fit the arts to it. The slight omission of the soul 
makes a considerable difference when it begins to influence 
the final results of the arrangement. 

Mr. Fergusson calls morals and religion ‘‘ Politick arts” (as 
if religion were an art at all! or as if both were not as neces- 
sary to individuals as to societies); and therefore, forming” 
these into a body of arts by themselves, leaves the best of the 
arts to do without the soul and the moral feeling as best they 
may. Hence “expression,” or ‘“ phonetics,” is of intellect 
only (as if men never expressed their feelings /); and then, 
strangest and worst of all, intellect is entirely resolved into 
talking! There can be no inteliect but it must talk, and all 
talking must be intellectual. I believe people do sometimes 
talk without understanding ; and I think the world would 
fare ill if they never understood without talking The intek 


“ 


APPENDIX. 38h 


lect is an entirely silent faculty, and has nothing to do with 
parts of speech any more than the moral part has. A man 
may feel and know things without expressing either the feel- 
ing or knowledge; and the talking is a muscular mode of 
communicating the workings of the intellect or heart :—mus- 
cular, whether it be by tongue or by sign, or by carving or 
writing, or by expression of feature ; so that to divide a man 
into muscular and talking parts, is to divide him into body in 
general, and tongue in particular, the endless confusion re- 
sulting from which arrangement is only less marvellous in 
itself, than the resolution with which Mr. Fergusson has 
worked through it, and in spite of it, up to some very interest- 
ing and suggestive truths ; although starting with a division 
of humanity which does not in the least raise it above the 
brute, for a rattlesnake has his muscular, esthetic, and talk- 
ing part as much as man, only he talks with his tail, and says, 
“Tam angry with you, and should like to bite you,” more la- 
conically and effectively than any phonetic biped could, were 
he so minded, And, in fact, the real difference between the 
brute and man is not so much that the one has fewer means of 
expression than the other, as that it has fewer thoughts to ex- 
press, and that we do not understand its expressions. Ani- 
mals can talk to one another intelligibly enough when they 
have anything to say, and their captains have words of com- 
mand just as clear as ours, and better cbeyed. We have in- 
deed, in watching the efforts of an intelligent animal to talk 
to a human being, a melancholy sense of its dumbness; but 
the fault is still in its intelligence, more than in its tongue. It 
has not wit enough to systematise its cries or signs, and form 
them into language. 

But there is no end to the fallacies and confusions of Mr. 
Fergusson’s arrangement. It is a perfect entanglement of 
gun-cotton, and explodes into vacuity wherever one holds a 
light to it. I shall leave him to do so with the rest of it for 
himself, and should perhaps have left it to his own handling 
altogether, but for the intemperateness of the spirit with 
which he has spoken on a subject perhaps of all others de- 
manding gentleness and caution, No man could more ear 

Vou, L-~25 


3886 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


nestly have desired the changes lately introduced into the sys 
tem of the University of Oxford than I did myself; no man 
can be more deeply sensible than I of grievous failures in the 
practical working even of the present system: but I believe 
that these failures may be almost without exception traced to 
one source, the want of evangelical, and the excess of rubrical 
religion among the tutors ; together with such rustiness and 
stiffness as necessarily attend the continual operation of any 
intellectual machine. The fault is, at any rate, far less in the 
system than in the imperfection of its administration ; and 
had it been otherwise, the terms in which Mr. Fergusson 
speaks of it are hardly decorous in one who can but be imper- 
fectly acquainted with its working. They are sufficiently an- 
swered by the structure of the essay in which they occur ; for 
if the high powers of mind which its author possesses had 
been subjected to the discipline of the schools, he could not 
have wasted his time on the development of a system which 
their simplest formule of logic would have shown him to be 
untenable. 

Mr. Fergusson will, however, find it easier to overthrow his 
system than to replace it. Every man of science knows the 
difficulty of arranging a reasonable system of classification, in 
any subject, by any one group of characters ; and that the 
best classifications are, in many of their branches, convenient 
rather than reasonable: so that, to any person who is really 
master of his subject, many different modes of classification 
will occur at different times; one of which he will use rather 
than another, according to the point which he has to investi- 
gate. I need only instance the three arrangements of miner- ~ 
als, by their external characters, and their positive or negative 
bases, of which the first is the most useful, the second the 
most natural, the third the most simple; and all in several: 
ways unsatisfactory. 

But when the subject becomes one which no single mind 
can grasp, and which embraces the whole range of human 
occupation and enquiry, the difficulties become as great, and 
the methods as various, as the uses to which the classification 
might be put; and Mr. Fergusson has entirely forgotten te 


APPENDIX. 387 


inform us what is the object to which his arrangements are 
addressed. For observe: there is one kind of arrangement 
which is based on the rational connection of the sciences or 
arts with one another ; an arrangement which maps them out 
like the rivers of some great country, and marks tho points of 
their junction, and the direction and force of thoir united 
currents ; and this without assigning to any one of them a 
superiority above another, but considering them all as neces- 
sary members of the noble unity of human science and effort. 
There is another kind of classification which contemplates the 
order of succession in which they might most usefully be pre- 
sented to a single mind, so that the given mind should obtain 
the most effective and available knowledge of them all: and, 
finally, the most usual classification contemplates the powers 
of mind which they each require for their pursuit, the objects 
to which they are addressed, or with which they are con- 
cerned ; and assigns to each of them a rank superior or in- 
ferior, according to the nobility of the powers they require, 
or the grandeur of the subjects they contemplate. 

Now, not only would it be necessary to adopt a different 
classification with respect to each of these great intentions, 
but it might be found so even to vary the order of the suc- 
cession of sciences in the case of every several mind to which 
they were addressed ; and that their rank would also vary 
with the power and specific character_of the mind engaged 
upon them. I once heard a very profound mathematician 
remonstrate against the impropriety of Wordsworth’s receiv- 
ing a pension from government, on the ground that he was 
“only a poet.” If the study of mathematics had always this 
narrowing effect upon the sympathies, the science itself would 
need to be deprived of the rank usually assigned to it; and 
there coul¢c. be no doubt that, in the effect it had on the mind 
of this man, and of such others, it was a very contemptible 
science indeed. Hence, in estimating the real rank of any 
art or science, it is necessary for us to conceive it as it would 
be grasped by minds of every order. There are some arts 
and sciences which we underrate, because no one has risen to 
show us with what majesty they may be invested ; and others 


888 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


which we overrate, because we are blinded to their general 
meanness by the magnificence which some one man has 
thrown around them: thus, philology, evidently the most 
contemptible of all the sciences, has been raised to unjust 
dignity by Johnson.* And the subject is farther compli- 
cated by the question cf usefulness ; for many cf tho arts anv. 
sciences require considorable intellectual power for their yur- 
suit, and yet become contemptible by the slightness o what 
they accomplish: metaphysics, for instance, exercising intel- 
ligence of a high order, yet useless to the mass of mankind, 
and, to its own masters, dangerous. Yet, as it has become 
so by the want of the true intelligence which its inquiries 
need, and by substitution of vain subtleties in its stead, it 
may in future vindicate for itself a higher rank than a man of | 
common sense usually concedes to it. 
Nevertheless, the mere attempt at arrangement must be 
useful, even where it does nothing more than develop difficul- 
ties. Perhaps the greatest fault of men of learning is their 
so often supposing all other branches of science dependent 
upon or inferior to their own best beloved branch ; and the 
greatest deficiency of men comparatively unlearned, their 
want of perception of the connection of the branches with 
each other. He who holds the tree only by the extremities, 
can perceive nothing but the separation of its sprays. Ii 
must always be desirable to prove to those the equality of 
rank, to these the closeness of sequonce, of what they had’ 
falsely supposed subordinate or separate. And, after sucb 
candid admission of the co-equal dignity of the truly noble 
arts and sciences, we may be enabled more justly to estimate 
the inferiority of those which indeed seem ‘ tended for the 
occupation of inferior powers and neviow r capacitics. In 
Appendix 14, following, some suggestions will bo found as 
to the principles on which classification might be based ; but 
the arrangement of all the arts is certainly not a work which 


* Not, however, by Johnson's testimeny: Vide Adventurer, No. 89. 
“Such operations as required neither celerity nor strength,—the low 
drudgery of collating copies, comparing authorities, digesting dictions 
rics, or accumulating compilations.”’ 


APPENDIX. 359 


vould with discretion be attempted in the Appendix to an 
essay on a branch of one of them. 


14. DIVISIONS -OF HUMANITY. 


The reader will probably understand this part of the sub. 
ject bettcr if he will tako the trouble briefly to consider the 
actions of the mind and body of man in the sciences and arts, 
which give theso latter tho rolations of rank usually attrib- 
uted to them. 

It was above observed (Appendix 13) that the arts were 
generally ranked according to the nobility of the powers they 
require, that is to say, the quantity of the being of man which 
:-ey engaged or addressed. Now their rank is not @ very 
important matter as regards cach other, for there are few dis- 
putes more futile than that concerning the respectivo dignity 
of arts, all of which are necossary and honorable. Lut it is a 
very important matter as regards thomsclves ; vory important 
whether they are practiscd with the devotion and regarded 
with the respoct which are necessary or due to their perfec- 
tion. It docs not at all matter whether architecture or sculpt- 
ure be the nobler art; but it matters much whether the 
thought is bestowed upon buildings, or the feeling is ex- 
pressed in statues, which make eithor deserving of our admi- 
ration. It is foolish and insolent to imagine that the art 
which we ourselves practise is greater than any other; but it 
is wise to take care that in our own hands it is as noble as we 
ean mako it. Let us take some notice, therefore, in what de- 
grecs the faculties of man may be engaged in his several arts: 
we may consider the entire man as made up of body, soul, 
and intellect (Lord Lindsay, meaning the same thing, says in- 
accurately—sense, intellect, and spirit—forgetting that there 
is a moral sense as well as a bodily sense, and a spiritual 
body as well as a natural body, and so gets into some awk- 
ward confusion, though right in the main points). Then, 
taking the word soul as a short expression of the moral and 
responsible part of being, each of these three parts has a pase 
sive and active power. The body has senses and muscles; 


390 THH STONES OF VENICE. 


the soul, feeling and resolution ; the intellect, understanding 
and imagination. The scheme may be put into tabular form, 
thus :— 


Passive or Receptive Part. Active or Motive Part 


Body - - - Senses. Muscles. 
Soul - - - Feeling. Resolution. 
Intellect - - - Understanding. Imagination. 


In this scheme I consider memory a part of understanding, 
and conscience I leave out, as being the voice of God in the 
heart, inseparable from the system, yet not an essential part 
of it. The sense of beauty I consider a mixture of the Senses 
of the body and soul. 

Now all these parts of the human system have a reciproca! 
action on one another, so that the true perfection of any of 
them is not possible without some relative perfection of the 
others, and yet any one of the parts of the system may be 
brought into a morbid development, inconsistent with the 
perfection of the others. Thus, in a healthy state, the acute- 
ness of the senses quickens that of the feelings, and these lat- 
ter quiclcn the undcrstanding, and then all the three quicken 
the imagination, and then al! the four strengthen the resolu- 
tion ; while yet there is a danger, on the other hand, that the 
encouraged and morbid feeling may weaken or bias the un- 
dorstanding, or that the over shrewd and keen understanding 
may shorten the imagination, or that the understanding and 
imagination together may take place of, or undermine, the 
resolution, 2s in Hamlet. So in the mere bodily frame thers . 
is a delightful perfection of the senses, consistent with the ut- 
most health of the muscular system, as in the quick sight and 
‘ hearing of an active savage: another false delicacy of the 
senses, in the Sybarite, consequent on their over indulgence, 
until the doubled rose-leaf is painful ; and this inconsistent 
with muscular perfection. Again; there is a perfection of 
muscular action consistent with exquisite sense, as in that of 
the fingers of a musician or of a painter, in which the muscle 
are guided by the slightest feeling of the strings, or cf the 


APPENDIX. 391 


pencil: another perfection of muscular action inconsistent 
with acuteness of sense, asin the effort of battle, in which a 
soldier does not perceive his wounds. So that it is never so 
much the question, what is the solitary perfection of a given 
part of the man, as what is its balanced perfection in relation 
to the whole of him : and again, the perfection of any single 
power is not merely to be valued by the mere rank of the 
power itself, but by the harmony which it indicates among 
the other powers. Thus, for instance, in an archer’s glance 
along his arrow, or a hunter’s raising of his rifle, there isa 
certain perfection of sense and finger which is the result of 
mere practice, of a simple bodily perfection ; but there is a 
farther value in the habit which results from the resolution 
and intellect necessary to the forming of it: in the hunter's 
raising of his rifle there is a quietness implying far more than 
mere practice,—implying courage, and habitual meeting of 
danger, and presence of mind, and many other such noble 
characters. So also in a musician’s way of laying finger on 
his instrument, or a painter’s handling of his pencil, there are 
many qualities expressive of the special sensibilities of each, 
operating on the production of the habit, besides the sensi- 
bility operating at the moment of action. So that there are 
three distinct stages of merit in what is commonly called 
mere bodily dexterity : the first, the dexterity given by prac- 
tice, called command of tools or of weapons; the second stage, 
the dexterity or grace given by character, as the gentleness of 
hand proceeding from modesty or tenderness of spirit, and the 
steadiness of it resulting from habitual patience coupled with 
decision, and the thousand other characters partially discerni: 
ble, even in a man’s writing, much more in his general handi- 
work ; and, thirdly, there is the perfection of action produced 
by the operation of present strength, feeling, or intelligence on 
instruments thus previously perfected, as the handling of a 
great painter is rendered more beautiful by his immediate 
care and feeling and love of his subject, or knowledge of it, 
and as physical strength is increased by strength of will and 
greatness of heart. Imagine, for instance, the difference in 
manner of fighting, and in actual muscular strength and en: 


892 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


durance, between a common soldier, and a man in the circum 
stances of the Horatii, or of the temper of Leonidas. 

Mere physical skill, therefore, the mere perfection and power 
of the body as an instrument, is manifested in three stages: 


First, Bodily power by practice ; 
Secondly, Bodily power by moral habit ; 
Thirdly, Bodily power by immediate energy ; 


and the arts will be greater or less, ceeteris paribus, according 
to the degrees of these dexterities which they admit. A smith’s 
work at his anvil admits little but the first ; fencing, shooting, 
and riding, admit something of the second ; while the fine arts 
admit (merely through the channel of the bodily dexterities) an 
expression almost of the whole man. 

Nevertheless, though the higher arts admit this higher bodily 
perfection, they do not all require it in equal degrees, but can 
dispense with it more and more in proportion to their dignity. 
The arts whose chief element is bodily dexterity, may be classed 
together as arts of the third order, of which the highest will 
be those which admit most of the power of moral habit and 
energy, such as riding and the management of weapons ; and 
the rest may be thrown together under the general title of 
handicrafts, of which it does not much matter which are the 
most honorable, but rather, which are the most necessary and 
least injurious to health, which it is not our present business 
to examine. Men engaged in the practice of these are called 
artizans, as opposed to artists, who are concerned with the 
fine arts. 

The next step in elevation of art is the addition of the intelli- - 
gences which have no connection with bodily dexterity ; as, for 
instance, in hunting, the knowledge of the habits of animals 
and their places of abode ; in architecture, of mathematics ; in 
painting, of harmonies of color ; in music, of those of sound 3 
all this pure science being joined with readiness of expedient. 
in applying it, and with shrewdness in apprehension of difficul- 
ties, either present or probable. 

It will often happen that intelligence of this kind is possesseg 


APPENDIX. 393 


without bodily dexterity, or the need of it ; one man directing 
and another executing, as for the most part in architecture, 
war, and seamanship. And it is to be observed, also, that in 
proportion to the dignity of the art, the bodily dexterities 
needed even in its subordinate agents become less important. 
and are more and more replaced by intelligence ; as in the 
steering of a ship, the bodily dexterity required is less than in 
shooting or fencing, but the intelligence far greater: and so in 
war, the mere swordsmanship and marksmanship of the troops 
are of small importance in comparison with their disposition, 
and right choice of the moment of action. So that arts of this 
second order must be estimated, not by the quantity of bodily 
dexterity they require, but by the quantity and dignity of the 
knowledge needed in their practice, and by the degree of 
subtlety needed in bringing such knowledge into play. War 
certainly stands first in the general mind, not only as the 
greatest of the arts which I have called of the second order, 
but as the greatest of all arts. It is not, however, easy to 
distinguish the respect paid to the Power, from that rendered 
to the Art of the soldier ; the honor of victory being more 
dependent, in the vulgar mind, on its results, than its difficul- 
ties. I believe, however, that taking into consideration the 
greatness of the anxieties under which this art must be prac- 
tised, the multitude of circumstances to be known and ree 
garded in it, and the subtleties both of apprehension and 
stratagem constantly demanded by it, as well as the multi- 
plicity of ‘disturbing accidents and doubtful contingencies 
against which it must make provision on the instant, it must 
indeed rank as far the first of the arts of the second order; 
and next to this great art of killing, medicine being much like 
war in its stratagems and watchings against its dark and 
subtle death-enemy. 

Then the arts of the first order will be those in which the 
Imaginative part of the intellect and the Sensitive part of the 
soul are joined: as poetry, architecture, and painting ; these 
forming a kind of cross, in their part of the scheme of the hu- 
man being, with those of the second order, which wed the In 
telligent part of the intellect and Resolute part of the soul 

Stones of Venice—Vol. I.—18 


894 THE STONES OF VENICEH. 


But the reader must feel more and more, at every step, the 
impossibility of classing the arts themselves, independently ot 
the men by whom they are practised ; and how an art, low in 
itself, may be made noble by the quantity of human strength 
and being which a great man will pour into it ; and an art, 
great in itself, be made mean by the meanness of the mind 
occupied in it. Ido not intend, when I call painting an art 
of the first, and war an art of the second, order, to class 
Dutch landscape painters with good soldiers ; but I mean, 
that if from such a man as Napoleon we were to take away 
the honor of all that he had done in law and civil government, 
and to give him the reputation of his soldiership only, his 
name would be less, if justly weighed, than that of Buon- 
arroti, himself a good soldier also, when need was. But I 
will not endeavor to pursue the inquiry, for I believe that of 
all the arts of the first order it would be found that all that a 
man has, or is, or can be, he can fully express in them, and 
give to any of them, and find it not enough. 


15. INSTINCTIVE JUDGMENTS. 


The same rapid judgment which I wish to enable the reader 
to form of architecture, may in some sort also be formed of 
painting, owing to the close connection between execution and 
expression in the latter ; as between structure and expression 

‘in the former. We ought to be able to tell good painting by 
a side glance as we pass along a gallery; and, until we can do 
80, we are not fit to pronounce judgment at all: not that I 
class this easily visible excellence of painting with the great ex- 
pressional qualities which time and watchfulness only unfold. 
I have again and again insisted on the supremacy of these 
last and shall always continue to do so. But I perceive a ten- 
dency among some of the more thoughtful critics of the day 
to forget that the business of a painter is to paint, and so al- 
together to despise those men, Veronese and Rubens for in- 
stance, who were painters, par excellence, and in whom the 
expressional qualities are subordinate. Now it is well, when 
we have strong moral or poetical feeling manifested in paint 
ing, to mark this as the best part of the work; but it is not 


APPENDIX, 395 


well to consider as a thing of small account, the painter’s lan- 
guage in which that feeling is conveyed ; for if that language 
be not good and lovely, the man may indeed be a just moral- 
ist or a great poet, but he is not a painter, and it was wrong 
of him to paint. He had much better put his morality into 
sermons, and his poetry into verse, than into a language 
of which he was not master. And this mastery of the lan- 
guage is that of which we should be cognizant by a glance of 
the eye; and if that be not found, it is wasted time to look 
farther : the man has mistaken his vocation, and his. expres- 
sion of himself will be cramped by his awkward efforts to do 
what he was not fit to do. On the other hand, if the man be 
a painter indeed, and have the gift of colors and lines, what 
isin him will come from his hand freely and faithfully ; and 
the language itself is so difficult and so vast, that the mere 
possession of it argues the man is great, and that his works 
are worth reading: So that I have never yet seen the case in 
which this true artistical excellence, visible by the eye-glance, 
was not the index of some true expressional worth in the 
work. Neither have I ever seen a good expressional work 
without high artistical merit: and that this is ever denied is 
only owing to the narrow view which men are apt to take both 
of expression and of art; a narrowness consequent on their 
own especial practice and habits of thought. A man long 
trained to love the monk’s visions of Fra Angelico, turns in 
proud and ineffable disgust from the first work of Rubens 
which he encounters on his return across the Alps. Butis he 
right in his indignation? He has forgotten, that while An- 
gelico prayed and wept in his olive shade, there was different 
work doing in the dank fields of Flanders ;—wild seas to be 
banked out; endless canals to be dug, and boundless marshes 
to be drained ; hard ploughing and harrowing of the frosty 
clay ; careful breeding of stout horses and fat cattle ; close 
setting of brick walls against cold winds and snow ; much 
hardening of hands and gross stoutening of bodies in all this ; 
gross jovialities of harvest homes and Christmas feasts, whick 
were to be the reward of it; rough affections, and sluggisk 
imagination ; fleshy, substantial, ironshod humanities, but 


396 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


humanities still; humanities which God had his eye upon, 
and which won, perhaps, here and there, as much favor 
in his sight as the wasted aspects of the whispering monks 
of Florence (Heaven forbid it should not be so, since the 
most of us cannot be monks, but must be ploughmen and 
‘reapers still). And are we to suppose there is no nobility 
in Rubens’ masculine and universal sympathy with all this, 
and with his large human rendering of it, Gentleman though 
he was, by birth, and feeling, and education, and place ; and, 
when he chose, lordly in conception also? He had his 
faults, perhaps great and. lamentable faults, though more 
those of his time and his country than his own; he has 
neither cloister breeding nor boudoir breeding, and is very 
unfit to paint either in missals or annuals; but he has an 
open sky and wide-world breeding in him, that we may not 
be offended with, fit alike for king’s court, knight’s camp, or 
peasant’s cottage. On the other hand, a man trained here in 
England, in our Sir Joshua school, will not and cannot allow 
that there is any art at all in the technical work of Angelico. 
But he is just as wrong as the other. Fra Angelico is as true 
a master of the art necessary to his purposes, as Rubens was 
of that necessary for his. We have been taught in England 
to think there can be no virtue but in a loaded brush and 
rapid hand ; but if we can shake our common sense free of 
such teaching, we shall understand that there is art also in 
the delicate point and in the hand which trembles as it moves ; 
not because it is more liable to err, but because there is 
more danger in its error, and more at stake upon its precision 
The art of Angelico, both as a colorist and a draughtsman, is 
consummate ; so perfect and beautiful, that his work may be 
recognised at any distance by the rainbow-play and brilliancy 
of it : However closely it may be surrounded by other works 
of the same school, glowing with enamel and gold, Angelico’s 
may be told from them at a glance, like so many huge pieces 
of opal lying among common marbles. So again with Giotto ; 
the Arena chapel is not only the most perfect expressional 
work, it is the prettiest piece of wall decoration and fair color, 
in North Italy. 


APPENDIX. 397% 


Now there is a correspondence of the same kind between 
the technical and expressional parts of architecture ;—not a 
true or entire correspondence, so that when the expression is 
best, the building must be also best; but so much of corre- 
spondence as that good building is necessary to good expres- 
sion, comes before it, and is to be primarily looked for: and 
the more, because the manner of building is capable of being 
determinately estimated and classed; but the expressional 
character not so: we can at once determine the true value of 
technical qualities, we can only approximate to the value of 
expressional qualities : and besides this, the looking for the 
technical qualities first will enable us to cast a large quantity 
of rubbish aside at once, and so to narrow the difficult field of 
inquiry into expression : we shall get rid of Chinese pagodas 
and Indian temples, and Renaissance Palladianisms, and Al- 
hambra stucco and filigree, in one great rubbish heap ; and 
shall not need to trouble ourselves about their expression, or 
anything else concerning them. Then taking the buildings 
which have been rightly put together, and which show com- 
mon sense in their structure, we may look for their farther 
and higher excellences ; but on those which are absurd in 
their first steps we need waste no time. 


16. STRENGTH OF SHAFTS. 


I could have wished, before writing this chapter, to have 
given more study to the difficult subject of the strength of 
shafts of different materials and structure; but I cannot enter 
into every inquiry which general criticism might suggest, and 
this I believe to be one which would have occupied the reader 
with less profit than many others: all that is necessary for 
him to note is, that the great increase of strength gained by 
tubular form in iron shafts, of given solid contents, is no con- 
tradiction to the general principle stated in the text, that the 
strength of materials is most available when they are most 
concentrated. The strength of the tube is owing to certain 
properties of the arch formed by its sides, not to the disper: 
sion of its materials : and the principle is altogether inapplica: 


398 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


ble to stone shafts. No one would think of building a pillar 
of a succession of sandstone rings ; however strong it might 
be, it would be still stronger filled up, and the substitution of 
such a pillar for a solid one of the same contents would lose 
too much space ; for a stone pillar, even when solid, must be 
quite as thick as is either graceful or convenient, and in mod. 
ern churches is often too thick as it is, hindering sight of the 
preacher, and checking the sound of his voice. 


17. ANSWER TO MR. GARBETT. 


Some three months ago, and long after the writing of this 
passage, I met accidentally with Mr. Garbett’s elementary 
Treatise on Design. (Weale, 1850.) If I had cared about the 
reputation of originality, I should have been annoyed—and 
was so, at first, on finding Mr. Garbett’s illustrations of the 
subject exactly the same as mine, even to the choice of the ele- 
phant’s foot for the parallel of the Doric pillar: I even thought 
of omitting, or re-writing, great part of the chapter, but deter- 
mined at last to let it stand. Jam striving to speak plain 
truths on many simple and trite subjects, and I hope, there- 
fore, that much of what I say has been said before, and am 
quite willing to give up all claim to originality in any reason- 
ing or assertion whatsoever, if any one cares to dispute it. I 
desire the reader to accept what I say, not as mine, but as the 
truth, which may be all the world’s, if they look for it, If 
I remember rightly, Mr. Frank Howard promised at some 
discussion respecting the ‘‘Seven Lamps,” reported in the 
** Builder,” to pluck all my borrowed feathers off me; but I 
did not see the end of the discussion, and do not know to this 
day how many feathers I have left: at all events the elephant’s 
foot must belong to Mr. Garbett, though, strictly speaking, 
neither he nor I can be quite justified in using it, for an ele- 
phant in reality stands on tiptoe ; and this is by no means the 
expression of a Doric shaft. As, however, I have been obliged 
to speak of this treatise of Mr. Garbett’s, and desire also te 
recommend it as of much interest and utility in its statements 
of fact, it is impossible for me to pass altogether without no 


APPENDIX. 399 


tice, as if unanswerable, several passages in which the writer 
has objected to views stated in the “Seven Lamps.” I should 
at any rate have noticed the passage quoted above, (Chap. 
30th,) which runs counter to the spirit of all I have ever writ- 
ten, though without referring to me; but the references to 
the ‘Seven Lamps” I should not have answered, unless I had 
desired, generally, to recommend the book, and partly also, be- 
cause they may serve as examples of the kind of animadversion 
which the ‘“‘Seven Lamps” had to sustain from architects, 
very generally ; which examples being once answered, there 
will be little occasion for my referring in future to other criti- 
cisms of the kind. 

The first reference to the “Seven Lamps” is in the second 
page, where Mr. Garbett asks a question, ‘‘ Why are not con- 
venience and stability enough to constitute a fine building?” 
—which I should have answered shortly by asking another, 
“Why we have been made men, and not bees nor termites :* 
but Mr. Garbett has given a very pretty, though. partial, 
answer to it himself, in his 4th to 9th pages,—an answer 
which I heartily beg the reader to consider. But, in page 12, 
it is made a grave charge against me, that I use the words 
beauty and ornament interchangeably. I do so, and ever 
shall ; and so, I believe, one day, will Mr. Garbett himself; 
but not while he continues to head his pages thus :—-“‘ Beauty 
not dependent on ornament, or superfluous features.” What 
right has he to assume that ornament, rightly so called, ever 
was, or can be, superfluous? J have said before, and. repeat- 
edly in other places, that the most beautiful things are the 
most useless ; I never said superfluous. I said useless in the 
well-understood and usual sense, as meaning, inapplicable to 
the service of the body. Thus I called peacocks and lilies 
useless ; meaning, that roast peacock was unwholesome (take 
ing Juvenal’s word for it), and that dried lilies made bad hay: 
but I do not think peacocks superfluous birds, nor that the 
world could get on well without its lilies. Or, to look closer, 
I suppose the peacock’s blue eyes to be very useless to him ; 
not dangerous indeed, as to their first master, but of small 
service, yet I do not think there is a superfluous eye in all his 


£00 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


tail: and for lilies, though the great King of Israel was not 
“arrayed” like one of them, can Mr. Garbett tell us which 
are their superfluous leaves? Is there no Diogenes among 
lilies? none to be found content to drink dew, but out of 
silver? The fact is, I never met with the architect yet who 
did not think ornament meant a thing to be bought in a shop 
and pinned on, or left off, at architectural toilets, as the fancy 
seized them, thinking little more than many women do of the 
other kind of ornament—the only true kind,—St. Peter's kind, 
—“Not that outward adorning, but the inner—of the heart.” 
Ido not mean that architects cannot conceive this better or- 
nament, but they do not understand that it is the only orna- 
ment; that all architectural ornament is this, and nothing but 
this ; that a noble building never has any extraneous or su- 
perfluous ornament; that all its parts are necessary to its love- 
liness, and that no single atom of them could be removed 
without harm to its life. You do not build a temple and then 
dress it.* You create it in its loveliness, and leave it, as her 
Maker left Eve. Not unadorned, I believe, but so well adorned 
as to need no feather crowns. And I use the words ornament 
and beauty interchangeably, in order that architects may un- 
derstand this: I assume that their building is to be a perfect 
creature capable of nothing less than it has, and needing noth- 
ing more. {t may, indeed, receive additional decoration after- 
wards, exactly as a2 woman may gracefully put a bracelet on 
her arm, or set a flower in her hair: but that additional 
decoration is not the architecture. Tt is of curtains, pictures, 
statues, things that may be taken away from the building, and 
not hurt it. What has the architect to do with these? He has 
only to do with what is part of the building itself, that is to 
say, its own inherent beauty. And because Mr. Garbett does 
not understand or acknowledge this, he is led on from error 
to error ; for we next find him endeavoring to define beauty 
as distinct from ornament, and saying that “Positive beauty 
may be produced by a studious collation of whatever will 

* We have done so—theoretically ; just as one would reason on the 


human form from the bones outwards:. but the Architect of humar 
form frames all at cnge—bone and flesh. 


APPENDIX. 401 


display design, order, and congruity.” (p. 14.) Is that so# 
There is a highly studious collation of whatever will display 
design, order, and congruity, in a skull, is there not ?—yet 
small beauty. The nose is a decorative feature,—yet slightly 
necessary to beauty, it seems to me ; now, at least, for I once 
thought I must be wrong in considering a skull disagreeable. 
Z gave it fair trial: put one on my bedroom chimney-piece, 
and looked at it by sunrise every morning, and by moonlight 
every night, and by all the best lights I could think of, for a 
month, in vain. I found it as ugly at last as I did at first. 
So, also, the hair is a decoration, and its natural curl is of 
little use ; but can Mr. Garbett conceive a bald beauty ; or 
does he prefer a wig, because that is a ‘studious collation ” 
of whatever will produce design, order, and congruity? So 
the flush of the cheek is a decoration,—God’s painting of the 
temple of his spirit,—and the redness of the lip ; and yet poor 
Viola thought it beauty truly blent; and I hold with her. 

I have answered enough to this count. 

The second point questioned is my assertion, ‘‘ Ornament 
eannot be overcharged if it is good, and is always overcharged 
when it is bad.” To which Mr. Garbett objects in these terms : 
“T must contend, on the contrary, that the very best ornament 
may be overcharged by being misplaced.” 

A short sentence with two mistakes in it. 

First. Mr. Garbett cannot get rid of his unfortunate notion 
that ornament is a thing to be manufactured separately, and 
fastened on. He supposes that an ornament may be called 
good in itself, in the stonemason’s yard, or in the ironmonger’s 
shop : Once for all, let him put this idea out of his head. We 
may say of a thing, considered separately, that it is a pretty 
thing ; but before we can say it is a good ornament, we must 
know what it is to adorn, and how. As, for instance, a ring 
of gold is a pretty thing ; it is agood ornament on a woman’s 
finger ; not a good ornament hung through her under lip. A 
hollyhock, seven feet high, would be a good ornament for a 
cottage-garden ; not a good ornament for a lady’s head-dress. 
Micht not Mr. Garbett have seen this without my showing? 
and that, therefore, when I. said “good” ornament, I said 

Vou. 1.—26 


402 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


‘well-placed ” ornament, in one word, and that, also, when 
Mr. Garbett says “it may be overcharged by being mis- 
placed,” he merely says it may be overcharged by being bad. 

Secondly. But, granted that ornament were independent 
of its position, and might be pronounced good in a separate 
form, as books are good, or men are good,—Suppose I had 
written to a student in Oxford, “‘ You cannot have too many 
books, if they be good books ;” and he had answered me, 
“Yes, for if I have many, I have no place to put them in but 
the coal-cellar.” Would that in anywise affect the general 
principle that he could not have too many books ? 

Or suppose he had written, “I must not have too many, 
they confuse my head.” I should have written back to him : 
“Don’t buy books to putin the coal-hole, nor read them if 
they confuse your head ; you cannot have too many, if they be 
good: but if you are too lazy to take care of them, or too dull 
to profit by them, you are better without them.” 

Exactly in the same tone, I repeat to Mr. Garbett, “You 
cannot have too much ornament, if it be good: butif you are 
too indolent to arrange it, or too dull to take advantage of it, 
assuredly you are better without it.” 

The other points bearing on this question have already been 
stated in the close of the 21st chapter. 

The third reference I have to answer, is to my repeated as- 
sertion, that the evidence of manual labor is one of the chief 
sources of value in ornament, (‘‘Seven Lamps,” p. 56, “ Mod- 
ern Painters,” § 1, Chap. II.,) to which objection is made in 
these terms: “We must here warn the reader against a re- 
markable error of Ruskin. The value of ornaments in archi- 
tecture depends not in the slightest degree on the manual labor 
they contain. If it did, the finest ornaments ever executed 
would be the stone chains that hang before certain Indian 
rock-temples.” Is that so? Hear a parallel argument. “The 
value of the Cornish mines depends not in the slightest degree 
on the quantity of copper they contain. If it did, the most 
valuable things ever produced would be copper saucepans.” 
It is hardly worth my while to answer this; but, lest any of 
my readers should be confused by the objection, and as I hold 


APPENDIX. 403 


the fact to be of great importance, I may re-state it for them 
with some explanation. 

Observe, then, the appearance of labor, that is to say, the 
evidence of the past industry of man, is always, in the abstract, 
intensely delightful: man being meant to labor, it is delightful 
to see that he has labored, and to read the record of his active 
and worthy existence. 

_ The evidence of labor becomes painful only when it is a sign 
of Evil greater, as Evil, than the labor is great, as Good. ' As, 
for instance, if a man has labored for an hour at what might 
have been done by another man in a moment, this evidence of 
his labor is also evidence of his weakness ; and this weakness is 
greater in rank of evil, than his industry is great in rank of 
good. 
Again, if a man have labored at what was not worth accom- 
plishing, the signs of his labor are the signs of his folly, and his 
folly dishonors his industry ; we had rather he had been a wise 
man in rest than a fool in labor. 

Again, if aman have labored without accomplishing any- 
thing, the signs of his labor are the signs of his disappoint- 
ment; and we have more sorrow in sympathy with his failure, 
than pleasure in sympathy with his work. 

Now, therefore, in ornament, whenever labor replaces what 
was better than labor, that is to say, skill and thought ; wher- 
ever it substitutes itself for these, or negatives these by its exist- 
ence, then it is positive evil. Copper is an evil when it alloys 
gold, or poisons food: not an evil, as copper; good in the 
form of pence, seriously objectionable when it occupies the 
room of guineas. Let Danaé cast it out of her lap, when 
the gold comes from heaven ; but let the poor man gather it 
up carefully from the earth. 

Farther, the evidence of labor is not only a good when added 
to other good, but the utter absence of it destroys good in 
human work. It is only good for God to create without toil ; 
that which man can create without toil is worthless: machine 
ornaments are no ornaments at all. Consider this carefully, 
reader : I could illustrate it for you endlessly ; but you feel it 
yourself every hour of your existence. And if you do not 


404 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


know that you feel it, take up, for a little time, the trade 
which of all: manual trades has been most honored: be for 
once a carpenter. Make for yourself a table or a chair, and 
see if you ever thought any table or chair so delightful, 
and what strange beauty there will be in their crooked limbs, 

T have not noticed any other animadversions on the “ Seven 
Lamps” in Mr. Garbett’s volume ; but if there be more, I must 
now leave it to his own consideration, whether he may not, as 
in the above instances, have made them incautiously: I may, 
perhaps, also be permitted to request other architects, who 
may happen to glance at the preceding pages, not immediately 
to condemn what may appear to them false in general principle, 
I must often be found deficient in technical knowledge ; Imay 
often err in my statements respecting matters of practice or of 
special law. But I do not write thoughtlessly respecting prin- 
ciples; and my statements of these will generally be found 
worth reconnoitring before attacking. Architects, no doubt, 
fancy they have strong grounds for supposing me wrong when 
they seek to invalidate my assertions. Let me assure them, at 
least, that I mean to be their friend, although they may not 
immediately recognise me as such. If I could obtain the 
public ear, and the principles I have advocated were carried 
into general practice, porphyry and serpentine would be 
given to them instead of limestone and brick ; instead of tavern 
and shop-fronts they would have to build goodly churches 
and noble dwelling-houses ; and for every stunted Grecism 
and stucco Romanism, into which they are now forced to 
shape their palsied thoughts, and to whose crumbling plagiar- 
isms they must trust their doubtful fame, they would be 
asked to raise whole streets of bold, and rich, and living archi- 
tecture, with the certainty in their hearts of doing what was 
honorabie to themselves, and good for all men. 

Before I altogether leave the question of the influence of 
labor on architectural effect, the reader may expect from me a 
word or two respecting the subject which this year must be 
interesting to all--the applicability, namely, of. glass and iron 
to architecture in general, as in some sort exemplified by the 
Crystal Palace. 


APPENDIX. 405 


It is thought by many that we shall forthwith have great 
part of our architecture in glass and iron, and that new forms 
of beauty will result from the studied employment of these 
materials. 

It may be told in a few words how far this is possible; how 
far eternally impossible. 

There are two means of delight in all productions of art— 
color and form. 

The most vivid conditions of color attainable by human art 
are those of works in glass and enamel, but not the most per- 
fect. The best and noblest coloring possible to art is that 
attained by the touch of the human hand on an opaque sur- 
face, upon which it can command any tint required, without 
subjection to alteration by fire or other mechanical means 
No color is so noble as the color of a good painting on canvas 
or gesso. 

This kind of color being, however, impossible, for the most 
part, in architecture, the next best is the scientific disposition 
of the natural colors of stones, which are far nobler than any 
abstract hues producible by human art. 

The delight which we receive from glass painting is one 
altogether inferior, and in which we should degrade ourselves 
by over indulgence. Nevertheless, it is possible that we may 
raise some palaces like Aladdin’s with colored glass for jewels, 
which shall be new in the annals of human splendor, and 
good in their place ; but not if they superseded nobler edi- 
fices. : 

Now, color is producible either on opaque or in transpar+ 
ent bodies: but form is only expressible, in its perfection, on 
opaque bodies, without lustre. 

This law is imperative, universal, irrevocable. No perfect 
or refined form can be expressed except in opaque and lustre- 
less matter. You cannot see the form of a jewel, nor, in any 
perfection, even of a cameo or bronze. You cannot perfectly 
see the form of a humming-bird, on account of its burnish- 
ing; but you can see the form of a swan perfectly. No noble 
work in form can ever, therefore, be produced in transparent 
or lustrous glass or enamel, All noble architecture dependg 


406 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


for its majesty on its form : therefore you can never have any 
noble architecture in transparent or lustrous glass or enamel 
Iron is, however, opaque; and both it and opaque enamel 
may, perhaps, be rendered quite lustreless ; and, therefore, 
fit to receive noble form. 

Let this be thoroughly done, and both the iron and enamel] 
made fine in paste or grain, and you may have an architect- 
ure as noble as cast or struck architecture even can be: as 
noble, therefore, as coins can be, or common cast bronzes, and 
such other multiplicable things ; *—eternally separated from 
all good and great things by a gulph which not all the tubu- 
lar bridges nor engineering of ten thousand nineteenth cen- 
turies cast into one great bronze-foreheaded century, wiil ever 
overpass one inch of. All art which is worth its room in this 
world, all art which is not a piece of blundering refuse, occu- 
pying the foot or two of earth which, if unencumbered by it, 
would have grown corn or violets, or some better thing, is art 
which proceeds from an individual mind, working through in- 
struments which assist, but do not supersede, the muscular action 
of the human hand, upon the materials which most tenderly re- 
ceive, and most securely retain, the impressions of such human 
labor. 

And the value of every work of art is exactly in the ratio of 
the quantity of humanity which has been put into it, and leg- 
ibly expressed upon it for ever :— 

First, of thought and moral purpose ; 

Secondly, of technical skill ; 

Thirdly, of bodily industry. 


* Of course mere multiplicability, as of an engraving, does not dimin. 
ish the intrinsic value of the work ; and if the casts of sculpture could 
be as sharp as the sculpture itself, they would hold to it the relation of 
value which engravings hold to paintings. And, if we choose to have 
our churches all alike, we might cast them all in bronze—we might ac: 
tually coin churches, and have mints of Cathedrals. It would be worthy 
of the spirit of the century to put milled edges for mouldings, and have 
a popular currency of religious subjects: a new cast of nativities every 
Christmas. 1 have not heard this contemplated, however, and I speak, 
therefore, only of the results which T believe are contemplated, as at: 
tainable by mere mechanical applications of giass and iron, 


APPENDIX. 40% 


The quantity of bodily industry which that Crystal Palace 
expresses is very great So far it is good. 

The quantity of thought it expresses is, I suppose, a single 
and very admirable thought of Mr. Paxton’s, probably not a bit 
brighter than thousands of thoughts which pass through his 
active and intelligent brain every hour,—that it might be pos- 
sible to build a greenhouse larger than ever greenhouse was 
built before. This thought, and some very ordinary algebra, 
are as much as all that glass can represent of human intellect. 
** But one poor half-pennyworth of bread to all this intolerabla 
deal of sack.” Alas! 


‘*' The earth hath bubbles as the water hath: 
And this is of them.” 


18. EARLY ENGLISH CAPITALS. 


The depth of the cutting in some of the early English capi- 
tals is, indeed, part of a general system of attempts at exag- 
gerated force of effect, like the ‘ black touches ” of second-rate 
draughtsmen which I have noticed as characteristic of nearly 
all northern work, associated with the love of the grotesque: 
but the main section of the capital is indeed a dripstone rolled 
round, as above described ; and dripstone sections are con- 
tinually found in northern work, where not only they cannot 
increase force of effect, but are entirely invisible except on 
close examination ; as, for instance, under the uppermost range 
of stones of the foundation of Whitehall, or under the slope of 
the restored base of All Souls College, Oxford, under the level 
of the eye. I much doubt if any of the Fellows be aware of 
its existence. : 

Many readers will be surprised and displeased by the dis- 
paragement of the early English capital. That capital has, 
indeed, one character of considerable value ; namely, the bold- 
ness with which it stops the mouldings which fall upon it, and 
severs them from the shaft, contrasting itself with the multi- 
plicity of their vertical lines. Sparingly used, or seldom seen, 
it is thus, in its place, not unpleasing ; and we English love it 
from association, it being always found in connection with our 


408 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


purest and loveliest Gothic arches, and never in multitudes 
large enough to satiate the eye with its form. The reader 
who sits in the Temple church every Sunday, and sees ne 
architecture during the week but that of Chancery Lane, may 
most justifiably quarrel with me for what I have said of it. 
But if every house in Fleet Street or Chancery Lane were . 
Gothic, and all had early English capitals, I would answer for 
his making peace with me in a fortnight. 


19. TOMBS NEAR ST. ANASTASIA, 


Whose they are, is of little consequence to the reader or «6 
me, and I have taken no pains to discover ; their value being 
not in any evidence they bear respecting dates, but in their 
intrinsic merit as examples of composition. Two of them are 
within the gate, one on the top of it, and this latter is on the 
whole the best, though all are beautiful ; uniting the intense 
northern energy in their figure sculpture with the most serene 
classical restraint in their outlines, and unaffected, but mas- 
culine simplicity of construction. . 

I have not put letters to the diagram of the lateral arch at 
page 158, in order not to interfere with the clearness of the 
curves, but I shall always express the same points by the same 
letters, whenever I have to give measures of arches of this 
simple kind, so that the reader need never have the diagrams 
lettered at all. The base or span of the centre arch will 
always be a b ; its vertex will always be V; the points of the 
cusps will be cc; pp will be the bases of perpendiculars let 
fall from V and conab; and d the base of a perpendicular 
from the point of the cusp to the arch line. Then a 6 will 
always be a span of the arch, V p its perpendicular height, V _ 
a the chord of its side ares, d c the depth of its cusps, ¢ c the 
horizontal interval between the cusps, ac the length of the 
chord of the lower arc of the cusp, V c the length of the chord 
of the upper arc of the cusp, (whether continuous or not,) and 
cp the length of a perpendicular from the point of the cusp 
on a b. 

Of course we do not want all these measures for a single 
arch, but it often happens that some of them are attainable 


APPENDIX. 409 


more easily than others; some are often unattainable al- 
‘ together, and it is necessary therefore to have expressions for 
whichever we may be able to determine. 

V por Va,ab, and‘d ¢ are always essential ; then either a 
e and Vcor cc and c p: when I have my choice, I always 
take a b, V p, dc, ce, and cp, butc p is not to be generally 
obtained so accurately as the cusp arcs. 

The measures of the present arch are: 


Ft. In. 
av, 3,, 8 
Vp, 4 29 0 
Ve, 2,, 44 
ac, 2,, 04 
dec, 0,, 33 


20. SHAFTS OF DUCAL PALACE. 


The shortness of the thicker ones at the angles is induced 
by the greater depth of the enlarged capitals: thus the 36th 
shaft is 10 ft. 44 in. in circumference at its base, and 10 ,, 04 * 
in circumference under the fillet of its capital ; but it is only 
6 ,, 12 high, while the minor intermediate shafts, of which the 
thickest is 7,, 8 round at the base, and 7 ,, 4 under capital, 
are yet on the average'7,, 7 high. The angle shaft towards 
the sea (the 18th) is nearly of the proportions of the 36th, and 
there are three others, the 15th, 24th, and 26th, which are 
thicker than the rest, though not. so thick as the angle ones. 
The 24th and 26th have both party walls to bear, and I 
imagine the 15th must in old time have carried another, 
reaching across what is now the Sala del Gran Consiglio. 

They measure respectively round at the base, 


The 15th, 8,, 2 
24th, 9 ,, 6 
26th, 8 ,, 04 


*T shall often have. occasion to write measures in the current text 
therefore the reader will kindly understand that whenever they are thus 
written, 2 ,, 2, with double commas between, the first figures stand for 
English feet, the second for English inches. 


410 THE STONES OF VENICH. 


The other pillars towards the sea, and those to the 27th ins 
clusive of the Piazzetta, are all seven feet round at the base, 
and then there is a most curious and delicate crescendo of 
circumference to the 36th, thus : 


The 28th, 7,, 3 The 33rd, 7,, 6 
29th, 7,, 4 34th, 7,, 8 
30th, 7,, 6 - 35th, 7,, 8 
31st, 7,, 7 36th, 10 ,, 44 
32nd 7,, 5 


The shafts of the upper arcade, which are above these 
thicker columns, are also thicker than their companions, 
measuring on the average, 4 ,, 84 in circumference, while those 
of the sea facade, except the 29th, average 4,, 74 in circum- 
ference. The 29th, which is of course above the 15th of 
the lower story, is 5 ,, 5 in circumference, which little piece 
of evidence will be of no smail value to us by-and-by. The 
35th carries the angle of the palace, and is 6 ,, Oround. ‘The 
47th, which comes above the 24th and carries the party wall 
of the Sala del Gran Consiglio, is strengthened by a pilaster ; 
and the 51st, which comes over the 26th, is 5 ,, 44 round, 
or nearly the same as the 29th ; it carries the party wall of 
the Sala del Scrutinio ; a small room containing part of St. 
Mark’s library, coming between the two saloons; a room 
which, in remembrance of the help I have received in all my 
inquiries from the kindness and intelligence of its usual oc- 
cupant, I shall never easily distinguish otherwise than as ‘“ Mr. 
Lorenzi’s.” * 

I may as well connect with these notes respecting the ar- 
eades of the Ducal Palace, those which refer to Plate XIV., 
which represents one of its spandrils. Every spandril of the | 
lower arcade was intended to have been occupied by an orna- 
ment resembling the one given in that plate. The mass of the 
building being of Istrian stone, a depth of about two inches 
is left within the mouldings of the arches, rough hewn, to 

*T cannot suffer this volume to close without also thanking my kind 
friend, Mr. Rawdon Brown, for help given me in a thousand ways dur 


ing my stay in Venice: but chiefly for his direction to passages eluciday 
vory of my subject in the MSS. of St, Mark’s library. 


APPENDIX. 411 


receive the slabs of fine marble composing the patterns. I 
cannot say whether the design was ever completed, or the mar- 
bles have been since removed, but there are now only two 
spandrils retaining their fillings, and vestiges of them in a 
third. The two complete spandrils are on the sea facade, 
above the 8rd and 10th capitals (vide method of numbering, 
Chap. I., page 44); that is to say, connecting the 2nd arch 
with the 3rd, and the 9th with the 10th. The latter is the 
one given in Plate XIV. The white portions of it are all 
white marble, the dentil band surrounding the circle is in 
coarse sugary marble, which I believe to be Greek, and never 
found in Venice to my recollection, except in work at least 
anterior to the fifteenth century. The shaded fields charged 
with the three white triangles are of red Verona marble ; the 
inner disc is green serpentine, and the dark pieces of the ra- 
diating leaves are grey marble. The three triangles are equi- 
lateral. The two uppermost are 1,,5 each side, and the 
lower 1 ,, 2. 

The extreme diameter of the circle is 3 ,, 104; its field is 
slightly raised above the red marbles, as shown in the section 
at A, on the left. A ais part of the red marble field ; a b the 
section of the dentil moulding let into it; b ¢ the entire 
breadth of the rayed zone, represented on the other side of 
the spandril by the line C f; cd is the white marble band 
let in, with the dog-tooth on the face of it; bc is 7$ inches 
across ; cd 33; and at B are given two joints of the dentil 
(mentioned above, in the chapter on dentils, as unique in 
Venice) of their actual size. At C is given one of the inlaid 
leaves ; its measure being (in inches) C f 72; Ch#; fg }: 
Sf e 4%, the base of the smaller leaves being of course fe — 
fg =4. The pattern which occupies the other spandril is 
similar, except that the field bc, instead of the intersecting 
ares, has only triangles of grey marble, arranged like rays, 
with their oases towards the centre. There being twenty 
round the circle, the reader can of course draw them for him- 
self; they being isosceles, touching the dentil with their 
points, and being in contact at their bases: it has lost its 
central boss. The marbles are, in both, covered with a rusty 


412 THE STONES OF VENICR. 


couting, through which it is excessively difficult to distinguish 
the colors (another proof of the age of the crnament). But 
the white marbles are certainly, in places (except only the 
sugary dentil), veined with purple, and the grey seem warmed 
with green. 

A trace of another of these ornaments may be seen over the 
2ist capital; but I doubt if the marbles have ever been in- 
serted in the other spandrils, and their want of ornament oc- 
casions the slight meagreness in the effect of the lower story, 
which is almost the only fault of the building. 

This decoration by discs, or shield-like ornaments, is a 
marked characteristic of Venetian architecture in its earlier 
ages, and is carried into later times by the Byzantine Renais- 
sance, already distinguished from the more corrupt forms of 
Renaissance, in Appendix 6. Of the disc decoration, so bor- 
rowed, we have already an example in Plate I. In Plate VIL 
we have an earlier condition of it, one of the discs being there 
sculptured, the others surrounded by sculptured bands: here 
we have, on the Ducal Palace, the most characteristic of all, 
because likest to the shield, which was probably the origin of 
the same ornament among the Arabs, and assuredly among 
the Greeks. In Mr. Donaldson’s restoration of the gate of 
the treasury of Atreus, this ornament is conjecturally em- 
ployed, and it occurs constantly on the Arabian buildings of 
Cairo. 


21. ANCIENT REPRESENTATIONS OF WATER. 


I have long been desirous of devoting some time to an en- 
quiry into the effect of natural scenery upon the pagan, and 
especially the Greek, mind, and knowing that my friend, Mr. . 
C. Newton, had devoted much thought to the elucidation of . 
the figurative and symbolic language of ancient art, I asked 
him to draw up for me a few notes of the facts which he con 
sidered most interesting, as illustrative of its methods of rep- 
rssenting nature. I suggested te him. for an initiative subject, 
tae representation of wisn because this is ont o7 the natural 
opjects whose portraiture may most easily be made a test of 
treatment, for it is one of universal interest, and of more 


APPENDIX. ' 413 


elosely similar aspect in all parts of the world than any other. 
Waves, currents, and eddies are much liker each other, every: 
where, than either land or vegetation. Rivers and lakes, in- 
deed, differ widely from the sea, and the clear Pacific from 
the angry Northern ocean ; but the Nile is liker the Danube 
than a knot of Nubian palms is toa glade of the Black Forest ; 
and the Mediterranean is liker the Atlantic than the Campo 
Felice is like Solway moss. 

Mr. Newton has accordingly most kindly furnished me with 
the following data. One or two of the types which he describes 
have been already noticed in the main text ; but it is well that 
the reader should again contemplate them in the position which 
they here occupy in a general system. I recommend his spe- 
cial attention to Mr. Newton’s definitions of the terms “ figu- 
rative ”and “symbolic,” as applied to art, in the beginning of 
the paper. 


In ancient art, that is to say, in the art of the Egyptian, 
Assyrian, Greek, and Roman races, water is, for the most part, 
represented conventionally rather than naturally. 

By natural representation is here meant as just and perfect 
an imitation of nature as the technical means of art will allow: 
on the otner hand, representation is said to be conventional, 
either when a confessedly inadequate imitation is accepted in 
default of a better, or when imitation is not attempted at all, 
and it is agreed that other modes of representation, those by 
figures or by cymbols, shall be its substitute and equivalent. 

In figurative representation there is always impersonation ; 
the sensible form, borrowed by the artist from organic life, is 
conceived to be actuated by a will, and invested with such 
mental attributes as constitute personality. 

The sensible symbol, whether borrowed from organic or 
from inorganic nature, is not a personification at all, but the 
conventional sien or equivalent of some object or notion, to 
which it may perhaps bear no visible resemblance, but with 
which the intellect or the imagination has in some way asso- 
ciated it. 

For instance, a city may be figuratively represented as 4 


414 THE STONES OF VENICER. 


woman crowned with towers ; here the artist has selected for 
the expression of his idea a human form animated with a will 
and motives of action analogous to those of humanity gener- 
ally. Or, again, as in Greek art, a bull may be a figurative rep- 
resentation of a river, and, in the conception of the artist, this 
animal form may contain, and be ennobled by, a human mind 

This is still impersonation ; the form only in which person- 
ality is embodied is changed. 

Again, a dolphin may be used as a symbol of the sea; a 
man ploughing with two oxen is a well-known symbol of a 
Roman colony. In neither of these instances is there imper- 
sonation. The dolphin is not invested, like the figure of 
Neptune, with any of the attributes of the human mind ; it 
has animal instincts, but no will ; it represents to us its native 
element, only as a part may be taken for a whole. 

Again, the man ploughing does not, like the turreted female 
figure, personify, but rather typifies the town, standing as the 
visible representation of a real event, its first foundation. To 
our mental perceptions, as to our bodily senses, this figure 
seems no more than man ; there is no blending of his personal 
nature with the impersonal nature of the colony, no transfer 
of attributes from the one to the other. 

Though the conventionally imitative, the figurative, and the 
symbolic, are three distinct kinds of representation, they are 
constantly combined in one composition, as we shall see in 
the following examples, cited from the art of successive races 
in chronological order. 

In Egyptian art the general representation of water is the 
conventionally imitative. In the British Museum are two fres- 
coes from tombs at Thebes, Nos. 177 and 170: the subject of . 
the first of these is an oblong pond, ground-plan and elevation 
being strangely confused in the design. In this pond water 
is represented by parallel zigzag lines, in which fish are swim- 
ming about. On the surface are birds and lotos flowers; the 
herbage at the edge of the pond is represented by a border of 
symmetrical fan-shaped flowers ; the field beyond by rows of © 
trees, arranged round the sides of the pond at right angles te 
each other, and in defiance of all laws of perspective, 


APPENDIX. 415 


In the fresco, No. 170, we have the representation of a river 
with papyrus on its bank. Here the water is rendered by 
zigzag lines arranged vertically and in parallel lines, so as 
to resemble herring-bone masonry, thus. 
There are fish in this fresco as in the pre- 
ceding, and in both each fish is drawn very 
distinctly, not as it would appear to the 
eye viewed through water. The mode of 
representing this element in Egyptian 
painting is further abbreviated in their hieruglyphic writing, 
where the sign of water is a zigzag line ; this line is. so te 
speak, a picture of water written in short hand. In the Egyp- 
tian Fantheon there was but one aquatic deity, the god of the 
Nile ; his type is, therefore, the only fiyurative representation 
of water in Egyptian art. (Birch, “Gallery of British Museum 
Antiquities,” Pl. 13.) In Assyrian sculpture we have very cu- 
rious conventionally imitative representations of water. On 
several of the friezes from Nimroud and Khorsabad, men are 
seen crossing a river in boats, or in skins, accompanied by 
horses swimming (see Layard, ii. p. 381). In these scenes water 
is represented by masses of wavy lines somewhat resembling 
tresses of hair, and terminating in curls or volutes ; these wavy 
lines express the general character of a deep and rapid current, 
like that of the Tigris. Fish are but sparingly introduced, the 
idea of surface being sufficiently expressed by the floating 
figures and boats. In the representation of these there is the 
same want of perspective as in the Egyptian fresco which we 
have just cited. 

In the Assyrian Pantheon one aquatic deity has been dis. 
covered, the god Dagon, whose human form terminates in a 
fish’s tail. Of the character and attributes of this deity we 
know but little. 

The more abbreviated mode of representing water, the zig- 
zag line, occurs on the large silver coins with the tyne of a 
city or a war galley (see Layard, ii. p. 386). These coins were 
probably struck in Assyria, not long after the conquest of it 
by the Persians. 

In Greek art the modes of representing water are far more 


Fig. LXXI. 


416 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


‘varied. ‘Two conventional imitations, the wave moulding and 
the Meander, are well known. Both are probably of the most 
remote antiquity ; both have been largely employed as an 
architectural ornament, and subordinately as a decoration of 
vases, costume, furniture and implements. In the wave mould- 
ing we have a conventional representation of the small crisp- 
ing waves which break upon the shore of the Mediterranean, 
the sea of the Greeks. 

Their regular succession, and equality of force and volume, 
are generalised in this moulding, while the minuter varieties 
which distinguish one wave from another are merged in the 
general type. The character of ocean waves is to be ‘‘for ever 
changing, yet the same for ever ;” it is this eternity of recur- 
rence which the early artist has expressed in. this hiero- 
glyphie. 

With this profile representation of water may be compared 

‘the sculptured waves out of whith the head and arms of Hype- 
rion are rising in the pediment of the Parthenon (Elgin Room, 
No. (65) 91, Museum Marbles, vi. pl. 1). Phidias has repre- 
sented these waves like a mass of overlapping tiles, thus gen- 
eralising their rippling movement. In the Meander pattern 
the graceful curves of nature are represented by angles, as in 
the Egyptian hieroglyphic of water: so again the earliest rep- 
resentation of the labyrinth on the coins of the Cnossus is 
rectangular ; on later coins we find the curvilinear form intro- 
duced. 

In the language of Greek mythography, the wave pattern 
and the Meeander are sometimes used singly for the idea of 
water, but more frequently combined with figurative represen- 
tation. The number of aquatic deities in the Greek Pantheon 
led to the invention of a great variety of beautiful types. 
Some of these are very well known. Everybody is familiar 
with the general form of Poseidon (Neptune), the Nereids, 
the Nymphs and River Gods; but the modes in which these 
types were combined with conventional imitation and with 
accessory symbols deserve careful study, if we would appre- 
ciate the surpassing richness and beauty of the language of 
art formed out of these elements. 


APPENDIX. 417 


This class of representations may be divided into two princi- 
pal groups, those relating to the sea, and those relating to fresh 
weter. 

The power of the ocean and the great features of marine 
scenery are embodied in such types as Poseidon, Nereus and 
the Nereids, that is to say, in human forms moving through the 
‘iquid element in chariots, or on the back of dolphins, or who 
zombine the human form with that of the fish-like Tritons, 
The sea-monsters who draw these chariots are called Hippo- 
camps, being composed of the tail of a fish and the fore-part 
of a horse, the legs terminating in web-feet : this union seems 
to express speed and power under perfect control, such as 
would characterise the movements of sea deities. A few ex- 
amples have been here selected to show how these types were 
combined with symbols and conventional imitation. 

In the British Museum is a vase, No. 1257, engraved (Lenor- 
mant et De Witte, Mon. Céram., i. pl. 27), of which the sub- 
ject is, Europa crossing the sea on the back of the bull. In this 
design the sea is represented by a variety of expedients, 
First, the swimming action of the bull suggests the idea of 
the liquid medium through which he moves. Behind him 
stands Nereus, his staff held perpendicularly in his hand ; the 
top of his staff comes nearly to the level of the bull’s back, and 
is probably meant as the measure of the whole depth of the 
sea. Towards the surface line thus indicated a dolphin is ris- 
ing ; in the middle depth is another dolphin ; below a shrimp 
and a cuttle-fish, and the bottom is indicated by a jagged line 
of rocks, on which are two echini. 

On a mosaic found at Oudnah in Algeria (Revue Archéol, 
lii. pl. 50), we have a representation of the sea, remarkable for 
the fulness of details with which it is made out. 

This, though of the Roman period, is so thoroughly Greek 
in feeling, that it may be cited as an example of the class of 
mythography now under consideration. The mosaic lines the 
floor and sides of a bath, and, as was commonly the case in 
the baths of the ancients, serves as a figurative representation 
of the water it contained. 

On the sides are hippocamps, figures riding on dolphing, 

Stones of Venice--Vol. 1.—1¥ 


418 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


and islands on which fishermen stand; on the floor are fish 
crabs, and shrimps. 

These, as in the vase pith Europa, indicate the bottom of 
the sea: the same symbols of the submarine world appear on 
many other ancient designs. Thus in vase pictures, when 
Poseidon upheaves the island of Cos to overwhelm the Giant 
Polydotes, the island is represented as an immense mass of 
rock ; the parts which have been under water are indicated by 
a dolphin, a shrimp, and a sepia, the parts above the water by 
a goat and a serpent (Lenormant et De Witte, i., tav. 5). 

Sometimes these symbols occur singly in Greek art, as the 
types, for instance, of coins. In such cases they cannot be in- 
terpreted without being viewed in relation to the whole con- 
text of mythography to which they belong. If we find, for 
example, on one coin of Tarentum a shell, on another a dol- 
phin, on a third a figure of Tarus, the mythic founder of the 
town, riding.on a dolphin in the midst of the waves, and this 
latter group expresses the idea of the town itself and its posi- 
tion on the coast, then we know the two former types to b 
but portions of the greater design, having been detached from 
it, as we may detach words from sentences. 

The study of the fuller and clearer examples, such as we 
have cited above, enables us to explain many more compendi- 
ous forms of expression. We have, for instance, on eoins 
several representations of ancient harbors. 

Of these, the earliest occurs on the coins of Zancle, the 
modern Messina in Sicily. The ancients likened the form of 
this harbor to a sickle, and on the coins of the town we find 
a curved object, within the area of which isa dolphin. On 
this curve are four square elevations placed at equal distances. . 
It has been conjectured that these projections are either towers 
or the large stones to which galleys were moored still to be 
seen in ancient harbors (see Burgon, Numismatic Chronicle, 
ii. p. 40). With this archaic representation of a harbor may 
be compared some examples of the Roman period. On acoin 
of Sept. Severus struck at Corinth (Millingen, Sylloge of 
Uned. Coins, 1837, p. 57, Pi. IL No. 30) we have a female fig- 
ure standing on a rock between two recumbent male figures 


APPENDIX. 419 


holding rudders From an arch at the foot of the rock 4 
stream is flowing: this is a representation of the rock of the 
Acropolis of Corinth ; the female figure is a statue of Aphro- 
dite, whose temple surmounted the rock. The stream is the 
fountain Pirene. The two recumbent figures are impersona- 
tions of the two harbors, Lechreum and Cenchreia, between 
which Corinth was situated. Philostratus (Icon. ii., c. 16) de- 
scribes asimilar picture of the Isthmus between the two harbors, 
one of which was in the form of a youth, the other of a nymph, 

On another coin of Corinth we have one of the harbors in a 
semicircular form, the whole arc being marked with smal} 
equal divisions, to denote the archways under which the an. 
cient galleys were drawn, subducte ; at the either horn or ex- 
tremity of the harbor is a temple ; in the centre of the mouth, 
a statue of Neptune. (Millingen, Médailles Inéd., Pl. IL, No. 
19. Compare also Millingen, Ancient Coins of Cities and 
Kings, 1831, pp. 50—61, Pi. IV., No. 15; Mionnet, Suppl. 
vii. p. 79, No. 246; and the harbor of Ostium, on the large 
brass coins of Nero, in which there is a representation of the 
Roman fleet and a reclining figure of Neptune.) 

In vase pictures we have occasionally an attempt to represent 
water naturally. On a vase in the British Museum (No. 785), 
of which the subject is Ulysses and the Sirens, the Sea is ren- 
dered by wavy lines drawn in black on a red ground, and 
something like the effect of light playing on the surface of the 
water is given. On each side of the ship are shapeless masses 
of rock on which the Sirens stand. 

One of the most beautiful of the figurative representations 
of the sea is the well-known type of Scylla. She has a beau- 
tiful body, terminating in two barking dogs and two serpent 
tails. Sometimes drowning men, the rari nantes in gurgite 
vasto, appear caught up in the coils of these tails. Below are 
dolphins. Scylla generally brandishes a rudder to show the 
manner in which she twists the course of ships. For varieties 
of her type see Monum. dell’ Inst. Archeol. Rom., iii. Tavv. 
52—3. 

The representations of fresh water may be arranged under 
the following heads—rivers, lakes, fountains, 


420 THE STONES OF VENICN. 


There are several figurative modes of representing rivers 
very frequently employed in ancient mythography. 

In the type which occurs earliest we have the human form 
combined with that of the bull in several ways. On an archaie 
coin of Metapontum in Lucania, (see frontispiece to Millingen, 
Ancient Coins of Greek Cities and Kings,) the river Achelous 
is represented with the figure of a man with a shaggy beard 
and bull’s horns and_ears. On a vase of the best period of 
Greek art (Brit. Mus. No. 789; Birch, Trans. Roy. Soc. of 
Lit., New Series, Lond. 1843, i. p. 100) the same river is rep- 
resented with a satyr’s head and long bull’s horns on the fore- 
head ; his form, human to the waist, terminates in a fish’s tail ; 
his hair falls down his back; his beard is long and shaggy. 
In this type we see a combination of the three forms sepa- 
rately enumerated by Sophocles, in the commencement of the 
Trachinie. 

*"AxedAGov heya, 
os p ev tpioly popdatow ekyree mwatpds, 
orrdv evapyys adpos adddor aiddos, 
Spdxwy éduxrds, GAdor avdpewm Kvret 
Boumpwpos, ek 8% Sackiov yeverddos 
Kpovvot Sieppaivovro Kpyvaiov morod. 


In a third variety of this type the human-headed body is 
united at the waist with the shoulders of a bull’s body, in 
which it terminates. This occurs on an early vase. (Brit. 
Mus., No. 452.) On the coins of Giniade in Acarnia, and on 
those of Ambracia, all of the period after Alexander the Great, 
the Achelous hasa bull’s body, and head with a human face. 
In this variety of the type the human element is almost ab. — 
sorbed, as in the first variety cited above, the coin of Meta 
pontum, the bull portion of the type is only indicated by the 
addition of the horns and ears to the human head. On the 
analogy between these varieties in the type of the Achelous and 
those under which the metamorphoses of the marine goddess 
Thetis are represented, see Gerhard, Auserl Vasenb. ii. pp 
106—113. It is probable that, in the type of Thetis, of Pro- 
teus, and also of the Achelous, the singular combinations and 


APPENDIX. 42% 


transformations are intended to express the changeful nat 
ure of the element water. 

Numerous other examples may be cited, where rivers are 
represented by this combination of the bull and human form, 
which may be called, for convenience, the Androtauric type. 
On the coins of Sicily, of the archaic and also of the finest 
period of art, rivers are most usually represented by a youth: 
ful male figure, with small budding horns; the hair has the 
lank and matted form which characterises aquatic deities in 
Greek mythography. The name of the river is often inscribed 
round the head. When the whole figure occurs on the coin, 
it is always represented standing, never reclining. 

The type of the bull on the coins of Sybaris and Thurium, 
in Magna Grecia, has been considered, with great probability, 
a representation of this kind. On the coins of Sybaris, which 
are of a very early period, the head of the bull is turned 
round ; on those of Thurium, he stoops his head, butting: 
the first of these actions has been thought to symbolise the 
winding course of the river, the second, its headlong current. 
On the coins of Thurium, the idea of water is further sug- 
gested by the adjunct of dolphins and other fish in the ex- 
ergue of the coin. The ground on which the bull stands is 
indicated by herbage or pebbles. This probably represents 
the river bank. Two bulls’ head occur on the coins of Sardis, 
and it has been ingeniously conjectured by Mr. Burgon that 
the two rivers of the place are expressed under this type. 

The representation of river-gods as human figures in a re- 
clining position, though probably not so much employed in 
earlier Greek art as the Androtauric type, is very much more 
familiar to us, from its subsequent adoption in Roman my. 
thography. The earliest example we have of a reclining river- 
god is in the figure in the Elgin Room commonly called the 
Ilissis, but more probably the Cephissus. This occupied one 
angle in the western pediment of the Parthenon ; the other 
Athenian river, the Ilissus, and the fountain Callirrhoe being 
represented by a male and female figure in the opposite angle ; 
this group, now destroyed, is visible in the drawing made by 
Carrey in 1678. 


422 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


It is probable that the necessities of pedimental compost 
tion first led the artist to place the river-god in a reclining 
position. The head of the Ilissus being broken off, we are 
not sure whether he had bull’s horns, like the Sicilian figures 
already described. His form is youthful, in the folds of the 
drapery behind him there is a flow like that of waves, but the 
idea of water is not suggested by any other symbol. When 
we compare this figure with that of the Nile (Visconti, Mus. 
Pio Clem.,i, PL 38), and the figure of the Tiber in the 
Louvre, both of which are of the Roman period, we see how 
in these later types the artist multiplied symbols and acces 
sories, ingrafting them on the original simple type of the 
river-god, as it was conceived by Phidias in the figure of the 
Ilissus. The Nile is represented as a colossal bearded figure 
reclining. At his side is a cornucopia, full of the vegetable 
produce of the Egyptian soil. Round his body are sixteen 
naked boys, who represent the sixteen cubits, the height to 
which the river rose in a favorable year. The statue is placed 
on a basement divided into three compartments, one above 
another. In the uppermost of these, waves are flowing over 
in one great sheet from the side of the river-god. In the 
other two-compartments are the animals and plants of the 
river; the bas-reliefs on this basement are, in fact, a kind of 
abbreviated symbolic panorama of the Nile. 

The Tiber is represented in a very similar manner. On the 
base are, in two compartments, scenes taken from the early 
Roman myths; flocks, herds, and other objects on the banks 
of the river. (Visconti, Mus. P. Cl. i, Pl. 39; Millin, Galerie 
Mythol., i. p. 77, Pl. 74, Nos. 304, 308.) 

In the types of the Greek coins of Camarina, we find two 
interesting representations of Lakes. On the obverse of one — 
of these we have, within a circle of the wave pattern, a male 
head, fuli face, with dishevelled hair, and with a dolphin on 
either side ; on the reverse a female figure sailing on a swan, 
below which a wave moulding, and above, a dolphin. 

On another coin the swan type of the reverse is associated 
with the youthful head of a river-god, inscribed ‘‘Hipparis” 
on the obverse. On some smaller coins we have the swar 


APPENDIX. 42% 


flying over the rippling waves, which are represented by the 
wave moulding. When we examine the chart of Sicily, made 
by the Admiralty survey, we find marked down at Camarina, 
a lake through which the river Hipparis flows. 

We can hardly doubt that the inhabitants of Camarina rep- 
resented both their river and their lakes on their coins. The 
swan flying over the waves would represent a lake; the figure 
associated with it being no doubt the Aphrodite worshipped 
at that place: the head, in a circle of wave pattern, may ex- 
_press that part of the river which flows through the lake. 

Fountains are usually represented by a stream of water issu- 
ing from a lion’s head in the rock : see a vase (Gerhard, Auserl. 
Vasenb., taf. cxxxiy.), where Hercules stands, receiving a 
shower-bath from a hot spring at Therme in Sicily. On the 
coins of Syracuse the fountain Arethusa is represented by a 
female head seen to the front ; the flowing lines of her dishev- 
elled hair suggest, though they do not directly imitate, the 
bubbling action of the fresh-water spring; the sea in which 
it rises is symbolized by the dolphins round the head. This 
type presents a striking analogy with that of the Camarina head 
in the circle of wave pattern described above. 

These are the principal modes of representing water in Greek 
mythography. In theart of the Roman period, the same kind 
of figurative and symbolic language is employed, but there is 
a constant tendency to multiply accessories and details, as we 
have shown in the later representations of harbors and river- 
gods cited above. In these crowded compositions the eye is 
fatigued and distracted by the quantity it has to examine ; the 
language of art becomes more copious but less terse and em- 
phatic, and addresses itself to minds far less intelligent than 
the refined critics who were the contemporaries of Phidias, 

Rivers in Roman art are usually represented by reclining 
male figures, generally bearded, holding reeds or other plants 
in their hands, and leaning on urns from which water is flow- 
ing. On the coins of many Syrian cities, struck in imperial 
times, the city is represented by a turreted female figure seated 
on rocks, and resting her feet on the shoulder of a youthful 
tule figure, who looks up in her face, stretching out his ms, 


424 (HE STONES OF VENICE. 


and who is sunk in the ground as high as the waist. See 
Miller (Denkaaler d. A. Kunst, i., taf. 49, No 220) for a group 
of this kind in the Vatican, and several similar designs on 
coins. 

On the column of Trajan there occur many rude representa- 
tions of the Danube, and other rivers crossed by the Romans 
in their military expeditions. The water is imitated by sculpt- 
ured wavy lines, in which boats are placed. In one scene 
(Bartoli, Colonna Trajana, Tav. 4) this rude conventional imi- 
tation is combined with a figure. In a recess in the river 
bank is a reclining river-god, terminating at the waist. This 
is either meant for a statue which was really placed on the 
bank of the river, and which therefore marks some particular 
locality, or we have here figurative representation blended 
with conventional imitation. 

On the column of Antoninus (Bartoli, Colon. Anton., Tav. 
15) a storm of rain is represented by the head of Jupiter Plu- 
vius, who has a vast outspread beard flowing in long tresses. 
In the. Townley collection, in the British Museum, is a Roman 
helmet found at Ribchester in Lancashire, with a mask or vizor 
attached. The helmet is richly embossed with figures in a 
battle scene ; round the brow is a row of turrets; the hair on 
the forehead is so treated as to give the idea of waves washing 
the base of the turrets. This head is perhaps a figurative rep- 
resentation of a town girt with fortifications and a moat, near 
which some great battle was fought. It is engraved (Vetusta 
Monum. of Soc. Ant. London, iv., Pl. 1-4). 

In the Galeria at Florence is a group in alto relievo (Gori, 
Inscript. Ant. Flor. 1727, p. 76. Tab. 14) of three female 
figures, one of whom is certainly Demeter Kourotrophos, or’ 
the earth ; another, Thetis, or the sea; the centre of the three 
seems to represent Aphrodite associated, as on the coins of 
Camarina, with the element of fresh water. . 

This figure is seated on a swan, and holds over her head an 
arched veil. Her hair is bound with reeds; above her veil 
grows a tall water plant, and below the swan other water 
plants, and a stork seated on a hydria, or pitcher, from which 
water is flowing. The swan, the stork, the water plants, ang 


APPENDIX. 425 


the rydria must all be regarded as symbols of fresh water, the 
latter emblem being introduced to show that the element is 
fit for the use of man. 

Fountains in Roman art are generally personified as figures 
of nymphs reclining with urns, or standing holding before 
them a large shell. 

One of the latest. representations of water in ancient art is 
the mosaic of Palestrina (Barthélemy, in Bartoli, Peint. An- 
tiques) which may be described as a kind of rude panorama - 
of some district of Upper Egypt, a bird’s-eye view, half man, 
half picture, in which the details are neither adjusted to a 
scale, nor drawn according to perspective, but crowded to- 
gether, as they would be in an ancient bas-relief. 


22. ARABIAN ORNAMENTATION. 


I do not mean what I have here said of the Inventive power 
of the Arab to be understood as in the least applying to the 
detestable ornamentation of the Alhambra.* The Alhambra 
is no more characteristic of Arab work, than Milan Cathedral 
is of Gothic: it is a late building, a work of the Spanish dy- 
nasty in its last decline, and its ornamentation is fit for noth- 
ing but to be transferred to patterns of carpets or bindings of 
books, together with their marbling, and mottling, and other 
mechanical recommendations. The Alhambra ornament has 
of late been largely used in shop-fronts, to the no small detri- 
ment of Regent Street and Oxford Street. 


23. VARIETIES OF CHAMFER. 


Let B A C, Fig. LXXIL., be the original angle of the wall. 
Inscribe within it a circle, p Q N p, of the size of the bead 
required, touching A B, A C, in p, p; join p, p, and draw B C 
parallel to it, touching the circle. 

Then the lines B C, p p are the limits of the possible cham- 
fers constructed with curves struck either from centre A, as 

* T have not seen the building itself, but Mr. Owen Jones’s work may, 


i suppose, be considered as sufficiently representing it for all purposes 
ef criticism. 


426 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


the line Q 9, N d, ru, gc, &., or from any other point chosen 
as a centre in the direction Q A produced: and also of all 
chamfers in straight lines, a b, ef. There are, of course, an 
infinite number of chamfers to be struck between B C and pp, 
from every point in Q A produced to infinity ; thus we have 
infinity multiplied into infinity to express the number of pos- 
sible chamfers of this species, which are peculiarly Italian 
chamfers ; together with another singly infinite group of the 
straight chamfers, a b, ef, &c., of which the one formed by 


the line a b, passing through the centre of the circle, is the 
universal early Gothic chamfer of Venice. 

Again. Hither on the line A C, or on any other lines AJ or 
A m, radiating from A, any number of centres may be taken, 
from which, with any radii not greater than the distance be- 
tween such points and Q, an infinite number of curves may be 
struck, such as ¢ u, rs, N n (all which are here struck from 
centres on the line AC). These lines represent the great 


APPENDIX. 42% 


elass of the northern chamfers, of which the number is infinity 
raised to its fourth power, but of which the curve N n (for 
northern) represents the average condition; the shallower 
chamfers of the same group, rs, ¢ u, &c., occurring: often in 
Italy. The lines r wu, ¢ u, and ab may be taken approximat- 
ing to the most frequent conditions of the southern chamfer. 

It is evident that the chords of any of these curves will give 
a relative group of rectilinear chamfers, occurring both in the 
North and South ; but the rectilinear chamfers, I think, invari- 
ably fall within the line Q C, and are either parallel with it, 
or inclined to A C at an angle greater than A C Q, and often 
perpendicular to it ; but never inclined to it at an angle less 
than A C Q. 


24, RENAISSANCE BASES. 


The following extract from my note-book refers also to some 
features of late decoration of shafts. 

“The Scuola di San Rocco is one of the most interesting 
examples of Renaissance work in Venice. Its fluted pillars 
are surrounded each by a wreath, one of vine, another of lau- 
rel, another of oak, not indeed arranged with the fantasticism 
of early Gothic; but, especially the laurel, reminding one 
strongly of the laurel sprays, powerful as well as beautiful, of 
Veronese and Tintoret. Their stems are curiously and richly 
interlaced—the last vestige of the Byzantine wreathed work 
—and the vine-leaves are ribbed on the surfaces, I think, 
nearly as finely as those of the Noah,* though more injured 
by time. The capitals are far the richest Renaissance in Ven- 
ice, less corrupt and more masculine in plan, than any other, 
and truly suggestive of support, though of course showing the 
tendency to error in this respect; and finally, at the angles 
of the pure Attic bases, on the square plinth, are set couch- 
ant animals ; one, an elephant four inches high, very curiously 
and cleverly cut, and all these details worked with a spirit, 
finish, fancy, and affection quite worthy of the middle ages, 


*The sculpture of the Drunkenness of Noah on the Ducal Palace, of 
which we shall have much to say hereafter. 


£28 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


But they have all the marked fault of being utterly detached 
from the architecture. The wreaths round the columns look as 
if they would drop off the next moment, and the animals at 
the bases produce exactly the effect of mice who had got there 
by accident: one feels them ridiculously diminutive, and 
utterly useless.” 

The effect of diminutiveness is, I think, chiefly owing te 
there being no other groups of figures near them, to accustom 
the eye to the proportion, and to the needless choice of the 
largest animals, elephants, bears, and lions, to occupy a posi* 
tion so completely insignificant, and to be expressed on so 
contemptible a scale,—not in a bas-relief or pictorial piece of 
sculpture, but as independent figures. The whole building 
is a most curious illustration of the appointed fate of the Re- 
naissance architects,—to caricature whatever they imitated, 
and misapply whatever they learned. 


25. ROMANIST DECORATION OF BASES, 


T have spoken above (Appendix 12) of the way in which the 
Roman Catholic priests everywhere suffer their churches to be 
desecrated. But the worst instances I ever saw of sacrilege 
and brutality, daily permitted in the face of all men, were the 
uses to which the noble base of St. Mark’s was put, when I 
was last in Venice. Portions of nearly all cathedrals may be 
found abandoned to neglect ; but this base of St. Mark’s is in 
no obscure position, Full fronting the western sun—crossing 
the whole breadth of St. Mark’s Place—the termination of the 
most noble square in the world—the centre of the most noble 
city—its purple marbles were, in the winter of 1849, the cus- 
tomary gambling tables of the idle children of Venice; and 
the parts which flank the Great Entrance, that very entrance 
where ‘ Barbarossa flung his mantle off,” were the counters 
of a common bazaar for children’s toys, carts, dolls, and small 
pewter spoons and dishes, German caricatures and books of 
the Opera, mixed with those of the offices of religion; the 
caricatures being fastened with twine round the porphyry 
shafts of the church. One Sunday, the 24th of February, 


APPENDIX. 429 


1850, the book-stall being somewhat more richly laid out than 
usual, I noted down the titles of a few of the books in the 
order in which they lay, and I give them below. The irony 
conveyed by the juxtaposition of the three in Italics appears 
too shrewd to be accidental ; but the fact was actually so. 

Along the edge of the white plinth were a row of two kinds 
of books, . 

Officium Beatze Virg. M. ; and Officium Hebdomadaa 
sancte, juxta Formam Missalis et Breviarii Romani 
sub Urbano VIIL correcti. 

Behind these lay, side by side, the following : 
Don Desiderio. Dramma Giocoso per Musica. 
Breve Esposizione della Carattere di vera Religione. 
On the top of this latter, keeping its leaves open, 

La Figlia del Reggimento. Melodramma comica, 

Carteggio di Madama la Marchesa di Pompadour, ossia 
raccolia di Lettere scritte della Medesima. 

Istruzioni di morale Condotta per le Figlie. 

Francesca di Rimini. Dramma per Musica. 

Then, a little farther on, after a mass of plays :— 

Orazioni a Gesu Nazareno e a Maria addolorata. 

Semiramide ; Melodramma tragico da rappresentarsi 
nel Gran Teatro il Fenice. 

Modo di orare per l’Acquisto del S. Giubileo, conce- 
duto a tutto il Mondo Cattolico da 8. 8. Gregorio 
XVI. 

Le due illustre Rivali, Melodramma in Tre Atti, da 
rappresent arsi nel nuove Gran Teatro il Fenice. 

Il Cristiano secondo il Cuore di Gesu, per la Pratica 
delle sue Virtu. 

Traduzione del’ Idioma Italiana. 

La chiava Chinese ; Commedia del Sig. Abate Pietro 
Chiari. 

La Pelarina ; Intermezzo de Tre Parti per Musica. 

Il Cavaliero e la Dama; Commedia in Tre Atti in 
Prosa. 

I leave these facts without comment. But this being the 
last piece of Appendix I have to add to the present volume, 1 


430 THE STONES OF VENICR. 


would desire to close its pages with a question to my readers 
—a statistical question, which, I doubt not, is being accurately 
determined for us all elsewhere, and which, therefore, it seemg 
to me, our time would not be wasted in determining for our- 
selves, 

There has now been peace between England and the conti- 
nental powers about thirty-five years, and during that period 
the English have visited the continent at the rate of many 
thousands a year, staying there, I suppose, on the average, 
each two or three months ; nor these an inferior kind of Eng- 
lish, but the kind which ought to be the best—the noblest 
born, the best taught, the richest in time and money, having 
more leisure, knowledge, and power than any other portion oi 
the nation. These, we might suppose, beholding, as they 
travelled, the condition of the states in which the Papal relig- 
ion is professed, and being, at the same time, the most en- 
lightened section of a great Protestant nation, would have 
been animated with some desire to dissipate the Romanist 
errors, and to communicate to others the better knowledge 
which they possessed themselves. I doubt not but that He 
who gave peace upon the earth, and gave it by the hand of 
England, expected this much of her, and has watched every 
one of the millions of her travellers as they crossed the sea, 
and kept count for him of his travelling expenses, and of their 
distribution, in amanncr of which neither the traveller nor his 
courier were at all informed. I doubt not, I say, but that 
such accounts have been literally kept for all of us, and thata 
day will come when they will be made clearly legible to us, 
and when we shall see added together, on one side of the ac- 
count book, a great sum, the certain portion, whatever it may 
be, of this thirty-five years’ spendings of the rich English, ac- 
counted for in this manner :— 

To wooden spoons, nut-crackers, and jewellery, bought at 
Geneva, and elsewhere among the Alps, so much ; to shell 
cameos and bits of mosaic bought at Rome, so much ; to coral 
horns and lava brooches bought at Naples, so much ; to glasa— 
beads at Venice, and gold filigree at Genoa, so much ; to pict. 
ures, and statues, and ornaments, everywhere, so much ; to 


APPENDIX. 431 


avant-couriers and extra post-horses, for show and magnifi- 
eence, so much ; to great entertainments and good places for 
seeing sights, so much ; to ball-dresses and general vanities, 
s0 much. This, I say, will be the sum on one side of the 
book ; and on the other will be written, 

To the struggling Protestant Churches of France, Switzer- 
fand, and Piedmont, so much. 

Had we not better do this piece of statistics for ourselves 
‘a time ? 


et ‘ail. hivere 

Aa inay bereodaay’' 

ao obke oan Ws ide ein 
sical | gene eel ii tality odd wo Bere ¢ 

state to" RG etd tiatesiosd sarin ernie wild 

ied W ihe heater ose doses evcas lat ats, b 
daviserna al soitathater we 0 auld: ob fide oom aw Bath. A 


4 


th Beachy, ra £0: 


THE 


STONES’ OF VENICE 


VOLUME THE SECOND 


THE SEA STORIES _ 


re ey 


JO! V\ AY. AO. eav MOTe » 


dquooke 44k AMU AY - 


~ 


SaIAOTSe AAG ANT 


ADVERTISEMENT. 


Ir was originally intended that this Work should consist of 
two volumes only ; the subject has extended to three. The 
second volume, however, will conclude the account of the 
ancient architecture of Venice. The third will embrace the 
Early, the Roman, and the Grotesque Renaissance; and an 
Index, which, as it gives, in alphabetical order, a brief account 
of all the buildings in Venice, or references to the places 
where they are mentioned in the text, will be found a conven- 
ient guide for the traveller. In order to make it more service- 
able, I have introduced some notices of the pictures which J 
think most interesting in the various churches, and in the 
Scuola di San Rocco. 


Stones of Venice—Vol. — 


ay vee ELA 


See emia Pee DEEN OEY 


ino bl 0 od Ba ig a 


Site tani wi sic Ge gps age 
alt auentiony Uliw brid od'T dane lo oxadvotidor josivnn 
fe bas | idonsationst oupastort) oft bas andes odd shal 


diuovon bain & cwatre leoitodadighs ii aorkg di an doidyr sofa 


wooalq oct of eoonoxgtor ap Pode ai mpniblind ota te! a ; 


CONTENTS. 


FIRST, OR BYZANTINE, PERIOD. 


CHAPTER I. 

Yke Throne, . ° . < 5 A e e 
CHAPTER II. 

Torcello, ° ° ° . . ° ° © 3 


CHAPTER III. 
"  Marano, . 5 F 3 : ° . : ° ° 


CHAPTER IV 
St. Mark’s, . 


CHAPTER V. 


Byzantine Palaces, . 


SECOND, OR GOTHIC, PERIOD. 


CHAPTER VI. 
The Nature of Gothic, . a ° ‘ ° A 


1@ 


. 12¢ 


162 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER VIL 


Gothic Palaces, a . 5 . . 


CHAPTER VIII. 


The Ducal Palace, e : : A 


oP WO 


APPENDIX. 


. The Gondolier’s Cry, . ; ° . 
. Our Lady of Salvation, . : . 

. Tides of Venice, and Measures at Torcello, 
. Date of the Duomo of Torcello, 

. Modern Pulpits, 5 ° . . . 


. Apse of Murano, . c . . . 
. Karly Venetian Dress, . : . . 
. Inscriptions at Murano, . 


. Shafts of St. Mark, . A a ' . 
. Proper Sense of the Word Idolatry, 

. Situations of Byzantine Palaces, : . 
. Modern Painting on Glass, . 2 . 


? 


PAGB 


892 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 


STONES OF VENICE, VOLUME TWO. 


PLATE NPAGE 
4. Plans of Torcello and Murano, . : 3 , ie ; =-720 
2. The Acanthus of Torcello, . é , 3 * é 5 2] 
3. Inlaid Bands of Murano, . - 3 tik, % s 5 As 
4. Seulptures of Murano, . : é 2 se 20. : . AT 
5. Archivolt in the Duomo of Murano, . 5 is 3 : =, 60 
6. The Vine. Free, and in Service, . 3 H 7. S i 98 
7. Byzantine Capitals. Convex Group, . ‘ A di . 130 
8. Byzantine Capitals. Concave Group, . 3 t ol 184 
9. Lily Capital of St. Marks, 5 ‘ : : : 3 . 188 

10. Four Venetian Flower Orders (to follow Plate 9). 

11. Byzantine Sculpture, . : - 7 5 f : - 140 

12. Linear and Surface Gothic, , ‘ 5 - : ‘ . P24 

13. Balconies, . : 4 5 5 5 5 . 3 - 246 

14, The Orders of Venetian Arches, 5 ; 7 f ‘ . 248 

15. Windows of the Second Order. Casa Falier, ° - 258 

16. Windows of the Fourth Order, . : : ° : é . 256 

17. Windows of the Early Gothic Palaces, . 7 2 é . 258 

18. Windows of the Fifth Order, . é . 5 ‘ i . 264 

19. Leafage of the Vine Angle, . . Z s ; 3 - 808 

20. Leafage of the Venetian Capitals, . 5 . s . , . 866 


LIS? OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 


FIGURE 
1. Triple Chain, . : ° o Tis 
2. Bands of Murano, . ' 6 e ; 
Latin Inscription, . : * 5 . 


8. Archivolts of St. Marks and Murano, 


> 


Sree Sea ee 


10. 
1. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19: 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
27, 
28. 


The Fondaco de’ Turchi, 


. Diagram of Pillars. Casa Loredan, . 


Arches of St. Marks, Lines of, . . 
Leaf Group, . : : 2 : . 
Six Petal Star, ¢ 2 . . 3 
Flat Lintel Windows, 5 = . 


PAGE 


. ° . 49 | 
. ° . 52 
° ° 54 
. : » 128 
. A . 125 


° ° + 128 

: ° ° . 129 

. ° - 1380 
. . gael 


Pointed Arch (outline), . b r h é 3 ahF QTD 
Gothic Arches, . . 218 
Architecture of Lintel, Round Arch and Gable, . ; 214 


Architecture of Greek, Western Romanesque, and True Gothic, 215 


Gothic and Romanesque Gables, 

Gothic and Romanesque Gables, - > 
Weak and Strong Arch, . . . : 
Foliation, . : a . . . : 
Foliation, . ‘ . : . : 


Designs of Moulding, . ° ° ° 


Foliated Architecture, be sige ° . 
Veronese Niche Ornament, ° ° é 
Frari Traceries, . c Fy . . 
Quatrefoil, . ° ° . ° . 
Roof Parapets, : 5 ° . . 
Parapets, . s . ° . . ° 
Traceried Parapet, ‘ : ° . 


Door and Window in the Corte del Remer, 
Stone Arch, . f ‘< ° . i 


Brick Arches, . ° . . . 


216 
. F ‘ 247 


3 ° Sterne 218 


. . e . 219 
. . ° 7ht 219 
. ° . . 221 


. ° ° weet Zee 


. ° ° . 227 


° ° . 2 233 


. . : . 234 


. e . . 240 


° e ° . 243 


. shar 260 


. . . ext 261 


¢ Sisto ay . 251 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 


FIGURE PAGE 


29. Archivolt Profiles, . ; . c ; ° : 5 wees 


30. Keystone, . : 2 5 . ° . ° » ° . 254 
31. Windows of the Third Order, : ° d . 5 . 256 
32. Windows from the Salizada San Lio, Z P . - . 256 
33. Gothic Trefoils, . : A 5 c A : . 258 
34. Gothic Trefoil, . : ; : : e ° : 6 . 258 


35. Window. Brick Level Head, ‘.  . 6 (6 «© « 268 
36. Ground Plan of the Buildings round St. Mark’s Place, . . 280 
Si. sb, Mark’s’Palace,. 2%se Aas Roar ores ots, : Pee ysl), 
38. Facade, . . . e . . . 


vader? Bad i'l! s i Yo imcbart 


Ss weet 
il nae ahoxilar wat eto swobiit 


\ * 


: Mot Yar! 1 AMMO 


+ Dake favent ayiyi woh 


lt battiog Bnet ao § wud th aed lf 


THE STONES OF VENICH. 


FIRST, OR BYZANTINE, PERIOD, 


CHAPTER L 
THE THRONE. 


§ 1. In the olden days of travelling, now to return no more, 
in which distance could not be vanquished without toil, but in 
which that toil was rewarded, partly by the power of deliberate 
survey of the countries through which the journey lay, and 
partly by the happiness of the evening hours, when, from the 
top of the last hill he had surmounted, the traveller beheld the 
quiet village where he was to rest, scattered among the mead- 
ows beside its valley stream ; or, from the long-hoped-for turn 
in the dusty perspective of the causeway, saw, for the first time, 
the towers of some famed city, faint in the rays of sunset— 
hours of peaceful and thoughtful pleasure, for which the rush 
of the arrival in the railway station is perhaps not always, or 
to all men, an equivalent,—in those days, I say, when there 
was something more to be anticipated and remembered in the 
first aspect of each successive halting-place, than a new ar- 
rangement of glass roofing and iron girder, there were few mo- 
ments of which the recollection was more fondly cherished by 
the traveller than that which, as I endeavored to describe in 
the close of the last chapter, brought him within sight of 
Venice, as his gondola shot into the open lagoon from the 
canal of Mestre. Not but that the aspect of the city itself was 
generally the source of some slight disappointment, for, seen 
in this direction, its buildings are far less characteristic than 


> 


8 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


those of the other great towns of Italy ; but this inferiority . 
was partly disguised by distance, and more than atoned for b3 
the strange rising of its walls and towers out of the midst, as 
it seemed, of the deep sea, for it was impossible that the mind 
or the eye could at once comprehend the shallowness of ‘the 
vast sheet of water which stretched away in leagues of rippling 
lustre to the north and south, or trace the narrow line of islets 
bounding it to the east. The salt breeze, the white moaning 
sea-birds, the masses of black weed separating and disappear- 
ing gradually, in knots of heaving shoal, under the advauce of 
the steady tide, all proclaimed it to be indeed the ocean on 
whose bosom the great city rested so calmly ; not such blue, 
soft, lake-like ocean as bathes the Neapolitan promontories, 
or sleeps beneath the marble rocks of Genoa, but a sea with 
the bleak power of our own northern waves, yet subdued into 
a strange spacious rest, and changed from its angry pallor into 
a field of burnished gold, as the sun declined behind the bel- 
fry tower of the lonely island church, fitly named “ St. George 
of the Seaweed.” As the boat drew nearer to the city, the 
coast which the traveller had just left sank behind him into 
one long, low, sad-colored line, tufted irregularly with brush- 
wood and willows: but, at what seemed its northern extrem- 
ity, the hills of Arqua rose in a dark cluster of purple pyra- 
mids, balanced on the bright mirage of the lagoon ; two or 
three smooth surges of inferior hill extended themselves about 
their roots, and beyond these, beginning with the craggy peaks 
above Vicenza, the chain of the Alps girded the whole horizon 
to the north—a wall of jagged blue, here and there showing 
through its clefts a wilderness of misty precipices, fading far 
back into the recesses of Cadore, and itself rising and break- 
ing away eastward, where the sun struck opposite upon its snow, ~ 
into mighty fragments of peaked light, standing up behind 
the barred clouds of evening, one after another, countless, the 
crown of the Adrian Sea, until the eye turned back from pur- 
suing them, to rest upon the nearer burning of the campaniles 
of Murano, and on the great city, where it magnified itself 
along the waves, as the quick silent pacing of the gondola 
drew nearer and nearer. And at last, when its walls were 


THE THRONE. § 


reached, and the outmost of its untrodden streets was entered, 
not through towered gate or guarded rampart, but as a deep 
inlet between two rocks of coral in the Indian sea ; when first 
upon the traveller's sight opened the long ranges of. col- 
umned palaces,—each with its black boat moored at the 
portal,—each with its image cast down, beneath its feet, 
upon that green pavement which every breeze broke into new 
fantasies of rich tessellation; when first, at the extremity of 
the bright vista, the shadowy Rialto threw its colossal curve 
slowly forth from behind the palace of the Camerlenghi ; that 
strange curve, so delicate, so adamantine, strong as a moun- 
tain cavern, graceful as a bow just bent ; when first, before its 
moonlike circumference was all risen, the gondolier’s ery, 
“ Ah! Stali,” * struck sharp upon the ear, and the prow turned 
aside under the mighty cornices that half met over the narrow 
eanal, where the plash of the water followed close and loud, 
ringing along the marble by the boat’s side ; and when at last 
that boat darted forth upon the breadth of silver sea, across 
which the front of the Ducal palace, flushed with its sanguine 
veins, looks to the snowy dome of Our Lady of Salvation,t it 
was no marvel that the mind should be so deeply entranced 
by the visionary charm of a scene so beautiful and so strange, 
as to forget the darker truths of its history and its being. © 
Well might it seem that such a city had owed her existence 
rather to the rod of the enchanter, than the fear of the fugi- 
tive ; that the waters which encircled her had been chosen for 
the mirror of her state, rather than the shelter of her naked- 
ness; and that all which in nature was wild or merciless,— 
Time and Decay, as well as the waves and tempests,—had 
been won to adorn her instead of to destroy, and might still 
_ spare, for ages to come, that beauty which seemed to have 
fixed for its throne the sands of the hour-glass as well as of 
the sea. 

§ u. And although the last few eventful years, fraught witk 
change to the face of the whole earth, have been more fatal in 
their influence on Venice than the five hundred that preceded 

* Appendix 1, ‘‘ The Gondolier’s Cry.” 
¢ Appendix 2, ‘¢ Our Iady of Salvation.” 


10 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


them ; though the noble landscape of approach to her can now 
be seen no more, or seen only by a glance, as the engine slack- 
ens its rushing on the iron line; and though many of her 
palaces are for ever defaced, and many in desecrated ruins, 
there is still so much of magic in her aspect, that the hurried 
traveller, who must leave her before the wonder of that first 
aspect has been worn away, may still be led to forget the hu- 
mility of her origin, and to shut his eyes to the depth of her 
desolation. They, at least, are little to be envied, in whose 
hearts the great charities of the imagination lie dead, and for 
whom the fancy has no power to repress the importunity of 
painful impressions, or to raise what is ignoble, and disguise 
what is discordant, in a scene so rich in its remembrances, so 
surpassing in its beauty. But for this work of the imagina- 
tion there must be no permission during the task which is 
before us. The impotent feelings of romance, so singularly 
characteristic of this century, may indeed gild, but never save 
the remains of those mightier ages to which they are attached 
like climbing flowers ; and they must be torn away from the 
magnificent fragments, if we would see them as they stood in 
their own strength. Those feelings, always as fruitless as they 
are fond, are in Venice not only incapable of protecting, but 
even of discerning, the objects to which they ought to have 
been attached. The Venice of modern fiction and drama is a 
thing of yesterday, a mere efflorescence of decay, a stage 
dream whicn the first ray of daylight must dissipate into 
dust. No prisoner, whose name is worth remembering, or 
whose sorrow deserved sympathy, ever crossed that “ Bridge 
of Sighs,” which is the centre of the Byronic ideal of Venice ; 
no great merchant of Venice ever saw that Rialto under which 
the traveller now passes with breathless interest: the statue 
which Byron makes Faliero address as of one of his great an- 
cestors was erected to a soldier of fortune a hundred and fifty 
years after Faliero’s death ; and the most conspicuous parts 
of the city have been so entirely altered in the course of the 
last three centuries, that if Henry Dandolo or Francis Foscari 
could be summoned from their tombs, and stood each on the 
deck of his galley at the entrance of the Grand Canal, that 


THE THRONE. 11 


renowned entrance, the painter's favorite subject, the novelist’s 
favorite scene, where the water first narrows by the steps of 
the Church of La Salute,—the mighty Doges would not know 
in what spot of the world they stood, would literally not rec- 
ognize one stone of the great city, for whose sake, and by 
whose ingratitude, their grey hairs had been brought down 
with bitterness to the grave. The remains of their Venice lie 
hidden behind the cumbrous masses which were the delight 
of the nation in its dotage; hidden in many a grass-grown 
court, and silent pathway, and lightless canal, where the slow 
waves have sapped their foundations for five hundred years, 
and must soon prevail over them for ever. It must be our 
task to glean and gather them iorth, and restore out of them 
some faint image of the lost city, more gorgeous a thousand- 
fold than that which now exists, yet not created in the day- 
dream of the prince, nor by the ostentation of the noble, but 
built by iron hands and patient hearts, contending against 
the adversity of nature and the fury of man, so that its wonder- 
fulness cannot be grasped by the indolence of imagination, but 
only after frank inquiry into the true nature of that wild and 
solitary scene, whose restless tides and trembling sands did 
indeed shelter the birth of the city, but long denied her do- 
minion. 

§ ut. When the eye falls casually on a map of Europe, there 
is no feature by which it is more likely to be arrested than 
the strange sweeping loop formed by the junction of the Alps 
and Apennines, and enclosing the great basin of Lombardy. 
This return of the mountain chain upon itself causes a vast 
difierence in the character of the distribution of its débris on 
its opposite sides. The rock fragments and sediment which 
the torrents on the north side of the Alps bear into the plaing 
are distributed over a vast extent of country, and, though here 
and there lodged in beds of enormous thickness, soon permit 
the firm substrata to appear from underneath them ; but all 
the torrents which descend from the southern side of the High 
Alps, and from the northern slope of the Apennines, meet 
concentrically in the recess or mountain bay which the two 
ridges enclose ; every fragment which thunder breaks out ai 


12 THE STONES OF VENIVU. 


their battlements, and every grain of dust which the summe2 
rain washes from their pastures, is at last laid at rest in the 
blue sweep of the Lombardic plain ; and that plain must have 
risen within its rocky barriers as a cup fills with wine, but for 
two contrary influences which continually depress, or disperse 
from its surface, the accumulation of the ruins of ages. 

§ rv. I will not tax the reader’s faith in modern science by 
insisting on the singular depression of the surface of Lom< 
bardy, which appears for many centuries to have taken place 
steadily and continually ; the main fact with which we have 
to do is the gradual transport, by the Po and its great col- 
lateral rivers, of vast masses of the finer sediment to the sea, 
The character of the Lombardic plains is most strikingly ex- 
pressed by the ancient walls of its cities, composed for the 
most part of large rounded Alpine pebbles alternating with 
narrow courses of brick; and was curiously sTaxteateel in 
1848, by the ramparts of these same pebbles thrown up four 
or five feet high round every field, to check the Austrian cav- 
alry in the battle under the walls of Verona. The finer dust 
among which these pebbles are dispersed is taken up by the 
rivers, fed into continual strength by the Alpine snow, so 
that, however pure their waters may be when they issue from 
the lakes at the foot of the great chain, they become of the 
color and opacity of clay before they reach the Adriatic; the 
sediment which they bear is at once thrown down as they 
enter the sea, forming a vast belt of low land along the 
eastern coast of Italy. The powerful stream of the Po of 
course builds forward the fastest; on each side of it, north 
and south, there is a tract of marsh, fed by more feeble 
streams, and less liable to rapid change than the delta of the | 
central river. In one of these tracts is buiit Ravenna, and in 
the other VENICE. 

§ v. What circumstances directed the pdtle lie arrangement 
of this great belt of sediment in the earliest times, it is not 
here the place to inquire. It is enough for us to know that 
from the mouths of the Adige to those of the Piave there 
stretches, at a variable distance of from three to five mileg 
from the actua) shore, @ bank of sand, divided into long 


THE THRONE, 18 


islands by narrow channels of sea. The space between this 
bank and the true shore consists of the sedimentary deposits 
from these and other rivers, a great plain of calcareous mud, 
covered, in the neighborhood of Venice, by the sea at high 
water, to the depth in most places of a foot or a foot anda 
half, and nearly everywhere exposed at low tide, but divided 
by an intricate network of narrow and winding channels, from 
which the sea ever retires. In some places, according to the 
run of the currents, the land has risen into marshy islets, con- 
solidated, some by art, and some by time, into ground firm 
enough to be built upon, or fruitful enough to be cultivated : 
in others, on the contrary, it has not reached the sea-level ; so 
that, at the average low waiter, shallow lakelets glitter among 
its irregularly exposed fields of seaweed. In the midst of the 
largest of these, increased in importance by the confluence of 
several large river channels towards one of the openings*in 
the sea bank, the city of Venice itself is built, on a crowded 
cluster of islands ; the various plots of higher ground which 
appear to the north and south of this central cluster, have at 
different periods been also thickly inhabited, and now bear, 
according to their size, the remains of cities, villages, or iso- 
lated convents and churches, scattered among spaces of open 
ground, partly waste and encumbered by ruins, partly under 
cultivation for the supply of the metropolis. 

§ vi. The average rise and fall of the tide is about three 
feet (varying considerably with the seasons *); but this fall, 
on so flat a shore, is enough to cause continual movement in 
the waters, and in the main canals to produce a reflux which 
irequently runs like a mill stream. At high water no land is 
visible for many miles to the north or south of Venice, except 
m the form of small islands crowned with towers or gleaming 
with villages: there is a channel, some three miles wide, be- 
tween the city and the mainland, and some mile and a halt 
wide between it and the sandy breakwater called the Lido, 
which divides the lagoon from the Adriatic, but which is so 
tow as hardly to disturb the impression of the city’s having 
been built in the midst of the ocean, although the secret of 

* Appendix 3, ‘‘ Tides of Venice.” 


14 THE STONES OF VENIOR. 


its true position is partly, yet not painfully, betrayed by tha 
clusters of piles set to mark the deep-water channels, which 
undulate far away in spotty chains like the studded backs of 
huge sea-snakes, and by the quick glittering of the crisped 
and crowded waves that flicker and dance before the strong 
winds upon the unlifted level of the shallow sea. But the 
scene is widely different at low tide. A fall of eighteen or 
twenty inches is enough to show ground over the greater 
part of the lagoon ; and at the complete ebb the city is seen 
standing in the midst of a dark plain of seaweed, of gloomy 
green, except only where the larger branches of the Brenta 
and its associated streams converge towards the port of the 
Lido. Through this salt and sombre plain the gondola and 
the fishing-boat advance by tortuous channels, seldom more 
than four or five feet deep, and often so choked with slime 
that the heavier keels furrow the bottom till their crossing 
tracks are seen through the clear sea water like the ruts upon 
a wintry road, and the oar leaves blue gashes upon the ground 
at every stroke, or is entangled among the thick weed that 
fringes the banks with the weight of its sullen waves, leaning 
to and fro upon the uncertain sway of the exhausted tide. 
The scene is often profoundly oppressive, even at this day, 
when every plot of higher ground bears some fragment of 
fair building : but, in order to know what it was once, let the 
traveller follow in his boat at evéning the windings of some 
unfrequented channel far into the midst of the melancholy 
‘plain ; let him remove, in his imagination, the brightness of 
the great city that still extends itself in the distance, and 
the walls and towers from the islands that are near; and so 
wait, until the bright investiture and sweet warmth of the — 
sunset are withdrawn from the waters, and the black desert 
of their shore lies in its nakedness beneath the night, path- 
less, comfortless, infirm, lost in dark languor and fearful 
silence, except where the salt runlets plash into the tideless 
pools, or the seabirds flit from their margins with a question- 
ing cry ; and he will be enabled to enter in some sort inte 
the horror of heart with which this solitude was anciently 
chosen by man for his habitation. They little thought, whe 


TYRE THRONE. j AS 


drst drove the stakes into the sand, and strewed the ocean 
reeds for their rest, that their children were to be the princes 
of that ocean, and their palaces its pride; and yet, in the 
great natural laws that rule that sorrowful wilderness, let it 
be remembered what strange preparation had been made for 
the things which no human imagination could have foretold, 
and how the whole existence and fortune of the Venetian nas 
tion were anticipated or compelled, by the setting of those 
bars and doors to the rivers and the sea. Had deeper cur- 
rents divided their islands, hostile navies would again and 
again have reduced the rising city into servitude; had 
stronger surges beaten their shores, all the richness and re- 
finement of the Venetian architecture must have been ex- 
changed for the walls and bulwarks of an ordinary sea-port. 
Had there been no tide, as in other parts of the Mediterra- 
nean, the narrow canals of the city would have become noi- 
some, and the marsh in which it was built pestiferous. Had 
the tide been only a foot or eighteen inches higher in its rise, 
the water-access to the doors of the palaces would have been 
impossible: even as it is, there is sometimes a little difficulty, 
at the ebb, in landing without setting foot upon the lower 
and slippery steps: and the highest tides sometimes enter 
the courtyards, and overflow the entrance halls. Eighteen 
inches more of difference between the level of the flood and 
ebb would have rendered the doorsteps of every palace, at 
low water, a treacherous mass of weeds and limpets, and the 
entire system of water-carriage for the higher classes, in their 
easy and daily intercourse, must have been done away with. 
The streets of the city would have been widened, its network 
of canals filled up, and all the peculiar character of the place 
and the people destroyed. 

§ vi. The reader may perhaps have felt some pain in the 
contrast between this faithful view of the site of the Venetian 
Throne, and the romantic coneeption of it which we ordinarily 
form ; but this pain, if he have felt it, ought to be more than 
counterbalanced by the value ot the instance thus afforded to 
us at once of the inscrutableness and the wisdom of the ways 
of God. If, two thousand years ago, we had been permitted 


16 “THE STONES OF VENIOR. 


to watch the slow settling of the slime of those turbid rivers 
into the polluted sea, and the gaining upon its deep and fresh 
waters of the lifeless, impassable, unvoyageable plain, how lit- 
tle could we have understood the purpose with which those 
islands were shaped out of the void, and the torpid waters en- 
closed with their desolate walls of sand! How little could we 
have known, any more than of what now seems to us most dis- 
tressful, dark, and objectless, the glorious aim which was then 
in the mind of Him in whose hand are all the corners of the 
earth! how little imagined that in the laws which were 
stretching forth the gloomy margins of those fruitless banks, 
and feeding the bitter grass among their shallows, there was 
indeed a preparation, and the only preparation possible, for the 
founding of a city which was to be set like a golden clasp on 
the girdle of the earth, to write her history on the white 
scrolls of the sea-surges, and to word it in their thunder, 
and to gather and give forth, in world-wide pulsation, the 
glory of the West and of the East, from the burning heart of 
her Fortitude and Splendor. 


CHAPTER IL 
TORCELLO, 


§ 1. Srven miles to the north of Venice, the banks of sand, 
which near the city rise little above low-water mark, attain by 
degrees a higher level, and knit themselves at last into fields 
of salt morass, raised here and there into shapeless mounds, 
and intercepted by narrow creeks of sea. One of the feeblest 
of these inlets, after winding for some time among buried 
fragments of masonry, and knots of sunburnt weeds whitened ~ 
with webs of fucus, stays itself in an utterly stagnant pool be- 
side a plot of greener grass covered with ground ivy and vio- 
lets. On this mound is built a rude brick campanile, of the 
commonest Lombardic type, which if we ascend towards even- 
ing (and there are none to hinder us, the door of its ruinous 
staircase swinging idly on its hinges), we may command from 
it one of the most notable scenes in this wide world of ours, 


TORCELLO. 17 


Far as the eye can reach, a waste of wild sea moor, of a lurid 
ashen grey ; not like our northern moors with their jet-black 
pools and purple heath, but lifeless, the color of sackcloth, 
with the corrupted sea-water soaking through the roots of its 
acrid weeds, and gleaming hither and thither through its 
snaky channels. No gathering of fantastic mists, nor coursing 
of clouds across it ; but melancholy clearness of space in the 
warm sunset, oppressive, reaching to the horizon of its level 
gloom. ‘To the very horizon, on the north-east; but, to the 
north and west, there is a blue line of higher land along the 
border of it, and above this, but farther back, a misty band of 
mountains, touched with snow. To the east, the paleness 
and roar of the Adriatic, louder at momentary intervals as the 
surf breaks on the bars of sand ; to the south, the widening 
branches of the calm lagoon, alternately purple and pale 
green, as they reflect the evening clouds or twilight sky ; and 
almost beneath our feet, on the same field which sustains the 
tower we gaze from, a group of four buildings, two of them 
little larger than cottages (though built of stone, and one 
adorned by a quaint belfry), the third an octagonal chapel, of 
which we can see but little more than the flat red roof with 
its rayed tiling, the fourth, a considerable ‘church with nave 
and aisles, but of which, in like manner, we can see little but 
the long central ridge and lateral slopes of roof, which the 
sunlight separates in one glowing mass from the green field 
beneath and grey moor beyond. ‘There are no living creat- 
ures near the buildings, nor any vestige of village or city 
round about them. They lie like a little company of ships 
becalmed on a far-away sea. 

§ u. Then look farther to the south. Beyond the widening 
branches,of the lagoon, and rising out of the brigbt lake into 
which they gather, there are a multitude of towers, dark, and 
scattered among square-set shapes of clustered palaces, a long 
and irregular line fretting the southern sky. 

Mother and daughter, you behold them both in their wid- 
owhood,—Torcetto and VENIcE, 

Thirteen hundred years ago, the grey moorland looked as 
it does this day, and the purple mountains stood as radiantly 

Vou. II.—2 


i8 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


in the deep distances of evening ; but on the line of the hori 
zon, there were strange fires mixed with the light of sunset, 
and the lament of many human voices mixed with the fretting 
of the waves on their ridges of sand. The flames rose from 
the ruins of Altinum ; the lament from the multitude of its 
people, seeking, like Israel of old, a refuge from the sword in 
the paths of the sea. 

The cattle are feeding and resting upon the site of the city 
that they left ; the mower’s scythe swept this day at dawn over 
the chief street of the city that they built, and the swathes of 
soft grass are now sending up their scent into the night air, 
the only incense that fills the temple of their ancient worship. 
Let us go down into that little space of meadow land. 

§ ut. The inlet which runs nearest to the base of the cam- 
panile is not that by which Torcello is commonly approached. 
Another, somewhat broader, and overhung by alder copse, 
winds out of the main channel of the lagoon up to the very 
edge of the little meadow which was once the Piazza of the 
city, and there, stayed by a few grey stones which present 
some semblance of a quay, forms its boundary at one ex- | 
tremity. Hardly larger than an ordinary English farmyard, 
and roughly enclosed on each side by broken palings and 
hedges of honeysuckle and briar, the narrow field retires from 
the water’s edge, traversed by a scarcely traceable footpath, 
for some forty or fifty paces, and then expanding into the 
form of a small square, with buildings on three sides of it, 
the fourth being that which opens to the water. Two of these, 
that on our left and that in front of us as we approach from 
the canal, are so small that they might well be taken for the 
out-houses of the farm, though the first is a conventual build- 
ing, and the other aspires to the title of the “Palazzo publico,” . 
both dating as far back as the beginning of the fourteenth 
century ; the third, the octagonal church of Santa Fosca, is far 
more ancient than either, yet hardly on a larger scale. Though 
the pillars of the portico which surrounds it are of pure 
Greek marble, and their capitals are enriched with delicate 
sculpture, they, and the arches they sustain, together only 
raise the roof to the height of a cattle-shed ; and the first 


TORCELLO. 19 


strong impression which the spectator receives from the 
whole scene is, that whatever sin it may have been which hag 
on this spot been visited with so utter a desolation, it could 
not at least have been ambition. Nor will this impression be 
diminished as we approach, or enter, the larger church to 
which the whole group of building is subordinate. It has 
evidently been built by men in flight and distress,* who 
sought in the hurried erection of their island church such a 
shelter for their earnest and sorrowful worship as, on the one 
hand, could not attract the eyes of their enemies by its splen- 
dor, and yet, on the other, might not awaken too bitter feelings 
by its contrast with the churches which they had seen de- 
stroyed. There is visible everywhere a simple and tender ef- 
fort to recover some of the form of the temples which they 
had loved, and to do honor to God by that which they were 
erecting, while distress and humiliation prevented the desire, 
and prudence precluded the admission, either of luxury of 
ornament or magnificence of plan. The exterior is absolutely 
devoid of decoration, with the exception only of the western 
entrance and the lateral door, of which the former has carved 
sideposts and architrave, and the latter, crosses of rich sculpt- 
ure ; while the massy stone shutters of the windows, turning 
on huge rings of stone, which answer the double purpose of 
stanchions and brackets, cause the whole building rather to 
resemble a refuge from Alpine storm than the cathedral of a 
populous city ; and, internally, the two solemn mosaics of 
the eastern and western extremities,—one representing the 
Last Judgment, the other the Madonna, her tears falling ag 
her hands are raised to bless,—and the noble range of pillars 
which enclose the space between, terminated by the high 
throne for the pastor and the semicircular raised seats for the 
superior clergy, are expressive at once of the deep sorrow and 
the sacred courage of men who had no home left them upon 
earth, but wl.o looked for one to come, of men “ persecuted 
but not forsaken, cast down but not destroyed.” 

§ iv. I am not aware of any other early church in Italy 
which has this peculiar expression in so marked a degree ; and 

* Appendix 4, ‘‘ Date of the Duomo of Torcello.” 


vAU) THR STONHS OF VENICE. 


it is so consistent with all that Christian architecture ought te 
express in every age (for the actual condition of the exiles 
who built the cathedral of Torcello is exactly typical of the 
spiritual condition which every Christian ought to recognize 
in himself, a state of homelessness on earth, except so far as 
he can make the Most High his habitation), that I would 
rather fix the mind of the reader on this general character 
than on the separate details, however interesting, of the ar- 
chitecture itself. I shall therefore examine these only so far 
as is necessary to give a clear idea of the means by which the 
peculiar expression of the building is attained. 

§ v. On the opposite page, the uppermost figure, 1, is a 
rude plan of the church. Ido not answer for the thickness 
and external disposition of the walls, which are not to our 
present purpose, and which I have not carefully examined ; 
but the interior arrangement is given with sufficient accuracy. 
The church is built on the usual plan of the Basilica * that is 
to say, its body divided into a nave and aisles by two rows of 
massive shafts, the roof of the nave being raised high above 
the aisles by walls sustained on two ranks of pillars, and 
pierced with small arched windows. At Torcello the aisles 
are also lighted in the same manner, and the nave is nearly 
twice their breadth.+ 

The capitals of all the great shafts are of white marble, ‘and 
are arnong the best I have ever seen, as examples of perfectly 
calculated effect from every touch of the chisel. Mr. Hope 
calls them “ indifferently imitated from the Corinthian :” | but 
the expression is as inaccurate as it is unjust ; every one of 
them is different in design, and their variations are as grace- 
ful as they are fanciful. I could not, except by an elaborate 


* For a full account of the form and symbolical meaning of the Basil- 
fica, see Lord Lindsay’s ‘‘ Christian Art,” vol. i. p.12. It is much to be 
regretted that the Chevalier Bunsen’s work on the Basilicas of Rome is 
not translated into English. 

+ The measures are given in Appendix 3. 

{ Hope’s ‘‘ Historical Essay on Architecture” (third edition, 1840), 
chap. ix. p. 95. In other respects Mr. Hope has done justice to thir 
building and to the style of the early Christian churches in general, 


TorceHo. 


Apse of Murano 


PLATE I.—PLANS oF TORCELLO AND MURANO. 


TORCELLO. 21 


drawing, give any idea of the sharp, dark, deep penetrations 
of the chisel into their snowy marble, but a single example is 
given in the opposite plate, fig. 1, of the nature of the changes 
effected in them from the Corinthian type. In this capital, 
although a kind of acanthus (only with rounded lobes) is in- 
deed used for the upper range of leaves, the lower range is 
not acanthus at all, but a kind of vine, or at least. that species 
of plant which stands for vine in all early Lombardic and 
Byzantine work (vide Vol. I. Appendix 8) ; the leaves are tre- 
foiled, and the stalks cut clear so that they might be grasped 
with the hand, and cast sharp dark shadows, perpetually 
changing, across the bell of the capital behind them. I have 
drawn one of those vine plants larger in fig. 2, that the reader 
may see how little imitation of the Corinthian there is in them, 
and how boldly the stems of the leaves are detached from the 
ground. But there is another circumstance in this ornament 
still more noticeable. The band which encircles the shaft be- 
neath the spring of the leaves is copied from 

the common classical wreathed or braided / 
fillet, of which the reader may see exaraples 

on almost every building of any pretensions ale 

in modern London. But the mediseval 

builders could not be content with the dead and meaningless 
scroll: the Gothic energy and love of life, mingled with the 
early Christian religious symbolism, were struggling daily into. 
more vigorous expression, and they turned the wreathed band 
into a serpent of three times the length necessary to undulate 
round the shaft, which, knotting itself into a triple chain, shows 
at one side of the shaftits tail and head, as if perpetually gliding 
round it beneath the stalks of the vines. The vine, as is well 
known, was one of the early symbols of Christ, and the ser- 
pent is here typical either of the eternity of his dominion, or 
of the Satanic power subdued. 

§ v1. Nor sven when the builder confines himself to the 
acanthus leaf (or to that representation of it, hereafter to be 
more particularly examined, constant in Romanesque work) 
can his imagination allow him to rest content with its accus- 
tomed position. In a common Corinthian capital the leaves 


22 THE STONES OF VENIOCL. 


nod forward only, thrown out on every side from the bell 
which they surround: but at the base of one of the capitals 
on the opposite side of the nave from this of the vines,* two 
leaves are introduced set with their sides outwards, forming 
spirals by curling back, half-closed, in the position shown in 
fig. 4 in Plate IL, there represented as in a real acanthus leaf ; 
for it will assist our future inquiries into the ornamentation 
of capitals that the reader should be acquainted with the form 
of the acanthus leaf itself. I have drawn it, therefore, in the 
two positions, figs. 3 and 4in Plate IL. ; while fig. 5 is the 
translation of the latter form into marble by the sculptor of 
Torcello. Itis not very like the acanthus, but much liker 
than any Greek work ; though still entirely conventional in its 
cinquefoiled lobes. But these are disposed with the most 
graceful freedom of line, separated at the roots by deep drill 
holes, which tell upon the eye far away like beads of jet ; and 
changed, before they become too crowded to be effective, into 
a vigorous and simple zigzagged edge, which saves the designer 
some embarrassment in the perspective of the terminating 
spiral. But his feeling of nature was greater than his knowl- 
edge of perspective ; and it is delightful to see how he has 
rooted the whole leaf in the strong rounded under-stem, the 
indication of its closing with its face inwards, and has thus 
given organization and elasticity to the lovely group of spiral 
lines ; a group of which, even in the lifeless sea-shell, we are 
never weary, but which becomes yet more delightful when the 
ideas of elasticity and growth are joined to the sweet succes- 
sion of its involution. 

§ vi. It is not, however, to be expected that either the 
mute language of early Christianity (however important a part _ 
of the expression of the building at the time of its erection), 
or the delicate fancies of the Gothic leafage springing into 
new life, should be read, or perceived, by the passing trav- 
eller who has never been taught to expect anything in archi- 
tecture except five orders: yet he can hardly fail to be struck 
by the simplicity and dignity of the great shafts themselves ‘ 
by the frank diffusion of light, which prevents their severity 

* A sketch has been given of this capital in my folio work. 


PLATE II.—- THE ACANTHUS OF TORCELEC, 


TORCELLO. 23 


from becoming oppressive; by the delicate forms and lovely 
carving of the pulpit and chancel screen ; and, above all, by 
the peculiar aspect of the eastern extremity of the church, 
which, instead of being withdrawn, as in later cathedrals, inte 
a chapel dedicated to the Virgin, or contributing by the brill- 
iancy of its windows to the splendor of the altar, and theatri- 
cal effect of the ceremonies performed there, is a simple and 
stern semicircular recess, filled beneath by three ranks of 
seats, raised one above the other, for the bishop and pres- 
byters, that they might watch as well as guide the devotions 
of the people, and discharge literally in the daily service the 
_ functions of bishops or overseers of the flock of God. 

§ vi. Let us consider a little each of these characters in - 
succession ; and first (for of the shafts enough has been said 
already), what is very peculiar to this church, its luminous- 
ness. This perhaps strikes the traveller more from its con- 
trast with the excessive gloom of the Church of St. Mark’s ; 
but it is remarkable when we compare the Cathedral of Tor- 
cello with any of the contemporary basilicas in South Italy or 
Lombardic churches in the North. St. Ambrogio at Milan, 
St. Michele at Pavia, St. Zeno at Verona, St. Frediano at 
Lucca, St. Miniato at Florence, are all like sepulchral caverns 
compared with Torcello, where the slightest details of the 
sculptures and mosaics are visible, even when twilight is 
deepening. And there is something especially touching in 
our finding the sunshine thus freely admitted into a church 
built by men in sorrow. They did not need the darkness; 
they could not perhaps bear it. There was fear and depres- 
sion upon them enough, without a material gloom. They 
sought for comfort in their religion, for tangible hopes and 
promises, not for threatenings or mysteries ; and though the 
subjects chosen for the mosaics on the walls are of the most 
solemn character, there are no artificial shadows cast upon 
them, nor dark colors used in them: all is fair and bright, 
and intended evidently to be regarded in hopefulness, and not 
with terror. 

§ 1x. For observe this choice of subjects. It is indeed pos- 
pible that the walls of the nave and aisles, which are now 

Stones of Venice—Vol. 1I,—2 


94 THE STONES OF. VENIUVK. 


whitewashed, may have been covered with fresco or mosaic, 
and thus have supplied a series of subjects, on the choice of 
which we cannot speculate. I do not, however, find record of 
the destruction of any such works; and I am rather inclined 
to believe that at any rate the central division of the building 
was originally decorated, as it is now, simply by mosaics rep- 
resenting Christ, the Virgin, and the apostles, at one extrem- 
ity, and Christ coming to judgment at the other. And if so, 
I repeat, observe the significance of this choice. Most other 
early churches are covered with imagery sufficiently sugges- 
tive of the vivid interest of the builders in the history and 
occupations of the world. Symbols or representations of 
political events, portraits of living persons, and sculptures of 
satirical, grotesque, or trivial subjects are of constant occur- 
rence, mingled with the more strictly appointed representa- 
tions of scriptural or ecclesiastical history ; but at Torcello 
even these usual, and one should have thought almost neces- 
sary, successions of Bible events do not appear. The mind of 
the worshipper was fixed entirely upon two great facts, to him 
the most precious of all facts,—the present mercy of Christ to 
His Church, and His future coming to judge the world. 
That Christ’s mercy was, at this period, supposed chiefly to be 
attainable through the pleading of the Virgin, and that there- 
fore beneath the figure of*the Redeemer is seen that of the 
weeping Madonna in the act of intercession, may indeed be 
matter of sorrow to the Protestant beholder, but ought not to 
blind him to the earnestness and singleness of the faith with 
which these men sought their sea-solitudes ; not in hope of 
founding new dynasties, or entering upon new epochs of pros- 
perity, but only to humble themselves before God, and to 
pray that in His infinite mercy He would hasten the time ~ 
when the sea should give up the dead which were in it, and 
Death and Hell give up the dead which were in them, and 
' when they might enter into the better kingdom, “where the 
wicked cease from troubling and the weary are at rest.” 

§ x. Nor were the strength and elasticity of their minds, 
even in the least. matters, diminished by thus looking forward 
to the close of all things. On the contrary, nothing is more 


TORCELLO. 95 


semarkable than the finish and beauty of all the portions of 
the building, which seem to have been actually executed for 
the place they occupy in the present structure. The rudest 
are those which they brought with them from the mainland ; 
the best and most beautiful, those which appear to have been 
carved for their island church: of these, the new capitals al- 
ready noticed, and the exquisite panel ornaments of the chan- 
cel screen, are the most conspicuous ; the latter form a low 
wall across the church between the six small shafts whose 
places are seen in the plan, and serve to enclose a space 
raised two steps above the level of the nave, destined for the 
singers, and indicated also in the plan by an open line a bcd. 
The bas-reliefs on this low screen are groups of peacocks and 
lions, two face to face on each panel, rich and fantastic be- 
yond description, though not expressive of very accurate 
knowledge either of leonine or pavonine forms. And it is not 
until we pass to the back of the stair of the pulpit, which is 
connected with the northern extremity of this screen, that we 
find evidence of the haste with which the church was con- 
structed. 

§ x1. The pulpit, however, is not among the least notice- 
able of its features. It is sustained on the four small de 
tached shafts marked at p in the plan, between the two pillars — 
at the north side of the screen ; both pillars and pulpit stu- 
diously plain, while the staircase which ascends to it is a com- 
pact mass of masonry (shaded in the plan), faced by carved 
slabs of marble; the parapet of the staircase being also 
formed cf solid blocks like paving-stones, lightened by rich, 
but not deep, exterior carving. Now these blocks, or at least 
those which adorn the staircase towards the aisle, have been 
brought from the mainland ; and, being of size and shape 
not easily to be adjusted to the proportions of the stair, the 
architect has cut out of them pieces of the size he needed, 
utterly regardless of the subject or symmetry of the original 
design. The pulpit is not the only place where this rough 
procedure has been permitted: at the lateral door of the 
church are two crosses, cut out of slabs of marble, formerly 
sovered with rich sculpture over their whole surfaces, oi 


26 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


which portions are left, on the surface of the crosses; the 
lines of the original design being, of course, just as arbitra 
rily cut by the incisions between the arms, as the patterns 
upon a piece of silk which has been shaped anew. The fact 
is, that in all early Romanesque work, large surfaces are cov- 
ered with sculpture for the sake of enrichment only ; sculpt- 
ure which indeed had always meaning, because it was easier 
for the sculptor to work with some chain of thought to guide 
his chisel, than without any ; but it was not always intended, 
or at least not always hoped, that this chain of thought might 
be traced by the spectator. All that was proposed appears to 
have been the enrichment of surface, so as to make it delight- 
ful to the eye ; and this being once understood, a decorated 
piece of marble became to the architect just what a piece of 
lace or embroidery is to a dressmaker, who takes of it such 
portions as she may require, with little regard to the places 
where the patterns are divided. And though it may appear, 
at first sight, that the procedure is indicative of bluntness 
and rudeness of feeling, we may perceive, upon reflection, 
that it may also indicate the redundance of power which sets 
little price upon its own exertion. When a barbarous nation 
builds its fortréss-walls out of fragments of the refined archi- 
tecture it has overthrown, we can read nothing but its sav- 
ageness in the vestiges of art which may thus chance to have 
been preserved ; but when the new work is equal, if not su- 
perior, in execution, to the pieces of the older art which are 
associated with it, we may justly conclude that the rough 
treatment to which the latter have been subjected is rather a 
sign of the hope of doing better things, than of want of feel- 
ing for those already accomplished. And, in general, this 
careless fitting of ornament is, in very truth, an evidence of . 
life in the school of builders, and of their making a due dis- 
tinction between work which is to be used for architectural 
effect, and work which is to possess an abstract perfection ; 
and it commonly shows also that the exertion of design is 
so easy to them, and their fertility so inexhaustible, that they 
feel no remorse in using somewhat injuriously what they car 
replace with so slight an effort. 


TORCELLO. oT 


§ xm. It appears however questionable in the present in 
stance, whether, if the marbles had not been carved to bua 
hand, the architect would have taken the trouble to enrich 
them. For the execution of the rest of the pulpit is studi. 
ously simple, and it is in this réspect that its design possesses, 
it seems to me, an interest to the religious spectator greater 
than he will take in any other postion of the building. It is 
supported, as I said, on a group of four slender shafts ; itself 
of a slightly oval form, extending nearly from one pillar of 
the nave to the next, so as to give the preacher free room for 
the action of the entire person, which always gives an un- 
affected impressiveness to the eloquence of the southern 
nations. In the centre of its curved front, a small bracket and 
detached shaft sustain the projection of anarrow marble desk 
(occupying the place of a cushion in a modern pulpit), which 
is hollowed out into a shallow curve on the upper surface, 
leaving a ledge at the bottom of the slab, so that a book 
laid upon it, or rather into it, settles itself there, opening aa 
if by instinct, but without the least chance of slipping to the 
side, or in any way moving beneath the preacher’s hands.* 
Six balls, or rather almonds, of purple marble veined with 
white are set round the edge of the pulpit, and form its only 
decoration. Perfectly graceful, but severe and almost cold in 
its simplicity, built for permanence and service, so that no 
single member, no stone of it, could be spared, and yet all 
are firm and uninjured as when they were first set together, 
it stands in venerable contrast both with the fantastic pulpits 
of medieval cathedrals and with the rich furniture of those 
of our modern churches. It is worth while pausing for a mo- 
ment to consider how far the manner of decorating a pulpit 
may have influence on the efficiency of its service, and whether 
our modern treatment of this, to us all-important, feature of 
a church be the best possible. - 

§ xm. When the sermon is good we need not much concern 
ourselves avout the form of the pulpit. But sermons cannot 
always be good ; and I believe that the temper in which the 
congregation set themselves to listen may be in some degree 

* Appendix 5, ‘* Modern Pulpits.” 


28 TH SUONKS OF VENICE. 


modified by their perception of fitness or unfitness, impres 
siveness or vulgarity, in the disposition of the place ap- 
pointed for the speaker,—not to the same degree, but some- 
what in the same way, that they may be influenced by his 
own gestures or expression, irrespective of the sense of what 
he says. I believe, therefore, in the first place, that pulpits 
ought never to be highly decorated ; the speaker is apt to 
look mean or diminutive if the pulpit is either on a very large 
scale or covered with splendid ornament, and if the interest 
of the sermon should flag the mind is instantly tempted to 
wander. I have observed that in almost all cathedrals, when 
the pulpits are peculiarly magnificent, sermons are not often 
preached from them ; but rather, and especially if for any im- 
portant purpose, from some temporary erection in other parts 
of the building : and though this may often be done because 
the architect has consulted the effect upon the eye more than 
the convenience of the ear in the placing of his larger pulpit, 
I think it also proceeds in some measure from a natural dis- 
like in the preacher to match himself with the magnificence 
of the rostrum, lest the sermon should not be thought worthy 
of the place. Yet this will rather hold of the colossal sculpt- 
ures, and pyramids of fantastic tracery which encumber the 
pulpits of Flemish and German churches, than of the delicate 
mosaics and ivory-like carving of the Romanesque basilizas, 
for when the form is kept simple, much loveliness of color and 
costliness of work may be introduced, and yet the speaker 
not be thrown into the shade by them. 

§ xiv. But, in the second place, whatever ornaments we ad- 
mit ought clearly to be of a chaste, grave, and noble kind ; 
and what furniture we employ, evidently more for the honor. 


ing of God’s word than for the ease of the preacher. For: - 


there are two ways of regarding a sermon, either as a human 
composition, or a Divine message. If we look upon it en- 
tirely as the first, and require our clergymen to finish it with 
their utmost care and learning, for our better delight whether 
of ear or intellect, we shall necessarily be led to expect much 
formality and stateliness in its delivery, and to think that all 
is not well if the pulpit have not a golden fringe round it, 


TORCELLO. 29 


and a goodly cushion in front of it, and if the sermon be not 
fairly written in «# dlack book, to be smoothed upen the 
cushion in a majestic manner before beginning; all this we 
shall duly come to expect: but we shall at the same time con- 
sider the treatise thus prepared as something to which itis 
our duty to listen without restlessness for half an hour or 
three quarters, but which, when that duty has been decorously 
_ performed, we may dismiss from our minds in happy confi- 
dence of being provided with another when next it shall be 
necessary. But. if once we begin to regard the preacher, 
whatever his faults, as a man sent with a message to us, which 
it is a matter of life or death whether we hear or refuse; if 
we look upon him as set in charge over many spirits in danger 
of ruin, and having allowed to him but an hour or two in the 
seven days to speak to them; if we make some endeavor to 
conceive how precious these hours ought to be to him, a smal] 
vantage on the side of God after his flock have been exposed 
for six days together to the full weight of the world’s tempta- 
tion, and he has been forced to watch the thorn and the 
thistle springing in their hearts, and to see what wheat had 
been scattered there snatched from the wayside by this wild 
bird and the other, and at last, when breathless and weary 
syith the week’s labor they give him this interval of imperfect 
and /anguid hearing, he has but thirty minutes to get at the 
separate hearts of a thousand men, to convince them of all 
their weaknesses, to shame them for all their sins, to warn 
them of all their dangers, to try by this way and that to stir 
the hard fastenings of those doors where the Master himself 
has stood and knocked yet none opened, and to call at the 
openings of those dark streets where Wisdom herself hath 
stretched forth her hands and no man regarded,—thirty 
minutes to raise the dead in,—let us but once understand 
and feel this, and we shall look with changed eyes upon that 
frippery of ray furniture about the place from which the mes- 
sage of judgment must be delivered, which either breathes 
upon the dry bones that they may live, or, if ineffectual, re- 
mains recorded in condemnation, perhaps against the utterer 
and listener alike, but assuredly against one of them, We 


30 THE STONES OF VENICE, 


shall not so easily bear with the silk and gold upon the ceat 
of judgment, nor with ornament of oratory in the mouth of 
the messenger: we shall wish that his words may be simple, 
even when they are sweetest, and the place from which he 
speaks like a marble rock in the desert, about which the 
people have gathered in their thirst. 

§ xv. But the severity which is so marked in the pulpit at 
Torcello is sti!l more striking in the raised seats and episcopal 
throne which occupy the curve of the apse. The arrange- 
ment at first somewhat recalls to the mind that of the Roman 
amphitheatres ; the flight of steps which lead up to the central 
throne divides the curve of the continuous steps or seats (it 
appears in the first three ranges questionable which were in- 
tended, for they seem too high for the one, and too low and 
close for the other), exactly as in an amphitheatre the stairs 
for access intersect the sweeping ranges of seats. But in the 
very rudeness of this arrangement, and especially in the want 
of all appliances of comfort (for the whole is of marble, and 
the arms of the central throne are not for convenience, but 
for distinction, and to separate it more conspicuously from 
the undivided seats), there is a dignity which no furniture of 
stalls nor carving of canopies ever could attain, and well worth 
the contemplation of the Protestant, both as sternly significa- 
tive of an episcopal authority which in the early days of the 
Church was never disputed, and as dependent for all its im- 
pressiveness on the utter absence of any expression either of 
pride or self-indulgence. 

§ xv But there is one more circumstance which we ought 
to remember as giving peculiar significance to the position 
which the episcopal throne occupies in this island church, 
namely, that in the minds of all early Christians the Church 
itself was most frequently symbolized under the image of a 
ship, of which the bishop was the pilot. Consider the force 
which this symbol would assume in the imaginations of men 
to whom the spiritual Church had become an ark of refuge in 
the midst of a destruction hardly less terrible than that from 
which the eight souls were saved of old, a destruction in which 
the wrath of man had become as broad as the earth and ag ~ 


MURANO. dl 


merciless as the sea, and who saw the actual and literal edifice 
of the Church raised up, itself like an ark in the midst of the 
waters. No marvel if with the surf of the Adriatic rolling be- 
tween them and the shores of their birth, from which they 
were separated for ever, they should have looked upon each 
other as the disciples did when the storm came down on the 
Tiberias Lake, and have yielded ready and loving obedience 
to those who ruled them in His name, who had there rebuked 
the winds and commanded stillness to the sea And if the 
stranger would yet learn in what spirit it was that the domin- 
ion of Venice was begun, and in wha: strength she went forth 
conquering and to conquer, let him not seek to estimate the 
wealth of her arsenals or number of her armies, nor look 
upon the pageantry of her palaces, nor enter into the secrets 
of her councils ; but let him ascend the highest tier of the 
stern ledges that sweep round the altar of Torcello, and then, 
looking as the pilot did of old along the marble ribs of the 
goodly temple-ship, let him repeople its veined deck with the 
shadows of its dead mariners, and strive to feel in himself the 
strength of heart that was kindled within them, when first, 
after the pillars of it had settled in the sand, and the roof of 
it had been closed against the angry sky that was still red- 
dened by the fires of their “homesteads,—first, witbin the 
shelter of its knitted walls, amidst the murmur of the waste 
of waves and the beating of the wings of the sea-birds round 
the rock that was strange to them,—rose that ancient hymn, 
in the power of their gathered voices : 


Tue sea 18S His, AND He MADE IT: 
Anp His HANDS PREPARED THE DRY LAND 


CHAPTER IL 
MURANO. 

§ 1. Tue decay of the city of Venice is, in many respects, 
like that of an outwearied and aged human frame ; the cause 
of its decrepitude is indeed at the heart, but the outward 
appearances of it are first at the extremities. In the centre of 


52 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


the city there are still places where some evidence of vitality 
remains, and where, with kind closing of the eyes to signs, toc 
manifest even there, of distress and declining fortune, the 
stranger may succeed in imagining, for a little while, what 
must have been the aspect of Venice in her prime. But this 
lingering pulsation has not force enough any more to penetrate 
into the suburbs and outskirts of the city ; the frost of death 
has there seized upon it irrevocably, and the grasp of mortal 
disease is marked daily by the increasing breadth of its belt of 
ruin. Nowhere is this seen more grievously than along the 
great north-eastern boundary, once occupied by the smaller 
palaces of the Venetians, built for pleasure or repose; the 
nobler piles along the grand canal being reserved for the pomp 
and business of daily life. To such smaller palaces some 
garden ground was commonly attached, opening to the waters 
side ; and, in front of these villas and gardens, the lagoon was 
wont to be covered in the evening by gondolas : the space of 
it between this part of the city and the island group of Murano 
being to Venice, in her time of power, what its parks are to 
London ; only gondolas were used instead of carriages, and the 
crowd of the population did not come out till towards sunset, 
and prolonged their pleasures far into the night, company 
answering to company with alternate singing. 

§ um. If, knowing this custom of the Venetians, and with s 
vision in his mind of summer palaces lining the shore, and 
myrtle gardens sloping to the sea, the traveller now seeks this 
suburb of Venice, he will be strangely and sadly surprised to 
find a new but perfectly desolate quay, about a mile in length, 
extending from the arsenal to the Sacca della Misericordia, in 
. front of a line of miserable houses built in the course of the 
last sixty or eighty years, yet already tottering to their ruin ; 
and not less to find that the principal object in the view which 
these houses (built partly in front and partly on the ruins of 
the ancient palaces) now command is a dead brick wall about 
a quarter of a mile across the water, interrupted only by a kind 
of white lodge, the cheerfulness of which prospect is not en- 
hanced by his finding that this wall encloses the principal 
public cemetery of Venice. He may, perhaps, marvel for pe 


MURANO. 338 


few moments at the singular taste of the old Venetians in tak, 
ing their pleasure under a churchyard wall: but, on further 
inquiry, he will find that the building on the island, like those 
on the shore, is recent, that it stands on the ruins of the 
Church of St. Cristoforo della Pace ; and that with a singular, 
because unintended, moral, the modern Venetians have re- 
placed the Peace of the Christ-bearer by the Peace of Dea hh, 
and where they once went, as the sun set daily, to their pleas- 
ure, now go, as the sun sets to each of them for ever, to their 
graves. 

§ m. Yet the power of Nature cannot be shortened by the 
folly, nor her beauty altogether saddened by the misery, of 
man. The broad tides still ebb and flow brightly about the 
island of the dead, and the linked conclave of the Alps know 
no decline from their old pre-eminence, nor stoop from their: 
golden thrones in the circle of the horizon. So lovely is the 
scene still, in spite of all its injuries, that we shall find our- 
selves drawn there again and again at evening out of the nar- 
row canals and streets of the city, to watch the wreaths of the © 
sea-mists weaving themselves like mourning veils around the 
mountains far away, and listen to the green waves as they fret 
and sigh along the cemetery shore. 

§ iv. But it is morning now: we have a hard day’s work to 
do at Murano, and our boat shoots swiftly from beneath the 
last bridge of Venice, and brings us out into the open sea and 
sky. 
The pure cumuli of cloud lie crowded and leaning against 
one another, rank beyond rank, far over the shining water, 
each cut away at its foundation by a level line, trenchant and 
clear, till they sink to the horizon like a flight of marble steps, 
except where the mountains meet them, and are lost in them, 
barred across by the grey terraces of those cloud foundations, 
and reduced into one crestless bank of blue, spotted here and 
there with strange flakes of wan, aerial, greenish light, strewed 
upon them like snow. And underneath is the long dark line 
of the mainland, fringed with low trees; and then the wide- 
waving surface of the burnished lagoon trembling slowly, and 
shaking out into forked bands of lengthening light the imagea 

Vou, 1. —3 


84 THk STONES OF VENICR. 


of the towers of cloud above. To the north, there is first the 
great cemetery wall, then the long stray buildings of Murano, 
and the island villages beyond, glittering in intense crystalline 
vermilion, like so much jewellery scattered on a mirror, their 
towers poised apparently in the air a little above the horizon, 
and their reflections, as sharp and vivid and substantial as 
themselves, thrown on the vacancy between them and the sea. 
And thus the villages seem standing on the air ; and, to the 
east, there is a cluster of ships that seem sailing on the land ; 
for the sandy line of the Lido stretches itself between us and 
them, and we can see the tall white sails moving beyond it, 
but not the sea, only there is a sense of the great sea being 
indeed there, and a solemn strength of gleaming light in sky 
above. 

§ v. The most discordant feature in the whole scene is the 
cloud which hovers above the glass furnaces of Murano ; but 
this we may not regret, as it is one of the last signs left of 
human exertion among the ruinous villages which surround us, 
The silent gliding of the gondola brings it nearer to us every 
moment ; we pass the cemetery, and a deep sea-channel which 
separates it from Murano, and finally enter a narrow water- 
street, with a paved footpath on each side, raised three or four 
feet above the canal, and forming a kind of quay between the 
water and the doors of the houses. These latter are, for the 
most part, low, but built with massy doors and windows of 
marble or Istrian stone, square-set and barred with iron; 
buildings evidently once of no mean order, though now in- 
habited only by the poor. Here and there an ogee window 
of the fourteenth century, or a doorway deeply enriched with 
cable mouldings, shows itself in the midst of more ordinary 
features ; and several houses, consisting of one story only car- ~ 
ried on square pillars, forming a short arcade along the quay, 
have windows sustained on shafts of red Verona marble, of 
singular grace and delicacy. All now in vain: little care is 
there for their delicacy or grace among the rough fishermen 
sauntering on the quay with their jackets hanging loose from 
their shoulders, jacket and cap and hair all of the same dark- 
greenish sea-grey. But there is some life in the scene, mox¢ 


MURANO, 35 


than is wstxi m Venice: the women are sitting at their doors 
knitting busily, and various workmen of the glass-houses 
sifting glass dust upon the pavement, and strange cries com- 
ing ftom one side of the canal to the other, and ringing far 
along the crowded water, from venders of figs and grapes, and 
gourds and shell-fish ; cries partly descriptive of the eatables 
in question, but interspersed with others of a character unin- 
telligible in proportion to their violence, and fortunately so 
if we may judge by a sentence which is stencilled in black, 
within a garland, on the whitewashed walls of nearly every 
other house in the street, but which, how often soever written, 
_ no one seems to regard : ‘“‘Bestemme non pit. Lodate Gesu.” 

§ v1. We push our way on between large barges laden with 
fresh water from Fusina, in round white tubs seven feet across, 
and complicated boats full of all manner of nets that look as 
if they could never be disentangled, hanging from their masts 
and over their sides ; and presently pass under a bridge with 
the lion of St. Mark on its archivolt, and another on a pillar 
at the end of the parapet, a small red lion with much of the 
puppy in his face, looking vacantly up into the air (in passing 
we may note that, instead of feathers, his wings are covered 
with hair, and in several other points the manner of his sculpt- 
ure is not uninteresting). Presently the canal turns a little 
to the left, and thereupon becomes more quiet, the main bustle 
of the water-street being usually confined to the first straight 
reach of it, some quarter of a mile long, the Cheapside of 
Murano. We pass a considerable church on the left, St. Pietro, 
and a little square opposite to it with a few acacia trees, and 
then find our boat suddenly seized by a strong green eddy, 
and whirled into the tide-way of one of the main channels of 
the lagoon, which divides the town of Murano into two parts 
by a deep stream some fifty yards over, crossed only by one 
wooden bridge. We let ourselves drift some way down the 
current, looking at the low line of cottages on the other side 
of it, hardly Lnowing if there be more cheerfulness or melan- 
choly in the way the sunshine glows on their ruinous but 
whitewashed walls, and sparkles on the rushing of the green 
water by the grass-grown quay. It needs a strong stroke of 


86 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


the oar to bring us into the mouth of another: quiet canal on 
the farther side of the tide-way, and we are still somewhat 
giddy when we run the head of the gondola into the sand on 
the left-hand side of this more sluggish stream, and land tinder 
the east end of the church of San Donato, the ‘‘ Matrice ” or 
“ Mother ” Church of Murano. 

§ vi. It stands, it and the heavy campanile detached from 
it a few yards, in a small triangular field of somewhat fresher 
grass than is usual near Venice, traversed by a paved walk 
with green mosaic of short grass between the rude squares of 
its stones, bounded on one side by ruinous garden walls, on 
another by a line of low cottages, on the third, the base of the 
triangle, by the shallow canal from which we have just landed. 
Near the point of the triangular space is a simple well, bear- 
ing date 1502 ; in its widest part, between the canal and cam- 
panile, is a four-square hollow pillar, each side formed by a 
separate slab of stone, to which the iron hasps are still attached 
that once secured the Venetian standard. 

The cathedral itself occupies the northern angle of the 
field, encumbered with modern buildings, small outhouse-like 
chapels, and wastes of white wall with blank square windows, 
and itself utterly defaced in the whole body of it, nothing but 
the apse having been spared ; the original plan is only discov- 
erable by careful examination, and even then but partially. 
The whole impression and effect of the building are irretriev- 
ably lost, but the fragments of it are still mest precious. 

We must first briefly state what is known of its history. ° 

§ vit. The legends of the Romish Church, though gener- 
ally more insipid and less varied than those of Paganism, de- 
serve audience from us on this ground, if on no other, that 
they have once been sincerely believed by good men, and have - 
had no ineffective agency in the foundation of the existent 
Kuropean mind. The reader must not therefore accuse me of 
trifling, when I record for him the first piece of information I 
have been able to collect respecting the cathedral of Murano : 
namely, that the emperor Otho the Great, being overtaken by 
a storm on the Adriatic, vowed, if he were preserved, to build 
and dedicate a church to the Virgin, in whatever place might 


MURANO. 8% 


be inost pleasing to her; that the storm thereupon abated ; 
and the Virgin appearing to Otho in a dream showed him, 
covered with red lilies, that very triangular field on which we 
were but now standing, amidst the ragged weeds and shattered 
pavement. The emperor obeyed the vision; and the church: 
was consecrated on the 15th of August, 957. 

§ 1x. Whatever degree of credence we may feel disposed 
to attach to this piece of history, there is no question that a 
church was built on this spot before the close of the tenth 
century: since in the year 999 we find the incumbent of the 
Basilica (note this word, it is of some importance) di Santa 
Maria Plebania di Murano taking an oath of obedience to the 
Bishop of the Altinat church, and engaging at the same time 
to give the said bishop his dinner on the Domenica in Albis, 
when the prelate held a confirmation in the mother church, as 
it was then commonly called, of Murano. From this period, 
for more than a century, I can find no records of any altera- 
tions made in the fabric of the church, but there exist very 
full details of the quarrels which arose between its incumbents 
and those of San Stefano, San. Cipriano, San Salvatore, and 
the other churches of Murano, touching the due obedience 
which their less numerous or less ancient. brotherhoods owed 
to St. Mary’s. 

These differences seem to have been renewed at the elec- 
tion of every new abbot by each of the fraternities, and must 
have been growing serious when the patriarch of Grado, 
Henry Dandolo, interfered in 1102, and, in order to seal a 
peace between the two principal opponents, ordered chat the 
abbot of St. Stephen’s should be present at the service in St. 
Mary’s on the night of the Epiphany, and that the abbot of 
St. Mary’s should visit him of St. Stephen’s on St. Stephen’s 
day ; and that then the two abbots “should eat apples and 
drink good wine together, in peace and charity.” * 


* ‘Mela, e buon vino, con pace e carita.” Memorie Storiche de’ 
Veneti Primi e Secondi, di Jacopo Filiasi (Padua, 1811), tom. iii. cap. 
23. Perhaps, in the choice of the abbot’s cheer, there was some occult 
reference to the verse of Solomon's Song: ‘‘Stay me with flagons, com 
fort me with apples.” 


88 THE STONES OF VENIOR. 


§ x. But even this kindly effort seems to have been with 
out result: the irritated pride of the antagonists remained 
unsoothed by the love-feast of St. Stephen’s day ; and the 
breach continued to widen until the abbot of St. Mary’s ob- 
tained a timely accession to his authority in the year 1125. 
The Doge Domenico Michele, having in the second crusade 
secured such substantial advantages for the Venetians as 
might well counterbalance the loss of part of their trade with 
the East, crowned his successes by obtaining possession in 
Cephalonia of the body of St. Donato, bishop of Eurcea ; 
which treasure he having presented on his return to the 
Murano basilica, that church was thenceforward called the 
church of Sts. Mary and Donato. Nor was the body of the 
saint its only acquisition : St. Donato’s principal achievement 
had been the destruction of a terrible dragon in Hpirus ; 
Michele brought home the bones of the dragon as well as of 
the saint; the latter were put in a marble sarcophagus, and 
the former hung up over the high altar. 

§ x1. But the clergy of St. Stefano were indomitable. At 
the very moment when their adversaries had received this for- 
midable accession of strength, they had the audacity “ad onta 
de’ replicati giuramenti, e dell’ inveterata consuetudine,” * to 
refuse to continue in the obedience which they had vowed to 
their mother church. The matter was tried in a provincial 
council; the votaries of St. Stephen were condemned, and re- 
mained quiet for about twenty years, in wholesome dread of 
the authority conferred on the abbot of St. Donato, by the 
Pope’s legate, to suspend any of the clergy of the island from 
their office if they refused submission. In 1172, however, they 
appealed to Pope Alexander IIL, and were condemned again : 
and we find the struggle renewed at every promising oppor.’ 
tunity, during the course of the twelfth and thirteenth cen- 
turies ; until at last, finding St. Donato and the dragon together 
too strong for him, the abbot of St. Stefano “discovered ” in 
his church the bodies of two hundred martyrs at once !—a dis- 
covery, itis to be remembered, in some sort equivalent in those 


* Notizie Storiche delle Chiese di Venezia, illustrate da Flaminie Cor 
ner (Padua, 1758), p. 615. 


MURANO. 89 


days to that of California in ours. The inscription, however, 
on the fagade of the church, recorded it with quiet dignity :— 
*“moccixxry. a di xrv. di Aprile. Furono trovati nella presente 
vhiesa del protomartire San Stefano, duecento e pit corpi de’ 
Santi Martiri, dal Ven. Prete Matteo Fradello, piovano della 
chiesa.” * Corner, who gives this inscription, which no longer 
exists, goes on to explain with infinite gravity, that the bodies 
in question, ‘‘ being of infantile form and stature, are reported 
by tradition to have belonged to those fortunate innocents who 
suffered martyrdom under King Herod ; but that when, or by 

whom, the church was enriched with so vast a treasure, is not 
~ manifested by any document.” + 

§ xu. The issue of the struggle is not to our present pur- 
pose. We have already arrived at the fourteenth century 
without finding record of any effort made by the clergy of 
St. Mary’s to maintain their influence by restoring or beauti- 
fying their basilica ; which is the only point at present of im- 
portance tous. That great alterations were made in it at the 
time of the acquisition of the body of St. Donato is however 
highly probable, the mosaic pavement of the interior, which 
bears its date inscribed, 1140, being probably the last of the 
additions. I believe that no part of the ancient church can 
be shown to be of more recent date than this ; and I shall not 
occupy the reader’s time by any inquiry respecting the epochs 
or authors of the destructive modern restorations ; the wreck 
of the old fabric, breaking out beneath them here and there, 
is generally distinguishable from them at a glance ; and it is 
enough for the reader to know that none of these truly an- 
cient fragments can be assigned to a more recent date than 
1140, and that some of them may with probability be looked 
upon as remains of the shell of the first church, erected in the 
course of the latter half of the tenth century. We shall per- 


*“ On the 1/th day of April, 1374, there were found, in this church 
of the first martyr St. Stefano, two hundred and more bodies of holy 
martyrs, by the venerable priest, Matthew Fradello, incumbent of the 
church.” 

+ Notizie Storiche, p. 620. 


40 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


haps obtain some further reason for this belief as we examine 
these remains themselves. 

§ xm. Of the body of the church, unhappily, they are few 
and obscure ; but the general form and extent of the build- 
ing, as shown in the plan, Plate L fig. 2, are determined, first, 
by the breadth of the uninjured east end p£; secondly, by 
some remains of the original brickwork of the clerestory, and 
in all probability of the side walls also, though these have 
been refaced ; and finally by the series of nave shafts, which 
are still perfect. The doors a and B may or may not be in 
their original positions ; there must of course have been al-_ 
ways, aS now, a principal entrance at the west end. The 
ground plan is composed, like that of Torcello, of nave and 
aisles only, but the clerestory has transepts extending as far 
as the outer wall of the aisles. The semicircular apse, thrown 
out in the centre of the east end, is now the chief feature of 
interest in the church, though the nave shafts and the eastern 
extremities of the aisles, outside, arealso portions of the orig- 
inal building ; the latter having been modernized in the in- 
terior, it cannot now be ascertained whether, as is probable, 
the aisles had once round ends as well as the choir. The 
spaces F G form small chapels, of which ¢ has a straight ter- 
minal wall behind its altar, and F a curved one, marked by 
the dotted line; the partitions which divide these chapels 
from the presbytery are also indicated by dotted lines, being 
modern work. 

§ x1v. The plan is drawn carefully to scale, but the relation 
in which its proportions are disposed can hardly be appreci- 
ated by the eye. The width of the nave from shaft to opposite 
shaft is 82 feet 8 inches; of the aisles, from the shaft to the 
wall, 16 feet 2 inches, or allowing 2 inches for the thickness 
of the modern wainscot, 16 feet 4 inches, half the breadth of 
the nave exactly. The intervals between the shafts are exact- 
ly one fourth of the width of the nave, or 8 feet 2 inches, and 
the distance between the great piers which form the pseudo- 
transept is 24 feet 6 inches, exactly three times the interval of 
the shafts. So the four distances are accurately in arithmet- 
ical proportion ; i.e. 


MURANO. 4i 


Interval of shafts ‘ ¥ ° 8 
Width of aisle . SiGe 2 kb 
Width of transept . ayitl Se - 24 
Width.of nave . ; , F ot SBA 


= 
OOrDs 


The shafts average 5 feet 4 inches in circumference, as near 
the base as they can be got at, being covered with wood ; and 
the broadest sides of the main piers are 4 feet 7 inches wide, 
their narrowest sides 3 feet 6 inches. The distance a c from 
the outmost angle of these piers to the beginning of the curve 
of the apse is 25 feet, and from that point the apse is nearly - 
semicircular, but it is so encumbered with renaissance fittings 
that its form cannot be ascertained with perfect accuracy. It 
is roofed by a concha, or semi-dome ; and the external ar- 
rangement of its walls provides for the security of this dome 
by what is, in fact, a system of buttresses as effective and 
definite as that of any of the northern churches, although the 
buttresses are obtained entirely by adaptations of the Roman 
shaft and arch, the lower story being formed by a thick mass 
of wall lightened by ordinary semicircular round-headed 
niches, like those used so extensively afterwards in renaissance 
architecture, each niche flanked by a pair of shafts standing 
clear of the wall, and bearing deeply moulded arches thrown 
over the niche. The wall with its pillars thus forms a series 
of massy buttresses (as seen in the ground plan), on the top 
of which isan open gallery, backed by a thinner wall, and 
roofed by arches whose shafts are set above the pairs of shafts 
below. On the heads of these arches rests the roof. We 
have, therefore, externally a heptagonal apse, chiefly of rough 
and common brick, only with marble shafts and a few marble 
ornaments ; but for that very reason all the more interesting, ' 
because it shows us what may be done, and what was done, with 
materials suc’ as are now at our own command; and because in 
its proportions, and in the use of the few ornaments it possesses, 
it displays a delicacy of fecling rendered doubly notable by 
the roughness of the work in which laws so subtle are observed 
and with which so thoughtful ornamentation is associated. 


42 THE STONES OF VENICH. 


§ xv First, for its proportions: I shall have occasion in 
Chapter V. to dwell at some length on the peculiar subtlety of 
the early Venetian perception for ratios of magnitude ; the 
relations of the sides of this heptagonal apse supply one of the 
first and most curious instances of it. The proportions above 
given of the nave and aisles might have been dictated by a 
mere love of mathematical precision ; but those of the apse 
could only have resulted from a true love of harmony. 

in fig. 6, Plate L the plan of this part of the church is 
given on a large scale, showing that its seven external sides are 
arranged on a line less than a semicircle, so that if the figure 
’ were completed, it would have sixteen sides ; and it will be 
observed also, that the seven sides are arranged in four mag- 
nitudes, the widest being the central one. The brickwork is 
so much worn away, that the measures of the arches are not 
easily ascertainable, but those of the plinth on which they 
stand, which is nearly uninjured, may be obtained accurately. 
This plinth is indicated by the open line in the ground plan, 
and its sides measure respectively : 


Ft. Tn. 
Ist. a b in plan ° ay ties Senet 6 7 
Qnd:Oes Yer ° Prods ek) ye 4 7 
Srdued §.,!4 ° ebm Stinedts fitsn' ¢ 5 
4th.d e (central) . ©. . ° 7 10 
Sthef  . . b ab is . . 7 5 
S9 “ é ‘ ° : . 7 8 
Oth GB iit wrreipodunr net! cette oe 6 10 


§ xvr. Now observe what subtle feeling is indicated by this 
delicacy of proportion. How fine must the perceptions of | 
grace have been in those builders who could not be content 
without some change between the second and third, the fifth 
and sixth terms of proportion, such as should oppose the gen« 
eral direction of its cadence, and yet were content with a dimi- 
nution of two inches on a breadth of seven feet and a half’ 
For I do not suppose that the reader will think the curious 
lessening of the third and fifth arch a matter of accideat, and 


MURANO. 43 


even if he did so, I shall be able to prove to him hereafter that 
it was not, but that the early builders were always desirous of 
obtaining some alternate proportion of this kind. The rela- 
tions of the numbers are not easily comprehended in the form 
of feet and inches, but if we reduce the first four of them into 
inches, and then subtract some constant number, suppose 75, 
from them all, the remainders 4, 16, 14, 19, will exhibit the 
ratio of proportion in a clearer, though exaggerated form. 

§ xvm. The pairs of circular spots at b,c, d, &c., on the 
ground plan fig. 6, represent the bearing shafts, which are alt 
of solid marble as well as their capitals. Their measures and 
various other particulars respecting them are given in Appen- 
dix 6. ‘‘Apse of Murano;” here I only wish the reader to 
note the coloring of their capitals. Those of the two single 
shafts in the angles (a, h) are both of deep purple marble ; the 
two next pairs, 6 and g, are of white marble ; the pairs c and/ 
are of purple, and d and e are of white: thus alternating with 
each other on each side ; two white meeting in the centre. 
Now observe, the purple capitals are all left plain ; the white 
are all sculptured. For the old builders knew that by carving 
the purple capitals they would have injured them in two ways: 
first, they would have mixed a certain quantity of grey shadow 
with the surface hue, and so adulterated the purity of the 
color ; secondly, they would have drawn away the thoughts 
from the color, and prevented the mind from fixing upon it 
or enjoying it, by the degree of attention which the sculpture — 
would have required. So they left their purple capitals full 
broad masses of color ; and sculptured the white ones, which 
would otherwise have been devoid of interest. 

§ xvur. But the feature which is most to be noted in this 
apse is a band of ornament, which runs round it like a silver 
girdle, composed of sharp wedges of marble, preciously in- 
laid, and set like jewels into the brickwork ; above it there is 
another band of triangular recesses in the bricks, of nearly 
similar shape, and it seems equally strange that all the mar- 
bles should have fallen from it, or that it should have been 
originally destitute of them. The reader may choose his 
hypothesis ; but there is quite enough left to interest us in 


Ad. THE stONES OF VENICE. 


the lower band, which is fortunately left in its original state, 
as is sufficiently proved by the curious niceties in the arrange- 
yaent of its colors, which are assuredly to be attributed to the 
care of the first builder. A word or two, in the first place, re- 
specting the means of color at his disposal. 

§ x1x. I stated that the building was, for the most part, com~« 
posed of yellow brick. This yellow is very nearly pure, much 
more positive and somewhat darker than that of our English 
light brick, and the material of the brick is very good and 
hard, looking, in places, almost vitrified, and so compact as 
to resemble stone. Together with this brick occurs another 
of a deep full red, and more porous substance, which is used 
for decoration chiefly, while all the parts requiring strength 
are composed of the yellow brick. Both these materials are 
cast into any shape and size the builder required, either into 
curved pieces for the arches, or flat tiles for filling the tri- 
angles ; and, what is still more curious, the thickness of the 
yellow bricks used for the walls varies considerably, from twe 
inches to four ; and their length also, some of the larger pieces 
used in important positions being a foot and a half long. 

With these two kinds of brick, the builder employed five or 
six kinds of marble : pure white, and white veined with purple ; 
a brecciated marble of white and black ; a brecciated marble 
of white and deep green ; another, deep red, or nearly of the 
color of Egyptian porphyry ; anda grey and black marble, 
in fine layers. 

§ xx. The method of employing these materials will be un- 
derstood at once by a reference to the opposite plate (Plate 
III.), which represents two portions of the lower band. I 
could not succeed in expressing the variation and chequering 
of color in marble, by real tints in the print ; and have been 
content, therefore, to give them in line engraving. The dif. 
ferent triangles are, altogether, of ten kinds : 


a. Pure white marble with sculptured surface (as the third and fifth 
in the upper series of Plate H1.). 

b. Cast triangle of red brick with a sculptured round-headed piecsa 
of white marble inlaid (as the first and seventh of the upper 
series, Plate LIL. ). 


MURANO, 45 


& A plain triangle of greenish black marble, now perhaps consid. 
erably paler in color than when first employed (as the second and 
sixth of the upper series of Plate III.). 

a. Cast red brick triangle, with a diamond inlaid of the above-men- 
tioned black marble (as the fourth in the upper series of Plate 
IIT). 

e, Cast white brick, with an inlaid round-headed piece of marble, 
variegated with black and yellow, or white and violet (not seen 
in the plate). 

f. Occurs only once, a green-veined marble, forming the upper part 
of the triangle, with a white piece below. f 

g. Oceurs only once. A brecciated marble of intense black and 
pure white, the centre of the lower range in Plate III. 

h. Sculptured white marble with a triangle of veined purple mar- 
ble inserted (as the first, third, fifth, and seventh of the lower 
range in Plate III.). 

i. Yellow or white marble veined with purple (as the second an¢ 
sixth of the lower range in Plate III.). 

k. Pure purple marble, not seen in this plate. 


§ xx. The band, then, composed of these triangles, set 
tlose to each other in varied but not irregular relations, is 
thrown, like a necklace of precious stones, round the apse and 
along the ends of the aisles; each side of the apse taking, of 
course, as many triangles as its width permits. If the reader 
will look back to the measures of the sides of the apse, given 
before, p. 42, he will see that the first and seventh of the 
series, being much narrower than the rest, cannot take so 
many triangles in their band. Accordingly, they have only 
six each, while the other five sides have seven. Of these 
groups of seven triangles each, that used for the third and 
fifth sides of the apse is the uppermost in Plate III. ; and that 
used for the centre of the apse, and of the whole series, is the 
lowermost in the same plate ; the piece of black and white mar- 
ble being used to emphasize the centre of the chain, exactly as a 
painter would use a dark touch for a similar purpose. 

§ xxm.. And now, with a little trouble, we can set before the 
reader, at a glance, the arrangement of the groups along the 
entire extremity of the church. 

There are thirteen recesses, indicative of thirteen arches, 
geen in the ground plan, fig. 2, Plate I. Of these, the second 


46 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


and twelfth arches rise higher than the rest; so high as ta 
break the decorated band ; and the groups of triangles we 
have to enumerate are, therefore, only eleven in number ; one 
above each of the eleven low arches. And of these eleven, 
the first and second, tenth and eleventh, are at the ends of the 
aisles ; while the third to the ninth, inclusive, go round the 
apse. Thus, in the following table, the numerals indicate the 
place of each entire group (counting from the south to the 
north side of the church, or from left to right), and the letters 
indicate the species of triangle of which it is composed, as 
described in the list given above. 


6b ih g hi h. 
5. b. c. a d. aa b %. boc. a d.a oc. b. 
4. b. a boc. ae & 8. a e. ac. b. a b 
8. be 3. biuie./b. =a, 9. a. b. e. b. a Db. 
OeassD.aG 10. a b. c. b. 
1. a bc. b. a llLbacaafthas 


The central group is put first, that it may be seen how the 
series on the two sides of the apse answer each other. It was 
a very curious freak to insert the triangle e, in the outermost 
place but one of both the fourth and eighth sides of the apse, 
and in the outermost but two in the third and ninth ; in neither 
case having any balance to it in its own group, and the real 
balance being only effected on the other side of the apse, which 
it is impossible that any one should see at the same time. 
This is one of the curious pieces of system which so often 
occur in medizeval work, of which the key is now lost. The 
groups at the ends of the transepts correspond neither in 
number nor arrangement; we shall presently see why, but 
must first examine more closely the treatment of the triangles 
themselves, and the nature of the floral sculpture employed 
upon them. 

§ xxm. As the scale of Plate TI. is necessarily small, I have 
given three of the sculptured triangles on a larger scale in 
Plate IV. opposite. Fig. 3 is one of the four in the lower 
series of Plate IV., and figs 4 and 5 from another group. 


PyiATE IV.—ScULPTURES OF MURANO, 


~ fe yh od % 


MURANO. 47 


The forms of the trefoils are here seen more clearly ; they, 
and all the other portions of the design, are throw» out in low 
and flat relief, the intermediate spaces being cut out to the 
depth of about a quarter of an inch. I believe these vacant 
spaces were originally filled with a black composition, which is 
used in similar sculptures at St. Mark’s, and of which I found 
some remains in an archivolt moulding here, though not in 
the triangles. The surface of the whole would then be per- 
fectly smooth, and the ornamental form relieved by a ground 
of dark grey ; but, even though this ground is lost, the sim- 
plicity of the method insures the visibility of all its parts at 
the necessary distance (17 or 18 feet), and the quaint trefoils 
have a crispness and freshness of effect which I found it almost 
impossible to render in a drawing. Nor let us fail to note in 
passing how strangely delightful to the human mind the tre- 
foil always is. We have it here repeated five or six hundred 
times in the space of a few yards, and yet are never weary of 
it. In fact, there are two mystical feelings at the root of our 
enjoyment of this decoration: the one is the love of trinity 
in unity, the other that of the sense of fulness with order ; 
of every place being instantly filled, and yet filled with pro- 
priety and ease; the leaves do not push each other, nor 
put themselves out of their own way, and yet whenever 
there is a vacant space, a leaf is always ready to step in and 
occupy it. 

§ xxiv. I said the trefoil was five or six hundred times re- 
peated. It is so, but observe, it is hardly ever twice of the 
same size ; and this law is studiously and resolutely observed. 
In the carvings a and b of the upper series, Plate IIL, the 
diminution of the leaves might indeed seem merely represen- 
tative of the growth of the plant. But look at the lower: the 
triangles of inlaid purple marble are made much more nearly 
equilateral than those of white marble, into whose centres they 
are set, so that the leaves may continually diminish in size as 
the ornament descends at the sides. The reader may perhaps 
doubt the accuracy of the drawing on the smaller scale, but in 
that given larger, fig. 3, Plate IV., the angles are all measured, 
and the purposeful variation of width in the border therefore 


48 THR STONES OF VENTOu. 


admits of no dispute.* Remember how absolutely this prin. 
ciple is that of nature; the same leaf continually repeated, 
but never twice of the same size. Look at the clover under 
your feet, and then you will see what this Murano builder 
meant, and that he was not altogether a barbarian. 

§ xxy. Another point I wish the reader to observe is, the 
importance attached to color in the mind of the designer. 
Note especially—for it is of the highest importance to see how 
the great principles of art are carried out through the whole 
building —that, as only the white capitals are sculptured below, 
only the white triangles are sculptured above. No colored 
triangle is touched with sculpture ; note also, that in the twa 
principal groups of the apse, given in Plate IL, the centre of 
the group is color, not sculpture, and the eye is evidently in- 
tended to be drawn as much to the chequers of the stone, as 
to the intricacies of the chiselling. It will be noticed also 
how much more precious the lower series, which is central in 
the apse, is rendered, than the one above it in the plate, which 
flanks it: there is no brick in the lower one, and three kinds 
of variegated marble are used in it, whereas the upper is com- 
posed of brick, with black and white marble only ; and lastly 
—for this is especially delightful—see how the workman made 
his chiselling finer where it was to go with the variegated 
marbles, and used a bolder pattern with the coarser brick and 
dark stone. The subtlety and perfection of artistical feeling 
in all this are so redundant, that in the building itself the eye 
can rest upon this colored chain with the same kind of delight 
that it has in a piece of the embroidery of Paul Veronese. 

§ xxv1. Such being the construction of the lower band, that 
of the upper is remarkable only for the curious change in its 
proportions. The two are separated, as seen in the little wood- 
cut on the opposite page, by a string-course composed of two 
layers of red bricks, of which the uppermost projects as a 
cornice, and is sustained by an intermediate course of irregu- 


* The intention is farther confirmed by the singular variation in the 
breadth of the small fillet which encompasses the inner marble. J¢ ig 
much narrower at the bottom than at the sides, so as to recover thy 
wiginal breadth in the lower border. 


——— 


py) 7) © KAS UN “gS 


MURANO 49 


lar brackets, obtained by setting the thick yellow bricks edge- 
ways, in the manner common to this day. But the wall above 
is carried up perpendicularly from this projection, so that the 
whole upper band is advanced to the thickness of a brick over 
the lower one. The result of this is, 
of course, that each side of the apse 
is four or five inches broader above 
than below ; so that the same num- 
ber of triangles which filled a whole 
side of the lower band, leave an inch 
or two blank at each angle in the 
upper. This would have looked 
awkward, if there had been the least 
appearance of its being an accidental 
error; so that, in order to draw the eye to qt and show that it 
is aot on purpose, the upper triangles are made about two 
inches higher than the lower ones, so as to be much more acute 
in proportion and effect, and actually to look considerably nar- 
rower, though of the same width at the base. By this means 
they are made lighter in effect, and subordinated to the richly 
decorated series of the lower band, and the two courses, in- 
stead of repeating, unite with each other, and become a har- 
monious whole. 

In order, however, to make still more sure that this differ- 
ence in the height of the triangles should not escape the eye, 
another course of plain bricks is added above their points, in- 
creasing the width of the band by another two inches. There 
are five courses of bricks in the lower band, and it measures 
1 ft. 6 in. in height : there are seven courses in the upper (of 
which six fall between the triangles), and it measures 1 ft. 
10 in. in height, except at the extremity of the northern aisle, 
where for some mysterious reason the intermediate cornice is 
sloped upwards so as to reduce the upper triangles to the same 
height as those below. And here, finally, observe how deter- 
mined the builder was that the one series should not be a mere 
imitation of the other; he could not now make them acute 
by additional height—so he here, and here only, narrowed 
.their bases, and we have seven of them above, to six below. 

Vou. IIl.—4 


50 THE STONES OF VENICH. 


§ xxv. We come now to the most interesting portion of 
the whole east end, the archivolt at the end of the northern 
aisle. 

It was above stated, that the band of triangles was broken 
by two higher arches at the ends of the aisles. That, how- 
ever, on the northern side of the apse does not entirely inter- 
rupt, but lifts it, and thus forms a beautiful and curious archi- 
volt, drawn opposite, in Plate V. The upper band of triangles 
cannot rise together with the lower, as it would otherwise 
break the cornice prepared to receive the second story ; and 
the curious zigzag with which its triangles die away against 
the sides of the arch, exactly as waves break upon the sand, is 
one of the most curious features in the structure. 

It will be also seen that there is a new feature in the treat- 
ment of the band itself when it turns the arch. Instead of 
leaving the bricks projecting between the sculptured or col- 
ored stones, reversed triangles of marble are used, inlaid to 
an equal depth with the others in the brickwork, but project- 
ing beyond them so as to produce a sharp dark line of zigzag 
at their junctions. Three of these supplementary stones have 
unhappily fallen out, so that it is now impossible to determine 
the full harmony of color in which they were originally ar- 
ranged. The central one, corresponding to the keystone in a 
common arch, is, however, most fortunately left, with two lat- 
eral ones on the right hand, and one on the left. 

§ xxvin. The keystone, if it may be so called, is of white 
marble, the lateral voussoirs of purple ; and these are the only 
colored stones in the whole building which are sculptured ; 
but they are sculptured in a way which more satisfactorily 
proves that the principle above stated was understood by the. 
builders, than if they had been left blank. The object, ob- 
serve, was to make the archivolt as rich as possible ; eight of 
the white sculptured marbles were used upon it in juxtaposi- 
tion. Had the purple marbles been left altogether plain, they 
would have been out of harmony with the elaboration of the 
rest. It became necessary to touch them with sculpture as a 
mere sign of carefulness and finish, but at the same time de- 
stroying their colored surface as little as possible. The ornas. 


MURANO. 51 


ment is merely outlined upon them with a fine incision, as if it 
had been etched out on their surface preparatory to being 
carved. In two of them it is composed merely of three con- 
centric lines, parallel with the sides of the triangle ; in the 
third, it is a wreath of beautiful design, which I have drawn of 
larger size in fig. 2, Plate V., that the reader may see how 
completely the surface is left undestroyed by the delicate in- 
cisions of the chisel, and may compare the method of working 
with that employed on the white stones, two of which are 
given in that plate, figs. 4 and 5.. The keystone, of which we 
have not yet spoken, is the only white stone worked with the 
hight incision ; its design not being capable of the kind of 
workmanship given to the floral ornaments, and requiring 
either to be carved in complete relief, or left as we see it. It 
is given at fig. 1 of Plate IV. The sun and moon on each side 
of the cross are, as we shall see in the fifth Chapter, constantly 
employed in the keystones of Byzantine arches. 

§ xxix. We must not pass without notice the grey and 
green pieces of marble inserted at the flanks of the arch. 
For, observe, there was a difficulty in getting the forms of the 
triangle into anything like reconciliation at this point, and a 
medieval artist always delights in a difficulty : instead of con- 
cealing it, he boasts of it ; and just as we saw above that he 
directed the eye to the difficulty of filling the expanded sides 
of the upper band by elongating his triangles, so here, having 
to put in a piece of stone of awkward shape, he makes that 
very stone the most conspicuous in the whole arch, on both 
sides, by using in one case a dark, cold grey ; in the other a 
vigorous green, opposed to the warm red and purple and 
white of the stones above and besideit. The green and white 
piece on the right is of a marble, as far as I know, exceedingly 
rare. I at first thought the white fragments were inlaid, so 
sharply are they defined upon their ground. They are indeed 
inlaid, but I believe it is by nature ; and that the stone is a 
calcareous breccia of great mineralogical interest. The white 
spots are of singular value in giving piquancy to the whole 
range of more delicate transitional hues above. The effect, of 
the whole is, however, generally injured by the loss of the 


62 THR STONES OF VENIOR. 


three large triangles above. I have no doubt they were pur 
ple, like those which remain, and that the whole arch wag 
thus one zone of white, relieved on a purple ground, encircled 
by the scarlet cornices of brick, and the whole chord of color 
contrasted by the two precious fragments of grey and green 
at either side. 

§ xxx. The two pieces of carved stone inserted at each side 
of the arch, as seen at the bottom of Plate V., are of different 
workmanship from the rest ; they do not match each other, 
and form part of the evidence which proves that portions of 
the church had been brought from the mainland. One bears 
an inscription, which, as its antiquity is confirmed by the 
shapelessness of its letters, I was much gratified by not being 
able to read; but M. Lazari, the intelligent author of the 
latest and best Venetian guide, with better skill, has given as 
much of it:as remains, thus: 


SGCEMARIEDICENETRIGISETBEATIESTEFANIMARYT 
(RIEGOINDIGNVSETPZECCATVRDOMENICYST 


I have printed the letters as they are placed in the inscrip- 
tion, in order that the reader may form some idea of the diffi- 
culty of reading such legends when the letters, thus thrown 
into one heap, are themselves of strange forms, and half worn 
away ; any gaps which at all occur between them coming in 
the wrong places. There is no doubt, however, as to the 
reading of this fragment:—‘‘T . . . Sancte Marie Domini 
Genetricis et beati Estefani martiri ego indignus et peceator 
Domenicus T.” On these two initial and final T’s, expand- 
ing one into Templum, the other into Torcellanus, M. Lazari 
founds an ingenious conjecture that the inscription records 
the elevation of the church under a certain bishop Dominic of 
Torcello (named in the Altinat Chronicle), who flourished in 
the middle of the ninth century. If this were so, as the in- 
scription occurs broken off on a fragment inserted scornfully 
in the present edifice, this edifice must be of the twelfth cen- 
tury, worked with fragments taken from the ruins of that 
built in the ninth. The two T’s are, however, hardly a 
tcundation large enough to build the church upon, a hundred 


MURANO, 53 


years before the date assigned to it both by history and tra- 
dition (see above, § vi.) : and the reader has yet to be made 
aware of the principal fact bearing on the question. 

§ xxx. Above the first story of the apse runs, as he knows 
dready, a gallery under open arches, protected by a light 
balustrade. This balustrade is worked on the outside with 
mouldings, of which I shall only say at present that they are 
of exactly the same school as the greater part of the work of 
the existing church. But the great horizontal pieces of stone 
which form the top of this balustrade are fragments of an 
older building turned inside out. They are covered with 
sculptures on the back, only to be seen by mounting into the 
gallery. They have once had an arcade of low wide arches 
traced on their surface, the spandrils filled with leafage, and 
archivolts enriched with studded chainwork and with crosses 
in their centres. These pieces have been used as waste mar- 
‘ble by the architect of the existing apse. The small arches of 
the present balustrade are cut mercilessly through the old 
work, and the profile of the balustrade is cut out of what was 
once the back of the stone ; only some respect is shown for 
the crosses in the old design, the blocks are cut so that these 
shall be not only left uninjured, but come in the centre of the 
balustrades. 

§ xxxu. Now let the reader observe carefully that this balus- 
trade of Murano is a fence of other things than the low gal- 
lery round the deserted apse. It is a barrier between two 
great schools of early architecture. On one side it was cut by 
Romanesque workmen of the early Christian ages, and fur- 
nishes us with a distinct type of a kind of ornament which, 
as we meet with other examples of it, we shall be able to de- 
scribe in generic terms, and to throw back behind this balus- 
trade, out of our way. The front of the balustrade presents 
us with a totally different condition of design, less rich, more 
graceful, and here shown in its simplest possible form. From 
the outside of this bar of marble we shall commence our prog 
ress in the study of existing Venetian architecture. The only 
question is, do we begin from the tenth or from the twelfth 


century ¢ 


54 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


§ xxxin. I was in great hopes once of being able to detss 
mine this positively ; but the alterations in all the early build. 
ings of Venice are so numerous, and the foreign fragments 
introduced so innumerable, that I was obliged to leave the 
question doubtful. But one circumstance must be noted, 
bearing upon it closely. 

In the woodcut below, Fig. IIL, 6 is an archivolt of Murano, 
a one of St. Mark’s; the latter acknowledged by all historians 
and all investigators to be of the twelfth century. 

All the twelfth century archivolts in Venice, without ex- 
ception, are on the model of a, differing only in their decora- 


=a ae 
Reawra) DPR 


Nlliiizan> 
\) oe OR 


2 o_ 
i Se 


6 
' 

wy) 
4 

a 


Fia. III, 


tions and sculpture. There is not one which resembles that 
of Murano. 

But the deep mouldings of Murano are almost exactly simi- 
lar to those of St. Michele of Pavia, and other Lombard 
churches built, some as early as the seventh, others in the 
eighth, ninth, and tenth centuries. 

On this ground it seems to me probable that the existing 
apse of Murano is part of the original earliest church, and 
that the inscribed fragments used in it have been brought - 
from the mainland. The balustrade, however, may still be 
later than the rest ; it will be examined, hereafter, more care- 
fully.* 

T have not space to give any farther account of the exterior 
of the building, though one half of what is remarkable in it 
remains untold. We must now see what is left of interest 
within the walls. 

* Its elevation is given to scale in fig. 4, Plate XIII., below. 


MUnaw0O. 55 


§ xxxrv. All hope is taken away by our first glance ; for it 
falls on a range of shafts whose bases are concealed by wooden 
panelling, and which sustain arches decorated in the most 
approved style of Renaissance upholstery, with stucco roses in 
squares under the soffiis, and egg and arrow mouldings on the 
architraves, gilded, on a ground of spotty black and green, -with 
a small pink-faced and black-eyed cherub on every keystone ; 
the rest of the church being for the most part concealed either 
by dirty hangings, or dirtier whitewash, or dim pictures on 
warped and wasting canvas; all vulgar, vain, and foul. Yet 
let us not turn back, for in the shadow of the apse our more 
careful glance shows us a Greek Madonna, pictured on a field 
of gold; and we feel giddy at the first step we make on the 
pavement, for it, also, is of Greek mosaic waved like the sea, 
and dyed like a dove’s neck. 

§ xxxv. Nor are the original features of the rest of the 
edifice altogether indecipherable ; the entire series of shafts 
marked in the ground plan on each side of the nave, from the 
western entrance to the apse, are nearly uninjured ; and I 
believe the stilted arches they sustain are those of the origi- 
nal fabric, though the masonry is covered by the Renaissance 
stucco mouldings. Their capitals, for a wonder, are left bare, 
and appear to have sustained no farther injury than has re- 
sulted from the insertion of a large brass chandelier into each 
of their abaci, each chandelier carrying a sublime wax candle 
two inches thick, fastened with wire to the wall above. The 
due arrangement of these appendages, previous to festal days, 
can only be effected from a ladder set against the angle of 
the abacus ; and ten minutes before I wrote this sentence, I 
had the privilege of watching the candlelighter at his work, 
knocking his ladder about the heads of the capitals as if they 
had given him personal offence. He at last succeeded in 
breaking away one of the lamps altogether, with a bit of the 
marble of the abacus; the whole falling in ruin to the pave- 
ment, and causing much consultation and clamor among a 
tribe of beggars who were assisting the sacristan with their 
wisdom respecting the festal arrangements. 

§ xxxvr. It is fortunate that the capitals themselves, being 


56 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


somewhat rudely cut, can bear this kind of treatment better 
than most of those in Venice. They are all founded on the 
Corinthian type, but the leaves are in every one different : 
those of the easternmost capital of the southern range are the 
best, and very beautiful, but presenting no feature of much 
interest, their workmanship being inferior to most of the imi- 
tations of Corinthian common at the period ; much more to 
the rich fantasies which we have seen at. Torcello. The apse 
itself, to-day (12th September, 1851), is not to be described ; 
for just in front of it, behind the altar, is a magnificent cur- 
tain of new red velvet with a gilu edge and two golden tassels, 
held up in a dainty manner by two-angels in the upholsterer’s 
service ; and above all, for concentration of effect, a star or 
sun, some five feet broad, the spikes of which conceal the 
whole of the figure of the Madonna except the head and 
hands. 

§ xxxvu. The pavement is however still left open, and it is 
of infinite interest, although grievously distorted and defaced. 
For whenever a new chapel has been built, or a new altar 
erected, the pavement has been broken up and readjusted so 
as to surround the newly inserted steps or stones with some 
appearance of symmetry; portions of it either covered or 
carried away, others mercilessly shattered or replaced by 
modern imitations, and those of very different periods, with 
pieces of the old floor left here and there in the midst of them, 
- and worked round so as to deceive the eye into acceptance 
of the whole as ancient. The portion, however, which occu- 
pies the western extremity of the nave, and. the parts imme 
diately adjoining it in the aisles, are, I believe, in their origi- . 
nal. positions, and very little injured: they are composed 
chiefly of groups of peacocks, lions, stags, and griffins,—two 
of each in a group, drinking out of the same vase, or shaking 
claws together,—enclosed by interlacing bands, and alternat- 
ing with chequer or star patterns, and here and there an at- 
tempt at representation of architecture, all worked in marble 
mosaic. The floors of Torcello and of St. Mark’s are executed 
in the same manner; but what remains at Murano is finer - 
than either, in the extraordinary play of color obtained by the 


MURANG. 5? 


ase of variegated marbles. At St. Mark’s the patterns are 
more intricate, and the pieces far more skilfully set together; 
but each piece is there commonly of one color: at Murano 
every fragment is itself variegated, and all are arranged with 
a skill and feeling not to be taught, and to be observed with 
deep reverence, for that pavement is not dateless, like the 
rest of the church ; it bears its date on one of its central cir- 
cles, 1140, and is, in my mind, one of the most precious monu- 
ments in Italy, showing thus early, and in those rude chequers 
which the bared knee of the Murano fisher wears in its daily 
bending, the beginning of that mighty spirit of Venetian 
color, which was to be consummated in Titian. 

§ xxxvin. But we must quit the church for the present, for 
its garnishings are completed ; the candles are all upright in 
their sockets, and the curtains drawn into festoons, and a 
pasteboard crescent, gay with artificial flowers, has been at- 
tached to the capital of every pillar, in order, together with 
the gilt angels, to make the place look as much like Paradise 
as possible. If we return to-morrow, we shall find it filled 
with woful groups of aged men and women, wasted and fevere 
struck, fixed in paralytic supplication, haif-kneeling, half- 
couched upon the pavement; bowed down, partly in feeble- 
ness, partly in a fearful devotion, with their grey clothes cast 
far over their faces, ghastly and settled into a gloomy animal 
misery, all but the glittering eyes and muttering lips. 

Fit inhabitants, these, for what was once the Garden of 
Venice, “a terrestrial paradise,—a place of nymphs and demi- 
gods!” * 

§ xxxix. We return, yet once again, on the following day. 
Worshippers and objects of worship, the sickly crowd and 
gilded angels, all are gone; and there, far in the apse, is seen 
the sad Madonna standing in her folded robe, lifting her hands 
in vanity of blessing. ‘There is little else to draw away our 
thoughts fiom the solitary image. An old wooden tablet, 
carved into a rude effigy of San Donato, which occupies the 
central niche in the lower part of the tribune, has an interest 

*“Tuogo de’ ninfee de’ semidei.”—M. Andrea’ Calmo, quoted s¥ 
Multinelli, Annali Urbani di Venezia (Venice, 1841), p. 362. 


' 58 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


of its own, but is unconnected with the history of the older 
church. The faded frescoes of saints, which cover the upper 
tier of the wall of the apse, are also of comparatively recent 
date, much more the piece of Renaissance workmanship, shaft 
and entablature, above the altar, which has been thrust into 
the midst of all, and has cut away part of the feet of the Ma- 
donna. Nothing remains of the original structure but the 
semidome itself, the cornice whence it springs, which is the 
same as that used on the exterior of the church, and the bor- 
der and face-arch which surround it. The ground of the dome 
is of gold, unbroken except by the upright Madonna, and 
usual inscription, MR ©V. The figure wears a robe of blue, 
deeply fringed with gold, which seems to be gathered on the 
head and thrown back on the shoulders, crossing the breast, 
and falling in many folds to the ground. The under robe, 
shown beneath it where it opens at the breast, is of the same 
color ; the whole, except the deep gold fringe, being simply 
the dress of the women of the time. ‘‘ Le donne, anco elle del 
1100, vestivano di turchino con manti in spalla, che le copri- 
vano dinanzi e di dietro.” * 

Round the dome there is a colored mosaic border; and on 
the edge of its arch, legible by the whole congregation, this 
inscription : 


*Quos Eva conrrivit, PIA virco Maria REDEMIT ; 
HANC CUNCTI LAUDENT, QUi CRISTI MUNERE GAUDENT.” f 


The whole edifice is, therefore, simply a temple to the Vir- 
gin: to her is ascribed the fact of Redemption, and to her its 
praise. 

§ xu. ‘And is this,” it will be asked of me, “the time, is ~ 


* ‘The women, even as far back as 1100, wore dresses of blue, with 
mantles on the shoulder, which clothed them before and behind.”—~San- 
sovino. 

It would be difficult to imagine a dress more modest and beautiful 
See Appendix 7. 

+ ‘‘Whom Eve destroyed, the pious Virgin Mary redeemed ; 
All praise her, who rejoice in the Grace of Christ.” 
Vide Appendix 8. 


MURANO. 59 


this the worship, to which you would have us look back with 
reverence and regret?” Inasmuch as redemption is ascribed 
to the Virgin, No. Inasmuch as redemption is a thing desired, 
believed, rejoiced in, Yes,—and Yes a thousand times. As 
far as the Virgin is worshipped in place of God, No; but 
as far as there is the evidence of worship itself, and of the 
sense of a Divine presence, Yes. For there is a wider divi- 
sion of men than that into Christian and Pagan: before we 
ask what a man worships, we have to ask whether he worships 
at all. Observe Christ's own words on this head: “God isa 
spirit; and they that worship Him must worship Him in spirit, 
and in truth.” The worshipping in spirit comes first, and it — 
does not necessarily imply the worshipping in truth. There- 
fore, there is first the broad division of men into Spirit wor- 
shippers and Flesh worshippers; and then, of the Spirit 
worshippers, the farther division into Christian and Pagan,— 
worshippers in Falsehood or in Truth. I therefore, for the 
moment, omit all inquiry how far the Mariolatry of the early 
church did indeed eclipse Christ, or what measure of deeper 
reverence for the Son of God was still felt through all the 
grosser forms of Madonna worship. Let that worship be 
taken at its worst ; let the goddess of this dome of Murano 
be looked upon as just in the same sense an idol as the Athene 
of the Acropolis, or the Syrian Queen of Heaven; and then, 
on this darkest assumption, balance well the difference be- 
tween those who worship and those who worship not ;—that 
difference which there is in the sight of God, in all ages, be- 
tween the calculating, smiling, self-sustained, self-governed 
man, and the believing, weeping, wondering, struggling, 
Heaven-governed man ;—between the men who say in their 
hearts “there is no God,” and those who acknowledge a God 
at every step, “if haply they might feel after Him and find 
Him.” For that is indeed the difference which we shall find, 
in the end, between the builders of this day and the builders 
on that sand island long ago. They did honor something out 
of themselves ; they did believe in spiritual presence judging, 
animating, redeeming them; they built to its honor and for 
ite habitation; and were content to pass away in nameles¢ 


60 THE STONES OF VENICH. 


multitudes, so only that the labor of their hands might fix in 
the sea-wilderness a throne for their guardian angel. In this 
was their strength, and there was indeeda Spirit walking with 
them on the waters, though they could not discern the form 
thereof, though the Master’s voice came not to them, ‘It is L.” 
What their error cost them, we shall see hereafter ; for it re- 
mained when the majesty and the sincerity of their worship 
had departed, and remains to this day. Mariolatry is no 
special characteristic of the twelfth century; on the outside 
of that very tribune of San Donato, in its central recess, is an 
image of the Virgin which receives the reverence once paid to 
the blue vision upon the inner dome. With rouged cheeks 
and painted brows, the frightful doll stands in wretchedness 
of rags, blackened with the smoke of the votive lamps at its 
feet ; and if we would know what has been lost or gained by 
Italy in the six hundred years that have worn the marbles of 
Murano, let us consider how far the priests who set up this to 
worship, the populace who have this to adore, may be nobler 
than the men who conceived that lonely figure standing on 
the golden field, or than those to whom it seemed to receive 
their prayer at evening, far away, where they only saw the 
blue clouds rising out of the burning sea. 


CHAPTER IV. 
ST. MARK’S. 


§ 1 “Awnp so Barnabas took Mark, and sailed unto Cyprus.” 
It as the shores of Asia lessened upon his sight, the spirit of 
prophecy had entered into the heart of the weak disciple who 
had turned back when his hand was on the plough, and who 
had been judged, by the chiefest of Christ’s captains, un- 
worthy thenceforward to go forth with him to the work,* how 
wonderful would he have thought it, that by the lion symbol 
in future ages he was to be represented among men! how 


* Acts, xiii. 138; xv 38, 39. 


8ST. MARRS. . 64 


woful, that the war-cry of his name should so often reanimate 
the rage of the so-oier, on those very plains where he himself 
had failed in the courage of the Christian, and so often dye 
with fruitless blood that very Cypriot Sea, over whose waves, 
in repentance and shame, he was following the Son of Conso- 
lation ! 

§ mu. That the Venetians possessed themselves of his body 
in the ninth century, there appears no sufficient reason to 
doubt, nor that it was principally in consequence of their hay- 
ing done so, that they chose him for their patron saint. There 
exists, however, a tradition that before he went into Egypt he 
had founded the Church at Aquileia, and was thus, in some 
sort, the first bishop of the Venetian isles and people. I be- 
lieve that this tradition stands on nearly as good grounds as 
that of St. Peter having been the first bishop of Rome ;* but 
as usual, it is enriched by various later additions and embel- 
lishments, much resembling the stories told respecting the 
church of Murano. Thus we find it recorded by the Santo 
Padre who compiled the “ Vite de’ Santi spettanti alle Chiese 
di Venezia,” + that ‘St. Mark having seen the people of 
Aquileia well grounded in religion, and being called to Rome 
by St. Peter, before setting off took with him the holy bishop 
Hermagoras, and went in a small boat to the marshes of 
Venice. There were at that period some houses built upon.a 
certain high bank called Rialto, and the boat being driven by 
the wind was anchored in a marshy place, when St. Mark, 
snatched into ecstasy, heard the voice of an angel saying to 
him: ‘Peace be to thee, Mark; here shall thy body rest.’ ” 
The angel goes on to foretell the building of “ una stupenda, 
ne pit veduta Citti;” but the fable is hardly ingenious 
enough to deserve farther relation, 

§ m. But whether St. Mark was first bishop of Aquileia or 
not, St. Theodore was the first patron of the city ; nor can he 
yet be considered as having entirely abdicated his early right, 


* The reader who desires to investigate it may consult Galliciolli, 
“Delle Memorie Venete” (Venice, 1795), tom ii. p. 3382, and the am 
shorities quoted by him. ; 

{ Venice, 1761, tom. i. p. 126. 


62 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


as his statue, standing on a crocodile, still companions the 
winged lion on the opposing pillar of the piazzetta. A 
church erected to this Saint is said to have occupied, before 
the ninth century, the site of St. Mark’s ; and the traveller, 
dazzled by the brilliancy of the great square, ought not to 
leave it without endeavoring to imagine its aspect in. that 
early time, when it was a green field cloister-like and quiet, * 
divided by a small canal, with a line of trees on each side ; 
and extending between the two churches of St. Theodore and 
St. Geminian, as the little piazza of Torcello lies between its 
“ palazzo ” and cathedral. 

§1v. But in the year 813, when the seat of government 
was finally removed to the Rialto, a Ducal Palace, built on 
the spot where the present one stands, with a Ducal Chapet 
beside it,t gave a very different character to the Square of St. 
Mark ; and fifteen years later, the acquisition of the body of 
the Saint, and its deposition in the Ducal Chapel, perhaps 
not yet completed, occasioned the investiture of that chapel 
with all possible splendor. St. Theodore was deposed from 
his patronship, and his church destroyed, to make room for 
the agerandizement of the one attached to the Ducal Palace, 
and thenceforward known as “ St. Mark’s.” f 

§ v. This first church was however destroyed by fire, when 
the Ducal Palace was burned in the revolt against Candiano, 
in 976. It was partly rebuilt by his successor, Pietro Orseolo, 
on a larger scale; and, with the assistance of Byzantine 
architects, the fabric was carried on under successive Doges 
for nearly a hundred years ; the main building being com- 
pleted in 1071, but its incrustation with marble not tili con- 
siderably later. It was consecrated on the 8th of October, 
1085, § according to Sansovino and the author of tie ‘“ Chiesa 

* St. Mark’s Place, ‘‘ partly covered by turf, and planted with a few 
trees; and on account of its pleasant aspect called Brollo or Broglio, 
that is to say, Garden.” The canal passed through it, over which is 
built the bridge of the Malpassi. Galliciolli, lib. L cap. viii. 

+ My authorities for this statement are given below, in the chapter on 
the Ducal Palace. 

¢ In the Chronicles, ‘‘ Sancti Marci Ducalis Cappella.” 

§ **To God the Lord, the glorious Virgin Annunciate, and the Protec 


8ST. MARKS. 68 


Pucale di S. Marco,” in 1094 according to Lazari, but cer. 
tainly between 1084 and 1096, those years being the limits of 
the reign of Vital Falier ; I incline to the supposition that it 
was soon after his accession to the throne in 1085, though 
Sansovino writes, by mistake, Ordelafo instead of Vital Falier. 
But, at all events, before the close of the eleventh century the 
great consecration of the church took place. It was again 
injured by fire in 1106, but repaired ; and from that time to 
the fall of Venice there was probably no Doge who did not 
in some slight degree embellish or alter the fabric, so that few 
parts of it can be pronounced boldly to be of any given date. 
Two periods of interference are, however, notable above the 
rest: the first, thatin which the Gothic school had superseded 
the Byzantine towards the close of the fourteenth century, 
when the pinnacles, upper archivolts, and window traceries 
were added to the exterior, and the great screen, with various 
chapels and tabernacle-work, to the interior ; the second, when 
the Renaissance school superseded the Gothic, and the pupils 
of Titian and Tintoret substituted, over one half of the church, 
their own compositions for the Greek mosaics with which it 
was originally decorated ;* happily, though with no good 
will, having left enough to enable us to imagine and lament 
what they destroyed. Of this irreparable loss we shall have 
more to say hereafter; meantime, I wish only to fix in the 
reader’s mind the succession of periods of alteration as firmly 
and simply as possible. 

§ vi. We have seen that the main body of the church may 
be broadly stated to be of the eleventh century, the Gothic 
additions of the fourteenth, and the restored mosaics of the 


tor St. Mark.”—Corner, p. 14. It is needless to trouble the reader with 
the various authorities for the above statements: I have consulted tha 
best. The previous inscription once existing on the church itself: 


‘¢ Anno milleno transacto bisci.e trigeno 
Desuper unadecimo fuit facta primo,” 


is no longer to ve seen, and is conjectured by Corner, with much proba 
bility, to have perished ‘‘in qualche ristauro.” 
* Signed Bartolomeus Bozza, 1634, 1647, 1656, &e, 


64 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


seventeenth. There is no difficulty in distinguishing at a 
glance the Gothic portions from the Byzantine ; but there is 
considerable difficulty in ascertaining how long, during the 
course of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, additions were 
made to the Byzantine church, which cannot be easily distin- 
guished from the work of the eleventh century, being pur- 
posely executed in the same manner. Two of the most im- 
portant pieces of evidence on this point are, a raosaic in the 
south transept, and another over the northern door of the 
facade ; the first representing the interior, the second the ex- 
terior, of the ancient church. 

§ vi. It has just been stated that the existing building was 
consecrated by the Doge Vital Falier. A peculiar solemnity 
was given to that act of consecration, in the minds of the 
Venetian people, by what appears to have been one of the best 
arranged and most successful impostures ever attempted by 
the clergy of the Romish church. The body of St. Mark had, 
without doubt, perished in the conflugration of 976 ; but the 
revenues of the church depended too much upon the devotion 
excited by these relics to permit the confession of their loss. 
The following is the account given by Corner, and believed to 
this day by the Venetians, of the pretended miracle by which 
it was concealed. 

“After the repairs undertaken by the Doge Orseolo, the 
place in which the body of the holy Evangelist rested had 
been altogether forgotten ; so that the Doge Vital Falier was 
entirely ignorant of the place of the venerable deposit. This 
was no light affiiction, not only to the pious Doge, but to all 
the citizens and people ; so that at last, moved by confidence 
in the Divine mercy, they determined to implore, with prayer 
and fasting, the manifestation of so great a treasure, which 
did not now depend upon any human effort. A general fast 
being therefore proclaimed, and a solemn procession appointed 
for the 25th day of June, while the people assembled in the 
church interceded with God in fervent prayers for the desired 
boon, they beheld, with as much amazement. as joy, a slight 
shaking in the marbles of a pillar (near the place where the 
altar or the Cross is now), which, presently falling to the 


ST. MARRS. 65. 


earth, exposed to the view of the rejoicing people the chest of 
bronze in which the body of the Evangelist was laid.” 

§ vi. Of the main facts of this tale there is no doubt. 
They were embellished afterwards, as usual, by many fanciful 
traditions ; as, for instance, that, when the sarcophagus was 
discovered, St. Mark extended his hand out of it, with a gold 
ring on one of the fingers, which he permitted a noble of 
the Dolfin family to remove; and a quaint and delightful 
story was further invented of this ring, which I shall not 
repeat here, as it is now as well known as any tale of the 
Arabian Nights. But the fast and the discovery of the 
coffin, by whatever means effected, are facts; and they are 
recorded in one of the best-preserved mosaics of the north 
transept, executed very certainly not long after the event had 
taken place, closely resembling in its treatment that of the 
Bayeux tapestry, and showing, in a conventional manner, the 
interior of the church, as it then was, filled by the people, first 
in prayer, then in thanksgiving, the pillar standing open be- 
fore them, and the Doge, in the midst of them, distinguished 
by his crimson bonnet embroidered with gold, but more un- 
mistakably by the inseription “Dux” over his head, as uni- 
formly is the case in the Bayeux tapestry, and most other pic- 
torial works of the period. The church is, of course, rudely 
represented, and the two upper stories of it reduced to a small 
scale in order to form a background to the figures ; one of 
those bold pieces of picture history which we in our pride of 
perspective, and a thousand things besides, never dare attempt. 
We should have put ina column or two of the real or perspec- 
tive size, and subdued it into a vague background: the old 
workman crushed the church together that he might get it all 
in, up to the cupolas ; and has, therefore, left us some useful 
notes of its ancient form, though any one who is familiar with 
the method of drawing employed at the period will not push 
the evidence too far. The two pulpits are there, however, as 
they are at this day, and the fringe of mosaic flowerwork 
which then encompassed the whole church, but which modern 
restorers have destroyed, all but one fragment. still left in the 
south aisle. There ig no attempt to represent the other 

Vou, IL—} 


86 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


mosaics on the roof, the scale being too small to admit of thes. 
being represented with any success ; but some at least of those 
mosaics had been executed at that period, and their absence ir 
the representation of the entire church is especially to be ob- 
served, in order to show that we must not trust to any nega- 
tive evidence in such works. M. Lazari has rashly concluded 
that the central archivolt of St. Mark’s must be posterior to 
the year 1205, because it does not appear in the representation 
of the exterior of the church over the northern door ;* but he 
justly observes that this mosaic (which is the other piece 
of evidence we possess respecting the ancient form of the 
building) cannot itself be earlier than 1205, since it repre- 
sents the bronze horses which were brought from Con- 
stantinople in that year. And this one fact renders it very 
difficult to speak with confidence respecting the date of any 
part of the exterior of St. Mark’s; for we have above seen 
that it was consecrated in the eleventh century, and yet here 
is one of its most important exterior decorations assuredly re- 
touched, if not entirely added, in the thirteenth, although ita 
style would have led us to suppose it had been an original 
part of the fabric. However, for all our purposes, it will be 
enough for the reader to remember that the earliest parts of 
the building belong to the eleventh, twelfth, and first part of 
the thirteenth century ; the Gothic portions to the fourteenth; 
some of the altars and embellishments to the fifteenth and 
sixteenth ; and the modern portion of the mosaics to the 
seventeenth. 

§ rx. This, however, I only wish him to recollect in order 
that I may speak generally of the Byzantine architecture of 
St. Mark’s, without leading him to suppose the whole church 
to have been built and decorated by Greek artists. Its later 
portions, with the single exception of the seventeenth century 
mosaics, have been so dexterously accommodated to the 
original fabric that the general effect is still that of a Byzan- 
tine building ; and I shall not, except when it is absolutely 
necessary, direct attention to the discordant points, or weary 
the reader with anatomical criticism.. Whatever in St. Marks 

* Guida di Venezia, p, 6. 


ST. MARRE'S. 67 


arrests the eye, or affects the feelings, is either Byzantine, or 
has been modified by Byzantine influence ; and our inquiry 
into its architectural merits need not therefore be disturbed 
by the anxieties of antiquarianism, or arrested by the ob- 
scurities of chronology. 

§ x. And now I wish that the reader, before I bring him 
into St. Mark’s Place, would imagine himself for a little time 
in a quiet English cathedral town, and walk with me to the 
west front of its cathedral. Let us go together up the more 
retired street, at the end of which we can see the pinnacles of 
one of the towers, and then through the low grey gateway, 
with its battlemented top and small latticed window in the 
centre, into the inner private-looking road or close, where 
nothing goes in but the carts of the tradesmen who supply - 
the bishop and the chapter, and where there are little shaven 
grassplots, fenced in by neat rails, before old-fashioned groups 
of somewhat diminutive and excessively trim houses, with 
uttle oriel and bav windows jutting out here and there, and 
deep wooden cornices and eaves painted cream color and 
white, and small porches to their doors in the shape of cockle- 
shells, or little, crooked, thick, indescribable wooden gables 
warped a little on one side; and so forward till we come to 
larger houses, also old-fashioned, but of red brick, and with 
gardens behind them, and fruit walls, which show here and 
there, among the nectarines, the vestiges of an old cloister 
arch or shaft, and looking in front on the cathedral square 
itself, laid out in rigid divisions of smooth grass and gravel 
walk, yet not uncheerful, especially on the sunny side where 
the canon’s children are walking with their nurserymaids. 
And so, taking care not to tread on the grass, we will go 
along the straight walk to the west front, and there stand for 
a time, looking up at its deep-pointed porches md the dark 
places between their pillars where there were statues once, 
and where the fragments, here and there, of a stately figure 
are still left, which has in it the likeness of a king, perhaps 
indeed a king on earth, perhaps a saintly king long ago in 
heaven ; and so higher and higher up to the great moulder- 
ing wall of rugged sculpture and confused arcades, shattered, 


68 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


and grey, aud grisly with heads of dragons and mocking 
fiends, worn by the rain and swirling winds into yet unseemlier 
shape, and colored on their stony scales by the deep russet- 
orange lichen, melancholy gold ; and so, higher still, to the 
bleak towers, so far above that the eye loses itself among the 
bosses of their traceries, though they are rude and strong, 
and only sees like a drift of eddying black points, now clos- 
ing, now scattering, and now settling suddenly into invisible 
places among the bosses and flowers, the crowd of restless 
birds that fill the whole square with that strange clangor of 
theirs, so barsh and yet so soothing, like the cries of birds on 
a solitary coast between the cliffs and sea. 

§ x1. Think for a little while of that scene, and the mean- 
ing of all its small formalisms, mixed with its serene sublim- 
ity. Estimate its secluded, continuous, drowsy felicities, and 
its evidence of the sense and steady performance of such kind 
of duties as can be regulated by the cathedral clock ; and 
weigh the influence of those dark towers on al] who have 
passed through the lonely square at their feet for centuries, 
and on sll who have seen them rising far away over the wooded 
plain, or catching on their square masses the last rays of the 
sunset, when the city at their feet was indicated only by the 
mist at the bend of the river. And then let us quickly recol- 
lect that we are in Venice, and land at the extremity of the 
Calla Lunga San Moisé, which may be considered as there 
answering to the secluded street that led us to our Englisk 
cathedral gateway. 

§ xu. We find ourselves in a paved alley, some seven feet 
wide where it is widest, full of people, and resonant with cries 
of itinerant salesmen,—a shriek in their beginning, and dying 
away into a kind of brazen ringing, all the worse for its con- 
finement between the high houses of the passage along which 
we have to make our way. Over-head an inextricable con- 
fusion of rugged shutters, and iron balconies and chimney 
flues pushed out on brackets to save room, and arched win- 
dows with projecting sills of Istrian stone, and gleams of green 
leaves here and there where a fig-tree branch escapes over a 
lower wall from some inner cortile, leading the eye up to the 


ST. MARK’S, 69 


narrow stream of blue sky high over all. On each side, a row 
of shops, as densely set as may be, occupying, in fact, inter- 
vals between the square stone shafts, about eight feet high, 
which carry the first floors : intervals of which one is narrow 
and serves as a door ; the other is, in the more respectable shops, 
wainscoted to the height of the counter and glazed above, but 
in those of the poorer tradesmen left open to the ground, and 
the wares laid on benches and tables in the open air, the light 
in all cases entering at the front only, and fading away in a 
few feet from the threshold into a gloom which the eye from 
without cannot penetrate, but which is generally broken by a 
ray or two from a feeble lamp at the back of the shop, sus- 
pended before a print of the Virgin. The less pious shop- 
keeper sometimes leaves his lamp unlighted, and is contented 
with a penny print; the more religious one has his prin 
colored and set in a little shrine with a gilded or figured 
fringe, with perhaps a faded flower or two on each side, and 
his lamp burning brilliantly. Here at the fruiterer’s, where 
the dark-green water-melons are heaped upon the counter 
like cannon balls, the Madonna has a tabernacle of fresh laurel 
leaves ; but the pewterer next door has let his lamp out, and 
there is nothing to be seen in his shop but the dull gleam of 
the studded patterns on the copper pans, hanging from his 
roof in the darkness. Next comes a “Vendita Frittole e 
Liquori,” where the Virgin, enthroned in a very humble man- 
ner beside a tallow candle on a back shelf, presides over cer- 
tain ambrosial morsels of a nature too ambiguous to be defined 
or enumerated. But a few steps farther on, at the regular 
wine-shop of the calle, where we are offered ‘“ Vino Nostrani 
a Soldi 28°32,” the Madonna is in great glory, enthroned above: 
ten or a dozen large red casks of three-year-old vintage, and 
flanked by goodly ranks of bottles of Maraschino, and two 
crimson lamps ; and for the evening, when the gondoliers will 
come to drink out, under her auspices, the money they have 
gained during the day, she will have a whole chandelier. 

§ xm. A yard or two farther, we pass the hostelry of the 
Black Eagle, and, glancing as we pass through the square door 
of marble, deeply moulded, in the outer wall, we see the shad. 

Stones of Venice—Vol. If,—4 


70 THE SYtON#S OF VENICE. 


pws of its pergola of vines resting on an ancient well, with t 
poiuted shield carved on its side ; and so presently emerge on 
the bridge and Campo San Moisé, whence to the entrance into 
St. Mark’s Place, called the Bocca di Piazza (mouth of the 
square), the Venetian character is nearly destroyed, first by the 
frightful facade of San Mois?, which we will pause at another 
time to examine, and then by the modernizing of the shops as 
they near the piazza, and the mingling with the lower Vene- 
tian populace of lounging groups of English and Austrians. 
We will push fast through them into the shadow of the pillars 
at the end of the “ Bocca di Piazza,” and then we forget them 
all; for between those pillars there opens a great light, and, in 
the midst of it, as we advance slowly, the vast tower of St. 
Mark seems to lift itself visibly forth from the level field of 
chequered stones ; and, on each side, the countless arches pro- 
long themselves into ranged symmetry, as if the rugged and 
irregular houses that pressed together above us in the dark 
alley had been struck back into sudden obedience and lovely 
order, and all their rude casements and broken walls had been 
transformed into arches charged with goodly sculpture, and 
fluted shafts of delicate stone. 

§ xrv. And well may they fall back, for beyond those troops 
of ordered arches there rises a vision out of the earth, and 
all the great square seems to have opened from it in a kind 
of awe, that we may see it far away ;—a multitude of pillars 
and white domes, clustered into a long low pyramid of col- 
ored light ; a treasure-heap, it seems, partly of gold, and 
partly of opal and mother-of-pearl, hollowed beneath into 
five great vaulted porches, ceiled with fair mosaic, and beset 
with sculpture of alabaster, clear as amber and delicate as 
ivory,—sculpture fantastic and involved, of palm leaves and 
lilies, and grapes and pomegranates, and birds clinging and 
fluttering among the branches, all twined together into an 
endless network of buds and plumes ; and, in the midst of it, 
the solemn forms of angels, sceptred, and robed to the feet, 
and leaning to each other across the gates, their figures in- 
distinct among the gleaming of the golden ground through 
the leaves beside them, interrupted and dim, like the morn. 


ST. MARK’S. $i 


ing light as it faded back among the branches of Eden, when 
first its gates were angel-puarded long ago. And round the 
walls of the porches there are set pillars of variegated stones, 
jasper and porphyry, and deep-green serpentine spotted with 
flakes of snow, and marbles, that half refuse and half yield 
to the sunshine, Cleopatra-like, ‘‘ their bluest veins to kiss”— 
the shadow, as it steals back from them, revealing line aftet 
line of azure undulation, as a receding tide leaves the waved 
sand ; their capitals rich with interwoven tracery, rooted 
knots of herbage, and drifting leaves of acanthus and vine, 
and mystical signs, all beginning and ending in the Cross; 
and above them, in the broad archivolts, a continuous chain 
of language and of life—angels, and the signs of heaven, and 
the labors of men, each in its appointed season upon the 
earth ; and above these, another range of glittering pinnacles, 
mixed with white arches edged with scarlet flowers,—a con- 
fusion of delight, amidst which the breasts of the Greek 
horses are seen blazing in their breadth of golden strength, 
and the St. Mark’s Lion, lifted on a blue field covered with 
stars, until at last, as if im ecstasy, the crests of the arches 
break into a marble foam, and toss themselves far into the 
blue sky in flashes and wreaths of sculptured spray, as if the 
breakers on the Lido shore had been frost-bound before they 
fell, and the sea-nymphs had inlaid them with coral and ame- 
thyst. 

Between that grim cathedral of England and this, what an 
interval! ‘There is a type of it in the very birds that haunt 
them ; for, instead of the restless crowd, hoarse-voiced and 
sable-winged, drifting on the bleak upper air, the St. Mark’s 
porches are full of doves, that nestle among the marble foli- 
age, and mingle the soft iridescence of their living plumes, 
changing at every motion, with the tints, hardly less lovely, 
that have stood unchanged for seven hundred years. 

§ xv. And what effect has this splendor on those who pass 
beneath it? You may walk from sunrise to sunset, to and 
fro, before the gateway of St. Mark’s, and you will not see an 
eye lifted to it, nor a countenance brightened by it. Priest 
and layman, soldier and civilian, rich and poor, pass by it 


72 THE STONES OF VENICH. 


alike regardlessly. Up to the very recesses of the porches, 
the meanest tradesmen of the city push their counters; nay, 
the foundations of its pillars are themselves the seats—not 
“of them that sell doves ” for sacrifice, but of the vendors of 
toys and caricatures. Round the whole square in front of 
the church there is almost a continuous line of cafés, where 
the idle Venetians of the middle classes lounge, and read 
empty journals ; in its centre the Austrian bands play during 
the time of vespers, their martial music jarring with the organ 
notes,—the march drowning the miserere, and the sullen 
crowd thickening round them,—a crowd, which, if it had its 
will, would stiletto every soldier that pipes to it. And in the 
recesses of the porches, all day long, knots of men of the 
lowest classes, unemployed and listless, lie backing in the 
sun like lizards; and unregarded children,—every heavy 
glance of their young eyes full of desperation and stony de- 
pravity, and their throats hoarse with cursing,—gamble, and 
fight, and snarl, and sleep, hour after hour, clashing their 
bruised centesimi upon the marble ledges of the church 
porch. And the images of Christ and His angels look down 
upon it continually. 

That we may not enter the church out of the midst of the 
horror of this, let us turn aside under the portico which looxs 
towards the sea, and passing round within the two massive 
pillars brought from St. Jean d’Acre, we shall find the gate of 
tue Baptistery ; let us enter there. The heavy door closes 
behind us instantly, and the light, and the turbulence of the 
Piazzetta, are together shut out by it. 

§ xvi. We are in a low vaulted room; vaulted, not with 
arches, but with small cupolas starred with gold, and cheg- 
‘ueved with gloomy figures: in the centre is a bronze font 
charged with rich bas-reliefs, a small figure of the Baptist 
atanding above it in a single ray of light that glances across 
the, narrow room, dying as it falls from a window high in the 
wall, and the first thing that it strikes, and the only thing 
that it strikes brightly, is a tomb. We hardly know if it be a 
tomb indeed ; for it is like a narrow couch set beside the win- 
dow, low-roofed and curtained, so that it might seem, but that 


8T. MARKS, : 73 


it has some height above the pavement, to have been drawn 
towards the window, that the sleeper might be wakened early ; 
only there are two angels who have drawn the curtain back, 
and are looking down upon him. Let us look also, and thank 
that gentle light that rests upon his forehead for ever, and 
dies away upon his breast. . 

The face is of a man in middle life, but there are two deep 
furrows right across the forehead, dividing it like the founda« 
tions of a tower: the height of it above is bound by the fillet 
of the ducal cap. The rest of the features are singularly 
small and delicate, the lips sharp, perhaps the sharpness of 
death being added to that of the natural lines; but there is a 
sweet smile upon them, and a deep serenity upon the whole 
countenance. The roof of the canopy above has been blue, 
filled with stars ; beneath, in the centre of the tomb on which 
the figure rests, is a seated figure of the Virgin, and the bor- 
der of it all around is of flowers and soft leaves, growing rich 
and deep, as if in a field in summer. 

It is the Doge Andrea Dandolo, a man early great among 
the great of Venice ; and early lost. She chose him for her 
king in his 36th year; he died ten years later, leaving behind 
him that history to which we owe half of what we know of 
her former fortunes. 

§ xvi. Look round at the room in which he lies. The floor 
of it is of rich mosaic, encompassed by a low seat of red mar- 
ble, and its walls are of alabaster, but worn and shattered, 
and darkly stained with age, almost a ruin,—in places the 
slabs of marble have fallen away altogether, and the rugged 
brick-work is seen through the rents, but all beautiful; the 
ravaging fissures fretting their way among the islands and 
channelled zones of the alabaster, and the timc-stains on its 
translucent masses darkened into fields of rich golden brown, 
like the color of seaweed when the sun strikes on it through 
deep sea. The light fades away into the recess of the cham- 
ber towards the altar, and the eye can hardly trace the lines 
of the bas-relief behind it of the baptism of Christ: but on 
the vaulting of the roof the figures are distinct, and there are 
seen upon it two great circles, one surrounded by the “ Prins 


44 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


cipalities and powers in heavenly places,” of which Milton has 
expressed the ancient division in the single massy line, 


“Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Pewers,” 


and around the other, the Apostles ; Christ the centre of both ; 
and upon the walls, again and again repeated, the gaunt figure 
of the Baptist, in every circumstance of his life and death ; 
and the streams of the Jordan running down between their 
cloven rocks; the axe laid to the root of a fruitless tree that 
springs upon their shore. ‘Every tree that bringeth not 
forth good fruit shall be hewn down, and cast into the fire.” 
Yes, verily : to be baptized with fire, or to be cast therein ; it is 
the choice set before all men. The march-notes still murmur 
through the grated window, and mingle with the sounding in 
our ears of the sentence of judgment, which the old Greek has 
written on that Baptistery wall. Venice has made her choice. 

§ xvi. He who lies under that stony canopy would have 
taught her another choice, in his day, if she would have 
listened to him; but he and his counsels have long been for- 
gotten by her, and the dust lies upon his lips. 

Through the heavy door whose bronze network closes the 
place of his rest, let us enter the church itself. It is lost in 
still deeper twilight, to which the eye must be accustomed for 
some moments before the form of the building can be traced ; 
and then there opens before us a vast cave, hewn out into the 
form of a Cross, and divided into shadowy aisles by many 
pillars. Round the domes of its roof the light enters only 
through narrow apertures like large stars ; and here and there 
a ray or two from some far away casement wanders into the 
darkness, and casts a narrow phosphoric stream upon the 
waves of marble that heave and fall in a thousand colors along 
the floor. What else there is of light is from torches, or silver 
lamps, burning ceaselessly in the recesses of the chapels; the 
roof sheeted with gold, and the polished walls covered with 
alabaster, give back at every curve and angle some feeble 
gleaming to the flames; and the glories round the heads of 
the sculptured saints flash out upon us as we pass them, and 
sink again into the gloom. Under foot and over head, a con. 


ST) MARKS. "5 


tinual succession of crowded imagery, one picture passing. 
into another, as in a dream ; forms beautiful and terrible 
mixed together; dragons and serpents, and ravening beasts 
of prey, and graceful birds that in the midst of them drink 
from running fountains and feed trom vases of crystal ; the 
passions and the pleasures of human life symbolized together, 
and the mystery of its redemption ; for the mazes of interwo- 
ven lines and changeful pictures lead always at last to the 
Cross, lifted and carved in every place and upon every stone ; 
sometimes with the serpent of eternity wrapt round it, some. 
times with doves beneath its arms, and sweet herbage growing 
forth from its feet ; but conspicuous most of all on _.e great 
rood that crosses the church before the altar, raised in bright 
blazonry against the shadow of the apse. And although in 
the recesses of the aisle and chayels, when the mist of the in- 
cense hangs heavily, we may see continually a figure traced in 
faint lines upon their marble, a woman standing with her eyes 
raised to heaven, and the inscription above her, ‘‘ Mother of 
God,” she is not here the presiding deity. It is the Cross 
that is first seen, and always, burning in the centre of the 
temple ; and every dome and hollow of its roof has the figure 
of Christ in the utmost height of it, raised in power, or re- 
turning in judgment. 

§ xrx. Nor is this interior without effect on the minds of 
the people. At every hour of the day there are groups 
collected before the various shrines, and. solitary worshippers 
scattered through the darker places of the church, evidently 
in prayer both deep and reverent, and, for the most. part, 
profoundly sorrowful. The devotees at the greater number 
of the renowned shrines of Romanism may be seen murmur- 
ing their appointed prayers with wandering eyes and unen- 
gaged gestures ; but the step of the stranger does not disturb 
those who kneel on the pavement of St. Mark’s ; and hardly 
a moment passes, from early morning to sunset, in which we 
may not see some half-veiled figure enter beneath the Arabian 
porch, cast itself into long abasement on the floor of the 
‘temple, and then rising slowly with more confirmed step, 
and with a passionate kiss and clasp of the arms given to the 


76 THE ST1CNES OF VENICE. 


feet of the crucifix, by which the lamps burn always in the 
northern aisle, leave the church, as if comforted. 

§ xx. But we must not hastily conclude from this that the 
nobler characters of the building have at present any influence 
in fostering a devotional spirit. There is distress enough in 
Venice to bring many to their knees, without excitemert 
from external imagery ; and whatever there may be in the ~ 
temper of the worship offered in St. Mark’s more than can be 
accounted for by reference to the unhappy circumstances of 
the city, is assuredly not owing either to the beauty of its 
architecture or to the impressiveness of the Scripture histories 
embodied in its mosaics. That it has a peculiar effect, how- 
ever slight, on the popular mind, may perhaps be safely con- 
jectured from the number of worshippers which it attracts, 
while the churches of St. Paul and the Frari, larger in size and 
more central in position, are left comparatively empty.* But 
this effect is altogether to be ascribed to its richer assemblage 
of those sources of influence which address themselves to the 
commonest instincts of the human mind, and which, in all 
ages and countries, have been more or less employed in the 
support of superstition. Darkness and mystcry; confused 
recesses of building ; artificial hght employed in small quan- 
tity, but maintained with a constancy which secms to give it 
a kind of sacredness ; preciousness of material easily compre- 
hended by the vulgar eye ; close air loaded with a sweet and 
peculiar odor associated only with religious services, solemn 
music, and tangible idols or images having popular legends 
attached to them,—these, the stage properties of superstition, 
which have been from the beginning of the world, and must 
be to the end of it, employed by ail nations, whether openly 
savage or nominally civilized, to produce a false awe in minds 
incapable of apprehending the true nature of the Deity, are 
assembled in St. Mark’s to a degree, as far as I know, unex- 
ampled in any other European church. The arts of the Magus 


* The mere warmth of St. Mark's in winter, which is much greater 
than that of the other two churches above named, must, however, be « 
taken into consideration, as one of the most efficient causes of its being 
then more frequented, 


ST. MARRS. 77 


and the Brahmin are exhausted in the animation of a paralyzed 
Uhristianity ; and the popular sentiment which these arts ex- 
cite is to be regarded by us with no more respect than we 
should have considered ourselves justified in rendering to the 
devotion of the worshippers at Eleusis, Ellora, or Edfou.* 

§ xxt Indeed, these inferior means of exciting religious 
emotion were employed in the ancient Church as they are at 
this day, but not employed alone. Torchlight there was, as — 
there is now ; but the torchlight illumined Scripture histories 
on the walls, which every eye traced and every heart com- 
prehended, but which, during my whole residence in Venice, 
I never saw one Venetian regard for an instant. Inever heard 
from any one the most languid expression of interest in any 
feature of the church, or perceived the slightest evidence of 
their understanding the meaning of its architecture ; and while, 
therefore, the English cathedral, though no longer dedicated 
to the kind of services for which it was intended by its build- 
ers, and much at variance in many of its characters with the 
temper of, the people by whom it is now surrounded, retains 
yet so much of its religious influence that no prominent feat- 
ure of its architecture can be said to exist altogether in vain, 
we have in St. Mark’s a building apparently still employed in 
the ceremonies for which it wags designed, and yet of which 
the impressive attributes have altogether ceased to be compre- 
hended by its votaries. The beauty which it possesses is un- 
felt, the language it uses is forgotten ; and in the midst of the 
city to whose service it has so long been consecrated, and still 
filled by crowds of the descendants of those to whom it owes 
its magnificence, it stands, in reality, more desclate than the 


* T said above that the larger number of the devotees entered by the 
‘6 Arabian’’ porch; the porch, that is to say, on the north side of the 
ehurch, remarkable for its rich Arabian archivolt, and through which 
access is gained immediately to the northern transept. The reason is, 
that in that transept is the chapel of the Madonna, which has a greater 
attraction for the Venetiansthan all the rest of the church besides. The 
old builders kept their images of the Virgin subordinate to those of 
Christ; but modern Romanism has retrograded from theirs, and the 
most glittering portions of the whole church are the two recesses behind 
this lateral altar, covered with silver hearts dedicated to the Virgin. 


78 | THE STONES OF VENICE. 


ruins through which the sheep-walk passes unbroken in out 
English valleys ; and the writing on its marble walls is lesa 
~egarded and less powerful for the teaching of men, than the 
letters which the shepherd follows with his finger, where the 
moss is lightest on the tombs in the desecrated cloister. 

§ xxi It must therefore be altogether without reference to 
its present usefulness, that we pursue our inquiry into the 
merits and meaning of the architecture of this marvellous 
building ; and it can only be after we have terminated that 
inquiry, conducting it carefully on abstract grounds, that we 
can pronounce with any certainty how far the present neglect 
cf St. Mark’s is significative of the decline of the Venetian char- 
acter, or how far this church is to be considered as the relic 
of a barbarous age, incapable of attracting the admiration, or 
influencing the feelings of a civilized community. 

The inquiry before us is twofold. Throughout the first 
volume, I carefully kept the study of expression distinct from 
that of abstract architectural perfection ; telling the reader 
that in every building we should afterwards examine, he would 
have first to form a judgment of its construction and decora- 
tive merit, considering it merely as a work of art ; and then te 
examine farther, im what degree it fulfilled its expressional 
purposes. Accordingly, we have first to judge of St. Mark’s 
merely as a piece of architecture, not as a church ; secondly, 
to estimate its fitness for its special duty as a place of wor- 
ship, and the relation in which it stands, as such, to those 
northern cathedrals that still retain so much of the power over 
the human heart, which the Byzantine domes appear to have 
lost for ever. 

§ xx. In the two succeeding sections of this work, devoted 
respectively to the examination of the Gothic and Renais- 
sance buildings in Venice, I have endeavored to analyze and 
state, as briefly as possible, the true nature of each school,— 
first in Spirit, then in Form. I wished to have given a similar 
analysis, in this section, of the nature of Byzantine architect- 
ure; but could not make my statements general, because 1 
have never seen this kind of building on its native soil. Nev- 
ertheless, in the following sketch of the principles exemplified 


8T. MARK'S, "8 


in St. Mark’s, I believe that most of the leading features and 
motives of the style will be found clearly enough distinguished 
to enable the reader to judge of it with tolerable fairness, as 
compared with the better known systems of European archi- 
tecture in the middle ages. 

§ xxiv. Now the first broad characteristic of the building, 
and the root nearly of every other important peculiarity in it, 
is its confessed incrustation. Itis the purest example in Italy 
of the great school of architecture in which the ruling princi- 
ple is the incrustation of brick with more precious materials ; 
and it is necessary before we proceed to criticise any one of 
its arrangements, that the reader should carefully consider the 
principles which are likely to have influenced, or might leciti- 
mately influence, the architects of such a school, as distin- 
guished from those whose designs are to be executed in mas- 
sive materials. 

It is true, that among different nations, and at different 
times, we may find examples of every sort and degree of in- 
crustation, from the mere setting of the larger and more com- 
pact stones by preference at the outside of the wall, to the 
miserable construction of that modern brick cornice, with its 
coating of cement, which, but the other day, in London, killed 
its unhappy workmen in its fall.* But just as itis perfectly 
possible to have a clear idea of the opposing characteristics of - 
two different species of plants or animals, though between the 
two there are varieties which it is difficult to assign either to 
the one or the other, so the reader may fix decisively in his 
mind the legitimate characteristics of the incrusted and the 
massive styles, though between the two there are varieties 
which confessedly unite the attributes of both. For instance, 
in many Roman remains, built of blocks of tufa and incrusted 
with marble, we have a style, which, though truly solid, pos- 
sesses some of the attributes of incrustation ; and in the Ca- 
thedral of Florence, built of brick and coated with marble, the 
marble facing is so firmly and exquisitely set, that the build- 
ing, though in reality incrusted, assumes the attributes of 
solidity. But these intermediate examples need not in ne 

* Vide ‘‘ Builder,” for October, 1851. 


80- THE STONES OF VINICEH. 


least confuse our generally distinct ideas of the two families of 
buildings : the one in which the substance is alike throughout, 
and the forms and conditions of the ornament assume or prove 
that it is so, as in the best Greek buildings, and for the most 
part in our early Norman and Gothic ; and the other, in which 
the substance is of two kinds, one internal, the other external, 
and the system of decoration is founded on this duplicity, as 
pre-eminently in St. Mark’s. 

§ xxv. I have used the word duplicity in no depreciatory 
sense. In chapterii. of the ‘Seven Lamps,” § 18, I especially 
guarded this incrusted school from the imputation of insin- 
cerity, and I must do so now at greater length. It appears 
insincere at first to a Northern builder, because, accustomed 
to build with solid blocks of freestone, he is in the habit of 
supposing the external superficies of a piece of masonry te 
be some criterion of its thickness. But, as soon as he gets 
acquainted with the incrusted style, he will find that the 
Southern builders had no intention to deceive him. He will 
see that every slab cf facial marble is fastened to the next by 
a confessed rivet, and that the joints of the armor are so 
visibly and openly accommodated to the contours of the sub- 
stance within, that he has no more right to complain of 
treachery than a savage would have, who, for the first time in 
his life seeing a man in armor, had supposed him to be 
made of solid steel. -Acquaint him with the customs of 
chivalry, and with the uses of the coat of mail, and he ceases 
to accuse of dishonesty either the panoply or the knight. 

These laws and customs of the St. Mark’s architectural 
chivalry it must be our business to develope. 

§ xxvi First, consider the natural circumstances which 
give rise to such a style. Suppose a nation of builders, 
placed far from any quarries of available stone, and having 
precarious access to the mainland where they exist ; compelled 
therefore either to build entirely with brick, or to import 
whatever stone they use from great distances, in ships of 
small tonnage, and for the most part dependent for speed on 
the oar rather than the sail. The labor and cost of carriage 
are just as great, whether they import common or precious 


8T. MARKS. 81 


stone, and therefore the uatural tendency would always be te 
make each shipload as valuable as possible. But in propor- 
tion to the preciousness of the stone, is the limitation of its 
possible supply ; limitation not determined merely by cost, 
but by the physical conditions of the material, for of many 
marbles, pieces above a certain size are not to be had for 
money. There would also be a tendency in such circume 
stances to import as much stone as possible ready sculptured, 
in order to save weight ; and therefore, if the traffic of theix' 
merchants led them to places where there were ruins of an- 
cient edifices, to ship the available fragments of them home. 
Out of this supply of marble, partly composed of pieces of so 
precious a quality that only a few tons of them could be on 
any terms obtained, and partly of shafts, capitals, and other 
portions of foreign buildings, the island architect has to 
fashion, as best. he may, the anatomy of his edifice. It is at 
his choice either to lodge his few blocks of precious marble 
here and there among his masses of brick, and to cut out of 
the sculptured fragments such new forms as may be necessary 
for the observance of fixed proportions in the new building ; 
or else to cut the colored stones into thin pieces, of extent 
sufficient to face the whole surface of the walls, and to adopt 
a method of construction irregular enough to admit the in- 
sertion of fragmentary sculptures ; rather with a view of dis- 
playing their intrinsic beauty, than of setting them to any 
regular service in the support of the building. 

An architect who cared only to display his own skill, and 
had no respect for the works of others, would assuredly have 
chosen the former alternative, and would have sawn the old 
marbles into fragments in order to prevent all interference 
with his own designs. But an architect who cared for the 
preservation of noble work, whether his own or others’, and 
more regorded the beauty of his building than his own 
fame, would have done what those old builders of St. Mark’s 
did for us, and saved every relic with which he was entrusted. 

§ xxvut. But these were not the only motives which influ- 
enced the Venetians in the adoption of their method of archi- 
tecture. It might, under all the circumstanves above stated, 

Vou. II.—6 


83 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


have been a question with other builders, whether to iraport 
one shipload of ‘costly jaspers, or twenty of chalk flints ; and 
whether to build a small’ church faced with porphyry ard 
paved with agate, or to raise a vast cathedral in freestone. 
But with the Venetians it could not be a question for an in- 
stant; they were exiles from ancient and beautiful cities, and 
had been accustomed to build with their ruins, not less in 
affection than in admiration: they had thus not only grown 
familiar with the practice of inserting older fragments in 
modern buildings, but they owed to that practice a great part 
of the splendor of their city, and whatever charm of associa- 
tion might aid its change from a Refuge intoa Home. The 
practice which began in the affections of a fugitive nation, 
was prolonged in the pride of a conquering one ; and beside 
the memorials of departed happiness, were elevated the 
trophies of returning victory. The ship of war brought home 
more marble in triumph than the merchant vessel in specula- 
tion ; and the front of St. Mark’s became rather a shrine at 
which to dedicate the splendor of miscellaneous spoil, than 
the organized expression of any fixed architectural law, or re- 
ligious emotion. 

§ xxviu. Thus far, however, the justification of the style of 
this church depends on circumstances peculiar to the time of 
its erection, and to the spot where it arose. The merit of 
its method, considered in the abstract, rests on far broader 
grounds. 

In the fifth chapter of the “Seven Lamps,” § 14, the reader 
will find the opinion of a modern architect of some reputation, 
Mr. Wood, that the chief thing remarkable in this church “‘is 
its extreme ugliness ;” and he will find this opinion associated ~ 
with another, namely, that the works of the Caracci are far 
preferable to those of the Venetian painters. This second 
statement of feeling reveals to us one of the principal causes 
of the first ; namely, that Mr. Wood had not any perception 
of color, or delight in it. The perception of color isa gift just 
as definitely granted to one person, and denied to another, as 
an ear for music ; and the very first requisite for true judg- 
ment of St. Mark’s, is the perfection of that color-faculty which 


ST. MAREK’S. 83 


few people ever set themselves seriously to find out whether 
they possess or not. Tor it is on its value as a piece of perfect 
and unchangeable coloring, that the claims of this edifice to 
our respect are finally rested ; and a deaf man might as well 
pretend to pronounce judgment on the merits of a full orches- 
tra, as an architect trained in the composition of form only, 
to discern the beauty of St. Mark’s. It possesses the charm 
of color in common with the greater part of the architecture, 
as well as of the manufactures, of the Fast ; but the Venetians 
deserve especial note as the only Kuropean people who ap- 
pear to have sympathized to the full with the great instinct 
of the Eastern races. ‘They indeed were compelled to bring 
artists from Constantinople to design the mosaics of the vaults 
of St. Mark’s, and to group the colors of its porches ; but they 
rapidly took up and developed, under more masculine condi- 
tions, the system of which the Greeks had shown them the 
example : while the burghers and barons of the North were 
building their dark streets and grisly castles of oak and sand- 
stone, the merchants of Venice were covering their palaces 
with porphyry and gold ; and at last, when her mighty paint- 
ers had created for her a color more priceless than gold or 
porphyry, even this, the richest of her treasures, she lavished 
upon walls whose foundations were beaten by the sea; and 
the strong tide, as it runs beneath the Rialto, is reddened to 
this day by the reflection of the frescoes of Giorgione. 
§ xxx. If, therefore, the reader does not care for color, I 
must protest against his endeavor to form any judgment what- 
ever of this church of St. Mark’s. But, if he both cares for 
and loves it, let him remember that the school of incrusted 
architecture is the only one in which perfect and permanent 
chromatic decoration is possible ; and let him look upon every 
piece of jasper and alabaster given to the architect as a cake 
of very hard color, of which a certain portion is to be ground 
down or cut. off, to paint the walls with. Once understand 
this thoroughly, and accept the condition that the body and 
availing strength of the edifice are to be in brick, and that 
this under muscular power of brickwork is to be clothed with 
tie defence aud the brightness of the marble, as the body of 


84. THRE STONES OF VERNICH. 


of an animal is protected and adorned by its scales or its skin, 
and all the consequent fitnesses and laws of the structure will 
be easily discernible : These I shall state in their natural order. 

§ xxx. Law I. That the plinths and cornices used for binding 
the armor are to be light and delicate. A certain thickness, at 
least two or three inches, must be required in the covering 
pieces (even when composed of the strongest stone, and set 
on the least exposed parts), in order to prevent the chance of 
fracture, and to allow for the-wear of time. And the weight 
of this armor must not be trusted to cement ; the pieces must 
not be merely glued to the rough brick surface, but connected 
with the mass which they protect by binding cornices and 
string courses ; and with each other, so as to secure mutual 
support, aided by the rivetings, but by no means dependent 
upon them. And, for the full honesty and straightforward- 
ness of the work, it is necessary that these string courses and 
binding plinths should not be of such proportions as would 
fit them for taking any important part in the hard work of the 
inner structure, or render them liable to be mistaken for the 
great cornices and plinths already explained as essential parts 
of the best solid building. They must be delicate, slight, and 
visibly incapable of severer work than that assigned to them. 

§ xxx. Law II. Science of inner structure is to be abandoned. 
As the body of. the structure is confessedly of inferior, and 
comparatively incoherent materials, it would be absurd to at- 
tempt in it any expression of the higher refinements of con- 
struction. It will be enough that by its mass we are assured 
of its sufficiency and strength ; and there is the less reason for 
endeavoring to diminish the extent of its surface by delicacy of 
adjustment, because on the breadth of that surface we are to ~ 
depend for the better display of the color, which is to be the 
chief source of our pleasure in the building. The main body 
of the work, therefore, will be composed of solid walls and 
massive piers; and whatever expression of finer structural 
science we may require, will be thrown either into subordinate 
portions of it, or entirely directed to the support of the exter: 
nal mail, where in arches or vaults it might otherwise appear 
dangerously independent of the material within. 


ST. MARR’S. 8S 


§ xxxu. Law IIL All shafts are to be solid. Wherever, by 
the smallness of the parts, we may be driven to abandon the in- 
crusted structure at all, it must be abandoned altogether. The 
eye must never be left in the least doubt as to what is solid 
and what is coated. Whatever appears probably solid, must be 
assuredly so, and therefore it becomes an inviolable law that no 
shaft shall ever be incrusted. Not only does the whole virtue 
of a shaft depend on its consolidation, but the labor of cut- 
ting and adjusting an incrusted coat to it would be greater than 
the saving of material is worth. Therefore the shaft, of what: 
ever size, is always to be solid ; and because the incrusted char- 
acter of the rest of the building renders it more difficult for 
the shafts to clear themselves from suspicion, they must not, 
im this incrusted style, be inany place jointed. No shaft must 
ever be used but of one block ; and this the more, because the 
permission given to the builder to have his walls and piers as 
ponderous as he likes, renders it quite unnecessary for him to 
use shafts of any fixed size. In our Norman and Gothic, 
where definite support is required at a definite point, it be-~ 
comes lawful to build up a tower of small stones in the shape 
of a shaft. But the Byzantine is allowed to have as much sup- 
port as he wants from the walls in every direction, and he has 
no right to ask for further license in the structure of his shafts. 
Let him, by generosity in the substance of his pillars, repay.us 
for the permission we have given him to be superficial in his 
walls. The builder in the chalk valleys of France and Eng- 
land may be blameless in kneading his clumsy pier out of 
broken flint and calcined lime; but the Venetian, who has 
access to the riches of Asia and the quarries of Egypt, must 
frame at least his shafts out of flawless stone. 

§ xxxm. And this for another reason yet. Although, as 
we have said, it is impossible to cover the walls of a large 
building vith color, except on the condition of dividing the 
stone into plates, there is always a certain appearance of mean- 
ness and niggardliness in the procedure. It is necessary that 
the builder should justify himself from this suspicion ; and 
prove that it is not in mere economy or poverty, but in the 
real impossibility of doing otherwise, that he has sheeted hig 


86 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


walls so thinly with the precious film. Now the shaft is ex 
actly the portion of the edifice in which it is fittest to recover 
his honor in this respect. or if blocks of jasper or porphyry 
be inserted in the walls, the spectator cannot tell their thick- 
ness, and cannot judge of the costliness of the sacrifice. But 
the shaft he can measure with his eye in an instant, and esti- 
mate the quantity of treasure both in the mass of its existing 
substance, and in that which has been hewn away to bring it 
into its perfect and symmetrical form. And thus the shafts 
of all buildings of this kind are justly regarded as an expres- 
sion of their wealth, and a form of treasure, just as much as 
the jewels or gold in the sacred vessels ; they are, in fact, 
nothing else than large jewels,* the block of precious serpen- 
tine or jasper being valued according to its size and brilhancy 
of color, like a large emerald or ruby ; only the bulk required 
to bestow value on the one is to be measured in feet and tons, 
and on the other in lines and carats. The shafts must there- 
fore be, without exception, of one biock in all buildings of 
this kind ; for the attempt in any place to incrust or joint 
them would be a deception like that of introducing a false 
stone among jewellery (for a number of joints of any precious 
stone are of course not equal in value to a single piece of 
equal weight), and would put an end at once to the spectator’s 
confidence in the expression of wealth in any portion of the 
structure, or of the spirit of sacrifice in those who raised it. 

§ xxxiv. Law IV. The shafts may sometimes be independ- 
ent of the construction. Exactly in proportion to the impor- 
tance which the shaft assumes as a large jewel, is the diminu- 
tion of its importance as a sustaining member ; for the delight 
which we receive in its abstract bulk, and beauty of color, is 
altogether independent of any perception of its adaptation to 
mechanical necessities. Like other beautiful things in this 


* ¢*Quivi presso si vedi una colonna di tanta bellezza e finezza che e 
riputato pirtosto gio che pietra.”—Sansorino, of the verd-antique pillar 
in San Jacomo dell’ Orio. A remarkable piece of natural history and 
moral philosophy, connected with this subject, will be found in the sec- 
ond chapter of our third volume, quoted from the work of a Florentine 
architect of the fifteenth century, 


ST. MARR’S. 87 


world, its end is to be beautiful; and, in proportion to its 
beauty, it receives permission to be otherwise useless. We 
do not blame emeralds and rubies because we cannot make 
them into heads of hammers. Nay, so far from our admira- 
tion of the jewel shaft being dependent on its doing work for 
us, it is very possible that a chief part of its preciousness may 
consist in a delicacy, fragility, and tenderness of material, 
which must render it utterly unfit for hard work ; and there- 
fore that we shall admire it the more, because we perceive that 
if we were to put much weight upon it, it would be crushed. 
But, at all events, it is very clear that the primal object in the 
placing of such shafts must be the display of their beauty to 
the best advantage, and that therefore all imbedding of them 
in walls, or crowding of them into groups, in any position in 
which either their real size or any portion of their surface 
would be concealed, is either inadmissible altogether, or ob- 
jectionable in proportion to their value; that‘no symmetrical 
or scientific arrangements of pillars are therefore ever to be 
expected in buildings of this kind, and that all such are even © 
to be looked upon as positive errors and misapplications of 
materials : but that, on the contrary, we must be constantly 
prepared to see, and to see with admiration, shafts of great 
size and importance set in places where their real service is 
little more than nominal, and where the chief end of their ex- 
istence is to catch the sunshine upon their polished sides, and 
lead the eye into delighted wandering among the mazes of 
their azure veins. 

§ xxxv. Law V. The shafts may be of variable size. Since the 
value of each shaft depends upon its bulk, and diminishes 
with the diminution of its mass, in a greater ratio than the 
size itself diminishes, as in the case of all other jewellery, it is 
evident that we must not in general expect perfect symmetry 
and equality among the series of shafts, any more than defi- 
niteness of application ; but that, on the contrary, an acru- 
rately observed symmetry ought to give us a kind of pain, as 
proving that considerable and useless loss has been sustained 
by some of the shafts, in being cut down to match with the 
rest, It is true that symmetry is generally sought for in 


88 THE STCNES OF VENICEL. 


works of smaller jewellery; but, even there, not a perfect 
symmetry, and obtained under circumstances quite different 
from those which affect the placing of shafts in architecture. 
First: the symmetry is usually imperfect. The stones that 
seem to match each other in a ring or necklate, appear to do 
so only because they are so small that their differences are not 
easily measured by the eye ; but there is almost always such 
difference between them as would be strikingly apparent if it 
existed in the same proportion between two shafts nine or ten 
feet in height. Secondly: the quantity of stones which pass 
through a jeweller’s hands, and the facility of exchange of 
such small objects, enable the tradesman to select any num- 
ber of stones of approximate size ; a selection, however, often 
requiring so much time, that perfect symmetry in a group of 
very fine stones adds enormously to their value. But the ar- 
chitect has neither the time nor the facilities of exchange. 
He cannot lay aside one column in a corner of his church till, 
in the course of traffic, he obtain another that will match it ; 
he has not hundreds of shafts fastened up in bundles, out of 
which he can match sizes at his ease; he cannot send toa 
brother-tradesmen and exchange the useless stones for avail- 
able ones, to the convenience of both. His blocks of stone, 
or his ready hewn shafts, have been brought to him in limited 
number, from immense distances ; no others are to be had ; 
and for those which he does not bring into use, there is no 
demand elsewhere. His only means of obtaining symmetry 
will therefore be, in cutting down the finer masses to equality 
with the inferior ones ; and this we ought not to desire him 
often to do. And therefore, while sometimes in a Baldac- 
chino, or an important chapel or shrine, this costly symmetry 
may be necessary, and admirable in proportion to its probable 
cost, in the general fabric we must expect to see shafts intro- 
duced of size and proportion continually varying, and such 
symmetry as may be obtained among them never altogether 
perfect, and dependent for its charm frequently on strange 
complexities and unexpected rising and falling of weight and 
accent in its marble syllables ; bearing the same relation to a 
rigidly chiselled and proportioned architecture that the wild 


ST. MARKS. 89 


tyric rhythm of Aischylus or Pindar bears to the finished 
measures of Pope. 

§ xxxvi. The application of the principles of jewellery to the 
smaller as well as the larger blocks, will suggest to us another 
reason for the method of incrustation adopted in the walls. It 
often happens that the beauty of the veining in some varieties 
of alabaster is so great, that it becomes desirable to exhibit it 
by dividing the stone, not merely to economize its substance, 
but to display the changes in the disposition of its fantas(’3 
lines. By reversing one of two thin plates successively taken 
from the stone, and placing their corresponding edges in con- 
tact, a perfectly symmetrical figure may be obtained, which 
will enable the eye to comprehend more thoroughly the posi- 
tion of the veins. And this is actually the method in which, 
for the most part, the alabasters of St. Mark are employed ; 
thus accomplishing a double good,—directing the spectator, 
in the first place, to close observation of the nature of the 
stone employed, and in the second, giving him a farther proof 
of the honesty of intention in the builder : for wherever simi- 
lar veining is discovered in two pieces, the fact is declared 
that they have been cut from the same stone. It would have 
been easy to disguise the similarity by using them in different 
parts of the building ; but on the contrary they are set edge 
to edge, so that the whole system of the architecture may be 
discovered at a glance by any one acquainted with the nature 
of the stonesemployed. Nay, but, it is perhaps answered mo, 
not by an ordinary observer ; a person ignorant of the naturo 
of alabaster might perhaps fancy all these symmetrical pat. 
terns to have been found in the stone itself, and thus be 
doubly deceived, supposing blocks to be solid and symmetrical 
which were in reality subdivided and irregular. I grant it ; 
but be it remembered, that in all things, ignorance is liable 
to be deceived, and has no right to accuse anything but itself 
as the source of the deception. The style and the words are 
dishonest, not which are liable to be misunderstood if sub- 
jected to no inquiry, but which are deliberately calculated ta 
Jead inquiry astray. There are perhaps no great or noble 
truths, from those of religion downwards, which present no 


90 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


mistakeable aspect to casual or ignorant contemplation. Botk 
the truth and the lie agree in hiding themselves at first, but 
the lie continues to hide itself with effort, as we approach to 
examine it ; and leads us, if undiscovered, into deeper lies; the 
truth reveals itself in proportion to our patience and knowl- 
edge, discovers itself kindly to our pleading, and leads us, 
as it is discovered, into deeper truths. 

§ xxxvi. Law VI. The decoration must be shallow in cutting. 
The method of construction being thus systematized, it is evi- 
dent that a certain style of decoration must arise out of it, 
based on the primal condition that over the greater part of 
the edifice there can be no deep cutting. The thin sheets of 
covering stones do not admit of it; we must not cut them 
through to the bricks ; and whatever ornaments we engrave 
upon them cannot, therefore, be more than an inch deep at 
the utmost. Consider for an instant the enormous differenceg 
which this single condition compels between the sculptural 
decoration of the incrusted style, and that of the solid stones 
of the North, which may be hacked and hewn into whatever 
cavernous hollows and black recesses we choose ; struck inte 
grim darknesses and grotesque projections, and rugged plough- 
ings up of sinuous furrows, in which any form or thought 
may be wrought out on any scale,—mighty statues with robes 
of rock and crowned foreheads burning in the sun, or venom- 
ous goblins and stealthy dragons shrunk into lurking-places 
of untraceable shade: think of this, and of the play and free 
dom given to the sculptor’s hand and temper, to smite out 
and in, hither and thither, as he will; and then consider 
what must be the different spirit of the design which is to be 
wrought on the smooth surface of a film of marble, where 
every line and shadow must be drawn with the most tender 
pencilling and cautious reserve of resource,—where even the 
chisel must not strike hard, lest it break through the delicate 
stone, nor the mind be permitted in any impetuosity of con- 
ception inconsistent with the fine discipline of the hand. Con. 
sider that whatever animal or human form is to be suggested, 
must be projected on a flat surface; that all the features of 
the countenance, the folds cf the drupery, the involutions of 


ST. MARK’S. 91 


the limbs, must be so reduced and subdued that the whole 
work becomes rather a piece of fine drawing than of sculpture; 
and then follow out, until you begin to perceive their end- 
lessness, the resulting differences of character which will be 
necessitated in every part of the ornamental designs of these 
incrusted churches, as compared with that of the Northern 
schools. I shall endeavor to trace a few of them only. 

§ xxxvut. The first would of course be a diminution of the 
builder’s dependence upon human form as a source of orna- 
ment : since exactly in proportion to the dignity of the form 
itself is the loss which it must sustain in being reduced to a 
shallow and linear bas-relief, as well as the difficulty of ex- 
pressing it at all under such conditions. Wherever sculpture 
can be solid, the nobler characters of the human form at once 
lead the artist to aim at its representation, rather than at that 
of inferior organisms ; but when all is to be reduced to out- 
line, the forms of flowers and lower animals are always more 
intelligible, and are felt to approach much more to a satisfac- 
tory rendering of the objects intended, than the outlines of 
the human body. This inducement to seek for resources of 
ornament in the lower fields of creation was powerless in the 
minds of the great Pagan nations, Ninevite, Greek, or Egyp- 
tian: first, because their thoughts were so concentrated on 
their own capacities and fates, that they preferred the rudest 
suggestion of human form to the best of an inferior organism ; 
secondly, because their constant practice in solid sculpture, 
often colossal, enabled them to bring a vast amount of science 
into the treatment of the lines, whether of the low relief, ihe 
monochrome vase, or shallow hieroglyphic. 

§ xxxrx. But when various ideas adverse to the representa- 
tion of animal, and especially of human, form, originating 
with the Arabs and iconoclast Greeks, had begun at any rate 
to direct tae builders’ minds to seek for decorative materials 
in inferior types, and when diminished practice in solid sculpt- 
ure had rendered it more difficult to find artists capable of 
satisfactorily reducing the high organisms to their element- 
ary outlines, the choice of subject for surface sculpture would 
be more and more uninterruptedly directed to floral organ. 


69 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


isms, and human and animal form would become diminished 
in size, frequency, and general importance. So that, while in 
the Northern solid architecture we constantly find the effect 
of its noblest features dependent on ranges of statues, often 
colossal, and full of abstract interest, independent of their 
architectural service, in the Southern incrusted style we must 
expect to find the human form for the most part subordinate 
and diminutive, and involved among designs of foliage and 
flowers, in the manner of which endless examples had been 
furnished by the fantastic ornamentation of the Romans, from 
which the incrusted style had been directly derived. 

§ xt. Farther. In proportion to the degree in which his 
subject must be reduced to abstract outline will be the ten- 
dency in the sculptor to abandon naturalism of representa- 
tion, and subordinate every form to architectural service. 
Where the flower or animal can be hewn into bold relief, 
there will always be a temptation to render the representa- 
tion of it more complete than is necessary, or even to intro- 
duce details and intricacies inconsistent with simplicity of 
distant effect. Very often a worse fault than this is commit- 
te 1; and in the endeavor to give vitality to the stone, the 
original ornamental purpose of the design is sacrificed or for- 
gotten. But when nothing of this kind can be attempted, and 
a slight outline is all that the sculptor can command, we may 
anticipate that this outline will be composed with exquisite 
grace ; and that the richness of its ornamental arrangement 
will atone for the feebleness of its power of portraiture. On 
the porch of a Northern cathedral we may seek for the images 
of the flowers that grow in the neighboring fields, and as we 
watch with wonder the grey stones that fret themselves into 
thorns, and soften into blossoms, we may care little that these 
knots of ornament, as we retire from them to contemplate the 
whole building, appear unconsidered or confused. On the 
incrusted building we must expect no such deception of the 
eye or thoughts. It may sometimes be difficult to determine, 
from the involutions of its linear sculpture, what were the 
natural forms which vriginally suggested them: but we may 
confidently expect that the grace of their arrangement wil 


8T. MARE'S 98 


always be complete; that there will not be a line in them 
which could be taken away without injury, nor one wanting 
which could be added with advantage. 

§ xut Farther. While the sculptures of the incrusted 
school will thus be generally distinguished by care and 
purity rather than force, and will be, for the most part, ut: 
terly wanting in depth of shadow, there will be one means of 
obtaining darkness peculiarly simple and obvious, and often 
in the sculptor’s power. Wherever he can, without danger, 
leave a hollow behind his covering slabs, or use them, like 
glass, to fill an aperture in the wall, he can, by piercing them 
with holes, obtain points or spaces of intense blackness to 
contrast with the light tracing of the rest of his design. And 
we may expect to find this artifice used the more extensively, 
because, while it will be an effective means of ornamentation 
on the exterior of the building, it will be also the safest way 
of admitting light to the interior, still totally excluding both 
rain and wind. And it will naturally follow that the archi- 
tect, thus familiarized with the effect of black and sudden 
points of shadow, will often seek to carry the same principle 
into other portions of his ornamentation, and by deep drill- 
holes, or perhaps inlaid portions of black color, to refresh the 
eye where it may be wearied by the lightness of the general 
handling. 

§ xtu. Farther. Exactly in proportion to the degree in 
which the force of sculpture is subdued, will be the impor- 
tance attached to color as a means of effect or constitu- 
ent of beauty. Ihave above stated that the incrusted style 
was the only one in which perfect or permanent color dec- 
oration was possible. It is also the only one in which a 
true system of color decoration was ever likely to be invented. 
In order to understand this, the reader must permit me to re- 
view with some care the nature of the principles of coloring 
adopted by the Northern and Southern nations. 

§ xu. I believe that from the beginning of the world there 
has never been a true or fine school of art in which color was 
despised. It has often been imperfectly attained and injudi+ 
ciously applied, but I believe it to be one of the essential signa 

Stones of Venice—Vol. IT.—5 


94 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


of life in a school of art, that it loves color ; and I know it to 
be one of the first signs of death in the Renaissance schools, 
that they despise color. 

Observe, it is not now the question whether our Northern 
cathedrals are better with color or without. Perhaps the 
great monotone grey of Nature and of Time is a better color 
than any that the human hand can give; but that is nothing 
to our present business. The simple fact is, that the builders 
of those cathedrals laid upon them the brightest colors they 
could obtain, and that there is not, as far as I am aware, in 
Kurope, any monument of a truly noble school which has not 
been either painted all over, or vigorously touched with paint, 
mosaic, and gilding in its prominent parts. Thus far Egyp- 
tians, Greeks, Goths, Arabs, and medizval Christians all agree: 
none of them, when in their right senses, ever think of doing 
without paint; and therefore, when I said above that the 
Venetians were the only people who had thoroughly sympa- 
thized with the Arabs in this respect, I referred, first, to.their 
intense love of color, which led them to lavish the most ex- 
pensive decorations on ordinary dwelling-houses ; and, sec- 
ondly, to that perfection of the color-instinct in them, which 
enabled them to render whatever they did, in this kind, as 
just in principle as it was gorgeous in appliance. It is this 
principle of theirs, as distinguished from that of the Northern 
builders, which we have finally to examine. 

§ xtiv. In the second chapter of the first volume, it was 
noticed that the architect of Bourges Cathedral liked haw- 
thorn, and that the porch of his cathedral was therefore dec- 
orated with a rich wreath of it ; but another of the predilec- 
tions of that architect was there unnoticed, namely, that he 
did not at all like grey hawthorn, but preferred it green, and 
he painted it green accordingly, as bright as he could. The 
color is still left in every sheltered interstice of the foliage. 
He had, in fact, hardly the choice of any other color ; he might 
have gilded the thorns, by way of allegorizing human life, but 
if they were to be painted at all, they could hardly be painted 
anything but green, and green all over. People would have 
been apt to object to any pursuit of abstract harmonies of 


ST. MARK’S. 95 


color, which might have induced him to paint bis hawthorn 
blue. 

§ xtv. In the same way, whenever the subject of the sculpt- 
ure was definite, its color was of necessity definite also ; and, 
in the hands of the Northern builders, it often became, in 
consequence, rather the means of explaining and animating 
the stories of their stone-work, than a matter of abstract deco- 
rative science. Flowers were painted red, trees green, and 
faces flesh-color ; the result of the whole being often far more 
entertaining than beautiful. And also, though in the lines of 
the mouldings and the decorations of shafts or vaults, a richer | 
and more abstract method of coloring was adopted (aided by 
the rapid development of the best principles of color in early 
glass-painting), the vigorous depths of shadow in the Northern 
sculpture confused the architect's eye, compelling him to use 
violent colors in the recesses, if these were to be seen as color 
at all, and thus injured his perception of more delicate color 
harmonies ; so that in innumerable instances it becomes very 
disputable whether monuments even of the best times were 
improved by the color bestowed upon them, or the contrary. 
But, in the South, the flatness and comparatively vague forms 
of the sculpture, while they appeared to call for color in order 
to enhance their interest, presented exactly the conditions 
which would set it off to the greatest advantage ; breadth of 
surface displaying even the most delicate tints in the lights, 
and faintness of shadow joining with the most delicate and 
pearly greys of color harmony ; while the subject of the design 
being in nearly all‘cases reduced to mere intricacy of orna- 
mental line, might be colored in any way the architect chose 
without any loss of rationality. Where oak-leaves and roses 
were carved into fresh relief and perfect bloom, it was neces- 
sary to paint the one green and the other red; but in portions 
of orname:tation where there was nothing which could be 
definitely construed into either an oak-leaf or a rase, but a 
mere labyrinth of beautiful lines, becoming here something 
likea leaf, and there something like a flower, the whole tracery 
of the sculpture might be left white, and grounded with gold 
or blue, or treated in any other manner best harmonizing with 


96 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


the colors around it. And as the necessarily feeble character 
of the sculpture called for and was ready to display the best 
arrangements of color, so the precious marbles in the archi- 
tect’s hands give him at once the best examples and the best 
means of color. The best examples, for the tints of all natural 
stones are as exquisite in quality as endless in change; and 
the best means, for they are all permanent. 

§ xvi. Every motive thus concurred in urging him to the 
study of chromatic decoration, and every advantage was given 
him in the pursuit of it; and this at the very moment when, 
as presently to be noticed, the naiveté of barbaric Christianity 
could only be forcibly appealed to by the help of colored pict- 
ures: so that, both externally and internally, the architectu- 

‘ral construction became partly merged in pictorial effect ; and 

the whole edifice is to be regarded less as a temple wherein 
to pray, than as itself a Book of Common Prayer, a vast illumi- 
nated missal, bound with alabaster instead of parchment, 
studded with porphyry pillars instead of jewels, and written 
within and without in letters of enamel and gold. 

§ xtvu. Law VIL That the impression of the architecture is 
not to be dependent on size. And now there is but one final 
consequence to be deduced. The reader understands, I trust, 
by this time, that the claims of these several parts of the build- 
ing upon his attention will depend upon their delicacy of de- 
sign, their perfection of color, their preciousness of material, 
and their legendary interest. All these qualities are indepen- . 
dent of size, and partly even inconsistent with it. Neither deli- 
cacy of surface sculpture, nor subtle gradations of color, can 
be appreciated by the eye at a distance; and since we have 
seen that our sculpture is generally to be only an inch or two 
in depth, and that our coloring is in great part to be produced 
with the soft tints and veins of natural stones, it will follow 
necessarily that none of the parts of the building can be re- 
moved far from the eye, and therefore that the whole mass of 
it cannot be large. It is not even desirable that it should be 
so ; for the temper in which the mind addresses itself to con- 
template minute and beautiful details is altogether different 
from that in which it submits itself to vague impressions of 


ST. MARK’'S, 97 


space and size. And therefore we must not be disappointed, 
but grateful, when we find all the best work of the building 
concentrated within a space comparatively small ; and that, for 
the great cliff-like buttresses and mighty piers of the North, 
shooting up into indiscernible height, we have here low walls 
spread before us like the pages of a book, and shafts whose 
capitals we may touch with our hand. 

§xitvut The due consideration of the principles alias 
stated will enable the traveller to judge with more candor and 
justice of the architecture of St. Mark’s than usually it would 
have been possible for him to do while under the influence of 
the prejudices necessitated by familiarity with the very differ- 
ent schools of Northern art. I wish it were in my power to 
lay also before the general reader some exemplification of the 
manner in which these strange principles are developed in the 
lovely building. But exactly in proportion to the nobility of 
any work, is the difficulty of conveying a just impression of 
it ; and wherever I have occasion to bestow high praise, there 
it is exactly most dangerous for me to endeavor to illustrate 
my meaning, except by reference to the work itself. And, in 
fact, the principal reason why architectural criticism is at this 
day so far behind all other, is the impossibility of illustrating 
the best architecture faithfully. Of the various schools of 
painting, examples are accessible to every one, and reference 
to the works themselves is found sufficient for all purposes of 
criticism ; but there is nothing like St. Mark’s or the Ducal 
Palace to be referred to in the National Gallery, and no faith- 
ful illustration of them is possible an the scale of such a vol- 
ume as this. And it is exceedingly difficult on any scale. 
Nothing is so. rare in art, as far as my own experience goes, 
as a fair illustration of architecture ; perfect illustration of it 
does not exist. For all good architecture depends upon the 
adaptation of its chiselling to the effect at a certain distance 
from the eye; and to render the peculiar confusion in the 
midst of order, and uncertainty in the midst of decision, and 
mystery in the midst of trenchant lines, which are the result 
of distance, together with perfect expression of the peculiar- 
ities of the design, requires the skill of the most admirable 

Vou, Il.—7 


9S THE STONES OF VHNICE. 


artist, devoted to the work with the most severe conscientious. 
ness, neither the skill nor the determination having as yet 
been given to the subject. And in the illustration of details, 
every building of any pretensions to high architectural rank 
would require a volume of plates, and those finished with 
extraordinary care. With respect to the two buildings which 
are the principal subjects of the present volume, St. Mark’s 
and the Ducal Palace, I have found it quite impossible to do 
them the slightest justice by any kind of portraiture ; and I 
abandoned the endeavor in the ease of the latter with less re- 
gret, because in the new Crystal Palace (as the poetical public 
insist upon calling it, though it is neither a palace, nor of erys- 
tal) there will be placed, I believe, a noble cast of one of itg 
angles. As for St. Mark’s, the effort was hopeless from the 
beginning. For its effect depends not only upon the most 
delicate sculpture in every part, but, as we have just stated, 
eminently on its color also, and that the most subtle, vari- 
able, inexpressible color in the world,—the color of glass, of 
transparent alabaster, of polished marble, and lustvous gold. 
It would be easier to illustrate a crest of Scottish mountain, 
with its purple heather and pale harebells at their fullest and 
fairest, or a glade of Jura forest, with its floor of anemone and 
moss, than a’ single portico of St. Mark’s. The fragment of 
one of its archivolts, given at the bottom of the opposite Plate, 
is not to illustrate the thing itself, but to illustrate the impos- 
sibility of illustration. 

§ xux. It is left a fragment, in order to get it ona larger 
scale; and yet even on this scale it is too small to show the 
sharp folds and points of the marble vine-leaves with sufficient 
clearness. The ground of it is gold, the sculpture in the’ 
spandrils is not more than an inch and a valf deep, rarely so 
much. It is in fact nothing more than an exquisite sketching 
of outlines in marble, to about the same depth as in the Elgin 
frieze ; the draperies, however, being filled with close folds, 
in the manner of the Byzantine pictures, folds especially 
necessary here, as large masses could not be expressed in the 
shallow sculpture without becoming insipid; but the disposi- 
tion of these folds is always most beautiful, and often opposed 


PLATE VI.—THE VINE. FREE, AND IN SERVICE, 


ST. MARK’S. 9$ 


by broad and simple spaces, like that obtained by the scroll 
in the hand of the prophet, seen in the plate. 

The balls in the archivolt project considerably, and the in- 
terstices between their interwoven bands of marble are filled 
with colors like the illuminations of a manuscript ; violet, 
crimson, blue, gold, and green alternately: but no green is 
ever used without an intermixture of blue pieces in the mo- 
saic, nor any blue without a little centre of pale green ; some- 
times only a single piece of glass a quarter of an inch square, 
so subtle was the feeling for color which was thus to be satis- 
fied.* The intermediate circles have golden stars set on an 
azure ground, varied in the same manner; and the small 
crosses seen in the intervals are alternately blue and subdued 
scarlet, with two small circles of white set in the golden 
ground above and beneath them, each only about half an inch 
across (this work, remember, being on the outside of the 
building, and twenty feet above the eye), while the blue 
crosses have each a pale green centre. Of all this exquisitely 
mingled hue, no plate, however large or expensive, could give 
any adequate conception ; but, if the reader will supply in 
imagination to the engraving what he supplies to a common 
woodcut of a group of flowers, the decision of the respective 
merits of modern and of Byzantine architecture may be al- 
lowed to rest on this fragment of St. Mark’s alone. 

From the vine-leaves of that archivolt, though there is no 
direct imitation of nature in them, but on the contrary a stu- 
dious subjection to architectural purpose more particularly 
to be noticed hereafter, we may yet receive the same kind 
of pleasure which we have in seeing true vine-leaves and 
wreathed branches traced upon golden light; its stars upon 
their azure ground ought to make us remember, as its builder 
remembered, the stars that ascend and fall in the great arch 
of the sky: and I believe that stars, and boughs, and leaves, 
and bright colors are everlastingly lovely, and to be by all 


* The fact is, that no two tesserz of the glass are exactly of the same 
fint. the greens being all varied with blues, the blues of different depths, 
the reds of different clearness, so that the effect of each mass of color is 
full of variety, like the stippled color of a fruit piece. 


100 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


men beloved ; and, moreover, that church walls grimly seared 
with squared lines, are not better nor nobler things than 
these. I believe the man who designed and the men who de- 
lighted in that archivolt to have been wise, happy, and holy. 
Let the reader look back to the archivolt I have already given 
out of the streets of London (Plate XIII. Vol. L.), and see what 
there is in it to make us any of the three. Let him remem- 
ber that the men who design such work as that call St. Mark’s 
a barbaric monstrosity, and let him judge between us. 

§ u. Some farther details of the St. Mark’s architecture, and 
especially a general account of Byzantine capitals, and of the 
principal ones at the angles of the church, will be found in 
the following chapter.* Here I must pass on to the second 
part of our immediate subject, namely, the inquiry how far 
the exquisite and varied ornament of St. Mark’s fits it, asa 
Temple, for its sacred purpose, and would be applicable in 
the churches of modern times. We have here evidently two 
questions: the first, that wide and continually agitated one, 
whether richness of ornament be right in churches at all; the 
second, whether the ornament of St. Mark’s be of a truly ec- 
clesiastical and Christian character. 

§ u1. In the first chapter of the “Seven Lamps of Architect- 
ure” I endeavored to lay before the reader some reasons why 
churches ought to be richly adorned, as being the only places 
in which the desire of offering a portion of all precious things 
to God could be legitimately expressed. But I left wholly 
untouched the question : whether the church, as such, stood 
in need of adornment, or would be better fitted for its pur- 
poses by possessing it. This question I would now ask the 
reader to deal with briefly and candidly. 

The chief difficulty in deciding it has arisen from its being 
always presented to us in an unfair form. It is asked of us, 
or we ask of ourselves, whether the sensation which we now 
feel in passing from our own modern dwelling-house, through 
a newly built street, into a cathedral of the thirteenth century, 

* Some illustration, also, of what was said in § xxxmi. above, respect- 


ing the value of the shafts of St. Mark’s as large jewels, will be found 
in Appendix 9, ‘Shafts of St. Mark’s,” 


ST. MARE’S. 101 


be safe or desirable as a preparation for public worship. But 
we never ask whether that sensation was at all calculated upon 
by the builders of the cathedral. 

§ ro. Now I do not say that the contrast of the ancient 
with the modern building, and the strangeness with which 
the earlier architectural forms fall upon the eye, are at this 
day disadvantageous. But I do say, that their: effect, what- 
ever it may be, was entirely uncalculated upon by the old 
builder. He endeavored to make his work beautiful, but 
never expected it to be strange. And we incapacitate our- 
selves-altogether from fair judgment of its intention, if we for- 
eet that, when it was built, it rose in the midst of other work 
fanciful and beautiful as itself; that every dwelling-house in 
the middle ages was rich with the same ornaments and quaint 
with the same grotesques which fretted the porches or ani- 
mated the gargoyles of the cathedral; that what we now re- 
gard with doubt and wonder, as well as with delight, was then 
the natural continuation, into the principal edifice of the city, 
of a style which was familiar to every eye throughout all its 
lanes and streets; and that the architect had often no more 
idea of producing a peculiarly devotional impression by the 
richest color and the most elaborate carving, than the builder 
of a modern meeting-house has by his white-washed walls and 
square-cut casements.* 

§ um. Let the reader fix this great fact well in his mind, 
and then follow out its important corollaries. We attach, in 
modern days, a kind of sacredness to the pointed arch and the 
groined roof, because, while we look habitually out of square 
windows and live under flat ceilings, we meet with the more 
beautiful forms in the ruins of our abbeys. But when those 
abbeys were built, the pointed arch was used for every shop 
door, as well as for that of the cloister, and the feudal baron 
and freebooter feasted, as the monk sang, under vaulted roofs; 
not because the vaulting was thought especially appropriate to 
either the revel or psalm, but because it was then the form in 
which a strong roof was easiest built. We have destroyed the 
goodly architecture of our cities; we have substituted one 

* See the farther notice of this subject in Vol. III. Chap. IV, 


102 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


wholly devoid of beauty or meaning ; and then we reason re 
specting the strange effect upon our minds of the fragments 
which, fortunately, we have left in our churches, as if those 
churches had always been designed to stand out in strong 
relief from all the buildings around them, and Gothic archi- 
tecture had always been, what it is now, a religious language, 
like Monkish Latin. Most readers know, if they would arouse 
their knowledge, that this was not so ; but they take no pains 
to reason the matter out: they abandon themselves drowsily 
to the impression that Gothic is a peculiarly ecclesiastical 
style ; and sometimes, even, that richness in church ornament 
is a condition or furtherance of the Romish religion. Un- 
doubtedly it has become so in modern times: for there being 
no beauty in our recent architecture, and much in the remains 
of the past, and these remains being almost exclusively eccle- 
siastical, the High Church and Romanist parties have not been 
slow in availing themselves of the natural instincts which were 
deprived of all food except from this source ; and have will- 
ingly promulgated the theory, that because all the good 
architecture that is now left is expressive of High Church or 
Romanist doctrines, all good architecture ever has been and 
must be so,—a piece of absurdity from which, though here 
and there a country clergyman may innocently believe it, I 
hope the common sense of the nation wil) soon manfully quit 
itself. It needs but little inquiry into the spirit of the past, 
to ascertain what, once for all, I would desire here clearly and 
forcibly to assert, that wherever Christian church architecture 
has been good and lovely, it has been merely the perfect de- 
velopment of the common dwelling-house architecture of the 
period ; that when the pointed arch was used in the street, it © 
was used in the church ; when the round arch was used in 
the street, it was used in the church ; when the pinnacle was 
set over the garret window, it was set over the: belfry tower ; 
when the flat roof was used for the drawing-room, it was used 
for the nave. There is no sacredness in round arches, nor in 
pointed ; none in pinnacles, nor in buttresses ; none in pil- 
lars, nor in traceries. Churches were larger than most other 
buildings, hecause they had to hold more people; they were 


ST. MARK’S. 1038 


more adorned than most other buildings, because they were 
safer from violence, and were the fitting subjects of devotional 
offering : but they were never built in any separate, mystical, 
and religious style ; they were built in the manner that was 
common and familiar to everybody at the time. The flam- 
boyant traceries that adorn the facade of Rouen Cathedral 
had once their fellows in every window of every house in the 
market-place ; the sculptures that adorn the porches of St. 
Mark’s had once their match on the walls of every palace on 
the Grand Canal; and the only difference between the church 
and the dwelling-house was, that there existed a symbolical 
meaning in ‘the distribution of the parts of all buildings 
meent for worship, and that the painting or sculpture was, in 
the one case, less frequently of profane subject than in the 
other. A more severe distinction cannot be drawn : for secu- 
lar history was constantly introduced into church archyjecture ; 
and sacred history or allusion generally formed at least one 
half of the ornament of the dwelling-house. 

§ uv. This fact is so important, and so little considered, 
that I must be pardoned for dwelling upon it at some length, 
and accurately marking the limits of the assertion I have 
made. Ido not mean that every dwelling-house of medizval 
cities was as richly adorned and as exquisite in composition as 
the fronts of their cathedrals, but that they presented features 
of the same kind, often in parts quite as beautiful ; and that 
the churches were not separated by any change of style from 
the buildings round them, as they are now, but were merely 
more finished and full examples of a universal style, rising out 
of the confused streets of the city as an oak tree does out of 
an oak copse, not differing in leafage, but in size and sym- 
metry. Of course the quainter and smaller forms of turret 
and window necessary for domestic service, the inferior ma- 
terials, often wood instead of stone, and the fancy of the in: 
habitants, which had free play in the design, introduced odd: 
nesses, vulgarities, and variations into house architecture, 
which were prevented by the traditions, the wealth, and the 
skill of the monks and freemasons ; while, on the other hand, 
conditions of vaulting, buttressing, and arch and tower build: 


104 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


ing, were necessitated by the mere size of the cathedral, of 
which it would be difficult to find examples elsewhere. But 
there was nothing more in these features than the adaptation 
of mechanical skill to vaster requirements ; there was nothing 
intended to be, or felt to be, especially ecclesiastical in any of 
the forms so developed ; and the inhabitants of every village 
and city, when they furnished funds for the decoration of 
their church, desired merely to adorn the house of God as 
they adorned their own, only a little more richly, and with a 
somewhat graver temper in the subjects of the carving. Even 
this last. difference is not always clearly discernible : all man- 
ner of ribaldry occurs in the details of the ecclesiastical build- 
ings of the North, and at the time when the best of them were 
built, every man’s house was a kind of temple ; a figure of the 
Madonna, or of Christ, almost always occupied a niche over 
the principal door, and the Old Testament histories were 
curiously interpolated amidst the grotesques of the brackets 
and the gables. 

§ xv. And the reader will now perceive that the question 
respecting fitness of church decoration rests in reality on 
totally different grounds from those commonly made founda- 
tions of argument. So long as our streets are walled with bar- 
ren brick, and our eyes rest continually, in our daily life, on 
objects utterly ugly, or of inconsistent and meaningless design, 
it may be a doubtful question whether the faculties of eye 
and mind which are capable of perceiving beauty, having been 
left without food during the whole of our active life, should 
be suddenly feasted upon entering a place of worship ; and 
color, and music, and sculpture should delight the senses, and 
stir the curiosity of men unaccustomed to such appeal, at the 
moment when they are required to compose themselves for 
acts of devotion ;—this, I say, may be a doubtful question: 
but it cannot be a question at all, that if once familiarized 
with beautiful form and color, and accustomed to see in what- 
ever human hands have executed for us, even for the lowest 
services, evidence of noble thought and admirable skill, we 
shall desire to see this evidence also in whatever is built or 
labored for the house of prayer ; that the absence of the ac - 


ST, MARK’S. 108 


eustomed loveliness would disturb instead of assisting devo- 
tion ; and that we should feel it as vain to ask whether, with 
our own house full of goodly craftsmanship, we should wor- 
ship God in a house destitute of it, as to ask whether a pilgrim 
whose day’s journey had led him through fair woods and by 
sweet waters, must at evening turn aside into some barren 
place to pray. 

§ xv. Then the second question submitted to us, whether 
the ornament of St. Mark’s be truly ecclesiastical and Chris- 
tian, is evidently determined together with the first ; for, if 
not only the permission of ornament at all, but the beautiful 
execution of it, be dependent on our being familiar with it in 
daily life, it will follow that no style of noble architecture can 
be exclusively ecclesiastical. ‘It must be practised in the dwell- 
ing before it be perfected in the church, and it is the test of a 
noble style that it shall be applicable to both ; for if essen- 
tially false and ignoble, it may be made to fit the dwelling- 
house, but never can be made to fit the church: and just as 
there are many principles which will bear the light of the 
world’s opinion, yet will not bear the light of God’s word, 
while all principles which will bear the test of Scripture will 
also bear that of practice, so in architecture there are many 
forms which expediency and convenience may apparently jus- 
tify, or at least render endurable, in daily use, which will yet 
be found offensive the moment they are used for church service 3 
but there are none good for church service, which cannot bear 
daily use. Thus the Renaissance manner of building is a con- 
venient style for dwelling-houses, but the natural ‘sense of all 
religious men causes them to turn from it with pain when it 
has been used in churches; and this has given rise to the 
popular idea that the Roman style is good for houses and the 
Gothic for churches. This is not so; the Roman style is es- 
sentially base, and we can bear with it only so long asit gives 
us convenient windows and spacious rooms ; the moment the 
question of ‘convenience is set aside, and the expression or 
beauty of the style is tried by its being used in a church, we 
find it fail. But because the Gothic and Byzantine styles are 
fit for churches they are not therefore less fit for dwellings 


106 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


They are in the highest sense fit and good for both, nor were 
they ever brought to perfection except where they were used 
for both. 

§ tv But there is one character of Byzantine work which, 
according to the time at which it was employed, may be con- 
sidered as either fitting or unfitting it for distinctly ecclesias- 
tical purposes ; I mean the essentially pictorial character of ita 
decoration. We have already seen what large surfaces it 
leaves void of bold architectural features, to be rendered 
interesting merely by surface ornament or sculpture. In this 
respect Byzantine work differs essentially from pure Gothic 
styles, which are capable of filling every vacant space by feat- 
ures purely architectural, and may be rendered, if we please, 
altogether independent of pictorial aid, A Gothic church may 
be rendered impressive by mere successions of arches, accumu. 
lations of niches, and entanglements of tracery. But a Byzan- 
tine church requires expression and interesting decoration 
over vast plane surfaces,—decoration which becomes noble 
only by becoming pictorial ; that is to say, by representing 
natural objects,—men, animals, or flowers. And, therefore, 
the question whether the Byzantine style be fit for church 
service in modern days, becomes involved in the inquiry, what 
effect upon religion has been or may yet be produced by pic- 
torial art, and especially by the art of the mosaicist ? 

§ rvm. The more I have examined the subject the more 
dangerous I have found it to dogmatize respecting the charac- 
ter of the art which is likely, at a given period, to be most 
useful to the cause of religion. One great fact first meets me, 
I cannot answer for the experience of others, but I never yet 
met with a Christian whose heart was thoroughly set upon the - 
world to come, and, so far as human judgment could pro- 
nounce, perfect and right before God, who cared about art at 
all. Ihave known several very noble Christian men who loved 
it intensely, but in them there was always traceable some en- 
tanglement of the thoughts with the matters of this world, 
causing them to fall into strange distresses and doubts, and 
often leading them into what they themselves would confess te 
be errors in understanding, or even failures in duty. I do not 


8T. MARK’S. 107 


say that these men may not, many of them, be in very deed 
nobler than those whose conduct is more consistent ; they may 
be more tender in the tone of all their feelings, and farther< 
sighted in soul, and for that very reason exposed to greater 
trials and fears, than those whose hardier frame and naturally 
narrower vision enable them with less effort to give their 
hands to God and walk with Him. But still, the general fact 
is indeed so, that I have never knowna man who seemed alto- 
gether right and calm in faith, who seriously cared about art; 
and when casually moved by it, it is quite impossible to say 
beforehand by what class of art this impression will on such 
mer be made. Very often it is by a theatrical commonplace, 
more frequently still by false sentiment. I believe that the 
four painters who have had, and still have, the most influence, 
such as it is, on the ordinary Protestant Christian mind, are 
Carlo Dolci, Guercino, Benjamin West, and John Martin. 
Raphael, much as he is talked about, is, I believe in very fact, 
rarely looked at by religious people ; much less his master, or 
any of the truly great religious men of old. Buta smooth - 
Magdalen of Carlo Dolci with a tear on each cheek, or a Guer- 
cino Christ or St. John, or a Scripture illustration of West’s, 
or a black cloud with a flash of lightning in it of Martin’s, 
sarely fails of being verily, often deeply, felt for the time. 

§ tix. There are indeed many very evident reasons for this ; 
the chief one being that, as all truly great religious painters 
have been hearty Romanists, there are none of their works 
which do not embody, in some portions of them, definitely 
Romanist doctrines. The Protestant mind is instantly struck 
by these, and offended by them, so as to be incapable of enter- 
ing, or at least rendered indisposed to enter, farther into the 
heart of the work, or to the discovering those deeper charac- 
ters of it, which are not Romanist, but Christian, in the ever- 
lasting senss and power of Christianity. Thus most Protes- 
tants, entering for the first time a Paradise of Angelico, would 
be irrevocably offended by finding that the first person the 
painter wished them to speak to was St. Dominic; and would 
setire from such a heaven as speedily as possible,—not giving 
theméelves time to discover. that whether dressed in black, of 


108 THE STONES OF VENIOR,. 


white, or grey, and by whatever name in the calendar they 
might be called, the figures that filled that Angelico heaven 
were indeed more saintly, and pure, and full of love in every 
feature, than any that the human hand ever traced before or 
since. And thus Protestantism, having foolishly sought for 
the little help it requires at the hand of painting from the 
men who embodied no Catholic doctrine, has been reduced to 
receive it from those who believed neither Catholicism nor 
Protestantism, but who read the Bible in search of the pict- 
uresque. We thus refuse to regard the painters who passed 
their lives in prayer, but are perfectly ready to be taught by 
those who spent them in debauchery. There is perhaps no 
more popular Protestant picture than Salvator’s “ Witch of 
Endor,” of which the subject was chosen by the painter simply 
because, under the names of Saul and the Sorceress, he could 
paint a captain of banditti, and a Neapolitan hag. 

§ ux. The fact seems to be that strength of religious feel- 
ing is capable of supplying for itself whatever is wanting in 
the rudest suggestions of art, and will either, on the one hand, 
purify what is coarse into inoffensiveness, or, on the other, 
raise what is feeble into impressiveness. Probably all art, as 
such, is unsatisfactory to it ; and the effort which it makes to 
supply the void will be induced rather by association and acci- 
dent than by the real merit of the work submitted to it. The 
likeness to a beloved friend, the correspondence with a ha- 
bitual conception, the freedom from any strange or offensive 
particularity, and, above all, an interesting choice of incident, 
will win admiration for a picture when the noblest efforts of 
religious imagination would otherwise fail of power. How 
much more, when to the quick capacity of emotion is joined © 
a childish trust that the picture does indeed represent a fact! 
It matters little whether the fact be well or ill told; the 
moment we believe the picture to be true, we complain little 
of its being ill-painted. Let it be considered for a moment, 
whether the child, with its colored print, inquiring eagerly 
and gravely which is Joseph, and which is Benjamin, is not 
more capable of receiving a strong, even a sublime, impression 
‘rom the rude symbol which it invests with reality by its own 


ST. MARRS. 10% 


effort, than the connoisseur who admires the grouping of the 
three figures in Raphael’s “Telling of the Dreams;” and 
whether also, when the human mind is in right religious tone, 
it has not always this childish power—lI speak advisedly, this 
power—a noble one, and possessed more in youth than at any 
period of after life, but always, I think, restored in a measure 
by religion—of raising into sublimity and reality the rudest 
symbol which is given to it of accredited truth. 

§ uxt. Ever since the period of the Renaissance, however, 
the truth has not been accredited; the painter of religious 
subject is no longer regarded as the narrator of a fact, but as 
the inventor of an idea.* We do not severely criticise the 
manner in which a.true history is told, but we become harsh 
investigators of the faults of an invention ; so that in the mod- 
ern religious mind, the capacity of emotion, which renders 
judgment uncertain, is joined with an incredulity which ren- 
ders it severe ; and this ignorant emotion, joined with igno- 
rant observance of faults, is the worst possible temper in which 
any art can be regarded, but more especially sacred art. For 
as religious faith renders emotion facile, so also it generally 
renders expression simple; that is to say a truly religious 
painter will very often be ruder, quainter, simpler, and more 
faulty in his manner of working, than a great irreligious one. 
And it was in this artless utterance, and simple acceptance, on 
the part of both the workman and the beholder, that all noble 
schools of art have been cradled ; it is in them that they must 
be cradled to the end of time. It is impossible to calculate 


* IT do not mean that modern Christians believe less in the facts than 
ancient Christians, but they do not believe in the representation of the 
facts as true. We look upon the picture as this or that painter's concep- 
tion ; the elder Christians looked upon it as this or that painters de- 
scription of what had actually taken place. And in the Greek Church 
all painting is, to this day, strictly a branch of tradition. See M. Dide- 
rons admirably written introduction to his Iconographie Chrétienne, p. 
7:—*‘ Un de mes compagnons s’¢tonnait de retrouver a la Panagia de St, 
Luc, le saint Jean Chrysostome qu’il avait dessiné dans Je baptist°re de 
St. Mare, 4 Venise. Le costume des personnages est partout et en tout 
temps le mémw, non-seulement pour la forme, mais pour la couleur, 
mais pour le dessin, mais jusque pour le nombre et I’snaisseur des pus." 


110 THE STONES OF VENICE, 


the enormous loss of power in modern days, owing to the im 
perative requirement that art shall be methodical and learned : 
for as long as the constitution of this world remains unaltered, 
there will be more intellect in it than there can be education ; 
there will be many men capable of just sensation and vivid in- 
vention, who never will have time to cultivate or polish their 
natural powers. And all unpolished power is in the present 
state of society lost ; in other things as well as in the arts, but 
in the arts especially: nay, in nine cases out of ten, people 
mistake the polish for the power. Until a man has passed 
through a course of academy studentship, and can draw in an 
approved manner with French chalk, and knows foreshorten- 
ing, and perspective, and something of anatomy, we do not 
\hink he can possibly be an artist ; what is worse, we are very 
apt to think that we can make him an artist by teaching him 
anatomy, and how to draw with French chalk ; whereas the 
real gift in him is utterly independent of all such accomplish- 
ments: and I believe there are many peasants on every estate, 
and laborers in every town, of Europe, who have imaginative 
powers of a high order, which nevertheless cannot be used for 
our good, because we do not choose to look at anything but 
what is expressed in a legal and scientific way. I believe there 
is many a village mason who, set to carve a series of Scripture 
or any other histories, would find many a strange and noble 
fancy in his head, and set it down, roughly enough indeed, 
but in a way well worth our having. But we are too grand to 
let him do this, or to set up his clumsy work when it is done; 
and accordingly the poor stone-mason is kept hewing stones 
smooth at the corners, and we build our church of the smooth 
square stones, and consider ourselves wise. 
§ uxu. I shall pursue this subject farther in another place ; 
but I allude to it here in order to meet the objections of those 
persons who suppose the mosaics of St. Mark’s, and others of 
the period, to be utterly barbarous as representations of re- 
ligious history. Let it be granted that they are so; we are not 
for that reason to suppose they were ineffective in religious 
teaching. I have above spoken of the whole church as a great 
Book of Common Prayer ; the mosaics were its illuminationg, 


ST. MARK’S. aa 


and the common people of the time were taught their Script. 
ure history by means of them, more impressively perhaps, 
though far less fully, than ours are now by Scripture reading. 
They had no other Bible, and—Protestants do not often enough 
consider this—could have no other. We find it somewhat dif- 
ficult to furnish our poor with printed Bibles ; consider what 
the difficulty must have been when they could be given only 
in manuscript. The walls of the church necessarily became 
the poor man’s Bible, and a picture was more easily read upon 
the walls than a chapter. Under this view, and considering 
them merely as the Bible pictures of a great nation in its 
youth, I shall finally invite the reader to examine the connex- 
ion and subjects of these mosaics; but in the meantime I 
have to deprecate the idea of their execution being in any 
sense barbarous. I have conceded too much to modern preju- 
dice, in permitting them to be rated as mere childish efforts at 
colored portraiture: they have characters in them of a very 
noble kind ; nor are they by any means devoid of the remains 
of the science of the later Roman empire. The character of 
the features is almost always fine, the expression stern and. 
quiet, and very solemn, the attitudes and draperies always ma- 
jestic in the single figures, and in those of the groups which 
are not in violent action ;* while the bright coloring and disre- 
gard of chiaroscuro cannot be regarded as imperfections, since 
they are the only means by which the figures could be ren- 
dered clearly intelligible in the distance and darkness of the 
vaulting. So far am I from considering them barbarous, that 
I believe of all works of religious art whatsoever, these, and 
such as these, have been the most effective. They stand ex- 
actly midway between the debased manufacture of wooden and 
waxen images which is the support of Romanist idolatry all 
- * All the effects of Byzantine art to represent violent action are inade- 
quate, most of them ludicrously so, even when the scuptural art is in other 
respects far advanced. The early Gothic sculptors, on the other hand, 
fail in all points of refinement, but hardly ever in expression of action. 
This distinction is of course one of the necessary consequences of the 
difference in allrespects between the repose of the Eastern, and activity 
of the Western, mind, which we shall have to trace out completely in 
the inquiry into the nature of Gothic. 


112 THE STONES OF VENICH. 


over the world, and the great art which leads the mind away 
from the religious subject to the art itself. Respecting neither 
of these branches of human skill is there, nor can there be, any 
question. The manufacture of puppets, however influential on 
the Romanist mind of Europe, is certainly not deserving of 
consideration as one of the fine arts. It matters literally noth- 
ing to a Romanist what the image he worships is like. ‘Take 
the vilest doll that is screwed together in a cheap toy-shop, 
trust it to the keeping of a large family of children, let it be 
beaten about the house by them till it is reduced to a shapeless 
block, then dress it in a satin frock and declare it to have fallen 
from heaven, and it will satisfactorily answer all Romanist pur- 
poses. Idolatry,* it cannot be too often repeated, is no en- 
courager of the fine arts. But, on the other hand, the highest 
branches of the fine arts are no encouragers either of idolatry 
or of religion. No picture of Leonardo’s or Raphael’s, no 
statue of Michael Angelo’s, has ever been worshipped, except 
by accident. Carelessly regarded, and by ignorant persons, 
there is less to attract in them than incommoner works. Care: 
fully regarded, and by intelligent persons, they instantly divert 
the mind from their subject to their art, so that admiration 
takes the place of devotion. Ido not say that the Madonna di 
S. Sisto, the Madonna del Cardellino, and such others, have not 
had considerable religious influence on certain minds, but I say 
that on the mass of the people of Europe they have had none 
whatever ; while by far the greater number of the most cele- 
brated statues and pictures are never regarded with any other 
feelings than those of admiration of human beauty, or rever- 
ence for human skill. Effective religious art, therefore, has 

always lain, and I believe must always lie, between the two ex- — 
tremes—of barbarous idol-fashioning on one side, and magnif- 
icent craftsmanship on the other. _ It consists partly in missal 
painting, and such book-illustrations as, since the invention 
of printing, have taken its place; partly in glass-painting ; 
partly in rude sculpture on the outsides of buildings ; partly 
in mosaics; and partly in the frescoes and tempera pictureg 


* Appendix 10, ‘‘ Proper Sense of the word Idolatry.” 


ST. MARKE’S, 4138 


which, in the fourteenth century, formed the link between this 
powerful, because imperfect, religious art, and the impotent 
perfection which succeeded it. : 

§ rxm. But of all these branches the most important are 
the inlaying and mosaic of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, 
represented in a central manner by these mosaics of St. Mark’s. 
Missal-painting could not, from its minuteness, produce the 
same sublime impressions, and frequently merged itself in mere 
ornamentation of the page. Modern book-illustration has been 
so little skilful as hardly to be worth naming. Sculpture, 
though in some positions it becomes of great importance, has 
always a tendency to lose itself in architectural effect ; and 
was probably seldom deciphered, in all its parts, by the com- 
mon people, still less the traditions annealed in the purple 
burning of the painted window. Finally, tempera pictures 
and frescoes were often of limited size or of feeble color. But 
the great mosaics of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries cov- 
ered the walls and roofs of the churches with inevitable lustre ; 
they could not be ignored or escaped from ; their size rendered 
them majestic, their distance mysterious, their color attractive. 
They did not pass into confused or inferior decorations ; neither 
were they adorned with any evidences of skill or science, such 
as might withdraw the attention from their subjects. They 
were before the eyes of the devotee at every interval of his 
worship ; vast shadowings forth of scenes to whose realization 
he looked forward, or of spirits whose presence he invoked. 
And the man must be little capable of receiving a religious 
impression of any kind, who, to this day, does not acknowledge 
some feeling of awe, as he looks up at the pale countenances 
and ghastly forms which haunt the dark roofs of the Bap- 
tisteries of Parma and Florence, or remains altogether un- 
touched by the majesty of the colossal images of apostles, and 
of Him who sent apostles, that look down from the darkening 
gold of the domes of Venice and Pisa. 

§ uxtv. I shall, in a future portion of this work, endeavor to 
discover what probabilities there are of our being able to use 
this kind of art in modern churches ; but at present it re- 
mains for us to follow out the connexion of the subjects rep 

Vou. II.—8 ; 


114 THE STONES Of VENICE. 


resented in St. Mark’s so as to fulfil our immediate object, 
and form an adequate conception of the feelings of its build. 
ers, and of its uses to those for whom it was built. 

Now there is one circumstance to which J must, in the out- 
set, direct the reader’s special attention, as forming a notable 
distinction between ancient and modern days. Our eyes are 
now familiar and wearied with writing ; and if an inscription 
is put upon a building, unless it be large and clear, it is ten 
to one whether we ever trouble ourselves to decipher it. But — 
the old architect was sure of readers. He knew that every 
one would be glad to decipher all that he wrote ; that they 
would rejoice in possessing the vaulted leaves of his stone 
manuscript ; and that the more he gave them, the more grate- 
ful would the people be. We must take some pains, there- 
fore, when we enter St. Mark’s, to read all that is inscribed, 
or we shall not penetrate into the feeling either of the builder 
or of his times. 

§ xxy. A large atrium or portico is attached to two sides of 
the church, a space which was especially reserved for unbap- 
tized persons and new converts. It was thought right that, 
before their baptism, these persons should be led to contem- 
plate the great facts of the Old Testament history ; the his- 
tory of the Fall of Man, and of the lives of Patriarchs up to 
the period of the Covenant by Moses: the order of the sub- 
jects in this series being very nearly the same as in many 
Northern churches, but significantly closing with the Fall of 
the Manna, in order to mark to the catechumen the insuffi- 
ciency of the Mosaic covenant for salvation,—‘“ Our fathers did 
eat manna in the wilderness, and are dead,’—and to turn 
his thoughts to the true Bread of which that manna was the 
type. 

§ txvir. Then, when after his baptism he was permitted to 
enter the church, over its main entrance he saw, on looking 
back, a mosaic of Christ enthroned, with the Virgin on one 
side and St. Mark on the other, in attitudes of adoration. Christ 
is represented as holding a book open upon his knee, on which 
is written: “I am THE DOOR; BY ME IF ANY MAN ENTER IN, 3K 
SHALL BE savED.” On the red marble moulding which sur- 


ST. MARK’S. 115 


rounds the mosaic is written: “I am Tue cate or ure; Ler 
THOSE WHO ARE MINE ENTER BY ME.” Above, on the red marble 
fillet which forms the cornice of the west end of the church, 
is written, with reference to the figure of Christ below : ‘“‘ Wue 
HE WAS, AND FROM WHOM HE CAME, AND AT WHAT PRICE HE RE- 
DEEMED THEE, AND WHY HE MADE THEE, AND GAVE THEE ALL THINGS, 
DO THOU CONSIDER.” 

Now observe, this was not to be seen and read only by the 
catechumen when he first entered the church ; every one who 
at any time entered, was supposed to look back and to read 
this writing ; their daily entrance into the church was thus 
made a daily memorial of their first entrance into the spiritual 
Church ; and we shall find that the rest of the book which 
was opened for them upon its walls continually led them in 
the same manner to regard the visible temple as in every part 
a type of the invisible Church of God. 

§ txvu. Therefore the mosaic of the first dome, which is 
over the head of the spectator as soon as he has entered by 
the great door (that door being the type of baptism), repre- 
sents the effusion of the Holy Spirit, as the first consequence 
and seal of the entrance into the Church of God. In the 
centre of the cupola is the Dove, enthroned in the Greek man- 
ner, as the Lamb is enthroned, when the Divinity of the 
Second and Third Persons is to be insisted upon together 
with their peculiar offices. From the central symbol of the 
Holy Spirit twelve streams of fire descend upon the heads of 
the twelve apostles, who are represented standing around the 
dome; and below them, between the windows which are 
pierced in its walls, are represented, by groups of two figures 
for each separate people, the various nations who heard the 
apostles speak, at Pentecost, every man in his own tongue. 
Finally, on the vaults, at the four angles which support the 
cupola, are nictured four angels, each bearing a tablet upon 
the end of a rod in his hand: on each of the tablets of the 
three first angels is inscribed the word “ Holy ;” on that of 
the fourth is written ‘Lord ;” and the beginning of the hymn 
being thus put into the mouths of the four angels, the words 
of it are continued around the border of the dome, uniting 


116 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


praise to God for the gift of the Spirit, with welcome to the 
redeemed soul received into His Church : 


“ Hory, Hory, Hory, Lorn Gop or Sapaors : 
Heaven anp Marre arRE FULL oF THY GLORY. 
Hosanna In THE HicHest : 

BLEsseD IS HE THAT COMETH IN THE NAME OF THE LoRD.” 


And observe in this writing that the convert is required te 
regard the outpouring of the Holy Spirit especially as a work 
of sanctification. It is the holiness of God manifested in the 
giving of His Spirit to sanctify those who had become His 
children, which the four angels celebrate in their ceaseless 
praise ; and it is on account of this holiness that the heaven 
and earth are said to be full of His glory. 

§ rxvim. After thus hearing praise rendered to God by the 
angels for the salvation of the newly-entered soul, it was 
thought fittest that the worshipper should be led to contem- 
plate, in the most comprehensive forms possible, the past evi- 
dence and the future hopes of Christianity, as summed up 
in three facts without assurance of which all faith is vain ; 
namely that Christ died, that He rose again, and that He as- 
cended into heaven, there to prepare a place for His elect. 
On the vault between the first and second cupolas are repre- 
sented the crucifixion and resurrection of Christ, with the 
usual serie3 of intermediate scenes,—the treason of Judas, the 
judgment of Pilate, the crowning with thorns, the descent into 
Hades, the visit of the women to the sepulchre, and the appa- 
rition to Mary Magdalene. The second cupola itself, which is _ 
the central and principal one of the church, is entirely occu- 
pied by the subject of the Ascension. At the highest point ot 
it Christ is represented as rising into the blue heaven, borne 
up by four angels, and throned upon a rainbow, the type of 
reconciliation. Beneath him, the twelve apostles are seen 
upon the Mount of Olives, with the Madonna, and, in the 
midst of them, the two men in white apparel who appeared at 
the moment of the Ascension, above whom,.as uttered by them, 
are inscribed the words, ‘Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye 


8ST. MARRE’S. 117 


gazing up into heaven? This Christ, the Son of God, as He 
is taken from you, shall so come, the arbiter of the earth, 
trusted to do judgment and justice.” 

§ xxix. Beneath the circle of the apostles, between the win- 
dows of the cupola, are represented the Christian virtues, as 
sequent upon the crucifixion of the flesh, and the spiritual as- 
cension together with Christ. Beneath them, on the vaults 
which support the angles of the cupola, are placed the four 
Evangelists, because on their evidence our assurance of the 
fact of the ascension rests ; and, finally, beneath their feet, as 
symbols of the sweetness and fulness of the Gospel which they 
declared, are represented the four rivers of Paradise, Pison, 
Gihon, Tigris, and Euphrates. 

$ uxx. The third cupola, that over the altar, represents the 
witness of the Olid Testament to Christ ; showing him en- 
throned in its centre, and surrounded by the patriarchs and 
prophets. But this dome was little seen by the people ;* 
their contemplation was intended to be chiefly drawn to that 
of the centre of the church, and thus the mind of the wor- 
shipper was at once fixed on the main groundwork and hope 
of Christianity,—‘‘ Christ is risen,” and “ Christ shall come.” 
If he had time to explore the minor lateral chapels and cupo- 
las, he could find in them the whole series of New Testament 
history, the events of the Life of Christ, and the Apostolic 
miracles in their order, and finally the scenery of the Book of 
Revelation ;+ but if he only entered, as often the common 
people do to this hour, snatching a few moments before be- 
ginning the labor of the day to offer up an ejaculatory prayer, 
and advanced but from the main entrance as far as the altar 
screen, all the splendor of the glittering nave and variegated 
dome, if they smote upon his heart, as they might often, in 
strange contrast with his reed cabin among the shallows of 
the lagoon, smote upon it only that they might proclaim the 
two great messages—‘ Christ is risen,” and “Christ shall 


* It is also of inferior workmanship, and perhaps later than the rest. 
Vide Lord Lindsay, vol. i. p. 124, note. 
+ The old mosaics from the Revelation have perished, and have been 
seplaced by miserable work of the seventeenth century. 
Stones of Venice—Vol. IL —@ 


118 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


come.” Daily, as the white cupolas rose like wreaths of sea 
foam in the dawn, while the shadowy campanile and frowning 
palace were still withdrawn into the night, they rose with the 
Easter Voice of Triumph,—‘“ Christ is risen ;” and daily, as 
they looked down upon the tumult of the people, deepening 
and eddying in the wide square that opened from their feet 
to the sea, they uttered above them the sentence of warning, 
—‘ Christ shall come.” 

§ uxx1. And this thought may surely dispose the reader to 
look with some change of temper upon the gorgeous building 
and wild blazonry of that shrine of St. Mark’s. He now per- 
ceives that it was in the hearts of the old Venetian people far 
more than a place of worship. It was at once a type of the 
Redeemed Church of God, and a scroll for the written word of 
God. It was to be to them, both an image of the Bride, all 
glorious within, her clothing of wrought gold ; and the actual 
Table of the Law and the Testimony, written within and with- 
out. And whether honored as the Church or as the Bible, was 
it not fitting that neither the gold nor the crystal should be 
spared in the adornment of it ; that, as the symbol of the 
Bride, the building of the wall thereof should be of jasper,* 
and the foundations of it garnished with all manner of pre- 
cious stones; and that, as the channel of the World, that tri- 
umphant utterance of the Psalmist should be true of it,—‘‘I 
have rejoiced in the way of thy testimonies, as much as in all 
riches?” And shall we not look with changed temper down 
the long perspective of St. Mark’s Place towards the sevenfold 
gates and glowing domes of its temple, when we know with 
what solemn purpose the shafts of it were lifted above the pave- 
ment of the populous square? Men met there from all coun- 
tries of the earth, for traffic or for pleasure; but, above the 
crowd swaying for ever to and fro in the restlessness of ava- 
rice or thirst of delight, was seen perpetually the glory of the 
temple, attesting to them, whether they would hear or whether 
they would forbear, that there was one treasure which the 
merchantmen might buy without a price, and one delight 
better than all others, in the word and the statutes of God 


* Rev. xxi. 18, 


ST. MARK’S. 119 


Not in the wantonness of wealth, not in vain ministry to the 
desire of the eyes or the pride of life, were those marbles hewn 
into transparent strength, and those arches arrayed in the 
colors of the iris. There is a message written in the dyes of 
them, that once was written in blood; and a sound in the 
echoes of their vaults, that one day shall fill the vault of heaven, 
—‘ He shall return, to do judgment and justice.” The strength 
of Venice was given her, so long as she remembered this : her 
destruction found her when she had forgotten this; and it 
found her irrevocably, because she forgot it without excuse. 
Never had city a more glorious Bible. Among the nations of 
the North, a rude and shadowy sculpture filled their temples 
with confused and hardly legible imagery ; but, for her, the 
skill and the treasures of the Hast had gilded every letter, 
and illumined every page, till the Book-Temple shone from 
afar off like the star ofthe Magi. In other cities, the meetings 
of the people were often in places withdrawn from religious 
association, subject to violence and to change; and on the 
erass of the dangerous rampart, and in the dust of the 
troubled street, there were deeds done and counsels taken, 
which, if we cannot justify, we may sometimes forgive. But 
the sins of Venice, whether in her palace or in her piazza, 
were done with the Bible at her right hand. The wallson which 
its testimony was written were separated but by a few inches 
of marble from those which guarded the secrets of her coun- 
cils, or confined the victims of her policy. And when in her last 
hours she threw off all shame and all restraint, and the great 
square of the city became filled with the madness of the whole 
earth, be it remembered how much her sin was greater, be- 
cause it was done in the face of the House of God, burning 
with the letters of His Law. Mountebank and masquer 
laughed their laugh, and went their way ; and a silence has 
followed them, not unforetold ; for amidst them all, through 
century after century of gathering vanity and festering guilt, 
that white dome of St. Mark’s had uttered in the dead ear of 
Venice, ‘ Know thou, that for all these things God will bring 
thee into judgment.” 


12") THE STONES OF VENICK. 


CHAPTER V. 
BYZANTINE PALACES. 


§ x. Tue account of the architecture of St. Mark’s given in 
the previous chapter has, I trust, acquainted the reader suffi- 
ciently with the spirit of the Byzantine style: but he has 
probably, as yet, no clear idea of its generic forms. Nor 
would it be safe to define these after an examination of St. 
Mark’s alone, built as it was upon various models, and at 
various periods. .But if we pass through the city, looking for 
buildings‘which resemble St. Mark’s—first, in the most im- 
portant feature of incrustation ; secondly, in the character of 
the mouldings,—we shall find a considerable number, not in- 
deed very attractive in their first address to the eye, but agree- 
ing perfectly, both with each other, and with the earliest por- 
tions of St. Mark’s, in every important detail; and to be 
regarded, therefore, with profound interest, as indeed the 
remains of an ancient city of Venice, altogether different in 
aspect from that which now exists. From these remains we 
may with safety deduce general conclusions touching the 
forms of Byzantine architecture, as practised in Eastern Italy, 
during the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth centuries. 

§ u. They agree in another respect, as well as in style. Ali 
are either ruins, or fragments disguised by restoration. Not 
one of them is uninjured or unaltered ; and the impossibility 
of finding so much as an angle or asingle story in perfect 
condition is a proof, hardly less convincing than the method 
of their architecture, that they were indeed raised during the 
earliest phases of the Venetian power. The mere fragments, 
dispersed in narrow streets, and recognizable by asingle capi- 
tal, or the segment of an arch, I shall not enumerate: but, or 
important remains, there are six in the immediate neighbor- 
hood of the Rialto, one in the Rio di Ca’ Foseari, and one con- 
spicuously placed opposite the great Renaissance Palace known 
as the Vendramin Calerghi, one of the few palaces still inhab. 
ted * and well maintained ; and noticeable, moreover, as hav 

* In the year 1851, by the Duchesse de Berri. 


BYZANTINE PALACES. 121 


ing a garden beside it, rich with evergreens, and decorated 
by gilded railings and white statues that cast long streams of 
snowy reflection down into the deep water. The vista of 
canal beyond is terminated by the Church of St. Geremia, 
another but less attractive work of the Renaissance ; a mass 
of barren brickwork, with a dull leaden dome above, like those 
of our National Gallery. So that the spectator has the richest 
and meanest of the late architecture of Venice before him at 
once : the richest, let him observe, a piece of private luxury ; 
the poorest, that which was given to God. Then, looking to 
the left, he will see the fragment of the work of earlier ages, 
testifying against both, not less by its utter desolation than 
by the nobleness of the traces that are still left of it. 

§ ut. It isa ghastly ruin ; whatever is venerable or sad in 
its wreck being disguised by attempts to put it to present uses 
of the basest kind. It has been composed of arcades borne 
by marble shafts, and walls of brick faced with marble: but 
the covering stones have been torn away from it like the shroud 
from a corpse ; and its walls, rent into a thousand chasms, are 
filled and refilled with fresh brickwork, and the seams and 
hollows are choked with clay and whitewash, oozing and trick- 
ling over the marble,—itself blanched into dusty decay by the 
frosts of centuries. Soft grass and wandering leafage have 
rooted themselves in the rents, but they are not suffered to 
grow in their own wild and gentle way, for the place is in a 
sort inhabited ; rotten partitions are nailed across its corri- 
dors, and miserable rooms contrived in its western wing ; and 
here and there the weeds are indolently torn down, leaving 
their haggard fibres to struggle again into unwholesome 
growth when the spring next stirs them: and thus, in contest 
between death and life, the unsightly heap is festering to its 
fall. 

Of its history little is recorded, and that little futile. That 
it once belonged to the dukes of Ferrara, and was bought from 
them in the sixteenth century, to be made a general receptacle 
for the goods of the Turkish merchants, whence it is now gen- 
erally known as the Fondaco, or Fontico, de’ Turchi, are facts 
just as important to the antiquary, as that, in the year 1852 


122 THE STONES OF VENICR. 


the municipality of Venice allowed its lower story to be used 
for a “deposito di Tabacchi.” Neither of this, nor of any 
other remains of the period, can we know anything but what 
their own stones will tell us. 

§ 1v. The reader will find in Appendix 11, written chiefly 
for the traveller’s benefit, an account of the situation and 
present state of the other seven Byzantine palaces. Here I 
shall only give a general account of the most interesting points 
in their architecture. 

They all agree in being round-arched and incrusted with 
marble, but there are only six in which the original disposi- 
tion of the parts is anywise traceable ; namely, those distin- 
guished in the Appendix as the Fondaco de’ Turchi, Casa 
Loredan, Caso Farsetti, Rio-Foscari House, Terraced House, 
and Madonnetta House :* and these six agree farther in hav- 
ing continuous arcades along their entire fronts from one angle 
to the other, and in having their arcades divided, in each case, 
into a centre and w:ugs; both by greater size in the midmost 
arches, and by the alternation of shafts in the centre, with pi- 
lasters, or with small shafts, at the flanks. 

§ v. So far as their structure can be traced, they agree also 
in having tali and few arches in their lower stories, and shorter 
and more numerous arches above: but it happens most un- 
fortunately that in the only two cases in which the second 
stories are left the ground floors are modernized, and in the 
others where the sea stories are left the second stories are 
modernized ; so that we never have more than two tiers of the 
Byzantine arches, one above the other. These, however, are 
quite enough to show the first main point on which I wish to 
insist, namely, the subtlety of the feeling for proportion in the 
Greek architects ; and I hope that even the general reader 
will not allow himself to be frightened by the look of a few 
measurements, for, if he will only take the little pains neces- 
sary to compare them, he will, I am almost certain, find the 
result not devoid of interest. 

§ v1. I had intended originally to give elevations of all 


*Of the Braided House and Casa Businello, described in the Appen- 
lix, only the great central arcades remain, 


BYZANT*NE PALACES. 128 


tnese palaces; but have not had time to prepare plates re 
quiring so much labor and care. I must, therefore, explaiq 
the position of their parts in the simplest way in my power. 
The Fondaco de’ Turchi has sixteen arches in its sea story, 
and twenty-six above them in its first story, the whole based 
on a magnificent foundation, built of blocks of red marbie, 
some of them seven feet long by a foot and a haif thick, and 
raised to a height of about five feet above high-water mark. 


Om Mm} 


Tia. IV. 


At this level, the elevation of one half of the building, from 
its flank to the central pillars of its arcades, is rudely given in 
Fig. IV. It is only drawn to show the arrangement of the 
parts, as the sculptures which are indicated by the circles and 
upright oblongs between the arches are too delicate to be 
shown in a sketch three times the size of this. The building 
once was crowned with an Arabian parapet ; but it was taken 
down some years since, and I am aware of no authentic rep. 


124 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


resentation of its details. The greater part of the sculptures 
between the arches, indicated in the woodcut only by blank 
circles, have also fallen, or been removed, but enough remain 
on the two flanks to justify the representation given in the 
diagram of their original arrangement. 

And now observe the dimensions. The small arches of the 
wings in thé ground story, a, a, a, measure, in breadth, from 


Ft. In. 
shaft to shaft 3 $ ows: 5 
interval b ‘ : Pa f 64 
interval-¢ —. : n ree! 
intervals d, 2, f, & . 4 baad. | 1 


The difference between the width of the arches } and c is 
necessitated by the small recess of the cornice on the left hand 
as compared with that of the great capitals ; but this sudden 
difference of half a foot between the two extreme arches of 
the centre offended the builder’s eye, so he diminished the 
next one, unnecessarily, two inches, and thus obtained the 
gradual cadence to the flanks, from eight feet down to four 
and a half, in a series of continually increasing steps. Of 
course the effect cannot be shown in the diagram, as the first 
difference is less than the thickness of its ines. In the upper 
story the capitals are all nearly of the same height, and there 
was no occasion for the difference between the extreme arches. 
Its twenty-six arches are placed, four small ones above each 
lateral three of the lower arcade, and eighteen larger above 
the central ten ; thus throwing the shafts into all manner of 
relative positions, and completely confusing the eye in any 
effort to count them: but there is an exquisite symmetry run- 
ning through their apparent confusion ; for it will be seen 
that the four arches in each flank are arranged in two groups, 
of which one has a large single shaft in the centre, and the 
other a pilaster and two small shafts, The way in which the 
large shaft is used as an echo of those in the central arcade, 
dovetailing them, as it were, into the system of the pilasters, 
—yjust as a great painter, passing from one “ene of color ta 


BYZANTINE PALACES. 125 


another, repeats, over a small space, that which he has left,— 
is highly characteristic of the Byzantine.care in composition. 
There are other evidences of itin the arrangement of the 
capitals, which will be noticed below in the seventh chapter. 
The lateral arches of this upper arcade measure 3 ft. 2 in. 
across, and the central 3 ft. 11 in., so that the arches in the 
building are altogether of six magnitudes. 

§ vu. Next let us take the Casa Loredan. ‘The mode of 
arrangement of its pillars is precisely like that of the Fondaco 
de’ Turchi, so that I shall merely indicate them by vertical 
lines in order to be able to letter the intervals. It has five 
arches in the centre of the lower story, and two in each of ite 
wings. 


Fts:. In. 
The midmost interval, a, of the central five, is 6 £ 
The two on each side, b, b 5 2 
The two extremes, ¢, ¢ 4 9 
Inner arches of the wings, d, he 4 4 
Outer arches of the wings, e, e . 4 6 


Yhe gradation of these dimensions is visible at a glance ; 
tne boldest step being here taken nearest the centre, while in 
the Fondaco it is farthest from the centre. The first loss here 
is of eleven inches, the second of five, the third of five, and 
then there is a most subtle increase of two inches in the ex- 
treme arches, as if to contradict the principle of diminution, 
and stop the falling away of the building by firm resistance at 
its flanks. 

I could not get the measures of the upper story accurately, 

_the palave having been closed all the time I was in Venice ; 
but it hay seven central arches above the five below, and three 
at the flanks above the two below, the groups being separated 
by double pnafts. 


126 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


§ vi. Again, in-the Casa Farsetti, the lower story has a 
centre of five arches, and wings of two. Referring, therefore, 
to the last figure, which will answer for this palace also, the 
measures of the intervals are : 


Ft. In. 
a : “ ; > : 38 0 
b | . % A Oh: Val OD 
c i 5 ¢ 5 lb 4 
d and e A ; at 35 3 


It is, however, possible that the interval c and the wing arches 
may have been intended to be similar; for one of the wing 
arches measures 5 ft. 4in. We have thus a simpler proportion 
than any we have hitherto met with; only two losses taking 
place, the first of 2 ft. 2 in., the second of 6 inches. . 
The upper story has a central group of seven arches, whose 


widths are 4 ft. 1 in. 5 
Ft. In. 
The next arch on each side A gOS i 
The three arches of each wing yet: 6 


Here again we have a most curious instance of the subtlety of 
eye which was not satisfied without a third dimension, but 
could be satisfied with a difference of an inch on three feet 
and a half. 

§ 1x. In the Terraced House, the ground floor is modern- 
ized, but the first story is composed of a centre of five arches, 
with wings of two, measuring as follows : 


Ft? yin; 
Three midmost arches of the central group 4 0 
Outermost arch of the central group . + 6 
Innermost arch of the wing 4 10 
Outermost arch of the wing * 5 0 


Here the greatest step is towards the centre; but the in- 
crease, which is unusual, is towards the outside, the gain be- 
ing successively six, four, and two inches. 

I could not obtain the measures of the second story, in 


* Only one wing of the first story is left. See Appendix 11, 


BYZANTINE PALACES. {27 


which only the central group is left ; but the two outermost 
arches are visibly larger than the others, thus beginning a 
correspondent proportion to the one below, of which the 
lateral quantities have been destroyed by restorations. 

§ x. Finally, in the Rio-Foscari House, the central arch is 
the principal feature, and the four lateral ones form one mag- 
nificent wing ; the dimensions being from the centre to the 
side : 


Ft. In. 
Central arch 3 . : ore9 9 
Second “ z é a oe 8 
Third ie : ai ; Bene 10 
Fourth “ A ‘ 5 8 10 
Fifth a 3 8 


The difference of two inches on nearly three feet in the two 
midmost arches being all that was necessary to satisfy the 
builder’s eye. 

§ xr. I need not point out to the reader that these singular 
and minute harmonies of proportion indicate, beyond all dis- 
pute, not only that the buildings in which they are found are 
of one school, but (so far as these subtle coincidences of meas- 
urement can still be traced in them) in their original form. 
No modern builder has any idea of connecting his arches in 
this manner, and restorations in Venice are carried on with 
too violent hands to admit of the supposition that such refine- 
ments would be even noticed in the progress of demolition, 
much less imitated in heedless reproduction. And as if to 
direct our attention especially to this character, as indicative 
of Byzantine workmanship, the most interesting example of 
all will be found in the arches of the front of St. Mark’s itself, 
whose proportions I have not noticed before, in order that 
they might ere be compared with those of the contemporary 
palaces. 

§ xu. The doors actually employed for entrance in the west- 
ern fagade are as usual five, arranged as at a in the annexed 
woodcut, Fig. V. ; but the Byzantine builder could not be sat- 
isfied with so simple a group, and he introduced, therefore, 


128 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


two minor arches at the extremities, as at b, by adding tww 
small porticos which are of no use whatever except to consum- 
mate the proportions of the fagade, and themselves to exhibit 


ran Cove va 
ENN eee 


Fia. V. 


the most exquisite proportions in arrangements of shaft and 
archivolt with which Iam acquainted in the entire range of 
Kuropean architecture. 

Into these minor particulars I cannot here enter ; but ob- 
serve the dimensions of the range of arches in the fagade, as 
thus completed by the flanking porticos : 


Ft. —Inz 
The space of its central archivolt is . : d s8Lin8 
i the two on each side, about *. ahr § 

a the two succeeding, about. . 20 4. 
¢§ small arches at flanks, about . . HRO6HTSO 


I need not make any comment upon the subtle difference of 
eight inches on twenty feet between the second and third 
dimensions. If the reader will be at the pains to compare 
the whole evidence now laid before him, with that deduced 
above from the apse of Murano, he cannot but confess that it 
amounts to an irrefragable proof of an intense perception of 
harmony in the relation of quantities, on the part of the By- 


* Tam obliged to give these measures approximately, because, this front 
having been studied by the builder with unusual care, not one of its 
measures is the same as another ; and the symmetries between the corre- 
spondent arches are obtained by changes in the depth of their mouldings 
and variations in their heights, far too complicated for me to enter inte 
here ; so that of the two arches stated as 19 ft. 8 in. in span, one is in 
reality 19 ft. 64 in., the other 19 ft. 10 in., and of the two stated as 20 ft 
4 in., one is 20 ft. ford the other 20 ft. 8 in. 


BYZANTINE PALACKHS. 125 


zantine architects; a perception which we have at present 
lost so utterly as hardly to be able even to conceive it. And 
let it not be said, as it was of the late discoveries of subtle 
curvature in the Parthenon,* that what is not to be demon- 
strated without laborious measurement, cannot have influence 
on the beauty of the design. The eye is continually influ- 
enced by what it cannot detect; nay, it is not going too far 
to say, that it is most influenced by what it detects least. 
Let the painter define, if he can, the variations of lines on 
which depend the changes of expression in the human coun- 
tenance. The greater he is, the more he will feel their sub- 
tlety, and the intense difficulty of perceiving all their rela- 
tions, or answering for the consequences of a variation of a 
hair’s breadth in a single curve. Indeed, there is nothing 
truly noble either in color or in form, but its power depends 
on circumstances infinitely too intricate to be explained, and 
almost too subtle to be traced. And as for these Byzantine 
buildings, we only do not feel them because we do not watch 
them ; otherwise we should as much enjoy the variety of pro- 
portion in their arches, as we do at present that of the natural 
architecture of flowers and leaves. 

Any of us can feel in an instant 

the grace of the leaf group, b, in 

the annexed figure ; and yet that 

grace is simply owing to its being 
proportioned like the facade of 

St. Mark’s ; each leaflet answering a 
to an arch,—the smallest at the Fra. VI. 

root, to those of the porticos. I 

have tried to give the proportion quite accurately in b ; but 
as the difference between the second and third leaflets is 
hardly discernible on so small a scale, it is somewhat exag- 
gerated inv.+ Nature is often far more subtle in her propor- 
tions. In looking at some of the nobler species of lilies, full 
in the front of the flower, we may fancy for a moment. that 


* By Mr. Penrose. 
+I am sometimes obliged, unfortunately, to read my. woodcuts back: 
wards owing to my having forgotten to reverse them on the wood, 


VOL. Be —9 


130 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


they form a symmetrical six-petaled star; but on examining 
them more closely, we shall find that they are thrown into a 
group of three magnitudes by the expansion 
of two of the inner petals above the stamens 
to a breadth greater than any of the four 
others ; while the third inner petal, on which 
the stamens rest, contracts itself into the nar- 
rowest of the six, and the three under petals 
Fre. VIL. —s remain of one intermediate magnitude, as seen 
in the annexed figure. 

§ xm. I must not, however, weary the reader with this sub- 
ject, which has always been a favorite one with me, and is 
apt to lead too far; we will return to the palaces on the 
Grand Canal. Admitting, then, that their fragments are 
proved, by the minute correspondence of their arrangement, 
to be still in their original positions, they indicate to usa 
forra, whether of palace or dwelling-house, in which there 
were, universally, central galleries, or loggias, opening into 
apartments on each wing, the amount of light admitted being 
immense; and the general proportions of the building, 
slender, light, and graceful in the utmost degree, it being in 
fact little more than an aggregate of shafts and arches. Of 
the interior disposition of these palaces there is in no instance 
the slightest trace left, nor am I well enough acquainted with 
the existiny architecture of the East to risk any conjecture on 
this subject. I pursue the statement of the facts which still 
are ascertainuble respecting their external forms. 

§ xrv. In every one of the buildings above mentioned, ex- 
cept the Rio-Foscari House (which has only one great en- 
trance between its wings), the central arcades are sustained, 
at least in one story, and generally in both, on bold detached | 
cylindrical shafts, with rich capitals, while the arches of the 
wings are carried on smaller shafts assisted by portions of 
wall, which become pilasters of greater or less width. 

And now I must remind the reader of what was pointed 
out above (Vol. I. Chap. XXVIII §§ 1m. xxxy. x1.), that there 
nve two great orders of capitals in the world; that one of 
these is convex in its contour, the other concave ; and that 


PLATE VIL—-BYZANTINE CAPITALS. CoNVEX GROUP. 


EN 


BYZANTINE PALACES. 131 


richness of ornament, with all freedom of fancy, is for the 
most part found in the one, and severity of ornament, with 
stern Giscipline of the fancy, in the other. 

Of these two families of capitals both occur in the Byzan- 
tine period, but the concave group is the longest-lived, and 
extends itself into the Gothic times. In the account which I 
gave of them in the first volume, they were illustrated by giv- 
ing two portions of a simple curve, that of a salvia leaf. We 
must now investigate their characters more in detail ; and 
these may be best generally represented by considering both 
families as formed upon the types of flowers,—the one upon 
that of the water-lily, the other upon that of the convolvulus. 
There was no intention in the Byzantine architects to imitate 
either one or the other of these flowers ; but, as I have already 
so often repeated, all beautiful works of art must either in- 
tentionally imitate or accidentally resemble natural forms; 
and the direct comparison with the natural forms which these 
capitals most resemble, is the likeliest mode of fixing their 
distinctions in the reader’s mind. 

The one then, the convex family, is modelled according to 
the commonest shapes of that great group of flowers which 
form rounded cups, like that of the water-lily, the leaves 
springing horizontally from the stalk, and closing together 
upwards. The rose is of this family, but her cup is filled 
with the luxuriance of her leaves ; the crocus, campaunula, 
ranunculus, anemone, and almost all the loveliest children of 
the field, are formed upon the same type. 

The other family resembles the convolvulus, trumpet-flower, 
and such others, in which the lower part of the bell is slender, 
and the lip curves outwards at the top. There are fewer 
flowers constructed on this than on the convex model; but 
in the organization of trees and of clusters of herbage it is 
seen continually. Of course, both of these conditions are 
modified, when applied to capitals, by the enormously greater 
thickness of the stalk or shaft, but in other respects the 
parallelism is close and accurate ; and the reader had better 
at once fix the flower outlines in his mind,* and remember 

* Vide Plate X. figs. 1 and 4. 


13% THE STONES OF VENICE. 


them as representing the only two orders of capitals that the 
world has ever seen, or can see. 

.§ xv. The examples of the concave family in the Byzantine 
times are found principally either in large capitals founded 
on the Greek Corinthian, used chiefly for the nave pillars of 
churches, or in the small lateral shafts of the palaces. It ap- 
pears somewhat singular that the pure Corinthian form should 
have been reserved almost exclusively for nave pillars, as at 
Torcello, Murano, and St. Mark’s ; it occurs, indeed, together 
with almost every other form, on the exterior of St. Mark’s 
also, but never so definitely as in the nave and transept shafts. 
Of the conditions assumed by it at Torcello enough has been 
said ; and one of the most delicate of the varieties occurring 
in St. Mark’s is given in Plate VIII., fig. 15, remarkable for 
the cutting of the sharp thistle-like leaves into open relief, so 
that the light sometimes shines through them from behind, 
and for the beautiful curling of the extremities of the leaves 
outwards, joining each other at the top, as in an undivided 
flower. 

§ xvi The other characteristic examples of the concave 
groups in the Byzantine times are as simple as those resulting 
from the Corinthian are rich. They occur on the smai/ shafts 
at the flanks of the Fondaco de’ Turchi, the Casa Farsetti, 
Casa Loredan, Terraced House, and upper story of the 
Madonnetta House, in forms so exactly similar that the two 
figures 1 and 2 in Plate VIII. may sufficiently represent them 
all. They consist merely of portions cut out of the plinths 
or string-courses which run along all the faces of these 
palaces, by four truncations in the form of arrowy leaves (fig. 
1, Fondaco de’ Turchi), and the whole rounded a little at the 
bottom so as to fit the shaft. When they occur between two 
arches they assume the form of the group fig. 2 (Terraced 
House). Fig. 3 is from the central arches of the Casa 
Farsetti, and is only given because either it is a later restora- 
tion or a form absolutely unique in the Byzantine period. 

§ xvi. The concave group, however, was not naturally 
pleasing to the Byzantine mind. Its own favorite capital was 
of the bold convex or cushion shape, so conspicuous in all the 


PLATE VIII.--ByZANTINE CAPITALS, CONCAVE GRouR, 


BYZANTINE PALACKS. 133 


buildings of the period that I have devoted Plate VII., oppo: 
site entirely to its illustration. The form in which it is first 
used is practically obtained from a square block laid on the 
head of the shaft (fig. 1, Plate VII.), by first cutting off the 
lower corners, as in fig. 2, and then rounding the edges, as in 
fig. 3; this gives us the bell stone: on this is laid a simple 
abacus, as seen in fig. 4, which is the actual form used in the 
upper arcade of Murano, and the framework of the capital is 
complete. Fig. 5 shows the general manner and effect of its 
decoration on the same scale ; the other figures, 6 and 7, both 
from the apse of Murano, 8, from the Terraced House, and 9, 
from the Baptistery of St. Mark’s, show the method of chisel- 
ling the surfaces in capitals of average richness, such as occur 
everywhere, for there is no limit to the fantasy and beauty of 
the more elaborate examples. 

§ xvi. In consequence of the peculiar affection entertained 
for these massy forms by the Byzantines, they were apt, when 
they used any condition of capital founded on the Corinthian, 
to modify the concave profile by making it bulge out at the 
bottom. Fig. 1, a, Plate X., is the profile of a capital of the 
pure concave family; and observe, it needs a fillet or cord 
round the neck of the capital to show where it separates from 
the shaft. Fig. 4, a, on the other hand, is the profile of the 
pure convex group, which not only needs no such projecting 
fillet, but would be encumbered by it ; while fig. 2, a, is the 
profile of one of the Byzantine capitals (Fondaco de’ Turchi, 
lower arcade) founded on Corinthian, of which the main 
sweep is concave, but which bends below into the convex 
bell-shape, where it joins the shaft. And, lastly, fig. 3, a, is 
the profile of the nave shafts of St. Mark’s, where, though 
very delicately granted, the concession to the Byzantine 
temper is twofold ; first at the spring of the curve from the 
base, and secondly the top, where it again becomes convex, 
though the expression of the Corinthian bell is still given to 
it by the bold concave leaves. 

§ xtx. These, then, being the general modifications of By- 
zantine profiles, I have thrown together in Plate VIL, oppo- 
site, some of the most characteristic examples of the decora 


(34 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


tion of the concave and transitional types ; their localities are 
given in the note below,* and the following are the principal 
points to be observed respecting them. 

The purest concave forms, 1 and 2, were never decorated 
in the earliest times, except sometimes by an incision or rib 
down the centre of their truncations on the angles. 

Figures 4, 5, 6, and 7 show some of the modes of applica- 
tion of a peculiarly broad-lobed acanthus leaf, very character- 
istic of native Venetian work; 4 and 5 are from the same 
building, two out of a group of four, and show the boldness 
of the variety admitted in the management even of the capitals 
most closely derived from the Corinthian. I never saw one of 
these Venetian capitals in all respects like another. The tre- 
foils into which the leaves fall at the extremities are, however, 
for the most part similar, though variously disposed, and gen- 
erally niche themselves one under the other, as very character- 
istically in fig. 7. The form 8 occurs in St. Mark’s only, and 
there very frequently: 9 at Venice occurs, I think, in St. 
Mark’s only ; but it is a favorite early Lombardic form. 10, 
11, and 12 are all highly characteristic. 10 occurs with more 
fantastic interweaving upon its sides in the upper stories of 
St. Mark’s; 11 is derived, in the Casa Loredan, from the 
ereat lily capitals of St. Mark’s, of which more presently. 13 
and 15 are peculiar to St. Mark’s. 14 is a lovely condition, 
occurring both there and in the Fondaco de’ Turchi. 

The modes in which the separate portions of the leaves are 
executed in these and other Byzantine capitals, will be noticed 
more at length hereafter. Here I only wish the reader to ob- 
serve two things, both with respect to these and the capitals of 


*1. Fondaco de’ Turchi, lateral pil- 8. St. Mark’s. 
lars. 9. St. Mark’s. 
2. Terraced House, lateral pillars, 10. Braided House, upper arcade. 
3. Casa Farsetti, central pillars, 11. Casa Loredan, upper arcade. . 


upper arcade. 12. St. Mark’s. 
4. Casa Loredan, lower arcade. 13. St. Mark’s. 
E. Casa Loredan, lower arcade. 14, Fondaco de’ Turehi, upper ax 
6. Fondaco de’ Turchi, upper ar- cade. 

cade. 15. St. Mark’s, 


%. Casa Loredan, upper arcade. 


PLatéE JX.--LILy CAPITAL OF ST. MARkK’s 


ZN 


PLATE X.—FOUR VENETIAN FLOWER ORDERS. 


Stones of Venice—Vol. II.—7 


BYZANTINE PALACES. 135 


the convex family on the former Plate: first the Life, second- 
ly, the Breadth, of these capitals, as compared with Greek 
forms. ‘ 

§ xx. I say, first, the Life. . Not only is every one of these 
capitals differently fancied, but there are many of them which 
have no two sides alike. Fig. 5, for instance, varies on every 
side in the arrangement of the pendent leaf in its centre ; fig. 
6 has a different plant on each of its four upper angles. The 
birds are each cut with a different play of plumage in figs. 9 
and 12, and the vine-leaves are every one varied in their posi- 
tion in fig. 13. But this is not all. The differences in the 
vharacter of ornamentation between them and the Greek 
capitals, all show a greater love of nature; the leaves are, 
every one of them, more founded on realities, sketched, how- 
ever rudely, more directly from the truth ; and are continually 
treated in a manner which shows the mind of the workman to 
have been among the living herbage, not among Greek prece- 
dents. The hard outlines in which, for the sake of perfect in- 
telligibility, I have left this Plate, have deprived the examples 
of the vitality of their light and shade; but the reader can 
nevertheless observe the ideas of life occurring perpetually : 
at the top of fig. 4, for instance, the small leaves turned side- 
ways; in fig. 5, the formal volutes of the old Corinthian 
transformed into a branching tendril; in fig. 6, the bunch of 
grapes thrown carelessly in at the right-hand corner, in defi- 
ance of all symmetry; in fig. 7, the volutes knitted into 
wreaths of ivy ; in fig. 14, the leaves, drifted, as it were, by a 
whirlwind round the capital by which they rise ; while figs. 18 
and 15 are as completely living leaves as any of the Gothic 
time. These designs may or may not be graceful ; what grace 
or beauty they have is not to be rendered in mere outline,— 
but they are indisputably more natural than any Greek ones, 
and therefore healthier, and tending to greatness. 

§ xxi. In tke second place, note in all these examples, the 
excessive breadth of the masses, however afterwards they may 
be filled with detail. Whether we examine the contour of the 
simple convex bells, or those of the leaves which bend out- 
wards from the richer and more Corinthian types, we find they 


136 THE STONES OF VENTOEZ. 


are all outlined by grand and simple curves, and that the 
whole of their minute fretwork and thistle-work is cast into a 
gigantic mould which subdues all their multitudinous points 
and foldings to its own inevitable dominion. And the fact is, 
that in the sweeping lines and broad surfaces of these Byzan- 
tine sculptures we obtain, so far as I know, for the first time 
in the history of art, the germ of that unity of perfect ease in 
every separate part, with perfect subjection to an enclosing 
form or directing impulse, which was brought to its most in- 
tense expression in the compositions of the two men in whom 
the art of Italy consummated itself and expired—Tintoret and 
Michael Angelo. 

I would not attach too much importance to the mere habit 
of working on the rounded surface of the stone, which is often 
as much the result of haste or rudeness as of the desire for 
breadth, though the result obtained is not the less beautiful. 
But in the capital from the Fondaco de’ Turchi, fig. 6, it will 
be seen that while the sculptor had taken the utmost care to 
make his leaves free, graceful, and sharp in effect, he was dis- 
satisfied with their separation, and could not rest until he had 
enclosed them with an unbroken line, like that of a pointed 
arch ; and the same thing is done in many different ways in 
other capitals of the same building, and in many of St. Mark’s: 
but one such instance would have been enough to prove, if the 
loveliness of the profiles themselves did not do so, that the 
sculptor understood and loved the laws of generalization ; and 
that the feeling which bound his prickly leaves, as they waved 
or drifted round the ridges of his capital, into those broad 
masses of unbroken flow, was indeed one with that which 
made Michael Angelo encompass the principal figure in his. 
Creation of Adam with the broad curve of its cloudy drapery. 
It may seem strange to assert any connexion between so 
great a conception and these rudely hewn fragments of ruined 
marble ; but all the highest principles of art are as universal 
as they are majestic, and there is nothing too small to receive 
their influence. They rule at once the waves of the mountain 
outline, and the sinnosities of the minutest lichen that stains 
its shattered stones. 


BYZANTINE PALACRS. 13% 


§ xx. We have not yet spoken of the three braided and 
chequered capitals, numbered 10, 11,and 12. They arerepre- 
sentations of a group, with which many most interesting asso- 
ciations are connected. It was noticed in the last chapter, that 
the method of covering the exterior of buildings with thin 
pieces of marble was likely to lead to a system of lighting the 
interior by minute perforation. In order to obtain both light 
and air, without admitting any unbroken body of sunshine, in 
warm countries, it became a constant habit of the Arabian 
architects to pierce minute and starlike openings in slabs of 
stone ; and to employ the stones so pierced where the Gothic 
architects employ traceries. Internally, the form of stars 
assumed by the light as it entered * was, in itself, an exquisite 
decoration ; but, externally, it was felt necessary to add some 
slight ornament upon the surface of the perforated stone ; and 
it was soon found thst, as the small perforations had a ten- 
dency to look scattered and spotty, the most effective treat- 
ment of the intermediate surfaces would be one which bound 
them together, and gave unity and repose to the pierced and 
disturbed stone: universally, therefore, those intermediate 
spaces were carved into the semblance of interwoven fillets, 
which alternately sank beneath and rose above each other as 
they met. Thissystem of braided or woven ornament was not 
confined to the Arabs ; it is universally pleasing to the instinct 
of mankind. I believe that nearly all early ornamentation is. 
_ full of it,—more especially, perhaps, Scandinavian and Anglo- 
Saxon ; and illuminated manuscriptsdepend upon it for their 
loveliest effects of intricate color, up to the close of the thir- 
teenth century. There are several very interesting metaphys- 
ical reasons for this strange and unfailing delight, felt ina 
thing so simple. It is not often that any idea of utility has 
power to enhance the true impressions of beauty ; but it is 
possible that the enormous importance of the art of weaving 
to mankind raay give some interest, if not actual attractive- 
ness, to any type or image of the invention to which we owe, 
at once, our comfort and our pride. But the more profound 
reason lies in the innate love of mystery and unity ; in the joy 

* Compare ‘‘ Seven Lamps,” chap, ii, § 22, 


138 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


that the human mind has in contemplating any kind of maze 
or entanglement, so long as it can discern, through its con- 
fusion, any guiding clue or connecting plan: a pleasure in- 
creased and solemnized by some dim feeling of the setting 
forth, by such symbols, of the intricacy, and alternate rise and 
fall, subjection and supremacy, of human fortune ; the 


‘¢ Weave the warp, and weave the woof,” 


of Fate and Time. 

§ xxi. But be this as it may, the fact is that we are never 
tired of contemplating this woven involution ; and that, in 
some degree, the sublime pleasure which we have in watching 
the branches of trees, the intertwining of the grass, and the 
tracery of the higher clouds, is owing to it, not less than that 
which we receive from the fine meshes of the robe, the braid- 
ing of the hair, and the various glittering of the linked net or 
wreathed chain. Byzantine ornamentation, like that of almost 
all nations in a state of progress, is full of this kind of work : 
but it occurs most conspicuously, though most simply, in the 
minute traceries which surround their most solid capitals ; 
sometimes merely in a reticulated veil, as in the tenth figure 
in the Plate, sometimes resembling a basket, on the edges of 
which are perched birds and other animals. The diamonded 
ornament in the eleventh figure is substituted for it in the 
Casa Loredan, and marks a somewhat later time and a ten- 
dency to the ordinary Gothic chequer ; but the capitals which 
show it most definitely are those already so often spoken of as 
the lily capitals of St. Mark’s, of which the northern one is 
carefully drawn in Plate IX. 

§ xxiv. These capitals, called barbarous by our architects, 
are without exception the most subtle pieces of composition in 
broad contour which I have ever met’ with in architecture. 
Their profile is given in the opposite Plate X. fig. 3, b; the 
inner line in the figure being that of the stone behind the lily, 
the outer that of the external network, taken through the 
side of the capital ; while fig. 3, ¢ is the outer profile at its 
angle ; and the reader will easily understand that the passing 


BYZANTINE PALAOKS, 139 


of the one of these lines into the other is productive of the 
most exquisite and wonderful series of curvatures possible 
within such compass, no two views of the capital giving the 
same contour. Upon these profoundly studied outlines, as re- 
markable for their grace and complexity as the general mass 
of the capital is for solid strength and proportion to its neces- 
sary service, the braided work is wrought with more than 
usual care; perhaps, as suggested by the Marchese Selvatico, 
with some idea of imitating those “nets of chequerwork and 
wreaths of chainwork ” on the chapiters of Solomon’s temple, 
which are, I suppose, the first instances on record of an orna~ 
mentation of this kind thus applied. The braided work en- 
closes on each of the four sides of the capital a flower ..nose 
form, derived from that of the lily, though as usual modified, 
in every instance of its occurrence, in some minor particulars, 
is generally seen as represented in fig. 11 of Plate VHT. It 
is never without the two square or oblony objects at the ex- 
tremity of the tendrils issuing from its root, set like vessels te 
catch the dew from the points of its leaves ; but I do not un- 
derstand their meaning. The abacus of the capital has already 
been given at a, Plate XVI., Vol. I. ; but no amount of illus- 
trations or eulogium would be enough to make the reader un- 
derstand the perfect beauty of the thing itself, as the sun steals 
from interstice to interstice of its marble veil, and touches with 
the white lustre of its rays at mid-day the pointed leaves of 
its thirsty lilies. 

In all the capitals hitherto spoken of, the form of the head 
of the bell has been square, and its varieties of outline have 
been obtained in the transition from the square of the abacus 
to the circular outline of the shafts. A far more complex 
series of forms results from the division of the bell by recesses 
into separate lobes or leaves, like those of a rose or tulip, which 
are each in their turn covered with flowerwork or hollowed 
into reticulation. The example (fig. 10, Plate VIL) from St. 
Mark’s will give some idea of the simplest of these conditions : 
perhaps the most exquisite in Venice, on the whole, is the 
central capital of the upper arcade of the Fondaco de’ Turchi 

Such are the principal generic conditions of the Byzantine 


140 THE STONES OF VENICH. 


capital ; but the reader must always remember that the 
examples given are single instances, and those not the most 
beautiful but the most intelligible, chosen out of thousands : 
the designs of the capitals of St. Mark’s alone would form a 
volume. 

§ xxv. Of the archivolts which these capitals generally sus- 
tain, details are given in the Appendix and in the notice of 
Venetian doors in Chapter VI. In the private palaces, the 
ranges of archivolt are for the most part very simple, with 
dentilled mouldings ; and all the ornamental effect is entrusted 
to pieces of sculpture set in the wall above or between the 
arches, in the manner shown in Plate XV., below, Chapter 
YI. These pieces of sculpture are either crosses, upright ob- 
- longs, or circles: of all the three forms an example is given 
in Plate XI. opposite. The cross was apparently an invariable 
prnament, placed either in the centre of the archivolt of the 
doorway, or in the centre of the first story above the windows ; 
on each side of it the circular and oblong ornaments were 
used in various alternation. In too many instances the wall 
marbles have been torn away from the earliest Byzantine pal- 
aces, so that the crosses are left on their archivolts only. The 
best examples of the cross set above the windows are found in 
houses of the transitional period: one in the Campo St M. 
Formosa ; another, in which a cross is placed between every 
window, is still well preserved in the Campo St* Maria Mater 
Domini; another, on the Grand Canal, in the parish of the 
Apostoli, has two crosses, one on each side of the first story, 
and a bas-relief of Christ enthroned in the centre ; and finally, 
that from which the larger cross in the Plate was taken in 
the house once belonging to Marco Polo, at St. Giovanni Gris- 
ostomo. 

§ xxvr. This cross, though graceful and rich, and given be- 
cause it happens to be one of the best preserved, is unchar- 
acteristic in one respect ; for, insteed of the central rose at 
the meeting of the arms, we usually find a hand raised in the 
attitude of blessing, between the sun and moon, as in the two 
smaller crosses seen in the Plate. In nearly all representations 
oi the Crucifixion, over the whole of Europe, at the period in 


BYZANTINE PALACKS. 141 


question, the sun and the moon are introduced, one on each 
side of the cross—the sun generally, in paintings, as a red 
star ; but Ido not think with any purpose of indicating the 
darkness at the time of the agony ; especially because, had this 
been the intention, the moon ought not to have been visible, 
since it could not have been in the heavens during the day at 
the time of passover. I believe rather that the two luminaries 
are set there in order to express the entire dependence of the 
heavens and the earth upon the work of the Redemption : and 
this view is confirmed by our frequently finding the sun and 
moon set in the same manner beside the figure of Christ, as 
in the centre of the great archivolt of St. Mark’s, or beside 
the hand signifying benediction, without any cross, in some 
other early archivolts ;* while, again, not unfrequently they 
are absent from the symbol of the cross itself, and its saving 
power over the whole of creation is indicated only by fresh 
leaves springing from its foot, or doves feeding beside it ; and 
so also, in illuminated Bibles, we find the series of pictures 
representing the Creation terminate in the Crucifixion, as the 
work by which all the families of created beings subsist, no less 
than that in sympathy with which “the whole creation 
groaneth and travaileth in pain together until now.” 

§ xxvu. This habit of placing the symbol of the Christian 
faith in the centres of their palaces was, as I above said, uni- 
versal in early Venice ; it does not cease till about the middle 
of the fourteenth century. The other sculptures, which were 
set above or between the arches, consist almost invariably of 
groups of birds or beasts; either standing opposite to each 
other with a small pillar or spray of leafage between them, or 
else tearing and devouring each other. The multitude y 
these sculptures, especially of the small ones enclosed in 
circles, as figs. 5 and 6, Plate XI, which are now scattered 
through the city of Venice, is enormous, but they are seldom 
to be seen in their original positions. When the Byzantine 
palaces were destroyed, these fragments were generally pre- 
served, and inserted again in the walls of the new buildings, 

* Two of these are represented in the second number of my folie 
work upon Venice, 


142 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


with more or less attempt at symmetry; fragments of friezes 
and mouldings being often used in the same manner ; so that 
the mode of their original employment can only be seen in 
St. Mark’s, the Fondaco de’ Turchi, Braided House, and one 
or two others. The most remarkable point about them is, 
that the groups of beasts or birds on each side of the small 
pillars bear the closest possible resemblance to the group of 
Lions over the gate of Mycene ; and the whole of the orna- 
mentation of that gate, as far as I can judge of it from draw- 
ings, is so like Byzantine sculpture, that I cannot help some- 
times suspecting the original conjecture of the French anti- 
quarians, that it was a work of the middle ages, to be not 
altogether indefensible. By far the best among the sculptures 
at Venice are those consisting of groups thus arranged ; the 
first figure in Plate XI. is one of those used on St. Mark’s, 
and, with its chain of wreathen work round it, is very char- 
acteristic of the finest kind, except that the immediate trunk 
or pillar often branches into luxuriant leafage, usually of the 
vine, so that the whole ornament seems almost composed 
from the words of Ezekiel. “A great eagle with great wings, 
long-winged, full of feathers, which had divers colors, came 
into Lebanon, and took the highest branch of the cedar: He 
cropped off the top of his young twigs ; and carried it into a 
city of traffic ; he set it in a city of merchants. He took also 
of the seed of the land, . . . and it grew, and became a 
spreading vine of low stature, whose branches turned towards 
him, and the roots thereof were under him.” 

§ xxvii. The groups of contending and devouring animals 
are always much ruder in cutting, and take somewhat the place 
in Byzantine sculpture which the lower egrotesques do in the | 
Gothic ; true, though elumsy, grotesques being sometimes 
mingled among them, as four bodies joined to one head in the 
centre ;* but never showing any attempt at variety of inven- 
tion, except only in the effective disposition of the light and 
shade, and in the vigor and thoughtfulness of the touches 
which indicate the plumes of the birds or folding of the leaves. 


* The absence of the true grotesque spirit in Byzantine work will be 
examined in the third chapter of the third volume. 


PLATE XI.—BYZANTINE SCULPTURE. 


= 


ie tae ce 


< 


BYZANTINE PALACHS. 148 


Care, however, is always taken to secure variety enough to 
keep the eye entertained, no two sides of these Byzantine or- 
naments being in all respects the same: for instance, in the 
chainwork round the first figure in Plate XI. there are two 
circles enclosing squares on the left-hand side of the arch at 
the top, but two smaller circles and a diamond on the other, 
enclosing one square, and two small circular spots or bosses ; 
and in the line of chain at the bottom there is a circle on the 
right, and a diamond on the left, and so down to the working 
of the smallest details. I have represented this upper sculpt- 
ure as dark, in order to give some idea of the general effect 
of these ornaments when seen in. shadow against light ; an 
effect much calculated upon by the designer, and obtained by 
the use of a golden ground formed of glass mosaic inserted in 
the hollows of the marble. Each square of glass has the leaf 
gold upon its surface protected by another thin film of glass 
above it, so that no time or weather can affect its lustre, until 
the pieces of glass are bodily torn from their setting. The 
smooth glazed surface of the golden ground is washed by 
every shower of rain, but the marble usually darkens into an 
amber color in process of time ; and when the whole ornament 
is cast into shadow, the golden surface, being perfectly re- 
flective, refuses the darkness, and shows itself in bright and 
burnished light behind the dark traceries of the ornament. 
Where the marble has retained its perfect whiteness, on the. 
other hand, and is seen in sunshine, it is shown as a snowy 
tracery on a golden ground ; and the alternations and inter- 
mingling of these two effects form one of the chief enchant- 
ments of Byzantine ornamentation. 

§ xxix. How far the system of grounding with gold and 
color, universal in St. Mark’s, was carried out in the sculptures 
of the private palaces, it is now impossible to say. The wrecks 
of them which remain, as above noticed, show few of their 
ornamental sculptures in their original position ; and from 
those marbles which were employed in succeeding buildings, 
during the Gothic period, the fragments of their mosaic 
grounds would naturally rather have been removed than re- 
stored. Mosaic, while the most secure of all decorations if 


144 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


carefully watched and refastened when it loosens, may, if neg. 
lected and exposed to weather, in process of time disappear so 
as to leave no vestige of its existence. However this may have 
been, the assured facts are, that both the shafts of the pillars 
and the facing of the old building were of veined or variously 
colored marble : the capitals and sculptures were either, as they 
now appear, of pure white marble, relieved upon the veined 
ground ; or, which is infinitely the more probable, grounded 
in the richer palaces with mosaic of gold, in the inferior ones 
with blue color ; and only the leaves and edges of the sculpt- 
ure gilded. These brighter hues were opposed by bands of 
deeper color, generafly alternate russet and green, in the archi- 
volts,—bands which still remain in the Casa Loredan and Fon- 
daco de’ Turchi, and in a house in the Corte del Remer, near 
the Rialto, as well as in St. Mark’s ; and by circular disks of 
green serpentine and porphyry, which, together with the cir- 
cular sculptures, appear to have been an ornament peculiarly 
erateful to the Eastern mind, derived probably in the first 
instance from the suspension of shields upon the wall, as in 
the majesty of ancient Tyre. ‘‘'The men of Arvad with thine 
army were upon thy walls round about, and the Gammadins 
were in thy towers: they hanged their shields upon thy walls 
round about; they have made thy beauty perfect.”* The 
sweet and solemn harmony of purple with various green (the 
same, by the by, to which the hills of Scotland owe their best 
loveliness) remained a favorite chord of color with the Vene- 
tians, and was constantly used even in the later palaces ; but 
never could have been seen in so great perfection as when op- 
posed to the pale and delicate sculpture of the Byzantine time. 
§ xxx. Such, then, was that first and fairest Venice which 
rose out of the barrenness of the lagoon, and the sorrow of her 
people ; a city of graceful arcades and gleaming walls, veined 
with azure and warm with gold, and fretted with white sculpt- 
ure like frost upon forest branches turned to marble. And 
yet, in this beauty of her youth, she was no city of thought- 
less pleasure. There was still a sadness of heart upon her, 
and a depth of devotion, in which lay all her strength. Ido 


* Hzekiel, xxvii. 11, 


BYZANTINE PALACHS 145 


not insist upon the probable religious signification of many of 

2e sculptures which are now difficult of interpretation ; but 
the temper which made the cross the principal ornament of 
every building is not to be misunderstood, nor can we fail to 
perceive, in many of the minor sculptural subjects, meanings 
perfectly familiar to the mind of early Christianity. The pea- 
cock, used in preference to every other bird, is the well-known 
symbol of the resurrection ; and when drinking from a foun- 
tain (Plate XI. fig. 1) or from a font (Plate XI. fig. 5), is, I 
doubt not, also a type of the new life received in faithful bap- 
tism. The vine, used in preference to all other trees, was 
equally recognized as, in all cases, a type either of Christ him- 
self * or of those who were in a state of visible or professed 
union with him. The dove, at its foot, represents the coming 
of the Comforter ; and even the groups of contending animals 
had, probably, a distinct and universally apprehended refer- 
ence to the powers of evil. But I lay no stress on these more 
occult meanings. The principal circumstance which marks the 
seriousness of the early Venetian mind is perhaps the last in 
which the reader would suppose it was traceable ;—that love 
of bright and pure color which, in a modified form, was after- 
wards the root of all the triumph of the Venetian schools of 
painting, but which, in its utmost simplicity, was characteris- 
tic of the Byzantine period only ; and of which, therefore, in 
the close of our review of that period, it will be well that we 
should truly estimate the significance. The fact is, we none 
of us enough appreciate the nobleness and sacredness of color. 
Nothing is more common than to hear it spoken of as a sub- 
ordinate beauty,—nay, even as the mere source of a sensual 
pleasure ; and we might almost believe that we were daily 
among men who 


“¢ Could strip, for aught the prospect yields 
To them, their verdure from the fields ; 
And take the radiance from the clouds 
With which the sun his setting shrouds.” 


* Perhaps this type is in no place of Scripture more touchingly use? 
than in Lamentations, i. 12, where the word ‘: afflicted” is rendered iH 
the Vulgate ‘‘ vindemiavit,”’ ‘‘ vintaged.” 

Vou. II.—10 


146 THE STONES OF VENTOE. 


But it is not so. Such expressions are used for the most paré 
in thoughtlessness ; and if the speakers would only take the’ 
pains to imagine what the world and their own existence would 
become, if the blue were taken from the sky, and the gold 
from the sunshine, and the verdure from the leaves, and the 
crimson from the blood which is the life of man, the flush 
from the cheek, the darkness from the eye, the radiance from 
the hair,—if they could but see for an instant, white human 
creatures living in a white world,—they would soon feel what 
they owe to color. The fact is, that, of all God’s gifts to the 
sight of man, color is the holiest, the most divine, the mos’ 
solemn. We speak rashly of gay color, and sad color, for 
color cannot at once be good and gay. All good color is in 
some degree pensive, the loveliest is melancholy, and the pur- 
est and most thoughtful minds are those which love color the 
most. 

§ xxxt. I know that this will sound strange in many ears, 
and will be especially startling to those who have considered 
the subject chiefly with reference to painting; for the great 
Venetian schools of color are not usually understood to be 
either pure or pensive, and the idea of its pre-eminence is 
associated in nearly every mind with the coarseness of Ru- 
bens, and the sensualities of Correggio and Titian. But a 
more comprehensive view of art will soon correct this impres- 
sion. It will be discovered, in the first place, that the more 
faithful and earnest the religion of the painter, the more purs 
and prevalent is the system of his color. It will be found, in 
the second place, that where color becomes a primal inten- 
tion with a painter otherwise mean or sensual, it instantly 
elevates him, and becomes the one sacred and saving element 
in his work. The very depth of the stoop to which the Vene- 
tian painters and Rubens sometimes condescend, is a conse- 
quence of their feeling confidence in the power of their color 
to keep them from falling. They hold on by it, as by a chain 
let down from heaven, with one hand, though they may some- 
times seem to gather dust and ashes with the othcr. And, 
in the last place, it will be found that so surely as a painter 
is irreligious, thoughtless, or obscone in disposition, so surely 


BYZANTINE PALACEKS. 14% 


% his coloring cold, gloomy, and valueless. The opposite 
poies of art in this respect are Fri Angelico and Salvator 
Rosa ; of whom the one was a man who smiled seldom, wept 
often, prayed constantly, and never harbored an impure 
thought. His pictures are simply so many pieces of jewel- 
lery, the colors of the draperies being perfectly pure, as vari- 
ous as those of a painted window, chastened only by paleness, 
and relieved upon a gold ground. Salvator was a dissipated 
jester and satirist, a man who spent his life in masquing and 
revelry. But his pictures are full of horror, and their color 
is for the most part gloomy grey. Truly it would seem as if 
art had so much of eternity in it, that it must take its dye 
from the close rather than’ the course of life:—‘‘In such 
laughter the heart of man is sorrowful, and the end of that 
mirth is heaviness.” 

§ xxxu. These are no singular instances. I know no law 
more severely without exception than this of the connexion 
of pure color with profound and noble thought. The late 
Flemish pictures, shallow in conception and obscene in sub- 
ject, are always sober in color. But the early religious paint- 
ing of the Flemings is as brilliant in hue as it is holy in 
thought. The Bellinis, Francias, Peruginos painted in crim- 
son, and blue, and gold. The Caraccis, Guidos, and Rem- 
brandts in brown and grey. The builders of our great cathe- 
drals veiled their casements and wrapped their pillars with 
one robe of purple splendor. The builders of the luxurious 
Renaissance left their palaces filled only with cold white light, 
and in the paleness of their native stone.* 

§ xxx. Nor does it seem difficult to discern a noble rea- 
gon for this universal law. In that heavenly circle which 
binds the statutes of color upon the front of the sky, when it 
became the sign of the covenant of peace, the pure hues of 
divided light were sanctified to the human heart for ever ; nor 
this, it would seem, by mere arbitrary appointment, but in 
consequence of the fore-ordained and marvellous constitution 
of those hues inte a sevenfold, or, more strictly still, a three 
told order, typical of the Divine nature itself. Observe also 

* Appendix 12, “ Modern Tainting on Glass,” 


148 THE STONHS OF VENICE. 


the name Shem, or Splendor, given to that son of Noah in 
whom this covenant with mankind was to be fulfilled, and 
see how that name was justified by every one of the Asiatic 
races which descended from him. Not without meaning was 
the love of Israel to his chosen son expressed by the coat “of 
many colors ;” not without deep sense of the sacredness of 
that symbol of purity, did the lost daughter of David tear it 
from her breast :—‘ With such robes were the king’s daugh- 
. ters that were virgins apparelled.” * We know it to have 
been by Divine command that the Israelite, rescued from ser- 
vitude, veiled the tabernacle with its rain of purple and scar- 
let, while the under sunshine flashed throngh the fall of the 
color from its tenons of gold: but was it less by Divine 
guidance that the Mede, as he struggled out of anarchy, en- 
compassed his king with the sevenfold burning of the battle- 
ments of Ecbatana ?—of which one circle was golden like the 
sun, and another silver like the moon; and then came the 
great sacred chord of color, blue, purple, and scarlet ; and 
then a circle white like the day, and another dark, like night ; 
so that the city rose like a great mural rainbow, a sign of 
peace amidst the contending of lawless races, and guarded, 
with color and shadow, that seemed to symbolize the great. 
order which rules over Day, and Night, and Time, the first 
organization of the mighty statutes,—the law of the Medes 
and Persians, that altereth not. 

§ xxxry. Let us not dream that it is owing to the accidents 
of tradition or education that those races possess the suprem- 
acy over color which has always been felt, though but lately 
acknowledged among men. However their dominion might 
be broken, their virtue extinguished, or their religion defiled, 
they retained alike the instinct and the power: the instinct 
which made even their idolatry more glorious than that of 
others, bursting forth in fire-worship from pyramid, cave, and 
mountain, taking the stars for, the rulers of its fortune, and 
the sun for the God of its life; the power which so dazzled 
and subdued the rough crusader into forgetfulness of sorrow 
and of shame, that Europe put on the splendor which she had 

* 2 Samuel, xiii, 18, 


BYZANTINE PALACES. 149 


learnt of the Saracen, as her sackcloth of mourning for what 
she suffered from his sword ;—the power which she confesses 
to this day, in the utmost thoughtlessness of her pride, or her 
beauty, as it treads the costly carpet, or veils itself with the 
variegated Cachemire ; and in the emulation of the concourse 
of her workmen, who, but a few months back, perceived, or at 
least admitted, for the first time, the pre-eminence which has 
been determined from the birth of mankind, and on whose 
charter Nature herself has set a mysterious seal, granting to 
the Western races, descended from that son of Noah whose 
name was Extension, the treasures of the sullen rock, and 
stubborn ore, and gnarled forest, which were to accomplish 
their destiny across all distance of earth and depth of sea, 
while she matured the jewel in the sand, and rounded the 
pearl in the shell, to adorn the diadem of him whose name 
was Splendor. 

§ xxxv. And observe, farther, how in the Oriental mind a 
peculiar seriousness is associated with this attribute of the 
love of color ; a seriousness rising out of repose, and out of 
the depth and breadth of the imagination, as contrasted with 
the activity, and consequent capability of surprise, and of 
laughter, characteristic of the Western mind: as aman on a 
journey must look to his steps always, and view things nar- 
rowly and quickly ; while one at rest may command a wider 
view, though an unchanging one, from which the pleasure he 
receives must be one of contemplation, rather than of amuse- 
ment or surprise. Wherever the pure Oriental spirit mani- 
fests itself definitely, I believe its work is serious; and the 
meeting of the influences of the Eastern and Western races is 
perhaps marked in Europe more by the dying away of the 
grotesque laughter of the Goth than by any other sign. I 
shall have more to say on this hed in other places of this 
volume ; but the point I wish at present to impress upon the 
ceader is, that the bright hues of the early architecture of 
Venice were no sign of gaiety of heart, and that the investi- 
ture with the mantle of many colors by which she is known 
above all other cities of Italy and of Europe, was not granted 
to her in the fever of her festivity, but in the solemnity of her 


150 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


early and earnest religion. She became in after times the 
revel of the earth, the masque of Italy; and therefore is she 
now desolate : but her glorious robe of gold’and purple was 
given her when first she rose a vestal from the sea, not 
when she became drunk with the wine of her fornication. 

§ xxxvz. And we have never yet looked with enough rever- 
ence upon the separate gift which was thus bestowed upon 
her; we have never enough considered what an inheritance 
she has left us, in the works of those mighty painters who 
were the chief of her children. That inheritance is indeed 
less than it ought to have been, and other than it ought to 
have been ; for before Titian and Tintoret arose,—the men in 
whom her work and her glory should have been together con- 
summated,—she had already ceased to lead her sons in the 
way of truth and life, and they erred much, and fell short of 
that which was appointed for them. There is no subject of 
thought more melancholy, more wonderful, than the way in 
which God permits so often His best gifts to be trodden under 
foot of men, His richest treasures to be wasted by the moth, 
and the mightiest influences of His Spirit, given but once in 
the world’s history, to be quenched and shortened by miseries 
of chance and guilt. Ido not wonder at what men Suffer, 
but I wonder often at what they Lose. We may see how good 
rises out of pain and evil; but the dead, naked, eyeless loss, 
what good comes of that? The fruit struck to the earth before 
its ripeness ; the glowing life and goodly purpose dissolved 
away in sudden death ; the words, half spoken, choked upon 
the lips with clay for ever; or, stranger than all, the whole 
majesty of humanity raised to its fulness, and every gift and 
power necessary for a given purpose, at a given moment, _ 
centred in one man, and all this perfected blessing permitted 
to be refused, perverted, crushed, cast aside by those who 
need it most,—the city which is Not set ‘on a hill, the candle 
that giveth light to None that are in the house :—these are 
the heaviest mysteries of this strange world, and, it seems to 
me, those which mark its curse the most. And it is true that 
the power with which this Venice had been entrusted, was 
perverted, when at its highest, in a thousand miserable ways ; 


BYZANTINE PALACES. {51 


still, it was possessed by her alone ; to her all hearts have 
turned which could be moved by its manifestation, and none 
without being made stronger and nobler by what her hand 
had wrought. That mighty Landscape, of dark mountains 
that guard the horizon with their purple towers, and solemn 
forests, that gather their weight of leaves, bronzed with sun- 
shine, not with age, into those gloomy masses fixed in heaven, 
which storm and frost have power no more to shake, or shed ; 
—that mighty Humanity, so perfect and so proud, that hides 
no weakness beneath the mantle, and gains no greatness from 
the diadem ; the majesty of thoughtful form, on which the 
dust of gold and flame of jewcls are dashed as the sea-spray 
upon the rock, and still the great Manhood seems to stand 
bare against the blue sky ;—that mighty Mythology, which 
fills the daily walks of men with spiritual companionship, and 
beholds the protecting angels break with their burning pres- 
ence through the arrow-flights of battle :—measure the com- 
pass of that field of creation, weigh the value of the inheri- 
tance that Venice thus left to the nations of Kurope, and then 
judge if so vast, so beneficent a power could indeed have been 
rooted in dissipation or decay. It was when she wore the 
ephod of the priest, not the motley of the masquer, that the 
fire fell upon her from heaven; and she saw the first rays of 
it through the rain of her own teais, when, as the barbaric 
deluge ébbed from the hills of Italy, the circuit of her palaces, 
and the orb of her fortunes, rose together, like the Iris, painted 
upon the Cloud. 


SECOND, OR GOTHIC, PERIOD. 


CHAPTER VI. 
THE NATURE OF GOTHIC. 


§ 1. Ir the reader will look back to the division of our sub 
ject which was made in the first chapter of the first volume, he 
will find that we are now about to enter upon the examination 
of that school of Venetian architecture which forms an inter- 
mediate step between the Byzantine and Gothic forms; but 
which I find may be conveniently considered in its connexion 
with the latter style. In order that we may discern the ten- 
dency of each step of this change, it will be wise in the outset 
to endeavor to form some general idea of its final result. We 
know already what the Byzantine architecture is from which 
the transition was made, but we ought to know something of 
the Gothic architecture into which it led. I shall endeavor 
therefore to give the reader in this chapter an idea, at once 
broad and definite, of the true nature of Gothic architecture, 
properly so called ; not of that of Venice only, but of univer- 
sal Gothic : fer it will be one of the most interesting parts of 
our subsequent inquiry, to find out how far Venetian archi- 
tecture reached the universal or perfect type of Gothic, and. 
how far it either fell short of it, or assumed foreign and inde- 
pendent forms. 

§u. The principal difficulty in doing this arises from the 
fact that every building of the Gothic period differs in some 
important respect from every other ; and many include feat- 
ures which, if they occurred in other buildings, would not be 
considered Gothic at all ; so that all we have to reason upon 
is merely. if I may be allowed so to express it, a greater or less 


THE NATURE OF . /THIC. 153 


degree of Gothicness in each building we examine. And it is 
this Gothicness,—the character which, ..ccording as it is found 
more or less in a building, makes it more or less Gothic,—of 
which I want to define the nature ; and I feel the same kind 
of difficulty in doing so which would be encountered by any 
one who undertook to explain, for instance, the nature of Red- 
ness, without any actual red thing to point to, but only orange 
and purple things. Suppose he had only a piece of heather 
and a dead oak-leaf to do it with, He might say, the color 
which is mixed with the yellow in this oak-leaf, and with the 
blue in this heather, would be red, if you had it separate ; but 
it would be difficult, nevertheless, to make the abstraction per- 
fectly intelligible : and it is so in a far greater degree to make 
the abstraction of the Gothic character intelligible, because 
that character itself is made up of many mingled ideas, and 
can consist only in their union. That is to say, pointed arches 
do not constitute Gothic, nor vaulted roofs, nor flying but- 
tresses, nor grotesque sculptures; but all or some of. these 
things, and many other things ‘vith them, when they come 
together so as to have life. 

§ mt. Observe also, that, in the definition proposed, I shall 
only endeavor to analyze the idea which I suppose already to 
exist in the reader’s mind. We all have some notion, most of 
us a very determined one, of the meaning of the term Gothic ; 
but I know that many persons have this idea in their minds 
without being able to define it: that is to say, understanding 
generally that Westminster Abbey is Gothic, and St. Paul’s is 
not, that Strasburg Cathedral is Gothic, and St. Peter’s is not, 
they have, nevertheless, no clear notion of what it is that 
they recognize in the one or miss in the other, such as would 
enable them to say how far the work at Westminster or Stras- 
burg is good and pure of its kind: still less to say of any non- 
descript building, like St. James’s Palace or Windsor Castle, 
how much right Gothic element there is in it, and how much 
wanting. And I believe this inquiry to bea pleasant and prof- 
itable one ; and that there will be found something more than 
usually interesting in tracing out this grey, shadowy, many- 
pinaacled image of the Gothic spirit within us; and discern 


154 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


ing what fellowship there is between it and our Northern 
hearts. And if, at am, point of the inquiry, I should interfere 
with any of the reader’s previously formed conceptions, and 
use the term Gothic in any sense which he would not will- 
ingly attach to it, I do not ask him to accept, but only to ex- 
amine and understand, my interpretation, as necessary to the 
intelligibility of what follows in the rest of the work. 

§ tv. We have, then, the Gothic character submitted to our 
analysis, just as the rough mineral is submitted to that of the 
chemist, entangled with many other foreign substances, itself 
perhaps in no place pure, or ever to be obtained or seen in 
purity for more than an instant ; but nevertheless a thing of 
definite and separate nature, however inextricable or confused 
in appearance. Now observe: the chemist defines his mineral 
by two separate kinds of character ; one external, its crystal- 
line form, hardness, lustre, &c. ; the other internal, the pro- 
portions and nature of its constituent atoms. Exactly in the 
same manner, we shall find that Gothic architecture has ex- 
ternal forms, and internal elements. Its elements are certain 
mental tendencies of the builders, legibly expressed in it; as 
fancifulness, love of variety, love of richness, and such others. 
Its external forms are pointed arches, vaulted roofs, &e. And 
unless both the elements and the forms are there, we have no 
right to call the style Gothic. It is not enough that it has the 
Form, if it have not also the power and life. It is not enough 
that it has the Power, if it have not the form. We must there- 
fore inquire into each of these characters successively ; and 
determine first, what is the Mental Expression, and secondly, 
what the Material Form, of Gothic architecture, properly so 
called. a 

Ist. Mental Power or Expression. . What characters, we 
have to discover, did the Gothic builders love, or instinctively 
express in their work, as distinguished from all other builders ? 

§ v. Let us go back for a moment to our chemistry, and 
note that, in defining a mineral by its constituent parts, it is 
not one nor another of them, that can make up the mineral, 
but the union of all: for instance, it is neither in charcoal, nor 
in oxygen, uor in lime, that there is the making of chalk, but 


THR NATURE OF GOTHIC. - 155 


in the combination of all three in certain measures , they are 
ali found in very different things from chalk, and there is 
nothing like chalk either in charcoal or in oxygen, but they 
are nevertheless necessary to its existence. 

So in the various mental characters which make up the soul 
of Gothic. It is not one nor another that produces it; but 
cheir union in certain measures. Hach one of them is found 
in many other architectures besides Gothic ; but Gothic can- 
not exist where they are not found, or, at least, where their 
place is not in some way supplied. Only there is this great 
difference between the composition of the mineral, and of the 
architectural style, that if we withdraw one of its elements 
from the stone, its form is utterly changed, and its existence 
as such and such a mineral is destroyed ; but if we withdraw 
one of its mental elem2nts from the Gothic style, it is only a 
little less Gothic than it was before, and the union of two or 
three of its elements is enough already to bestow a certain 
Gothicness of character, which gains in intensity as we add 
the others, and loses as we again withdraw them. 

§ vi. I believe, then, that the characteristic or moral ele. 
ments ef Gothic are the following, placed in the order of their 
importance : 


1. Savageness. 4. Grotesqueness. 
2. Changefulness. 5. Rigidity. 
3. Naturalism. 6. Redundance. 


These characters are here expressed as belonging to the 
building ; as belonging to the builder, they would be expressed 
thus: 1. Savageness, or Rudeness. 2. Love of Change. 3. 
Love of Nature. 4. Disturbed Imagination. 5. Obstinacy. 
6. Generosity. And I repeat, that the withdrawal of any one, 
or any two, will not at once destroy the Gothic character of a 
building, but the removal of a majority of them will. I shall 
proceed to examine them in their order. 

§ vu. 1. Savaceness. I am not sure when the word 
* Gothic ” was first generically applied to the architecture of 
the North; but I presume that, whatever the date of its orig- 
inal usage, it was intended to imply reproach, and express 


156 VHE STONES OF VENICE. 


the barbaric character of the nations among whom that ar 
chitecture arose. It never implied that they were literally of 
Gothic lineage, far less that their architecture had been orig- 
inally invented by the Goths themselves ; but it did imply 
that they and their buildings together exhibited a degree of 
sternness and rudeness, which, in contradistinction to the 
character of Southern and Eastern nations, appeared like a per- 
petual reflection of the contrast between the Goth and the 
Roman in their first encounter. And when that fallen Roman, 
in the utmost impotence of his luxury, and insolence of his guilt, 
became the model for the imitation of civilized Europe, at the 
close of the so-called Dark ages, the word Gothic became a 
term of unmitigated contempt, not unmixed with aversion. 
From that contempt, by the exertion of the antiquaries and 
architects of this century, Gothic architecture has been suffi- 
ciently vindicated ; and perhaps some among us, in our ad~ 
miration of the magnificent science of its structure, and sacred- 
ness of its expression, might desire that the term of ancient 
reproach should be withdrawn, and some other, of more ap- 
parent honorableness, adopted in its place. There is no chance, 
as there is no need, of such asubstitution. As far as the epithet 
was used scornfully, it was used falsely ; but there is no re- 
proach in the word, rightly understood ; on the contrary, there 
is a profound truth, which the instinct of mankind almost un- 
consciously recognizes. It is true, greatly and deeply true, 
that the architecture of the North is rude and wild; but it 
is not true, that, for this reason, we are to condemn it, or de- 
gpise. Far otherwise: I believe it isin this very character 
that it deserves our profoundest reverence. 

§ viz. The charts of the world which have been drawn up 
by modern science have thrown into a narrow space the ex- 
pression of a vast amount of knowledge, but I have never yet 
seen any one pictorial enough to enable the spectator to im- 
agine the kind of contrast in physical character which exists 
between Northern and Southern countries. We know the dif- 
ferences in detail, but we have not that broad glance and 
grasp which would enable us to feel them in their fulness 
We know that gentians grow on the Alps, and olives on the 


THE NATURE OF GOTHIC. 157 


Apennines ; but we do not enough conceive for ourselves that 
variegated mosaic of the world’s surface which a bird sees in 
its migration, that difference between the district of the gen- 
tian and of the olive which the stork and the swallow see far 
off, as they lean upon the sirocco wind. Let us, for a moment, 
try to raise ourselves even above the level of their flight, and 
imagine the Mediterranean lying beneath us like an irregular 
lake, and all its ancient promontories sleeping in the sun: 
here and there an angry spot of thunder, a grey stain of storm, 
moving upon the burning field; and here and there a fixed 
wreath of white volcano smoke, surrounded by its circle of 
ashes ; but for the most part a great peacefulness of light, 
Syria and Greece, Italy and Spain, laid like pieces of a goiden 
pavement into the sea-blue, chased, as we stoop nearer to 
them, with bossy beaten work of mountain chains, and glow- 
ing softly with terraced gardens, and flowers heavy with frank- 
incense, mixed among masses of laurel, and orange and plumy 
palm, that abate with their grey-green shadows the burning of 
the marble rocks, and of the ledgesof porphyry sloping under 
lucent sand. Then let us pass farther towards the north, 
until we see the orient colors change gradually into a vast belt 
of rainy green, where the pastures of Switzerland, and poplar 
valleys of France, and dark forests of the Danube and Carpa- 
thians stretch from the mouths of the Loire to those of the 
Volga, seen through clefts in grey swirls of rain-cloud and 
flaky veils of the mist of the brooks, spreading low along the 
pasture lands: and then, farther north still, to see the earth 
heave into mighty masses of leaden rock and heathy moor, 
oordering with a broad waste of gloomy purple that belt of 
field and wood, and splintering into irregular and grisly islands 
amidst the northern seas, beaten by storm and chilled by ice- 
drift, and tormented by furious pulses of contending tide, 
until the roots of the last forests fail from among the hill 
ravines, and the hunger of the north wind bites their peaks 
into barrenness ; and, at last, the wall of ice, durable like iron, 
sets, deathlike, its white teeth against us out of the polar twi- 
light. And, having once traversed in thought its gradation of 
the zoned iris of the earth in all its material vastness, let us 


158 THH STONES OF VENICE. 


go down nearer to it, and watch the parallel change in the 
belt of ‘animal life: the multitudes of swift and brilliant 
creatures that glance in the air and sea, or tread the sands of 
the southern zone ; striped zebras and spotted leopards, glis- 
tening serpents, and birds arrayed in purple and scarlet. Let 
us contrast their delicacy and brilliancy of color, and swiftness 
of motion, with the frost-cramped strength, and shaggy cov- 
ering, and dusky plumage of the northern tribes; contrast the 
Arabian horse with the Shetland, the tiger and leopard with 
the wolf and bear, tlie antelope with the elk, the bird of para- 
dise with the osprey;: and then, submissively acknowledging 
the great laws by which the earth and all that it bears are 
ruled throughout their being, let us not condemn, but rejoice 
at the expression by man of his own rest in the statutes of 
the lands that gave him birth. Let us watch him with rever- 
ence as he sets side by side the burning gems, and smoothes 
with soft sculpture the jasper pillars, that are to reflect a cease- 
less sunshine, and rise into a cloudlesssky : but not with less 
reverence let us stand by him, when, with rough strength and 
hurried stroke, he smites an uncouth animation out of the 
rocks which he has torn from among the moss of the moor- 
land, and heaves into the darkened air the pile of iron buttress 
and rugged wall, instinct with work of an imagination as 
wild and wayward as the northern sea; creations of un- 
gainly shape and rigid limb, but full of wolfish life; fierce as 
the winds that beat, and changeful as the clouds that shade 
them. 

There is, I repeat, no degradation, no reproach in this, but 
all dignity and honorableness ; and we should err grievously 
in refusing either to recognise as an essential character of the 
existing architecture of the North, or to admit as a desirable — 
character in that which it yet may be, this wildness of thought, 
and roughness of work; this look of mountain brotherhood 
between the cathedral and the Alp ; this magnificence of sturdy 
power, put forth only the more energetically because the fine 
finger-touch was chilled away by the frosty wind, and the eye 
dimmed by the moor-mist, or blinded by the hail; this out- 
speaking of the strong spirit of men who may not gather re. 


THE NATURE OF GOTHIC. 159 


dundant fruitage from the earth, nor bask in dreamy benignity 
of sunshine, but must break the rock for bread, and cleave the 
forest for fire, and show, even in what they did for their de- 
light, some of the hard habits of the arm and heart that grew 
on them as they swung the axe or pressed the plough. 

§ 1x. If, however, the savageness of Gothic architecture 
merely as an expression of its origin among Northern nations, 
may be considered, in some sort, a noble character, it possesses 
a higher nobility still, when considered as an index, not of cli- 
mate, but of religious principle. 

In the 13th and 14th paragraphs of Chapter XXI. of the 
first volume of this work, it was noticed that the systems of 
architectural ornament, properly so called, might be divided 
into three :—1. Servile ornament, in which the execution or 
power of the inferior workman is entirely subjected to the in- 
tellect of the higher :—2. Constitutional ornament, in which 
the executive inferior power is, to a certain point, emancipated 
and independent, having a will of its own, yet confessing its 
inferiority and rendering obedience to higher powers ;—and 
3. Revolutionary ornament, in which no executive inferiority 
is admitted at all. I must here explain the nature of these 
divisions at somewhat greater length. 

Of Servile ornament, the principal schools are the Greek, 
Ninevite, anc Egyptian; but their servility is of different 
kinds. The Greek master-workman was far advanced in 
knowledge and power above the Assyrian or Egyptian. 
Neither he nor those for whom he worked could endure the 
appearance of imperfection in anything ; and, therefore, what 
ornament he appointed to be done by those beneath him was 
composed of mere geometrical forms,—balls, ridges, and per- 
fectly symmetrical foliage,—which could be executed with ab- 
solute precision by line and rule, and were as perfect in their 
way when completed, as his own figure sculpture. The Assyr- 
ian and Egyptian, on the contrary, less cognizant of accurate 
form in anything, were content to allow their figure sculpture 
to be executed by inferior workmen, but lowered the method 
of its treatment to a standard which every workman could 
reach, and then trained him by discipline so rigid, that there 


160 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


was no chance of his falling beneath the standard appointed. 
The Greek gave to the lower workman no subject which he 
could not perfectly execute. The Assyrian gave him subjects 
which he could only execute imperfectly, but fixed a legal 
standard for his imperfection. The workman was, in both 
systems, a slave.* 

§ x. But in the medieval, or especially Christian, system of 
ornament, this slavery is done away with altogether ; Chris- 
tianity having recognized, in small things as well as great, the 
individual value of every soul But it not only recognizes its 
value ; it confesses its imperfection, in only bestowing dignity 
upon the acknowledgment of unworthiness. That admission 
of lost power and fallen nature, which the Greek or Ninevite 
felt to be intensely painful, and, as far as might be, altogether 
refused, the Christian makes daily and hourly, contemplating 
the fact of it without fear, as tending, in the end, to God’s 
greater glory. Therefore, to every spirit which Christianity 
summons to her service, her exhortation is: Do what you 
can, and confess frankly what you are unable to do; neither 
let your effort be shortened for fear of failure, nor your con- 
fession silenced for fear of shame. And it is, perhaps, the 
principal admirableness of the Gothic schools of architecture, 
that they thus receive the results of the labor of inferior 
minds ; and out of fragments full of imperfection, and be- 
traying that imperfection in every touch, indulgently raise up 
a stately and unaccusable whole. 

§ xz. But the modern English mind has this much in com- 
mon with that of the Greek, that it intensely desires, in all 
things, the utmost completion or perfection compatible with 
their nature. This is a noble character in the abstract, but 


* The third kind of ornament, the Renaissance, is that in which the 
inferior detail becomes principal, the executor of every minor portion 
being required to exhibit skill and possess knowledge as great as that 
which is possessed by the master of the design; and in the endeavor to 
endow him with this skill aud knowledge, his own original power is 
overwhelmed, and the whole building becomes a wearisome exhibition 
of well-educated imbecility. We must fully inquire into the nature of 
this form of error, when we arrive at the examination of the Renaig 
gance ‘schools 


THE NATURE OF GOTHIC. 161 


becomes ignoble when it causes us to forget the relative dig. 
nitics of the nature itself, and to prefer the perfectness of the 
tower nature to the imperfection of the higher ; not consider. 
ing that as, judged by such arule, all the brute animals would 
be preferable to man, because more perfect in their functions 
and kind, and yet are always held inferior to him, so also in 
the works of man, those which are more perfect in their kind 
are always inferior to those which are, in their nature, liable 
to more faults and shortcomings. For the finer the nature, 
the more flaws it will show through the clearness of it ; and 
it is a law of this universe, that the best things shall be sel. 
domest seen in their best form. The wild grass grows well and 
strongly, one year with another ; but the wheat is, according to 
- the greater nobleness of its nature, liable to the bitterer blight. 
And therefore, while in all things that we see, or do, we are to 
desire perfection, and strive for it, we are nevertheless no to set 
the meaner thing, in its narrow accomplishment, above the 
nobler thing, in its mighty progress ; not to esteem smooth 
minuteness above shattered majesty ; not to prefer mean victory 
to honorable defeat ; not to lower the level of our aim, that we 
may the more surely enjoy the complacency of success. But, 
above all, in our dealings with the souls of other men, we are to 
take care how we check, by severe requirement or narrow cau- 
tion, efforts which might otherwise lead to a noble issue ; and, 
still more, how we withhold our admiration from great excel- 
lences, because they are mingled with rough faults. Now, in the 
make and nature of every man, however rude or simple, whom 
we employ in manual labor, there are some powers for better 
things: some tardy imagination, torpid capacity of emotion, 
tottering steps of thought, there are, even at the worst ; and 
in most cases it is all our own fault that they are tardy or 
torpid. But they cannot be strengthened, unless we are 
content to take them in their feebleness, and unless we prize 
and honor them in their imperfection above the best and 
most perfect manual skill. And this is what we have to do 
with all our laborers ; to look for the thoughiful part of them, 
and get that out of them, whatever we lose for it, whatever 
faults and errors we are obliged to take with it. For the 
Vou. IL—11 


162 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


best that is in them cannot manifest itself, but in company 
with much error, Understand this clearly: You can teach a 
man to draw a straight line, and to cut one; to strike a 
curved line, and to carve it; and to copy and carve any num- 
ber of given lines or forms, with admirable speed and perfect 
precision ; and you find his work perfect of its kind: but if 
you ask him to think about any of those forms, to consider if 
he cannot find any batter in his own head, he stops ; his exe- 
cution becomes hesitating ; he thinks, and ten to one he 
thinks wrong; ten to one he makes a mistake in the first 
touch he gives to his work asa thinking being. But you 
have made a man of him for all that. He was only a machine 
before, an animated tool. 

§ xm. And observe, you are put to stern choice in this 
matter. You must either make a tool of the creature, or a 
man of him. You cannot make both. Men were not intended 
to work with the accuracy of tools, to be precise and perfect 
in all their actions. If you will have that precision out of 
them, and make their fingers measure degrees like cog-wheels, 
and their arms strike curves like compasses, you must un- 
humanize them. Allthe energy of their spirits must be given 
to make cogs and compasses of themselves. All their atten- 
tion and strength must go to the accomplishment of the mean 
act. The eye of the soul must be bent upon the finger-point, 
and the soul's force must fill all the invisible nerves that guide 
it, ten hours a day, that it may not err from its steely pre- 
cision, and so soul and sight be worn away, and the whole 
human being be lost at last—a heap of sawdust, so far as its 
intellectual work in this world is concerned ; saved only by 
its Heart, which cannot go into the form of cogs and com- 
passes, but expands, after the ten hours are over, into fireside ° 
humanity. On the other hand, if you will make a man of 
the working creature, you cannot make a tool. Let him but 
begin to imagine, to think, to try to do anything worth do- 
ing ; and the engine-turned precision is lost at once. Out 
gome all his roughness, all his dulness, all his incapability; 
shame upon shame, failure upon failure, pause after pause: 
but out comes the whole majesty of him also; and we know 


THE NATURE OF GOTHIC. 163 


the height of it only, when we see the clouds settling upon 
him. And, whether the clouds be bright or dark, there will 
be transfiguration behind and within them. 

§ xm. And now, reader, look round this English room of 
yours, about which you have been proud so often, because the 
work of it was so good and strong, and the ornaments of it 
so finished. Examine again all those accurate mouldings, and 
perfect polishings, and unerring adjustments of the seasoned 
wood and tempered steel. Many a time you have exulted 
over them, and thought how great England was, because her 
slightest work was done so thoroughly. Alas! if read rightly, 
these perfectnesses are signs of a slavery in our England a 
thousand times more bitter and more degrading than that of 
the scourged African, or helot Greek. Men may be beaten, 
chained, tormented, yoked like cattle, slaughtered like summer 
flies, and yet remain in one sense, and the best sense, free. 
But to smother their souls within them, to blight and hew intc 
rotting pollards the suckling branches of their human intelli. 
gence, to make the flesh and skin which, after the worm’s 
work on it, is to see God, into leathern thongs to yoke ma- 
chinery with,—this it is to be slave-masters indeed ; and there 
might be more freedom in England, though her feudal lords’ 
lightest words were worth men’s lives, and though the blood 
of the vexed husbandman dropped in the furrows of her fields, 
than there is while the animation of her multitudes is sent 
like fuel to feed the factory smoke, and the strength of them 
is given daily to be wasted into the fineness of a web, or racked 
into the exactness of a line. 

§ xv. And, on the other hand, go forth again to gaze upon ~ 
the old cathedral front, where you have smiled so often at the 
fantastic ignorance of the old sculptors: examine once more 
those ugly goblins, and formless monsters, and stern statues, 
anatomiless and rigid ; but do not mock at them, for they are 
signs of the life and liberty of every workman who struck the 
stone ; a freedom of thought, and rank in scale of being, such 
as no laws, no charters, no charities can secure ; but which it 
must be the first aim of all Europe at this day to regain for 
her children, 


164 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


§ xv. Let me not be thought to speak wildly or extrava 
gantly. It is verily this degradation of the operative into a 
machine, which, more than any other evil of the times, is lead- 
ing the mass of the nations everywhere into vain, incoherent, 
destructive struggling for a freedom of which they cannot ex- 
plain the nature to themselves. Their universal outcry against 
wealth, and against nobility, is uot forced from them either 
by the pressure of famine, or the sting of mortified pride. 
These do much, and have done much in all ages; but the 
foundations of society were never yet shaken as they are at 
this day. It is not that men are ill fed, but that they have no 
pleasure in the work by which they make their bread cud 
therefore look to wealth as the only means of pleasure. It is 
not that men are pained by the scorn of the upper classes, but 
they cannot endure their own ; for they feel that the kind of 
labor to which they are condemned is verily a degrading one, 
and makes them less than men. Never had the upper classes 
so much sympathy with the lower, or charity for them, as they 
have at this day, and yet never were they so much hated by 
them: for, of old, the separation between the noble and the 
poor was merely a wall built by law ; now it is a veritable 
difference in level of standing, a precipice between upper and 
lower grounds in the field of humanity, and there is pesti- 
lential air at the bottom of it. I know not if a day is ever to 
come when the nature of right freedom will be understood, 
and when men will see that to obey another man, to labor for 
lim, yield reverence to him or to his place, is not slavery. It 
is often the best kind of liberty,—liberty from care. The man 
who says to one, Go, and he goeth, and to another, Come, and 
he cometh, has, in most cases, more sense of restraint and 
difficulty than the man who obeys him, The movements of - 
the one are hindered by the burden on his shoulder ; of the 
other, by the bridle on his lips: there is no way by which the 
burden may be lightened ; but we need not suffer from the 
bridle if we do not champ at it. To yield reverence to an- 
other, to hold ourselves and our lives at his disposal, is not 
slavery ; often, it is the noblest state in which a man can live 
in this world. ‘There is, indeed, a reverence which is servile, 


THE NATURE OF GOTHIC. 165 


that is to say, irrational or selfish: but there is also noble 
reverence, that is to say, reasonable and loving ; and a man is 
never so noble as when he is reverent in this kind ; nay, even 
if the feeling pass the bounds of mere reason, so that it be 
loving, a man is raised by it. Which had, in reality, most of 
the serf nature in him,—the Irish peasant who was lying in 
wait yesterday for his landlord, with his musket muzzle 
thrust through the ragged hedge ; or that old mountain ser- 
vant, who, 200 years ago, at Inverkeithing, gave up his own 
life and the lives of his seven sons for his chief?*—and as 
each fell, calling forth his brother to the death, ‘“‘ Another for 
Hector!” And therefore, in all ages and all countries, rever- 
ence has been paid and sacrifice made by men to each other, 
not only without complaint, but rejoicingly ; and famine, and - 
peril, and sword, and all evil, and all shame, have been borne 
willingly in the causes of masters and kings; for all these 
gifts of the heart ennobled the men who gave, not less than 
the men who received them, and nature prompted, and God 
rewarded the sacrifice. But to feel their souls withering 
within them, unthanked, to find their whole being sunk into 
an unrecognized abyss, to be counted off into a heap of mech- 
anism, numbered with its wheels, and weighed with its ham- 
mer strokes ;—this nature bade not,—this God blesses not,— 
this humanity for no long time is able to endure. 

§ xv. We have much studied and much perfected, of late, 
the great civilized invention of the division of labor ; only we 
give it a false name. It is not, truly speaking, the labor that 
is divided ; but the men :—Divided into mere segments of 
men—broken into small fragments and crumbs of life; so 
that all the little piece of intelligence that is left in a man is 
not enough to make a pin, or a nail, but exhausts itself in 
making the point of a pin, or the head of a nail. Now itisa 
good and desirable thing, truly, to make many pins in a day ; 
but if we could only see with what crystal sand their points 
were polished,—sand of human soul, much to be magnified’ 
before it can be discerned for what it is,—we should think 
there might be some loss in it also, And the great cry that 

* Vide Preface to ‘‘ Fair Maid of Perth.” 


166 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


rises from all our manufacturing cities, louder than their fur 
nace blast, is all in very deed for this,—that we manufact 
ure everything there except men; we blanch cotton, and 
strengthen steel, and refine sugar, and shape pottery ; but to 
brighten, to strengthen, to refine, or to form a single living 
spirit, never enters into our estimate of advantages. And alli 
the evil to which that cry is urging our myriads can be met 
only in one way : not by teaching nor preaching, for to teach 
them is but to show them their misery, and to preach to them, 
if we do nothing more than preach, is to mock at it. It can 
be met only by aright understanding, on the part of ali classes, 
of what kinds of labor are good fc? men, raising them, and 
making them happy ; by a determined sacrifice of such con- 
venience, or beauty, or cheapness as is to be got only by the 
degradation of the workman ; and by equally determined de- 
mand for the products and results of healthy and ennobling 
labor. 

§ xvu. And how, it will be asked, are these products to be 
recognized, and this demand to be regulated? Easily: by 
the observance of three broad and simple rules : 

1. Neyer encourage the manufacture of any article not 
absolutely necessary, in the production of which Jnvention has 
no share. 

2. Never demand an exact finish for its own sake, but only 
for some practical or noble end. 

3. Never encourage imitation or copying of any kind, ex~ 
cept for the sake of preserving record of great works. 

The second of these principles is the only one which di- 
rectly rises out of the consideration of our immediate subject ; 
but I shall briefly explain the meaning and extent of the first 
also, reserving the enforcement of the third for another place, 

1. Never encourage the manufacture of anything not nec- 
essary, in the production of which invention has no share. 

For instance. Glass beads are utterly unnecessary, and 
there is no design or thought employed in their manufacture, 
They are formed by first drawing out the glass into rods; 
these rods are chopped up into fragments of the size of beads 
by the human hand, and the fragments are then rounded in 


THK NATURE OF GOTHIC. 167 


the furnace. The men who chop up the rods sit at their work 
all day, their hands vibrating with a perpetual and exquisitely 
timed palsy, and the beads dropping beneath their vibration 
like hail. Neither they, nor the men who draw out the rods, 
or fuse the fragments, have the smallest occasion for the use 
_of any single human faculty ; and every young lady, there- 
fore, who buys glass beads is engaged in the slave-trade, and 
in a much more cruel one than that which we have so long 
been endeavoring to put down. 

But glass cups and vessels may become the subjects of ex- 
quisite invention ; and if in buying these we pay for the in- 
vention, that is to say for the beautiful form, or color, or en- 
graving, and not for mere finish of execution, we are doing 
good to humanity. 

§ xvur. So, again, the cutting of precious stones, in all ordi- 
nary cases, requires little exertion of any mental faculty ; 
some tact and judgment in avoiding flaws, and so on, but 
nothing to bring out the whole mind. Every person who 
wears cut jewels merely for the sake of their value is, there- 
fore, a slave-driver. 

But the working of the goldsmith, and the various de- 
signing of grouped jewellery and enamel-work, may become 
the subject of the most noble human intelligence. ‘Therefore, 
money spent in the purchase of well-designed plate, of pre- 
cious engraved vases, cameos, or enamels, does good to hu- — 
manity ; and, in work of this kind, jewels may be employed 
to heighten its splendor; and their cutting is then a price 
paid for the attainment of a noble end, and thus perfectly al- 
lowable. 

§ xix. I shall perhaps press this law farther elsewhere, but 
our immediate concern is chiefly with the second, namely, 
never to demand an exact finish, when it does not lead toa 
noble end. Yor observe, I have only. dwelt upon the rudeness 
of Gothic, or nny other kind of imperfectness, as admirable, 
where it was impossible to get design or thought without it. 
If you are to have the thought of a rough and untaught man, 
. you must have it in a rough and untaught way ; but from an 
educated man, who can without effort express his thoughts ix 


168 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


an educated way, take the graceful expression, and be thank 
ful. Only get the thought, and do not silence the peasant be- 
cause he cannoi.speak good grammar, or until you have taught 
him his grammar.. Grammar and refinement are good things, 
both, only be sure cf the better thing first. And thus in art, 
delicate finish is desirable from the greatest masters, and is - 
always given by them. ‘In some places Michael Angelo, Leo- 
nardo, Phidias, Perugino, Turner, all finished with the most 
exquisite care; and the finish they give always leads to the 
fuller accomplishment of their noble purposes. But lower 
men than these cannot finish, for it requires consummate 
knowledge to finish consummately, and then we must take 
their thoughts as they are able to give them. So the rule is 
simple: Always look for invention first, and after that, for 
such execution as will help the invention, and as the inventor 
is capable of without painful effort, and no more. Above all, 
demand no refinement of execution where there is no thought, 
for that is slaves’ work, unredeemed. Rather choose rough 
work than smooth work, so only that the practical purpose be 
answered, and never imagine there is reason to. be proud of 
anything that may be accomplished by patience = sand- 
paper. 

§ xx. I shall only give one example, which however will 
show the reader what I mean, from the manufacture ‘ already 
alluded to, that of glass. Our modern glass is exquisitely 
clear in its substance, true in its form, accurate in its cutting. 
We are proud of this. We ought to be ashamed of it. ‘The 
old Venice glass was muddy, inaccurate in all its forms, and 
clumsily cut, if at all. And the old Venetian was justly proud 
of it. For there is this difference between the English an 
Venetian workman, that the former thinks only of accurately 
watching his patterns, and getting his curves perfectly true 
and his edges perfectly sharp, and becomes‘a mere machine 
for rounding curves and sharpening edges, while the old Vene- 
tian cared not a whit whether his edges were sharp or not, but 
he invented a new design for every glass that he made, and 
never moulded a handle or a lip without a new fancy in it. . 
And therefore, though some Venetian glass is ugly and clumsy 


THH NATURE OF GOTHIC. 169 


enough, when made by clumsy and uninventive workmen, 
other Venetian glass is so lovely in its forms that no price is 
too great for it; and we never see the same form in it twice. 
Now you cannot have the finish and the varied form too. If 
the workman is thinking about his edges, he cannot be think- 
ing of his design; if of his design, he cannot think of his 
edges. Choose whether you will pay for the lovely form or 
the perfect finish, and choose at the same moment whether 
you will make the worker a man or a grindstone. 

§ xxt. Nay, but the reader interrupts me,—‘“If the work- 
man can design beautifully, I would not have him kept at the 
furnace. Let him be taken away and made a gentleman, and 
have a studio, and design his glass there, and I will have it 
blown and cut for him by common workmen, and so I will 
have my design and my finish too.” 

All ideas of this kind are founded upon two mistaken sup- 
positions : the first, that one man’s thoughts can be, or ought 
to be, executed by another man’s hands; the second, that 
manual labor is a degradation, when it is governed by intellect. 

On a large scale, and in work determinable by line and 
rule, it is indeed both possible and necessary that the thoughts 
of one man should be carried out by the labor of others ; in this 
sense I have already defined the best architecture to be the 
expression of the mind of manhood by the hands of childhood. 
But on a smaller scale, and in a design which cannot be math- 
ematically defined, one man’s thoughts can never be expressed 
by another : and the difference between the spirit of touch of 
the man who is inventing, and of the man who is obeying direc- 
tions, is often all the difference between a great and a com- 
mon work of art. How wide the separation is between orig: 
inal and second-hand execution, I shall endeavor to show 
elsewhere ; it is not so much to our purpose here as to mark 
the other and more fatal error of despising manual labor when 
governed by intellect ; for it is no less fatal an error to despise 
it when thus regulated by intellect, than to value it for its own 
sake. We are always in these days endeavoring to separate 
the two ; we want one man to be always thinking, and another 
to be always working, and we call one a gentleman, and the 


170 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


other an operative ; whereas the workman ought often to be 
thinking, and the thinker often to be working, and both 
should be gentlemen, in the best sense. As it is, we make 
both ungentle, the one envying, the other despising, his 
brother ; and the mass of society is made up of morbid think- 
ers, and miserable workers. Now it is only by labor that 
thought can be made healthy, and only by thought that labor 
can be made happy, and the two cannot be separated with im- 
punity. It would be well if all of us were good handicrafts- 
men in some kind, and the dishonor of manual labor done 
away with altogether; so that though there should still bea 
trenchant distinction of race between nobles and commoners, 
there should not, among the latter, be a trenchant distinction 
of employment, as between idle and working men, or between 
men of liberal and illiberal professions. All professions should 
be liberal, and there should be less pride felt in peculiarity of 
employment, and more in excellence of achievement. And 
yet more, in each several profession, no master should be too 
proud to do its hardest work. The painter should grind his 
own colors; the architect work in the mason’s yard with his 
men; the master-manufacturer be himself a more skilful 
operative than any man in his mills ; and the distinction be- 
tween one man and another be only in experience and skill, 
and the authority and wealth which these must naturally and 
justly obtain. 

§ xxu. I should be led far from the matter in hand, if I 
were to pursue this interesting subject. Enough, I trust, has 
been said to show the reader that the rudeness or imperfec- 
tion which at first rendered the term “Gothic” one of re- 
proach is indeed, when rightly understood, one of the most 
noble characters of Christian architecture, and not only a. 
noble but an essential one. It seems a fantastic paradox, but 
it is nevertheless a most important truth, that no architecture 
can be truly noble which is not imperfect. And this is easily 
demonstrable. For since the architect, whom we will suppose 
capable of doing all in perfection, cannot execute the whole 
with his own hands, he must either make slaves of his work- 
_men in the old Greek, and present English fashion, and level 


THE NATURE OF GOTHIC. 17] 


his work to a slave’s capacities, which is to degrade it; or 
else he must take his workmen as he finds them, and let them 
show their weaknesses together with their strength, which 
will involve the Gothic imperfection, but render the whole 
work as noble as the intellect of the age can make it. 

§ xx. But the principle may be stated more broadly still. 
Ihave confined the illustration of it to architecture, but I 
must not leave it as if true of architecture only. Hitherto I 
have used the words imperfect and perfect merely to dis- 
tinguish between work grossly unskilful, and work executed 
with average precision and science ; and I have been pleading 
that any degree of unskilfulness should be admitted, so only 
that the laborer’s mind had room for expression. But, accu- 
rately speaking, no good work whatever can be perfect, and 
the demand for perfection is always a sign of a peers: aii) 
of the ends of art. 

§ xxv. This for two reasons, both based on everlasting 
laws. The first, that no great man ever stops working till he 
has reached his point of failure; that is to say, his mind is 
always far in advance of his powers of execution, and the 
latter will now and then give way in trying to follow it ; be- 
sides that he will always give tothe inferior portions of his 
work only such inferior attention as they require ; and accord- 
ing to his greatness he becomes so accustomed to the feeling 
of dissatisfaction with the best he can do, that in moments of 
lassitude or anger with himself he will not care though the 
beholder be dissatisfieC also. I believe there has only been 
one man who would not acknowledge this necessity, and strove 
always to reach perfection, Leonardo ; the end of his vain 
effort being merely that he would take ten years to a picture, 
and leave it unfinished. And therefore, if we are to have 
great men working at all, or less men doing their best, the 
work will be imperfect, however beautiful. Of human work 
none but what is bad can be perfect, in its own bad way.* 


* The Elgin marbles are supposed by many persons to be “‘ perfect.” 
In the most important portions they indeed approach perfection, but 
only there. The draperies are unfinished, the hair and wool of the 
mimals are unfinished, and the entire bas-reliefs of the frieze ara 


soughly cut, 


172 THR STONES OF VENICE. 


§ xxv. The second reason is, that imperfection is in some 
sort essential to all that we know of life. Itis the sign of life 
in a mortal body, that is to say, of a state of progress and 
change. Nothing that lives is, or can be, rigidly perfect ; 
part of it is decaying, part nascent. The foxglove blossom,— 
a third part bud, a third part past, a third part in full bloom. 
—is a type of the life of this world. And in all things that 
live there are certain irregularities and deficiencies which are 
not only signs of life, but sources of beauty. No human face — 
is exactly the same in its lines on each side, no leaf perfect in 
its lobes, no branch in its symmetry. All admit irregularity 
as they imply change ; and to banish imperfection is to de- 
stroy expression, to check exertion, to paralyse vitality. All 
things are literally better, lovelier, and more beloved for the 
imperfections which have been divinely appointed, that the 
law of human life may be Effort, and the law of human judg- 
ment, Mercy. 

Accept this then for a universal law, that neither architect- 
‘are nor any other noble work of man can be good unless it 
be imperfect ; and let us be prepared for the otherwise strange 
fact, which we shall discern clearly as we approach the period 
of the Renaissance, that the first cause of the fall of the arts 
of Europe was a relentless requirement of perfection, inca- 
pable alike either of being silenced by veneration for great- 
ness, or softened into forgiveness of simplicity. 

Thus far then of the Rudeness or Savageness, which is the 
first mental element of Gothic architecture. It is an element 
jn many other healthy architectures also, as in Byzantine and 
Romanesque ; but true Gothic cannot exist without it 

§ xxvz The second mental element above named. was 
Cu GEFULNESS, or Variety. 

1 have already enforced the allowing independent soebaiion 
to the inferior workman, simply as a duty ¢o him, and as en- 
nobling the architecture by rendering it more Christian. We 
have now to consider what reward we obtain for the perform- 
ance of this duty, namely, the perpetual variety of every 
feature of the building. 

Wherever the workman is utterly enslaved, the parts of the 


THE NATURE OF GOTHIC. 173 


building must of course be absolutely like each other ; for the 
perfection of his execution can only be reached by exercising 
him in doing one thing, and giving him nothing else to do. 
The degree in which the workman is degraded may be thus 
known at a glance, by observing whether the several parts of 
the building are similar or not; and if, as in Greek work, all 
the capitals are alike, and all the mouldings unvaried, then the 
degradation is complete ; if, as in Egyptian or Ninevite work, 
though the manner of executing certain figures is always the 
same, the order of design is perpetually varied, the degradation 
is less total ; if, as in Gothic work, there is perpetual change 
both in design and execution, the workman must have been 
altogether set free. 

§ xxvu. How much the beholder gains from the liberty of 
the laborer may perhaps be questioned in England, where one 
of the strongest instincts in nearly every mind is that Love of 
Order which makes us desire that our house windows should 
pair like our carriage horses, and allows us to yield our faith 
unhesitatingly to architectural theories which fix a form for 
everything and forbid variation from it. I would not impeach 
love of order: it is one of the most useful elements of the 
English mind ; it helps us in our commerce and in all purely 
practical matters ; and it is in many cases one of the founda- 
tion stones of morality. Only do not let us suppose that love 
of order is love of art. Itis true that order, in its highest 
sense, is one of the necessities of art, just as time is a necessity © 
of music ; but love of order has no more to do with our right 
enjoyment of architecture or painting, than love of punctuality 
with the appreciation of an opera. Experience, I fear, teaches 
us that accurate and methodical habits in daily life are seldom 
characteristic of those who either quickly perceive, or richly 
possess, the creative powers of art ; there is, however, nothing 
inconsistent between the two instincts, and nothing to hinder 
us from retaining our business habits, and yet fully allowing 
and enjoying the noblest gifts of Invention. We already do 
so, in every other branch of art except architecture, and we 
only do not so there because we have been taught that it would 
be wrong. Our architects gravely inform us that, as there are 


174 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


four rules of arithmetic, there are five orders of architecture, 
we, in our simplicity, think that this sounds consistent, and 
believe them. They inform us also that there is one proper 
form for Corinthian capitals, another for Doric, and another 
for Ionic. We, considering that there is also a proper form 
for the letters A, B, and ©, think that this also sounds con- 
sistent, and accept the proposition. Understanding, there- 
fore, that one form of the said capitals is proper, and no other, 
and having a conscientious horror of all impropriety, we allow 
the architect to provide us\ with the said capitals, of the 
proper form, in such and such a quantity, and in all other 
points to take care that the legal forms are observed ; which 
having done, we rest in forced confidence that we are well 
housed. 

§ xxvm. But our higher instincts are not deceived. We 
take no pleasure in the building provided for us, resembling 
that which we take-in a new book or a new picture. We may 
be proud of its size, complacent in its correctness, and happy 
in its convenience. We may take the same pleasure in its 
symmetry and workmanship as in a well-ordered room, or a 
skilful piece of manufacture. And this we ‘suppose to be all 
the pleasure that architecture was ever intendéd to give us. 
The idea of reading a building as we would read Milton or 
Dante, and getting the same kind of delight out of the stones 
as out of the stanzas, never enters our minds for a moment. 
And for good reason :—There is indeed rhythm in the verses, 
quite as strict as the symmetries or rhythm of the architect- 
ure, and a thousand times more beautiful, but there is some» 
thing else than rhythm. The verses were neither made to 
order, nor to match, as the capitals were ; and we have theres 
fore a kind of pleasure in them other than a sense of pro- 
priety. But it requires a strong effort of common sense to 
shake ourselves quit of all that we have been taught for the 
last two centuries, and wake. to the perception of a truth just 
as simple and certain as it is new: that great art, whether 
expressing itself in words, colors, or stones, does not say the 
same thing over and over again ; that the merit of architect- 
ural, as of every other art, consists in its saying new and 


THE NATURE OF GOTHIC 174 


different things; that to repeat itself is no more a character. 
istic of genius in marble than it is of genius in print ; and 
that we may, without offending any laws of good taste, re- 
quire of an architect, as we do of a novelist, that he should 
be not only correct, but entertaining. 

Yet all this is true, and self-evident ; only hidden from us 
as many other self-evident things are, by false teaching. 
Nothing is a great work of art, for the production of which 
either rules or models can be given. Exactly so far as archi- 
tecture works on known rules, and from given models, it is 
not an art, but a manufacture ; and it is, of the two pro- 
cedures, rather less rational (because more easy) to copy 
capitals or mouldings from Phidias, and call ourselves archi- 
tects, than to copy heads and hands from Titian, and call our- 
selves painters. 

§ xxix. Let us then understand at once, that change or 
variety is as much a necessity to the human heart and brain 
in buildings as in books ; that there isno merit, though there 
is some occasional use, in monotony ; and that we must no 
more expect to derive either pleasure or profit from an archi- 
tecture whose ornaments are of one pattern, and whose pillars 
are of one proportion, than we should out of a universe in which 
the clouds were all of one shape, and the trees all of one size. 

§ xxx. And this we confess in deeds, though not in words. 
All the pleasure which the people of the nineteenth century 
take in art, is in pictures, sculpture, minor objects of virti, or 
medieval architecture, which we enjoy under the term pictu- 
resque : no pleasure is taken anywhere in modern buildings, 
and we find all men of true feeling delighting to escape out of 
modern cities into natural scenery : hence, as I shall hereafter 
show, that peculiar love of landscape which is characteristic of 
the age. It would be well, if, in all other matters, we were as 
ready to put up with what we dislike, for the sake of compli- 
ance with esteblished law, as we are in architecture. 

§ xxxr. How so debased a law ever came to be established, 
we shall see when we come to describe the Renaissance 
schools : here we have only to note, as the second most essen- 
tial element of the Gothic spirit, that it broke through that 


176 THE STONES OF y#HNIUH. 


law wherever it found it in existence; it not only dared, but 
Jelighted in, the infringement of every servile principle ; and 
invented a series of forms of which the merit was, not merely 
that they were new, but that they were capable of perpetual 
novelty. The pointed arch was not merely a bold variation 
from the round, but it admitted of millions of variations in 
itself ; for the proportions of a pointed arch are changeable 
to infinity, while a circular arch is always the same. The 
grouped shaft was not merely a bold variation from the single 
one, but it admitted of millions of variations in its grouping, 
and in the proportions resultant from its grouping. The in- 
troduction of tracery was not only a startling change in the 
treatment of window lights, but admitted endless changes in 
the interlacement of the tracery bars themselves. So that 
while in all living Christian architecture the love of variety 
exists, the Gothic schools exhibited that love in culminating 
energy ; and their influence, wherever it extended itself, may 
be sooner and farther traced by this character than by any 
other ; the tendency to the adoption of Gothic types being 
always first shown by greater irregularity and richer variation 
in the forms of the architecture it is about to supersede, long 
before the appearance of the pointed arch or of any other 
recognizable outward sign of the Gothic mind. 

§ xxxu. We must, however, herein note carefully what dis- 
tinction there is between a healthy and a diseased love of 
change ; for as it was in healthy love of change that the 
Gothic architecture rose, it was partly in consequence of dis- 
eased love of change that it was destroyed. In order to un- 
derstand this clearly, it will be necessary to consider the 
different ways in which change and monotony are presented 
to us in nature; both having their use, like darkness and 
light, and the one incapable of being enjoyed without the 
ether: change being most delightful after some prolongation 
of monotony, as light appears most brilliant after the eyes 
have been for some time closed. 

§ xxxm. I believe that the true relations of monotony and 
change may be most simply understood by observing them in 
music, We may therein notice, first, that there is a sublimity 


THR NATURE OF GOTHIC. 177 


énd majesty in monotony which there is not in 1apid cr tre. 
quent variation. This is true throughout all nature. The 
greater part of the sublimity of the sea depends on its monot- 
ony ; so also that of desolate moor and mountain scenery ; ana 
especially the sublimity of motion, as in the quiet, unchanged 
fall and rise of an engine beam. So also there is ae in 
darkness which there is not in light. 

§ xxxrv. Again, monotony after a certain time, or beyond a 
certain degree, becomes either uninteresting or intolerable, 
and the musician is obliged to break it in one or two ways: 
either while the air or passage is perpetually repeated, its 
notes are variously enriched and harmonized ; or else, after a 
certain number of repeated passages, an entirely new passage 
is introduced, which is more or less delightful according to 
the length of the previous monotony. Nature, of course, uses 
both these kinds of variation perpetually. The sea-waves, 
resembling each other in general mass, but none like its 
brother in minor divisions and curves, are a monotony of the 
first kind ; the great plain, broken by an emergent rock or 
clump of trees, is a monotony of the second. 

§ xxxv. Farther: in order to the enjoyment of the change 
in either case, a certain degree of patience is required from 
the hearer or observer. In the first case, he must be satisfied 
to endure with patience the recurrence of the great masses of 
sound or form, and to seek for entertainment in a careful 
watchfulness of the minor details. In the second case, he 
must bear patiently the infliction of the monotony for some 
moments, in order to feel the full refreshment of the change. 
This is true even of the shortest musical passage in which the 
element of monotony is employed. In cases of more majestic 
monotony, the patience required is so considerable that it be- 
comes a kind of pain,—a price paid for the future pleasure. 

§ xxxvi. Again: the talent of the composer is not in the 
monotony, but in the changes: he may show feeling and taste 
by his use of raonotony in certain places or degrees ; that is to 
say, by his various employment of it; but it is always in the 
new arrangement or invention that his intellect is shown, and 
not ia the monotony which relieves it. 

VoL. 1. —12 


178 THE STONES OF VENICH. 


Lastly : if the pleasure of change be too often repeated, it 
ceases to be delightful, for then change itself becomes monot- 
onous, and we are driven to seek delight in extreme and fan- 
tastic degrees of it. This is the diseased love of change of 
which we have above spoken. __ 

§ xxxvu. From these facts we may gather generally that 
monotony is, and ought to be, in itself painful to us, just as 
darkness is ; that an architecture which is altogether monoto- 
nous is a dark or dead architecture ; and, of those who love it, 
it may be truly said, ‘‘ they love darkness rather than light.” 
But monotony in certain measure, used in order to give value 
to change, and, above all, that transparent monotony which, 
like the shadows of a great painter, suffers all manner of dimly 
suggested form to be seen through the body of it, is an essen- 
tial in architectural as in all other composition ; and the en- 
durance of monotony has about the same place in a healthy 
mind that the endurance of darkness has: that is to say, as a 
strong intellect will have pleasure in the solemnities of storm 
and twilight, and in the broken and mysterious lights that 
gleam among them, rather than in mere brilliancy and glare, 
while a frivolous mind will dread the shadow and the storm ; 
and as a great man will be ready to endure much darkness of 
fortune in order to reach greater eminence of power or felicity, 
while an inferior man will not pay the price ; exactly in like 
manner a great mind will accept, or even delight in, monotony 
which would be wearisome to an inferior intellect, because it 
bas more patience and power of expectation, and is ready to 
pay the full price for the great future pleasure of change. But 
in all cases it is not that the noble nature loves monotony, 
any more than it loves darkness or pain. But it can bear with 
it, and receives a high pleasure in the endurance or patience, 
a pleasure necessary to the well-being of this world; while 
those who will not submit to the temporary sameness, but 
rush from one change to another, gradually dull the edge of 
change itself, and bring a shadow and weariness over the 
whole world from which there is no more escape. 

§ xxxvi. From these general uses of variety in the econ. 
omy of the world, we may at once understand its use and 


THE NATURE OF GOTHIC. 179 


abuse in architecture. The variety of the Gothic schools is 
the more healthy and beautiful, because in many cases it is 
entirely unstudied, and results, not from the mere love of 
change, but from practical necessities. For in one point of 
view Gothic is not only the best, but the only rational archi- 
tecture, as being that which can fit itself most easily to all ser- 
vices, vulear or noble. Undefined in its slope of roof, height 
of shaft, breadth of arch, or disposition of ground plan, it can 
shrink into a turret, expand intoa hall, coil into a staircase, or 
spring into a spire, with undegraded grace and unexhausted 
enerey ; and whenever it finds occasion for change in its form 
or purpose, it submits to it without the slightest sense of loss 
either to its unity or majesty,—subtle and flexible like a fiery 
serpent, but ever attentive to the voice of the charmer. And 
it is one of the chief virtues of the Gothic builders, that they 
never suffered ideas of outside symmetries and consistencies 
to interfere with the real use and value of what they did. If 
they waned a window, they opened one; a room, they added 
one ; a buttress, they built one; utterly regardless of any es- 
tablished conventionalities of external appearance, knowing (as 
indeed it always happened) that such daring interruptions of 
the formal plan would rather give additional interest to its 
symmetry than injure it. So that, in the best times of Gothic, 
a useless window would rather have been opened in an unex- 
_ pected place for the sake of the surprise, than a useful one 
forbidden for the sake of symmetry. Every successive archi- 
tect, employed upon a great work, built the pieces he added 
in his own way, utterly regardless of the style adopted by his 
predecessors ; and if two towers were raised in nominal cor- 
respondence at the sides of a cathedral front, one was nearly 
sure to be different from the other, and in each the style at 
the top to be different from the style at the bottom.* 

§ xxxrx. These marked variations were, however, only per- 
mitted as part of the great system of perpetual ehange which 
ran through every member of Gothic design, and rendered it 


*In the eighth chapter we shall see a remarkable instance of this 
sacrifice of symmetry to convenience in the arrangement of the windows 
of the Ducal Palace, 


£80 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


as endless a field for the beholder’s inquiry, as for the builder’s 
imagination : change, which in the best schools is subtle and 
delicate, and rendered more delightful by intermingling of a 
noble monotony ; in the more barbaric schools is somewhat 
fantastic and redundant ; but, in all, a necessary and constant 
condition of the life of the school. Sometimes the variety is 
in one feature, sometimes in another ; it may be in the capitals 
or crockets, in the niches or the traceries, or in all together, 
but in some one or other of the features it will be found 
always. If the mouldings are constant, the surface sculpture 
will change ; if the capitals are of a fixed design, the traceries 
will change ; if the traceries are monotonous, the capitals will 
change ; and if even, as in some fine schools, the early English 
for example, there is the slightest approximation to an unvary- 
ing type of mouldings, capitals, and floral decoration, the 
variety is found in the disposition of the masses, and in the 
figure sculpture. 

§ xz, I must now refer for a moment, before we quit the 
consideration of this, the second mental element of Gothic, to 
the opening of the third chapter of the ““Seven Lamps of Ar- 
chitecture,” in which the distinction was drawn (§ 2) between 
man gathering and man governing; between his acceptance 
of the sources of delight from nature, and his developement of 
authoritative or imaginative power in their arrangement: for 
the two mental elements, not only of Gothic, but of all good 
architecture, which we have just been examining, belong to it, 
and are admirable in it, chiefly as it is, more than any other 
subject of art, the work of man, and the expression of the 
average power of man. A picture or poem is often little more 
than a feeble utterance of man’s admiration of something out 
of himself; but architecture approaches more to a creation of 
his.own, born of his necessities, and expressive of his nature. 
It is also, in some sort, the work of the whole race, while the 
picture or statue are the work of one only, in most cases more 
highly gifted than his fellows. And therefore we may expect 
that the first two elements of good architecture should be ex- 
pressive of some great truths commonly belonging to the whote 
race, and necessary to be understood or “elt by them in al 


THE NATURE OF GOTHIC. 181 


their work that they do under the sun. And observe what 

they are: the confession of Imperfection and the confession of 
Desire of Change. The building of the bird and the bee needs 
not express anything like this. It is perfect and unchanging. 

But just because we are something better than birds or bees, 

our building must confess that we have not reached the perfec- 
tion we can imagine, and cannot rest in the condition we have 
attained. If we pretend to have reached either perfection or 
. satisfaction, we have degraded ourselves and our work. God’s 
work only may express that ; but ours may never have that 
sentence written upon it,—‘‘ And behold, it was very good.” 
And, observe again, it is not merely as it renders the edifice a 
book of various knowledge, or a mine of precious thought, that 
variety is essential to its nobleness. The vital principle is not 
_ the love of Knowledge, but the love of Change. It is that 
strange disquietude of the Gothic spirit that is its greatness ; 
that restlessness of the dreaming mind, that wanders hither 
and thither among the niches, and flickers feverishly around 
the pinnacles, and frets and fades in labyrinthine knots and 
shadows along wall and roof, and yet is not satisfied, nor shall 
be satisfied. The Greek could stay in his triglyph furrow, and 
be at peace ; but the work of the Gothic heart is fretwork still, 
and it can neither rest in, nor from, its labor, but must pass on, 
sleeplessly, until its love of change shall be pacified for ever in 
the change that must come alike on them that wake and them 
that sleep. 

§ xu The third constituent element of the Gothic mind 
was stated to be Narurauism ; that is to say, the love of natu- 
ral objects for their own sake, and the effort to represent them 
frankly, unconstrained by artistical laws. 

This characteristic of the style partly follows in necessary 
connexion with those named above. For, so soon as the 
workman is left free to represent what subjects he chooses, 
he must look to the nature that is round him for material, 
and will endeavor to represent it as he sees it, with more or 
lees accuracy according to the skill he possesses, and with 
much play of fancy, but with small respect for law. There is, 
however, a marked distinction between the imaginations of 


182 THE STONES OF VENICR#. 


the Western and Eastern races, even when both are left free, 
the Western, or Gothic, delighting most in the representation 
of facts, and the Eastern (Arabian, Persian, and Chinese) in 
the harmony of colors and forms. Each of these intellectual 
dispositions has its particular forms of error and abuse, which, 
though I have often before stated, I must here again briefly 
explain ; and this the rather, because the word Naturalism is, 
in one of its senses, justly used as a term of reproach, and the 
questions respecting the real relations of art and nature are 
so many and so confused throughout all the schools of Europe 
at this day, that I cannot clearly enunciate any single truth 
without appearing to admit, in fellowship with it, some kind 
of error, unless the reader will bear with me in entering into 
such an analysis of the subject as will serve us for general 
guidance. 

§ xtu. We are to remember, in the first place, that the ar- 
rangement cf colors and lines is an art analogous to the com- 
position * of music, and entirely independent of the represen- 
tation of facts. Good coloring does not necessarily convey 
the image of anything but itself. It consists in certain pro- 
portions and arrangements of rays of light, but not in like- 
nesses to anything. A few touches of certain greys and 
purples laid by a master’s hand on white paper, will be good 
coloring ; as more touches are added beside them, we may 
find out that they were intended to represent a dove’s neck, 
and we may praise, as the drawing advances, the perfect imi- 


*T am always afraid to use this word ‘‘ Composition ;” it is so utterly 
misused in the general parlance respecting art. Nothing is more com- 
mon than to hear divisions of art into ‘‘form, composition, and color,” 
or ‘‘ light and shade and composition,” or ‘‘ sentiment and composition,” 
or it matters not what else and composition ; the speakers in each case - 
attaching a perfectly different meaning to the word, generally an indis- 
tinct one, and always a wrong one. Composition is, in plain English, 
“putting together,” and it means the putting together of lines of forms, 
of colors, of shades, or of ideas. Painters compose in color, compose in 
thought, compose in form, ana compose in effect. the word being of 
use merely in order to express a scientific, disciplined, and inventive 
arrangement of any of these, instead of a merely natural or accidenta} 
one. 


THE NATURE OF GOTHIC. 183 


tation of the dove’s neck. But the good coloring does not 
consist in that imitation, but in the abstract qualities and re- 
lations of the grey and purple. 

In like manner, as soon as a great sculptor begins to shape 
his work out of the block, we shall see that its lines are nobly 
arranged, and of noble character. We may not have the 
slightest idea for what the forms are intended, whether they 
are of man or beast, of vegetation or drapery. Their likeness 
to anything does not affect their nobleness. They are mag- 
nificent forms, and that is all we need care to know of them, 
in order to say whether the workman is a good or bad sculp- 
tor. 

§ xu. Now the noblest artis an exact unison of the ab- 
stract value, with the imitative power, of forms and colors. 
It is the noblest composition, used to express the noblest facts. 
But the human mind cannot in general unite the two perfec- 
tions : it either pursues the fact to the neglect of the compo- 
sition, or pursues the composition to the neglect of the fact. 

§ xxiv. And itis intended by the Deity that it should do 
this; the best art is not always wanted. Facts are often 
wanted without art, as in a geological diagram ; and art often 
without facts, as in a Turkey carpet. And most men have 
been made capable of giving either one or the other, but not 
both ; only one or two, the very highest, can give both. 

Observe then. Men are universally divided, as respects 
their artistical qualifications, into three great classes ; a right, 
a left, and a centre. On the right side are the men of facts, 
on the left the men of design,* in the centre the men of both. 

The three classes of course pass into each other by imper- 
ceptible gradations. The men of facts are hardly ever alto- 
gether without powers of design ; the men of design are al- 
ways in some measure cognizant of facts; and as each clasg 
possesses more or less of the powers of the opposite one, it 
approaches to the character of the central class. Few men, 


* Design is used in this place as expressive of the power to arrange 
lines and colors nobly. By facts, I mean facts perceived by the eye and 
mind, not facts accumulated by knowledge. See the chapter on Romar 
Renaissance (Vol. III. Chap. II.) for this distinction. 


184 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


even in that central rank, are so exactly throned on the sum. 
mit of the crest that they cannot be perceived to incline in the 
least one way or the other, embracing both horizons with their 
glance. Now each of these classes has, as I above said, a 
healthy function in the world, and correlative diseases or un- 
healthy functions ; and, when the work of either of them is 
seen in its morbid condition, we are apt to find fault with the 
class of workmen, instead of finding fault only with the par- 
ticular abuse which has perverted their action. 

§ xiv. Let us first take an instance of the healthy action uf 
the three classes on a simple subject, so as fully to understand 
the distinction between them, and then we shall more easily 
examine the corruptions to which they are liable. Fig. 1 in 
Plate VI. is a spray of vine with a bough of cherry-tree, which 
I have outlined from nature as accurately as I could, without 
in the least endeavoring to compose or arrange the form. It 
is a simple piece of fact-work, healthy and good as such, and 
useful to any one who wanted to know plain truths about ten- 
drils of vines, but there is no attempt at design init. Plate 
XIX., below, represents a branch of vine used to decorate the 
angle of the Ducal Palace. It is faithful as a representation 
of vine, and yet so designed that every leaf serves an archi- 
tectural purpose, 1nd could not be spared from its place with- 
out harm. This is central work; fact and design together. 
Fig. 2 in Plate V?. is a spandril from St. Mark’s, in which the 
forms of the vine are dimly suggested, the object of the design 
being merely to obtain graceful lines and well proportioned 
masses upon the gold ground. There is not the least attempt 
to inform tbe spectator of any facts about the growth of the 
vine ; there are no stalks or tendrils,—merely running bands 
with leaves emergent from them, of which nothing but the - 
outline is taken from the vine, and even that imperfectly 
This is design, unregardful of facts. 

Now the work is, in all these three cases, perfectly healthy. 
Fig. 1 is not bad work because it has not design, nor Fig. 2 
bad work because it has not facts. The object of the one is ta 
give pleasure through truth, and of the other to give pleasure 
through composition. And both are right. 


THE NATURE OF GOTHIC. 185 


What, then, are the diseased operations to which the three 
classes of workmen are liable ? 

§ xtvz. Primarily, two ; affecting the two inferior classes : 

1st, When either of those two classes Despises the other ; 

2nd, When either of the two classes Envies the other ; pro< 
ducing, therefore, four forms of dangerous error. 

First, when the men of facts despise design. . This is the 
error of the common Dutch painters, of merely imitative 
painters of still life, flowers, &c., and other men who, having 
either the gift of accurate imitation or strong sympathies with 
nature, suppose that all is done when the imitation is perfected 
or sympathy expressed. A large body of English landscapista 
come into this class, including most clever sketchers from nat- 
ure, who fancy that to get a sky of true tone, and a gleam of 
sunshine or sweep of shower faithfully expressed, is all that 
can be required of art. These men are generally themselves 
answerable for much of their deadness of feeling to the higher 
qualities of composition. They probably have not originally 
the high gifts of design, but they lose such powers as thé 
originally possessed by despising, and refusing to study, the 
results of great power of design in others. Their knowledge, 
as far as it goes, being accurate, they are usually presumptu- 
ous and self-conceited, and gradually become incapable of ad- 
miring anything but what is like their own works. They see 
nothing in the works of great designers but the faults, and do 
harm almost incalculable in the European society of the pres- 
ent day by sneering at the compositions of the greatest men 
of the earlier ages,* because they do not absolutely tally with 
their own ideas of ‘‘ Nature.” 

§ xuvu. The second form of error is when the men of design 
despise facts. All noble design must deal with facts to a cer- 
tain extent, for there is no food for it but in nature. The best 
colorist invents best by taking hints from natural colors ; from 
birds, skies, or groups of figures. And if, in the delight of 
inventing featastic color and form the truths of nature are 

* “Harlier,” that is to say, pre-Raphaelite ages. Men of this stamp 


will praise Claude, and such other comparatively debased artists ; but 
they cannot taste the work of the thirteenth century. 


186 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


wilfully neglected, the intellect becomes comparatively de. 
crepit, and that state of art results which we find among the 
Chinese. The Greek designers delighted in the facts of the 
human form, and became great in consequence ; but the facts 
of lower nature were disregarded by them, and their inferior 
ornament became, therefore, dead and valueless. 

§ xtvur. The third form of error is when the men of facts 
envy design: that is to say, when, having only imitative 
powers, they refuse to employ those powers upon the visible 
world around them ; but, having been taught that composition 
is the end of art, strive to obtain the inventive powers which © 
nature has denied them, study nothing but the works of re- 
puted designers, and perizh in a fungous growth of plagiarism 
and laws of art. 

Here was the great error of the beginning of this century ; 
it is the error of the meanest kind of men that employ them- 
selves in painting, and it is the most fatal of all, rendering 
those who fall into it utterly useless, incapable of helping the 
world with either truth or fancy, while, in all probability, they 
deceive it by base resemblances of both, until it hardly recog- 
nizes truth o: fancy when they really exist. 

§ xix. The fourth form of error is when the men of design 
envy facts ; that is to say, when the temptation of closely imi- 
tating nature leads them to forget their own proper orna- 
mental function, and when they lose the power of the compo- 
sition for the sake of graphic truth ; as, for instance, in the 
hawthorn moulding so often spoken of round the porch of 
Bourges Cathedral, which, though very lovely, might perhaps, 
as we saw above, have been better, if the old builder, in his 
excessive desire to make it look like hawthorn, had not painted 
it green. 


§ u. It is, however, carefully to be noted, that the two mor- ~ ; 


bid conditions to which the men of facts are liable are much 
more dangerous and harmful than those to which the men of 
design are liable. The morbid state of men of design injures 
themselves only ; that of the men of facts injures the whole 
world. The Chinese porcelain-painter is, indeed, not so great 
@ man as he might be, but he does not want to break every- 


THE NATURE OF GOTHIC. 137 


thing that is not porcelain; but the modern English fact- 
hunter, despising design, wants to destroy everything that 
does not agree with his own notions of truth, and becomes the 
most dangerous and despicable of iconoclasts, excited by ego- 
tism instead of religion. Again: the Bourges sculptor, paint- 
ing his hawthorns green, did indeed somewhat hurt the effect 
of his own beautiful design, but did not prevent any one from 
loving hawthorn: but Sir George Beaumont, trying to make 
Constable paint grass brown instead of green, was setting him- 
self between Constable and nature, blinding the painter, and 
blaspheming the work of God. 

§ ut. So much, then, of the diseases of the inferior classes, 
caused by their envying or despising each other. It is evident 
that the men of the central class cannot be liable to any mor- 
bid operation of this kind, they possessing the powers of 
both. 

But there is another order of diseases which affect all the 
three classes, considered with respect to their pursuit of facts, 
For observe, all the three classes are in some degree pursuers 
of facts; even the men of design not being in any case alto- 
gether independent of external truth. Now, considering them 
all as more or less searchers after truth, there is another triple 
division to be made of them. THverything presented to them 
in nature has good and evil mingled in it: and artists, con- 
sidered as searchers after truth, are again to be divided into 
three great classes, a right, a left, and a centre. Those on the 
right perceive, and pursue, the good, and leave the evil : those 
In the centre, the greatest, perceive and pursue the good and 
evil together, the whole thing as it verily is: those on the left 
perceive and pursue the evil, and leave the good. 

§ uu. The first class, I say, take the good and leave the 
evil. Out of whatever is presented to them, they gather what 
it has of grace, and life, and light, and holiness, and leave all, 
or at least as much as possible, of the rest undrawn. The 
faces of their figures express no evil passions ; the skies of 
their landscapes are without storm ; the prevalent character 
of their color is brightness, and of their chiaroscuro fulness of 
light. The early Italian and Flemish painters, Angelico and 


188 THE STONES On! VENICE. 


Hembling, Perugino, Francia, Raffaelle in his best time, John 
Bellini, and our own Stothard, belong eminently to this class. 

§ ru. The second, or greatest class, render all that they see 
in nature unhesitatingly, with a kind of divine grasp and 
government of the whole, sympathizing with all the good, and 
yet confessing, permitting, and bringing good out of the evil 
also. Their subject is infinite as nature, their color equally 
balanced between splendor and sadness, reaching occasionally 
the highest degrees of both, and their chiaroscuro equally 
balanced between light and shade. 

The principal men of this class are Michael Angelo, Leon- 
ardo, Giotto, Tintoret, and Turner. Raffaelle in his second 
time, Titian, and Rubens are transitional ; the first inclining 
to the eclectic, and the last two to the impure class, Raffaelle 
rarely giving all the evil, Titian and Rubens rarely all the 
good. 

§ uv. The last class perceive and imitate evil only. They 
cannot draw the trunk of a tree without blasting and shatter- 
ing it, nor a sky except covered with stormy clouds: they de- 
light in the beggary and brutality of the human race ; their 
color is for the most part subdued or lurid, and the greatest 
spaces of their pictures are occupied by darkness. 

Happily the examples of this class are seldom seen in pere 
fection. Salvator Rosa and Caravaggio are the most charac- 
teristic : the other men belonging to it approach towards the 
central rank by imperceptible gradations, as they perceive and 
represent more and more of good. But Murillo, Zurbaran, 
Camillo Procaccini, Rembrandt, and Teniers, all belong nat~ 
urally to this lower class. 

§ tv. Now, observe: the three classes into which artists 
were previously divided, of men of fact, men of design, and 
men of both, are all of Divine institution ; but of these latter — 
three, the last is in no wise of Divine institution. It is entirely 
human, and the men who belong to it‘have sunk into it by 
their own faults. They are, so far forth, either useless or 
harmful men. It is indeed good that evil should be occasion- 
ally represented, even in its worst forms, but never that it 
should be taken delight in . and the mighty men of the central 


THE NATURE OF GOTHIC. : 189 


class will always give us all that isneedful of it ; sometimes, as 
Hogarth did, dwelling upon it bitterly as satirists,—but this 
with the more effect, because they will neither exaggerate it, nor 
represent it mercilessly, and without the atoning points that all 
evil shows to a Divinely guided glance, even at its deepest. 
So then, though the third class will always, I fear, in some 
measure exist, the two necessary classes are only the first two ; 
and this is so far acknowledged by the general sense of men, 
that the basest class has been confounded with the second ; and 
painters have been divided commonly only into two ranks, now 
known, I believe, throughout Europe by the names which they 
first received in Italy, “ Puristiand Naturalisti.” Since, how- 
ever, in the existing state of things, the degraded or evil- 
loving class, though less defined than that of the Puristi, is 
just as vast as it is indistinct, this division has done infinite 
dishonor to the great faithful painters of nature : and it has 
long been one of the objects I have had most at heart to 
show that, in reality, the Purists, in their sanctity, are less 
separated from these natural painters than the Sensualists in 
their foulness ; and that the difference, though less discernible, 
is in reality greater, between the man who pursues evil for 
its own sake, and him who bears with it for the sake of truth, 
than between this latter and the man who will not endure it 
at all. 

§ tv1. Let us, then, endeavor briefly to mark the real rela- 
tions of these three vast ranks of men, whom [J shall call, for 
convenience in speaking of them, Purists, Naturalists, and 
Sensualists ; not that these terms express their real characters, 
but I know no word, and cannot coin a convenient one, which 
would accurately express the opposite of Purist ; and I keep 
the terms Purist and Naturalist in order to comply, as far as 
possible, with the established usage of language on the Conti- 
nent. Now, observe: in saying that nearly everything pre- 
sented to us in nature has mingling in it of good and evil, I 
do not mean that nature is conceivably improvable, or that 
anything that God has made could be called evil, if we could 
see far enough into its uses, but that, with respect to immedi- 
ate effects or appearances, it may be so, just as the hard rind 


190 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


or bitter kernel of a fruit may be an evil to the eater, though 
in the one is the protection of the fruit, and in the other its 
continuance. The Purist, therefore, does not mend nature, 
but receives from nature and from God that which is good 
for him ; while the Sensualist fills himself “ with the husks 
that the swine did eat.” 

The three classes may, therefore, be likened to men reaping 
wheat, of which the Purists take the fine flour, and the Sen- 
sualists the chaff and straw, but the Naturalists take all home, 
and make their cake of the one, and their couch of the other. 

§ xvu. For instance. We know more certainly every day 
that whatever appears to us harmful in the universe has some 
beneficent or necessary operation ; that the storm which de- 
stroys a harvest brightens the sunbeams for harvests yet un. 
sown, and that the volcano which buries a city preserves a 
thousand from destruction. But the evil is not for the time 
less fearful, because we have learned it to be necessary ; and 
we easily understand the timidity or the tenderness of the 
apirit which would withdraw itself from the presence of de- 
struction, and create in its imagination a world of which the 
peace should be unbroken, in which the sky should not dark- 
en nor the sea rage, in which the leaf should not change 
nor the blossom wither. That man is greater, however, who 
contemplates with an equal mind the alternations of terror 
and of beauty ; who, not rejoicing less beneath the sunny 
sky, can bear also to watch the bars of twilight narrowing on 
the horizon ; and, not less sensible to the blessing of the 
peace of nature, can rejoice in the magnificence of the ordi- 
nances by which that peace is protected and secured. But 
separated from both by an immeasurable distance would be 
the man who delighted in convulsion and disease for their ~ 
own sake ; who found his daily food in the disorder of nature 
mingled with the suffering of humanity ; and watched joy- 
fully at the right hand of the Angel whose appointed work is 
to destroy as well as to accuse, while the corners of the House 
ot feasting were struck by the wind from the wilderness. 

§ tv. And far more is this true, when the subject of con- 
templation is humanity itself. The passions of mankind are 


THE NATURE OF GOTHIC. 19] 


partly protective, partly beneficent, like the chaff and grain 
of the corn; but none without their use, none without noble- 
ness when seen in balanced unity with the rest of the spirit 
which they are charged to defend. The passions of which 
the end is the continuance of the race ; the indignation which 
is to arm it against injustice, or strengthen it to resist wanton 
injury ; and the fear * which lies at the root of prudence, rev- 
erence, and awe, are all honorable and beautiful, so long as 
man is regarded in his relations to the existing world. The 
religious Purist, striving to conceive him withdrawn from 
those relations, effaces from the countenance the traces of all 
transitory passion, illumines it with holy hope and love, and 
seals it with the serenity of heavenly peace ; he conceals the 
forms of the body by the deep-folded garment, or else repre- 
sents them under severely chastened types, and would rather 
paint them emaciated by the fast, or pale from the torture, 
than strengthened by exertion, or flushed by emotion. But 
the great Naturalist takes the human being in its wholeness, 
in its mortal as well as its spiritual strength. Capable of 
sounding and sympathizing with the whole range of its pas- 
sions, he brings one majestic harmony out of them all; he 
represents it fearlessly in all its acts and thoughts, in its 
haste, its anger, its sensuality, and its pride, as well as in its 
fortitude or faith, but makes it noble in them all; he casts 
aside the veil from the body, and beholds the mysteries of its 
form like an angel looking down on an inferior creature: 
there is nothing which he isreluctant to behold, nothing that 
he is ashamed to confess; with all that lives, triumphing, 
falling, or suffering, he claims kindred, either in majesty or in 
mercy, yet standing, in a sort, afar off, unmoved even in the 
deepness of his sympathy ; for the spirit within him is too 
thoughtful to be grieved, too brave to be appalled, and too 
pure to be polluted. 

§ 11x. How far beneath these two ranks of men shall we 
place, in the scale of being, those whose pleasure is only in sin 
or in suffering ; who habitually contemplate humanity in pov- 

* Not selfish fear, caused by want of trust in God, or of resolution in 
the soul. 


192 . THE STONES OF VENICE. 


erty or decrepitude, fury or sensuality ; whose works are 
either temptations to its weakness, or triumphs over its ruin, 
and recognize no other subjects for thought or admiration 
than the subtlety of the robber, the rage of the soldier, or the 
joy of the Sybarite. It seems strange, when thus definitely 
stated, that such a school should exist. Yet consider a little 
what gaps and blanks would disfigure our gallery and chamber 
walls, in places that we have long approached with reverence, 
if every picture, every statue, were removed ‘from them, of 
which the subject was either the vice or the misery of man- 
kind, portrayed without any moral purpose : consider the in- 
numerable groups having reference merely to various forms 
of passion, low or high ; drunken revels and brawls among 
peasants, gambling or fighting scenes among soldiers, amours 
and intrigues among every class, brutal battle pieces, banditti 
subjects, gluts of torture and death in famine, wreck, or 
slaughter, for the sake merely of the excitement,—that quick- 
ening and suppling of the dull spirit that cannot be gained 
for it but by bathing it in blood, afterward to wither back into 
stained and stiffened apathy ; and then that whole vast false 
heaven of sensual passion, full of nymphs, satyrs, graces, god- 
desses, and I know not what, from its high seventh circle in 
Correggio’s Antiope, down to the Grecized ballet-dancers and 
smirking Cupids of the Parisian upholsterer, Sweep away all 
this, remorselessly, and see how much art we should have 
left. 

§ rx. And yet these are only the grossest manifestations of 
the tendency of the school. There are subtler, yet not less 
certain, signs of it 1 the works of men who stand high in the 
world’s list of sacred painters. I doubt not that the reader 
was surprised when I named Murillo among the men of this 
third rank. Yet, go into the Dulwich Gallery, and meditate 
for a little over that much celebrated picture of the two beg- 
gar boys, one eating lying on the ground, the other standing 
beside him. We have among our own painters one who can- 
not indeed be set beside Murillo asa painter of Madonnas, for 
he is a pure Naturalist, and, never having seen a Madonna, 
does not paint any ; but who; as a painter of beggar or peas 


THE NATURE OF GOTHIC. 193 


ant boys, may be set beside Murillo, or any one else,—W. 
Hunt. He loves peasant boys, because he finds them more 
roughly and picturesquely dressed, and ‘more healthily colored, 
than others. And he paints all that he sees in them fear- 
lessly ; all the health and humor, and -freshness, and vitality, 
together with such awkwardness and stupidity, and what else 
of negative or positive harm there may be in the creature ; 
but yet so that on the whole we love it, and find it perhaps 
even beautiful, or if not, at least we see that there is capabil- 
ity of good in it, rather than of evil ; and all is lighted up by 
a sunshine and sweet color that makes the smock-frock as 
precious as cloth of gold. But look at those two ragged and 
vicious vagrants that Murillo has gathered out of the street. 
You smile at first, because they are eating so naturally, and 
their roguery is so complete. But is there anything else 
than roguery there, or was it well for the painter to give his 
time to the painting of those repulsive and wicked children ? 
Do you feel moved with any charity towards children as you 
look at them? Ave we the least more likely to take any in- 
terest in ragged schools, or'to help the next pauper child that 
comes in our way, because the painter has shown us a cunning 
beggar feeding greedily? Mark the choice of the act. He 
might have shown hunger in other ways, and given interest 
to even this act of eating, by making the face wasted, or the 
eye wistful. But he did not care to do this. He delighted 
merely in the disgusting manner of eating, the food filling 
the cheek ; the boy is not hungry, else he would: not turn 
round to talk and grin as he eats. 

§ 1x1. But observe another point in the lower figure. It 
lies so that the sole of the foot is turned towards the spectator ; 
not because it would have lain less easily in another attitude, 
but that the painter may draw, and ‘exhibit, the grey dust en- 
grained in the foot. Do not call this the painting of nature ; 
it is mere delight in foulness. The lesson, if there be any, in 
the picture, is not one whit the stronger. We all know thata 
beggar’s bare foot cannot be clean ; there is no need to thrust 
its degradation into the light, as if no human imagination were 
vigorous enough for its conception, ; 

Vou, IL.—13 


194 THE STONES OF VENICKH. 


§ rx. The position of the Sensuulists, in treatment of land: 
scape, is less distinctly marked than in that of the figure: be- 
cause even the wildest passions of nature are noble: but the 
inclination is manifested by carelessness in marking generic 
form in trees and flowers: by their preferring confused and 
irregular arrangements of foliage or foreground to symmetri- 
cal and simple grouping ; by their general choice of such pict- 
uresqueness as results from decay, disorder, and disease, rather 
than of that which is consistent with the perfection of the 
things in which it is found ; and by their imperfect rendering 
of the elements of strength and beauty in all things. I pro- 
pose to work out this subject fully in the last volume of ‘‘ Mod- 
ern Painters ;” but I trust that enough has been here said to 
enable the reader to understand the relations of the three 
great classes of artists, and therefore also the kinds of morbid 
condition into which the two higher (for the last has no other 
than a morbid condition) are liable to fall. For, since the 
function of the Naturalists is to represent, as far as may be, 
the whole of nature, and the Purists to represent what is abso- 
lutely good for some special purpose or time, it is evident that 
both are liable to error from shortness of sight, and the last 
also from weakness of judgment. I say, in the first place, both 
may err from shortness of sight, from not seeing all that there 
is in nature ; seeing only the outsides of things, or those points 
of them which bear least on the matter in hand. For instance, 
a modern continental Naturalist sees the anatomy of a limb 
thoroughly, but does not see its color against the sky, which 
latter fact is to a painter far the more important of the two. 
And because it is always easier to see the surface than. the 
depth of things, the full sight of them requiring the highest 
powers of penetration, sympathy, and imagination, the world 
is full of vulgar Naturalists: not Sensualists, observe, not — 
men who delight in evil; but men who never see the deepest 
good, and who bring discredit on all painting of Nature by 
the little that they discover in her. And the Purist, besides 
being liable to this same shortsightedness, is liable also ta 
fatal errors of judgment; for he may think that good which 
is not so, and that the highest good which is the least. And 


THE NATURE OF GOTHIC. 195 


thus the world is full of vulgar Purists,* who bring discredit 
on all selection by the silliness of their choice ; and this the 
more, because the very becoming a Purist is commonly indi- 
cative of some slight degree of weakness, readiness to be of- 
fended, or narrowness of understanding of the ends of things : 
the greatest men being, in all times of art, Naturalists, without 
any exception ; and the greatest Purists being those who ap- 
proach nearest to the Naturalists, as Benozzo Gozzoli and 
Perugino. Hence there is a tendency in the Naturalists to 
despise the Purists, and in the Purists to be offended with the 
Naturalists (not understanding them, and confounding them 
with the Sensualists) ; and this is grievously harmful to both. 
§ xxu. Of the various forms of resultant mischief it is not 
here the place to speak: the reader may already be somewhat 
wearied with a statement which has led us apparently so far 
from our immediate subject. But the digression was neces- 
sary, in order that I might clearly define the sense in which I 
use the word Naturalism when I state it to be the third most 
essential characteristic of Gothic architecture. I mean that 
the Gothic builders belong to the central or greatest rank in 
both the classifications of artists which we have just made; 


* I reserve for another place the full discussion of this interesting sub- 
ject, which here would have led me too far; but it must be noted, in 
passing, that this vulgar Purism, which rejects truth, not because it is 
vicious, but because it is humble, and consists not in choosing what is 
good, but in disguising what is rough, extends itself into every species 
of art. The most definite instance of it is the dressing of characters of 
peasantry in an opera or ballet scene ; and the walls of our exhibitions 
. are full of works of art which ‘‘ exalt nature ” in the same way, not by 
revealing what is great in the heart, but by smoothing what is coarse in 
the complexion. There is nothing, I believe, so vulgar, so hopeless, so 
indicative of an irretrievably base mind, as this species of Purism. Of 
healthy Purism carried to the utmost endurable length in this direction, 
exalting the heart first, and the features with it, perhaps the most 
characteristic instance I can give is Stothard’s vignette to ‘‘ Jorasse,” in 
Rogers’s Italy ; at least it would be so if it could be seen beside a real 
group of Swiss girls. The poems of Rogers, compared with those of 
Crabbe, are admirable instances of the healthiest Purism and healthiest 
Naturalism in poetry. The first great Naturalists of Christian art were 
Orcagna and Giotto. 


196 THK SVYONES OF VENICE. 


that, considering all artists as either men of design, men of 
facts, or men of both, the Gothic builders were men of both ; 
and that again, considering all artists as either Purists, Natu- 
ralists, or Sensualists, the Gothic builders were Naturalists. 

§ uxiv. I say first, that the Gothic builders were of that 
central class which unites fact with design; but that the part 
of the work which was more especially their own was the 
truthfulness. Their power of artistical invention or arrange- 
ment was not greater than that of Romanesque and Byzantine 
workmen: by those workmen they were taught the principles, 
and from them received their models, of design ; but to the 
ornamental feeling and rich fancy of the Byzantine the Gothic 
builder added a love of fact which is never found in the South. 
Both Greek and Roman used conventional foliage in their or- 
nament, passing into something that was not foliage at all, 
knotting itself into strange cup-like buds or clusters, and 
growing out of lifeless rods instead of stems; the Gothic 
sculptor received these types, at first, as things that ought to 
be, just as we have a second time received them ; but he 
could: not rest in them. He saw there was no veracity in 
them, no knowledge, no vitality. Do what he would, he could 
not help liking the true leaves better ; and cautiously, a little 
at a time, he put more of nature into his work, until at last it 
was all true, retaining, nevertheless, every valuable character 
of the original well-disciplined and designed arrangement.* 

§ txyv. Nor is it only in external and visible subject that 
the Gothic workman wrought for truth: he is as firm in his 
rendering of imaginative as of actual truth; that is to say, 
when an idea would have been by a Roman, or Byzantine, 
symbolically represented, the Gothic mind realizes it to the 
utmost. For instance, the purgatorial fire is represented in 
the mosaic of Torcello (Romanesque) as a red stream, longitu- - 
dinally striped like a riband, descending out of the throne of 
Christ, and gradually extending itself to envelope the wicked. 
When we are once informed what this means, it is enough for 

* The reader will understand this ina moment by glancing at Plate 


XX., the last in this volume, where the series 1 to 12 represents the 
shange in one kind of leaf, from the Byzantine to the perfect Gothic. 


THE NATURE OF GOTHIC. -197 


its purpose ; but the Gothic inventor does not leave the sign 
in need of interpretation. He makes the fire as like real:fire 
as he can ; and in the porch of St. Maclou at Rouen the sculpt- 
ured flames burst out of the Hades gate, and flicker up, in 
writhing tongues of stone, through the interstices of the 
niches, as if the church itself were on fire. This is an extreme 
instance, but it is all the more illustrative of the entire difference 
in temper and thought between the two schools of art, and of 
the intense love of veracity which influenced the Gothic 
design. 

§ uxvi. I. do not say that this love of veracity is always 
healthy in its operation. I have above noticed the errors into 
which it falls from despising design ; and there is another kind 
of error noticeable in the instance just given, in which the love 
of truth is too hasty, and seizes on a surface truth instead of 
an inner one. For in representing the Hades fire, it is not the 
mere form of the flame which needs most to be told, but its 
unquenchableness, its Divine ordainment and limitation, and 
its inner fierceness, not physical and material, butin being the 
expression of the wrath of God. And these things are not to 
be told by imitating the fire that flashes out of a bundle of 
sticks. If we think over his symbol a little, we shall perhaps 
find that the Romanesque builder told more truth in that like- 
ness of a blood-red stream, flowing between definite shores and 
out of God’s throne, and expanding, as if fed by a perpetual 
current, into the lake wherein the wicked are cast, than the 
Gothic builder in those torch-flickerings about his niches. But 
this is not to our immediate purpose ; Iam not at present to 
insist upon the faults into which the love of truth was led in 
the later Gothic times, but on the feeling itself, as a glorious 
and peculiar characteristic of the Northern builders. For, ob- 
serve, it is not, even in the above instance, love of truth, but 
want of thought, which causes the fault. The love of truth, 
as such, is good, but when it is misdirected by thoughtlessness 
or over-exci'ed by vanity, and either seizes on facts of small 
value, or gathers them chiefly that it may boast of its grasp 
and apprehension, its work may well become dull or offensive. 
Yet let us not, therefore, blame the inherent love of facts, but 


198 THE STONES OF VENICH. 


the incautiousness of their selection, and impertinence of their 
statement. 

§ txvu. I said, in the second place, that Gothic work, when 
referred to the arrangement of all art, as purist, naturalist, or 
sensualist, was naturalist. This character follows necessarily 
on its extreme love of truth, prevailing over the sense of beauty, 
and causing it to take delight in portraiture of every kind, and 
to express the various characters of the human countenance 
and form, as it did the varieties of leaves and the ruggedness 
of branches. And this tendency is both increased and enno- 
bled by the same Christian humility which we saw expressed 
in the first character of Gothic work, itsrudeness. For as that 
resulted from a humility which confessed the imperfection of 
the workman, so thig naturalist portraiture is rendered more 
faithful by the humility which confesses the imperfection of 
the subject. The Greek sculptor could neither bear to confess 
his own feebleness, nor to tell the faults of the forms that he 
portrayed. But the Christian workman, believing that all is 
finally to work together for good, freely confesses both, and 
neither seeks to disguise his own roughness of work, nor his 
subject’s roughness of make. Yetthis frankness being joined, 
for the most part, with depth of religious feeling in other di- 
rections, and especially with charity, there is sometimes a ten- 
dency to Purism in the best Gothic sculpture ; so that it fre- 
quently reaches great dignity of form and tenderness of 
expression, yet never so as to lose the veracity of portraiture, 
wherever portraiture is possible: not exalting its kings into 
demi-gods, nor its saints into archangels, but giving what king- 
liness and sanctity was in them, to the full, mixed with due 
record of their faults ; and this in the most part with a great 
indifference like that of Scripture history, which sets down, - 
with unmoved and unexcusing resoluteness, the virtues and 
errors of all men of whom it speaks, often leaving the reader 
to form his own estimate of them, without an indication of the 
judgment of the historian. And this veracity is carried out by 
the Gothic sculptors in the minuteness and generality, as well 
as the equity, of their delineation : for they do not limit their 
art to the portraiture of saints and kings, but introduce the 


THE NATURE OF GOTHIC. 199 


most familiar scenes and most simple subjects ; filling up the 
backgrounds of Scripture histories with vivid and curious rep- 
resentations of the commonest incidents of daily life, and avai!- 
ing themselves of every occasion in which, either as a symbol, 
or an explanation of a scene or time, the things familiar to the 
eye of the workman could be introduced and made of account. 
Hence Gothic sculpture and painting are not only full of valu- 
able portraiture of the greatest men, but copious records of all 
the domestic customs and inferior arts of the ages in which it 
flourished.* 

§ uxvut. There is, however, one direction in which the 
Naturalism of the Gothic workmen is peculiarly manifested ; 
and this direction is even more characteristic of the school 
than the Naturalism itself; I mean their peculiar fondness 
for the forms of Vegetation. In rendering the various circum- 
stances of daily life, Egyptian and Ninevite sculpture is as 
frank and as diffuse as the Gothic. From the highest pomps 
of state or triumphs of battle, to the most trivial domestic 
arts and amusements, all is taken advantage of to fill the 
field of granite with the perpetual interest of a crowded. 
drama ; and the early Lombardic and Romanesque sculpture 
is equally copious in its description of the familiar circum- 
stances of war and the chase. But in all the scenes portrayed 
by the workmen of these nations, vegetation occurs. only as 
an explanatory accessory ; the reed is introduced to mark the 
course of the river, or the tree to mark the covert of the wild 
beast, or the ambush of the enemy, but there is no especial 
interest in the forms of thé vegetation strong enough to in- 
duce them to make it a subject of separate and accurate 
study. Again, among the nations who followed the arts of 
design exclusively; the forms of foliage introduced were 


* The best art either represents the facts of its own day, or, if facts of 
the past, expresses them with accessories of the time in which the work 
was done. All good art, representing past events, is therefore full of the 
most frank anachronism, and always ought to be. No painter has any 
business to be an antiquarian. We do not want his impressions or sup- 
positions respecting things that are past, We want his clear assertiong 
respecting things present, 


200 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


meagre and general, and their real intricacy and life wera 
neither admired nor expressed. But to the Gothic workman 
the living foliage became a subject of intense affection, and 
he struggled to render all its characters with as much accu- 
racy as was compatible with the laws of his design and the 
nature of his material, not unfrequently tempted in his en- 
thusiasm to transgress the one and disguise the other. 

§ uxix. There isa peculiar significancy in this, indicative 
both of higher civilization and gentler temperament, than 
had before been manifested in architecture. Rudeness, and 
the love of change, which we have insisted upon as the first 
elements of Gothic, are also elements common to all healthy 
schools. But here is a softer element mingled with them, 
peculiar to the Gothic itself. The rudeness or ignorance 
which would have been painfully exposed in the treatment of 
the human form, are still not so great as to prevent the suc- 
cessful rendering of the wayside herbage ; and the love of 
change, which becomes morbid and feverish in following the 
haste of the hunter, and the rage of the combatant, is at once 
- soothed and satisfied as it watches the wandering of the ten- 
dril, and the budding of the flower. Nor is this all: the new 
direction of mental interest marks an infinite change in the 
means and the habits of life. The nations whose chief sup- 
port was in the chase, whose chief interest was in the battle, 
whose chief pleasure was in the banquet, would take small 
care respecting the shapes of leaves and flowers ; and notice 
little in the forms of the forest trees which sheltered them, 
except the signs indicative of the wood which would make 
the toughest lance, the closest roof, or the clearest fire. The 
affectionate observation of the grace and outward character 
of vegetation is the sure sign of a more tranquil and gentle 
existence, sustained by the gifts, and gladdened by the splen- 
dor, of the earth. In that careful distinction of species, and 
richness of delicate and undisturbed organization, which 
characterize the Gothic design, there is the history of rural 
and thoughtful life, influenced by habitual tenderness, and 
devoted to subtle inquiry ; and every discriminating and deli- 
cate touch of the chisel, as it rounds the petal or guides the 


THE NATURE OF GOTHIC. 203 


branch, is a prophecy of the developement of the entire body 
of the natural sciences, beginning with that of medicine, of 
She recovery of literature, and the establishment of the most 
necessary principles of domestic wisdom and national peace. 

§ uxx. I have before alluded to the strange and vain sup- 
position, that the original conception of Gothic architecture 
had been derived from vegetation,—from the symmetry of 
avenues, and the interlacing of branches. It is a supposition 
which never could have existed for a moment in the mind of 
any person acquainted with early Gothic; but, however idle 
as a theory, itis most valuable as a testimony to the charac- 
ter of the perfected style. It is precisely because the reverse 
of this theory is the fact, because the Gothic did not arise out 
of, but develope itself into, a resemblance to vegetation, that 
' this resemblance is,so instructive as an indication of the 
temper of the builders. It was no chance suggestion of the 
form of an arch from the bending of a bough, but a gradual 
and continual discovery of a beauty in natural forms which 
could be more and more perfectly transferred into those of 
stone, that influenced at once the heart of the people, and the 
form of'the edifice. The Gothic architecture arose in massy 
and mountainous strength, axe-hewn, and iron-bound, block 
heaved upon block by the monk’s enthusiasm and the soldier’s 
force ; and cramped and stanchioned. into..such weight of 
grisly wall, as might bury the anchoret in darkness, and beat 
back the utmost storm of battle, suffering but by the same 
narrow crosslet the passing of the sunbeam, or of the arrow. 
Gradually, as that monkish enthusiasm became more thought- 
ful, and asthe sound of war became more and more intermit- 
tent beyond the gates of the convent or the keep, the stony 
pillar grew slender and the vaulted roof grew light, till they 
had wreathed themselves into the semblance of the summer 
woods at their fairest, and of the dead field-flowers, long trod- 
den down in blood, sweet monumental statues were set to 
bloom for ever, beneath the porch of the temple, or the canopy 
of the tomb. 

§ xxi. Nor is it only asa sign of greater gentleness or re- 
finement of mind, but as a proof of the best possible direction 


BO THE STONES OF VENICE. 


of this refinement, that the tendency of the Gothic to the ex 
pression of vegetative life is to be admired. That sentence of 
Genesis, “I have given thee every green herb for meat,” like 
all the rest of the book, has a profound symbolical as well as 
a literal meaning. It is not merely the nourishment of the 
body, but the food of the soul, that is intended. The green herb 
is, of all nature, that which is most essential to the healthy 
spiritual life of man. Most of us do not need fine scenery ; 
tho precipice and the mountain peak are not intended to be 
seen by all men,—perhaps their power is greatest over those 
who are unaccustomed to them. But trees, and fields, and 
flowers were made for all, and are necessary for all. God has 
connected the labor which is essential to the bodily sus. 
tenance, with the pleasures which are healthiest for the heart ; 
and while He made the ground stubborn, He made its herb- ~ 
age fragrant, and its blossoms fair. The proudest architecture 
that man can build has no higher honor than to bear the 
image and recall the memory of that grass of the field which 
is, at once, the type and the support of his existence; the 
goodly building is then most glorious when it is sculptured 
into the likeness of the leaves of Paradise; and the great 
Gothic spirit, as we showed it to be noble in its disquietude, 
is also noble in its hold of nature ; it is, indeed, like the dove 
of Noah, in that she found no rest upon the face of the 
waters,—but like her in this also, “Lo, IN HER MOUTH Was AN 
OLIVE BRANCH, PLUCKED OFF.” 

§ uxxm. The fourth essential element of the Gothic mind 
was above stated to be the sense of the Grorssguz; but I 
shall defer the endeavor to define this most curious and subtle 
character until we have occasion to examine one of the divis- 
ions of the Renaissance schools, which was morbidly influ- 
enced by it (Vol. III. Chap. IL). It is the less necessary to - 
insist upon it here, because every reader familiar with Gothic 
architecture must understand what I mean, and will, I be- 
lieve, have no hesitation in admitting that the tendency to 
delight in fantastic and ludicrous, as well as in sublime, 
images, is a universal instinct of the Gothic imagination. 

§ uxxim, The fifth element above named was Rierrry ; and 


THE NATURE OF GOTHIC. 203 


this character 1 must endeavor carefully to define, for neither 
the word I have used, nor any other that I can think of, wili 
express it accurately. For I mean, rot merely stable, but 
active rigidity; the peculiar energy which gives tension to 
movement, and stiffness to resistance, which makes the fiercest 
lightning forked rather than curved, and the stoutest oak- 
branch angular rather than bending, and is as much seen in 
the quivering of the lance as in the glittering of the icicle. 

§ txxtv. I have before had occasion (Vol. I. Chap. XJIL 
§ viz.) to note some manifestations of this energy or fixedness ; 
but xt must be still more attentively considered here, as it 
shows ztself throughout the whole structure and decoration of 
Gothte work. Egyptian and Greek buildings stand, for the 
most part, by their own weight and mass, one stone passively 
incumbent on another: but in the Gothic vaults and traceries 
there is a stiffness analogous to that of the bones of a limb, or 
fibres of a tree ; an elastic tension and communication of force 
from part to part, and also a studious expression of this 
throughout every visible line of the building. And, in like 
manner, the Greek and Egyptian ornament is either mere 
surface engraving, as if the face of the wall had been stamped 
with a seal, or its lines are flowing, lithe, and luxuriant ; in 
either case, there is no expression of energy in framework of 
the ornament itself. But the Gothic ornament stands out 
in prickly independence, and frosty fortitude, jutting into 
crockets, and freezing into pinnacles ; here starting up into a. 
monster, there germinating into a blossom; anon knitting 
itself into a branch, alternately thorny, bossy, and bristly, or 
writhed into every form of nervous entanglement; but, even 
when most graceful, never for an instant languid, always 
quickset ; erring, if at all, ever on the side of brusquerie. 

§ uxxv. The feelings or habits in the workman which give 
rise to this character in the work, are more complicated and 
various than those indicated by any other sculptural expres- 
sion hitherto named. ‘There is, first, the habit of hard and 
rapid working; the industry of the tribes of the North, 
quickened by the coldness of the climate, and giving an ex- 
pression of sharp energy to all they do (as above noted, Vol. I 


204 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


Chap. XTII. § vm), as opposed to the languor of the Southern 
tribes, however much of fire there may be in the heart of that 
languor, for lava itself may flow languidly. There is also the 
habit of finding enjoyment in the signs of cold, which is never 
found, I believe, in the inhabitants of countries south of the 
Alps. Cold is to them an unredeemed evil, to be suffered, and 
forgotten as soon as may be ; but the long winter of the North 
forces the Goth (I mean the Englishman, Frenchman, Dane, 
or German), if he would lead a happy life at all, to find sources 
of happiness in foul weather as well as fair, and to rejoice in 
the leafless as well as in the shady forest. And this we do 
with all our hearts ; finding perhaps nearly as much content- 
ment by the Christmas fire asin the summer sunshine, and 
gaining health and strength on the ice-fields of winter, as well 
as among the meadows of spring. So that there is nothing 
adverse or painful to our feelings in the cramped and stiffened 
structure of vegetation checked by cold ; and instead of seek- 
ing, like the Southern sculptor, to express only the softness 
of leafage nourished in all tenderness, and tempted into all 
luxuriance by warm winds and glowing rays, we find pleasure 
in dwelling upon the crabbed, perverse, and morose animation 
of plants that have known little kindness from earth or heaven, 
but, season after season, have had their best efforts palsied by 
frost, their brightest buds buried under snow, and their good- 
liest limbs lopped by tempest. 

§ txxvi. There are many subtle sympathies and affections 
which join to'confirm the Gothic mind in this peculiar choice 
of subject ; and when we add to the influence of these, the 
necessities consequent upon the employment of a rougher 
material, compelling the workman to seek for vigor of effect, 
rather than refinement of texture or accuracy of form, we 
have direct and manifest causes for much of the difference 
between the northern and southern cast of conception: but 
there are indirect causes holding a far more important place 
in the Gothic heart, though less immediate in their influence 
on design. Strength of will, independence of character, reso- 
luteness of purpose, impatience of undue control, and that 
general tendency to set the individual reason against authority, 


THE NATURE OF GOTHIC. 205 


and the individual deed against destiny, which, in the Northern 
tribes, has opposed itself throughout all ages to the languid 
submission, in the Southern, of thought to tradition, and 
purpose to fatality, are all more or less traceable in the rigid 
lines, vigorous and various masses, and daringly projecting 
and independent structure of the Northern Gothic ornament: 
while the opposite feelings are in like manner legible in the 
graceful and softly guided waves and wreathed bands, in which 
Southern decoration is constantly disposed ; in its tendency to 
lose its independence, and fuse itself into the surface of the 
masses upon which it is traced ; and in the expression seen so 
often, in the arrangement of those masses themselves, of an 
abandonment of their strength to an inevitable necessity, or a 
listless repose. 

§ txxvu. There is virtue in the measure, and error in the 
excess, of both these characters of mind, and in both of the 
styles which they have created ; the best architecture, and the 
best temper, are those which uate them both; and this fifth 
impulse of the Gothic heart is therefore that which needs 
most caution in its indulgence. It is more definitely Gothic 
than any other, but the best Gothic building is not that which 
is most Gothic : it can hardly be too frank in its confession of 
rudeness, hardly too rich in its changefulness, hardly too 
faithful in its naturalism ; but it may go too far in its rigidity, 
and, like the great Puritan spirit in its extreme, lose itself 
either in frivolity of division, or perversity of purpose.* It 
actually did so in its later times; but it is gladdening to 
remember that in its utmost nobleness, the very temper which 
has been thought most adverse to it, the Protestant spirit of 
self-dependence and inquiry, was expressed in its every line. 
Faith and. aypiration there were, in every Christian ecclesias- 
tical building, from the first century to the fifteenth ; but the 


* See the account of the meeting at Talla Linns, in 1682, given in the 
fourth chapter of the ‘“‘ Heart of Midlothian.” At length they arrived 
at the conclusion that ‘‘ they who owned (or allowed) such names as 
Monday, Tuesday, January, February, and so forth, served themselves 
heirs to the same if not greater punishment than had been denounced 
against the idolaters of old.” 


206 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


moral habits to which England in this age owes the kind of 
greatness that she has,—the habits of philosophical investiga- 
tion, of accurate thought, of domestic seclusion and indepen- 
dence, of stern self-reliance, and sincere upright searching 
into religious truth,—were only traceable in the features 
which were the distinctive creation of the Gothic schools, in 
the veined foliage, and thorny fret-work, and shadowy niche, 
and buttressed pier, and fearless height of subtle pinnacle 
and crested tower, sent like an “unperplexed question up to 
Heaven.” * 

§ txxvin. Last, because the least essential, of the constitu- 
ent elements of this noble school, was placed that of Repun- 
pANcE,—the uncalculating bestowal of the wealth of its labor. 
There is, indeed, much Gothic, and that of the best period, in 
which this element is hardly traceable, and which depends for 
its effect almost exclusively on loveliness of simple design and 
grace of uninvolved proportion: still, in the most character- 
istic buildings, a certain portion of their effect depends upon 
accumulation of ornament; and many of those which have 
most influence on the minds of men, have attained it by means 
of this attribute alone. And although, by careful study of the 
school, it is possible to arrive at a condition of taste which 
shall be better contented by a few perfect lines than by a 
whole facade covered with fretwork, the building which only 
satisfies such a taste is not to be considered the best. For the 
very first requirement of Gothic architecture being, as we saw 
above, that it shall both admit the aid, and appeal to the ad- 
miration, of the rudest as well as the most refined minds, the 
richness of the work is, paradoxical as the statement may ap- 
pear, a part of its humility. No architecture is so haughty as 
that which is simple ; which refuses to address the eye, except 
in a few clear and forceful lines ; which implies, in offering so 
little to our regards, that all it has offered is perfect ; and dis- 
dains, either by the complexity or the attractiveness of its feat- 


*See the beautiful description of Florence in Elizabeth Browning’s 
**Casa Guidi Windows,” which is not only a noble poem, but the only 
book I have seen which, favoring the Liberal cause in Italy, gives a just 
account of the incapacities ot the modern Italian, 


THE NATURE OF GOTHIC. 207 


ares, to embarrass our investigation, or betray us into delight. 
That humility, which is the very life of the Gothic school, is 
shown not only in the imperfection, but in the accumulation, 
of ornament. The inferior rank of the workman is often 
shown as much in the richness, as the roughness, of his work ; 
and if the co-operation of every hand, and the sympathy of 
every heart, are to be received, we must be content to allow 
the redundance which disguises the failure of the feeble, and 
wins the regard of the inattentive. There are, however, far 
nobler interests mingling, in the Gothic heart, with the rude 
love of decorative accumulation : a magnificent enthusiasm, 
which feels as if it never could do enough to reach the fulness 
of its ideal; an unselfishness of sacrifice, which would rathex 
cast fruitless labor before the altar than stand idle in the 
market ; and, finally, a profound sympathy with the fulness 
and wealth of the material universe, rising out of that Natural- 
ism whose operation we have already endeavored to define. 
The sculptor who sought for his models among the forest 
leaves, could not but quickly and deeply feel that complexity 
need not involve the loss of grace, nor richness that of repose ; 
and every hour which he spent in the study of the minute and 
various work of Nature, made him feel more forcibly the bar- 
renness of what was best in that of man : nor is it tc be won- 
dered at, that, seeing her perfect and exquisite creations 
poured forth in a profusion which conception could not grasp 
nor calculation sum, he should think that it ill became him to 
be niggardly of his own rude craftsmanship ; and where he 
saw throughout the universe a faultless beauty lavished on 
measureless spaces of broidered field and blooming mountain, 
to grudge his poor and imperfect labor to the few stones that 
he had raised one upon another, for habitation or memorial. 
The years of his life passed away before his task was ac- 
complished ; but generation succeeded generation with un- 
wearied enthusiasm, and the cathedral front was at last lost-in 
the tapestry of its traceries, like a rock among the thickets and 
herbage of spring. 

§ txxrx. We have now, I believe, obtained a view approach- 
ing to completeness Of the various moral or imaginative ele: 


208 THR STONES OF VENICE. 


ments which composed the inner spirit of Gothic architecture 
We have, in the second place, to define its outward form. 

Now, as the Gothic spirit is made up of several elements, 
some of which may, in particular examples, be wanting, sa 
the Gothic form is made up of minor conditions of form, 
some of which may, in particular examples, be imperfectly de. 
veloped. 

We cannot say, therefore, that a building is either Gothic 
or not Gothic in form, any more than we can in spirit. We 
can only say that it is more or less Gothic, in proportion to 
the number of Gothic forms which it unites. 

§ uxxx. There have been made latcly many subtle and in- 
genious endeavors to base the definition of Gothic form en- 
tirely upon the roof-vaulting ; endeavors which are both 
forced and futile : for many of the best Gothic buildings in 
the world have roofs of timber, which have no more connection 
with the main structure of the walls of the edifice than a hat 
has with that of the head it protects ; and other Gothic build- 
ings are merely enclosures of spaces, as ramparts and walls, 
or enclosures of gardens or cloisters, and have no roofs at all, 
in the sense in which the word “roof” is commonly accepted. 
But every reader who has ever taken the slightest interest in 
architecture must know that there is a great popular impres- 
sion on this matter, which maintains itself stiffly in its old 
form, in spite of all ratiocination and definition ; namely, that 
a flat lintel from pillar to pillar is Grecian, a round arch Nor- 
man or Romanesque, and a pointed arch Gothic. 

And the old popular notion, as far as it goes, is perfectly 
right, and can never be bettered. The most striking outward 
feature in all Gothic architecture is, that it is composed of 
pointed arches, as in Romanesque that it is in like manner 
composed of round; and this distinction would be quite as - 
clear, though the roofs were taken off every cathedral in Eu- 
rope. And yet, if we examine carefully into the real force and 
meaning of the term “roof’’ we shall perhaps be able to re- 
tain the old popular idea in a definition of Gothic architecture 
which shall also express whatever dependence that architect 
ure has upon true forms of roofing. 


THH NATURH OF GUTHIC. 20% 


§uzxxt In Chap. XH. of tho first volume, the reader 
will remember that roofs were considered as generally divided 
into two parts ; the roof proper, that is to say, the shell, vault, 
or ceiling, internally visible; and the roof-mask, which pro- 
tects this lower roof from the weather. In some buildings 
these parts are united in one framework ; but, in most, they 
are more or less independent of each other, and in nearly 
all Gothic buildings there is considerable interval between 
them. 

Now it will often happen, as above noticed, that owing to 
the nature of the apartments required, or the materials at 
hand, the roof proper may be flat, coved, or domed, in build- 
ings which in their walls employ pointed arches, and are, in 
the straitest sense of the word, Gothic in all other respects. 
Yet so far forth as the roofing alone is concerned, they are 
not Gothic unless the pointed arch be the principal form 
adopted either in the stone ronlfing or the timbers of the 
roof proper. 

I shall say then, in tho first ius that “ Gothic architecture 
is that which uses, if possiblo, the pointed arch in the roof 
proper.” This is the first step in our definition. 

§ uxxxu. Secondly. Although therc may be many advis- 
able or necessary forms ior tho lower roof ov ceiling, there is, 
in cold countries exposed to rain and snow, only one advisabie 
form for the roof-mask, and that is the gable, for this alone 
will throw off both rain and snow from all parts of its surface 
as speedily as possible. Snow can lodge on the top of a dome, 
not on the ridge ‘ble. And thus, as far as roofing is con- 
cerned, the gable is a far moro essential feature of Northern 
architecture than the pointed vault, for the one is a thorough 
necessity, the other often a graceful conventionality: the gable 
occurs in the timber roof of every dwelling-house and every 
cottage, but not the vault ; and the gable built on a polygonal 
or circular plan, is the origin of the turret and spire ;* and all 
the so-called aspiration of Gothic architecture is, as above 
noticed (Vol. I. Chap. XII. § v1.), nothing more than its de- 

* Salisbury spiro is only a tower with a polygonal gabled roof of stone, 
and so also the celebrated spires of Caen and Coutances. 

Vou, IIl.—14 


210 ' PHE STONES OF VENICE. 


velopement. So that we must add to our definition another 
clause, which will be, at present, by far the most important, 
and it will stand thus: ‘Gothic architecture is that which usea 
the pointed arch for the roof proper, and the gable for the 
roof-mask.” 

§ uxxxu. And here, in passing, let us notice a principle as 
true in architecture as in morals. It is not the compelled, but 
the wilful, transgression of law which corrupts the character. 
Sin is not in the act, but in the choice. It is a law for Gothio 
architecture, that it shall use the pointed arch for its root 
proper ; but because, in many cases of domestic building, this 
becomes impossible for want of room (the whole height of the 
apartment being required everywhere), or in various other 
ways inconvenient, flat ceilings may be used, and yet the 
Gothic shall not lose its purity. But in the roof-mask, there 
can be no necessity nor reason for a change of form: the gable 
is the best; and if any other—dome, or bulging crown, or ~ 
whatsoever else—be employed at all, it must be in pure 
caprice, and wilful transgression of law. And wherever, 
therefore, this is done, the Gothic has lost its character ; it is 
pure Gothic no more. . 

§ uxxxiv. And this last clause of the definition is to be 
more strongly insisted upon, because it includes multitudes of 
buildings, especially domestic, which are Gothic in spirit, but 
which we are not in the habit of embracing in our general con- 
ception of Gothic architecture ; multitudes of street dwelling- 
houses and straggling country farm-houses, built with little 
care for beauty, or observance of Gothic laws in vaults or 
windows, and yet maintaining their character by the sharp 
and quaint gables of the roofs. And, for the reason just 
given, a house is far more Gothic which has square windows, 
and a boldly gabled roof, than the one which has pointed 
arches for the windows, and a domed or flat roof. For it 
often happened in the best Gothic times, as it must in al] 
times, that it was more easy and convenient to make a window 
square than pointed ; not but that, as above emphatically 
stated, the richness of church architecture was also found in 
domestic ; and systematically “when the pointed arch wag 


THE NATURE OF GOTHIC. 91} 


ased in the church it was used in the street,” only in all times 
there were cases in which men could not build as they would, 
and were obliged to construct their doors or windows in the 
readiest way ; and this readiest way was then, in small work, 
as it will be to the end of time, to puta flat stone for a lintel 
and build the windows as in Fig. VILL. ; and the occurrence 
of such windows in a building or a street will not un-Gothicize 
them, so longas the bold gable roof be retained, and the spirit 
of the work be visibly Gothic in other respects. But if the 
roof be wilfully and conspicuously of any other form than the 
gable,—if it be domed, or Turkish, or Chinese,—the building 
has positive corruption mingled with its Gothic elements, in 
proportion to the conspicuous- 
ness of the roof; and, if not 
absolutely un-Gothicized, can 
maintain its character only by 
such vigor of vital Gothic ener- 
gy in other parts as shall cause 
the roof to be forgotten, thrown 
off like an eschar from the living frame. Nevertheless, we 
must always admit that it may be forgotten, and that if the 
Gothic seal be indeed set firmly on the walls, we are not to 
cavil at the forms reserved for the tiles and leads. For, observe, 
as our definition at present stands, being understood of large 
roofs only, it will allow a conical glass-furnace to be a Gothic 
building, but will not allow so much, either of the Duomo of 
Florence, or the Baptistery of Pisa. We must either mend it, 
therefore, or understand it in some broader sense. 

§ yxxxv. And now, if the reader will look back to the fifth 
paragraph of Chap. III. Vol. L, he will find that I carefully 
extended my definition of a roof so as to include more than is 
usually understood by the term. It was there said to be the 
covering of a space, narrow or wide. It does not in the least 
signify, with respect to the real nature of the covering, whether 
the space protected be two feet wide, or ten ; though in the 
one case we call the protection an arch, in the other a vault 
or roof. But the real point to be considered is, the manner 
in which this protection stands, and not whether it is narrow 


Fie. VIII. 


912 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


or broad. We call the vaulting of a bridge “an arch,” be 
cause it is narrow with respect to the river it crosses; but if 
it were built above us on the ground, we should call it a wag- 
gon vault, because then we should feel the breadth of it. The 
real question is the nature of the curve, not the extent of 
space over which it is carried : and this is more the case with 
respect to Gothic than to any other architecture ; for, in the 
greater number of instances, the form of the roof is entirely 
dependent on the ribs ; the domical shells being constructed 
in all kinds of inclinations, quite undeterminable by the eye, 
and all that is definite in their character being fixed by the 
curves of the ribs. 

§ rxxxvi Let us then consider our definition as including 
the narrowest arch, or tracery bar, as well as the broadest roof, 
and it will be nearly a perfect one. For the fact is, that ali 
good Gothic isnothing more than the developement, in various 
ways, and on every conceivable scale, of the group formed by 
the pointed arch for the bearing line below, and the gable for 
the protecting line above; and from the huge, gray, shaly slope 
of the cathedral roof, with its elastic pointed vaults beneath, 
to the slight crown-like points that enrich the 
smallest niche of its doorway, one law and one ex- 
pression will be found in all. The modes of support 
and of decoration are infinitely various, but the 
real character of the building, in all good Gothic, 
depends upon the single lines of the gable over the 
pointed arch, Fig. IX., endlessly rearranged or repeated. The 
larger woodeut, Fig. X., represents three characteristic con- 
litions of the treatment of the group: a, from a tomb at Ve- 
rona (1328) ; 6, one of the lateral porches at Abbeville; c, 
one of the uppermost points of the great western fagade of 
Rouen Cathedral ; both these last being, I believe, early work’ 
of the fifteenth century. The forms of the pure early English 
and French Gothic are too well known to need any notice ; 
my reason will appear presently for choosing, by way of ex- 
ample, these somewhat rare conditions, 

§ uxxxvi. But, first, let us try whether we cannot get the 
forms of the other great architectures of the world broadly 


\ 
Fie, TX. 


THE NATURE OF GOTHIC. 


expressed by relations of the same 
lines into which we have compress- 
ed the Gothic. We may easily do 
this if the reader will first allow 
me to remind him of the true nat- 
ure of the pointed arch, as it was 
expressed in § x. Chap. X. of the 
first volume. It was said there, 
that it ought to be called a “curved 
gable,” for, strictly speaking, an 
“arch” cannot be “pointed.” The, 
so-called pointed arch ought always 
to be considered as a gable, with 
its sides curved in order to enable 
them to bear pressure from with- 
out. Thus considering it, there 
are but three ways in which an 
interval between piers can be 
bridged,—the three ways repre- 
sented by 4, B, and o, Fig. XL.,* 
on page 214,—a, the lintel; 3, the 
rourd arch; c, the gable. All the 
architects in the world will never 
discover any other ways of bridg- 
ing a space than these three ; they 
may vary the curve of the arch, or 
curve the sides of the gable, or 
break them ; but in doing this they 
are merely modifying or subdivid- 
ing, not adding to the generic 
forms. 

§ uxxxvi. Now there are three 
good architectures in the world, 
and there never can be more, cor- 
respondent + each of these three 
simple ways of covering in a space, 

* Or by the shaded portions of Fig. 
XXIX. Vol. 4. 


914 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


which is the original function of all architectures. And those 
three architectures are pure exactly in proportion to the sim- 
plicity and directness with which they express the condition 
of roofing on which they are founded. They have many in. 
teresting varieties, according to their scale, manner of decoras 
tion, and character of the nations by whom they are practised, 
but all their varieties are finally referable to the three great 
heads :— ; 

A, Greek: Architecture of the Lintel. 

B, Romanesque: Architecture of the Round Arch. 

oc, Gothic: Architecture of the Gable. 


oe 


Fic. XI. 


The three names, Greek, Romanesque, and Gothic, are in- 
dyved inaccurate when used in this vast sense, because they 
imply national limitations ; but the three architectures may 
nevertheless not unfitly receive their names from those nations 
by whom they were carried to the highest perfections. We 
may thus briefly state their existing varieties. 

§ Lxxxix. a. Greek: Lintel Architecture. The worst of the 
three ; and, considered with reference to stone construction, 
always in some measure barbarous. Its simplest type is 
Stonehenge ; its most refined, the Parthenon ; its noblest, the 
Temple of Karnak. 

In the hands of the Egyptian, it is sublime ; in those of the 
Greek, pure ; in those of the Roman, rich; and in those of the 
Renaissance builder, effeminate. : 

B. Romanesque: Round-arch Architecture. Never thor. 
oughly developed until Christian times. It falls into two 
great branches, Eastern and Western, or Byzantine and Lom- 
bardic ; changing respectively in process of time, with certain 
helps from each other, into Arabian Gothic and Teutonic 
Gothic. Its most perfect Lombardic type is the Duomo af 


THE NATURE OF GOTHIC. 215 


Pisa ; its most perfect Byzantine type (I believe), St. Mark’ 
at Venice. Its highest glory is, that it has no corruption. It 
perishes in giving birth to another architecture as noble as 
itself. 

c. Gornic: Architecture of the Gable. The daughter of 
the Romanesque ; and, like the Romanesque, divided into two 
great branches, Western and Eastern, or pure Gothic and 
Arabian Gothic ; of which the latter is called Gothic, only be- 
cause it has many Gothic’ forms, pointed arches, vaults, &e., 
but its spirit remains Byzantine, more especially in the form 
of the roof-mask, of which, with respect to these three great 
families, we have next to determine the typical form. 

§ xc. For, observe, the distinctions we have hitherto been 
stating, depend on the form of the stones first laid from pier 
to pier; that is to say, of the simplest condition of roofs 
proper. Adding the relations of the roof-mask to these lines, 
we shall have the perfect type of form for each school. 

In the Greek, the Western Romanesque, and Western 
Gothic, the roof-mask is 
the gable: in the Eastern 
Romanesque, and Eastern 
Gothic, it is the dome: but = 
I have not studied the roof- 
ing of either of these last 
two groups, and shall not 
venture to generalize them 
in a diagram. But the three groups, in the hands of the West- 
ern builders, may be thus simply represented : a, Fig. XIL, 
Greek ;* b, Western Romanesque ; ¢, Western, or true, Gothic. 

Now, observe, first, that the relation of the roof-mask to the 
roof proper, in the Greek type, forms that pediment which 


a b c 
Fie. XII. 


'* The reader is not to suppose that Greek architecture had always, or 
often, flat ceflings, because I call its lintel the roof proper. He must 
remember I always use these terms of the first simple arrangements of 
materials that beidge a space; bringing in the real roof afterwards, if I 
can. In the case of Greek temples it would be vain to refer their 
structure to the real roof, for many were hypethral, and without a roof 
at all, I am unfortunately more ignorant of Hgyptian roofing than evea 


916 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


gives its most striking character to the temple, and is the 
principal recipient of its sculptural decoration. The relation 
of these lines, therefore, is just as important in the Greek aa 
in the Gothic schools, 

§ xcr. Secondly, the reader must observe the difference of 
steepness in the Romanesque and Gothic gables. This is not 
an unimportant distinction, nor an undecided one. The 
Romanesque gable does not pass gradually into the more ele- 
vated form ; there isa great gulf between the two; the whole 
effect of all Southern architecture being dependent upon the 
use of the flat gable, and of all Northern upon that of the 
acute. Ineed not here dwell upon the difference between 
the lines of an Italian village, or the flat tops of most Italian 

towers, and the peaked gables 

and spires of the North, attain- 

ing their most fantastic devel- 

opement, I believe, in Belgium: 

a@ b but it may be well to state the 

law of separation, namely, that 

a Gothic gable must have all its 

angles acute, and a Roman- 

esque one must have the upper 

one obtuse: or, to give -the 

reader a simple practical rule, 

take any gable, a or b, Fig, 

XUL, and strike a semicircle on its base; if its top rises 

above the semicircle, as at b, itis a Gothic gable ; if it falls 

beneath it, a Romanesque one; but the best forms in each 

group are those which are distinctly steep, or distinctly low. 

In the figure / is, perhaps, the average of Romanesque slope, 
and g of Gothic. 

§ xcu. But although we do not find a transition from one’ 
school into the other in the slope of the gables, there is often 


Fia. XIII. 


of Arabian, so that I cannot bring this school into the diagram ; but the 
gable appears to have been magnificently used for a bearing roof. Vide 
Mr. Fergusson’s section of the Pyramid of Geezeh, ‘‘ Principles of 
Beauty in Art,” Plate I., and his expressions of admiration of Egyptiau 
roof masonry, page 201, 


THE NATURE OF GOTHIC. 217 


a confusion between the two schools in the association of the 
gable with the arch below it. It has just been stated that the 
pure Romanesque condition is the round arch under the low 
gable, a, Fig. XIV., and the pure Gothic condition is the 
pointed arch under the high gable, b. But in the passage from 
one style to the other, we sometimes find the two conditions 
reversed ; the pointed arch under a low gable, as d, or the 
round arch under a high gable, as c. The form d occurs in 
the tombs of Verona, and c in the doors of Venice. 


a 6 c A 


Fie. XIV. 


§ xcmt. We have thus determined the relation of Gothic to 
the other architectures of the world, as far as regards the main 
lines of its construction ; but there is still one word which 
needs to be added to our definition of its form, with respect to 
a part of its decoration, which rises out of that construction. 
We have seen that the first condition of its form is, that it 
shall have pointed arches. When Gothic is perfect, therefore, 
it will follow that the pointed arches must be built in the 
strongest possible manner. 

Now, if the reader will look back to Chapter XI. of Vol. L, 
he will find the subject of the masonry of the pointed arch 
discussed at length, and the conclusion deduced, that of alt 
possible forms of the pointed arch (a certain weight of material 
being given), that generically represented at e, Fig. XV., is 
the strongest. In fact, the reader can see in a moment that 
the weakness of the pointed arch is in its flanks, and that by 
merely thickening them gradually at this point all chance of 
fracture is removed. Or, perhaps, more simply still :--Sup< 


918 THR STONES Gf VENIOE. 


pose a gable built of stone, as at a, and pressed upon from 
without by a weight in the direction of the arrow, clearly it 
would be liable to fall in, as 
at b. To prevent this, we 
make a pointed arch of it, ag 
atc; and now it cannot fal] 
in wards, but if pressed upon 
from above may give way out- 
wards, as at d. But at last 
we build as at e, and now it 


eo uf \ can neither fall out nor in. 

Xo § xcrv. The forms of arch 
thus obtained, with a pointed 

projection called a cusp or 


d c each side, must for ever be de- 
lightful to the human mind, 
as being expressive of the 


y 
ls utmost strength and _ per- 
oe 
] 


manency obtainable with a 

given mass of material. But 

2 it was not by any such pro- 

mia Ey cess of reasoning, nor with 

any reference to laws of construction, that the cusp waa 
originally invented. It is merely the special application to 
the arch of the great ornamental system of Fortatton ; or the 
adaptation of the forms of leafage which has been above in- 
sisted upon as the principal characteristic of Gothic Natural- 
ism. This love of foliage was exactly proportioned, in its 
intensity, to the increase of strength in the Gothic spirit: in 
the Southern Gothic it is soft leafage that is most loved ; in 
the Northern thorny leafage. And if we take up any North- 
ern illuminated manuscript of the great Gothic time, we shall | 
find every one of its leaf ornaments surrounded by a thorny 
structure laid round it in gold or in color ; sometimes appar- 
ently copied faithfully from the prickly developement of the 
root of the leaf in the thistle, running along the stems and 
branches exactly as the thistle leaf does along its own stem. 
and with sharp spines proceeding from the points, as in Fig, 


THE NATURE OF GOTHIC. 219 


XVI. At other times, and for the mest part in work in the 
thirteenth century, the golden ground takes the form of pure 
and severe cusps, sometimes enclosing the leaves, sometimes 
filling up the forks of the branches (as in the example fig. 1, 
Plate I. Vol. IIL), passing imperceptibly from the distinctly 
vegetable condition (in which it is just as certainly representa- 
tive of the thorn, as other parts of the design are of the bud, 
leaf, and fruit) into the crests on the necks, or the membra- 
nous sails of the wings, of serpents, dragons, and other gro- 
tesques, as in Fig. XVIL, and into rich and vague fantasies of 


Fie. XVI. 


curvature ; among which, however, the pure cusped system 
of the pointed arch is continually discernible, not acciden- 
tally, but designedly indicated, and connecting itself with the 
literally architectural portions of the design. 

_ § xcv. The system, then, of whatis called Foliation, whether 
simple, as in the cusped arch, or complicated, as in tracery, 
rose out of this love of leafage ; not that the form of the arch 
is intended to imitate a leaf, but to be invested with the same 
characters of beauty which the designer had discovered in the leaf. 
Observe, there is a wide difference between these two inten- 
tions. The idea that large Gothic structure, in arches and 
roofs, was int nded to imitate vegetation is, as above noticed, 
untenable for ;n instant in the front of facts. But the Gothic 


220 THK STONES OF VENICE. 


builder perceived that, in the leaves which he copied for hit 
minor decorations, there was a peculiar beauty, arising from 
certain characters of curvature in outline, and certain methodge 
of subdivision and of radiation in structure. Ona small scale, 
in his sculptures and his missal-painting, he copied the leaf 
or thorn itself; on a large scale he adopted from it its ab- 
stract sources of beauty, and gave the same kinds of curva- 
tures and the same species of subdivision to the outline of his 
arches, so far as was consistent with their strength, never, in 
any single instance, suggesting the resemblance to leafage by 
irregularity of outline, but keeping the structure perfectly 
simple, and, as we have seen, so consistent with the best prin- 
ciples of masonry, that in the finest Gothic designs of arches, 
which are always single cusped (the cinquefoiled arch being 
licentious, though in early work often very lovely), it is liter- 
ally impossible, without consulting the context of the build- 
ing, to say whether the cusps have been added for the sake 
of beauty or of strength ; nor, though in medieval architecture 

‘they were, I believe, assuredly first employed in mere love of 
their picturesque form, am I absolutely certain that their 
earliest invention was not a structural effort. For the earliest 
cusps with which I am acquainted are those used in the vaults 
of the great galleries of the Serapeum, discovered in 1850 by 
M. Maniette at Memphis, and described by Colonel Hamilton 
in a paper read in February last before the Royal Society of 
Literature.* The roofs of its galleries were admirably shown 
in Colonel Hamilton’s drawings made to scale upon the spot, 
and their profile is a cusped round arch, perfectly pure and 
simple; but whether thrown into this form for the sake of 
strength or of grace, I am unable to say. 

§ xovr. It is dvinenty however, that. the structural advantage 
of the cusp is available only in the case of arches on a com- | 
paratively small scale. If the arch becomes very large, the 
projections under the flanks must become too ponderous to 
be secure ; the suspended weight of stone would be liable to 
break off, and such arches are therefore never constructed 
with heavy cusps, but rendered secure by. general mass of 

* See ‘ Atheneum,’ March 5th, 1853, 


THR NATURE OF GOTHIC. 221 


masonry : and what additional appearance of support may be 
thought necessary (sometimes a considerable degree of actual 
support) is given by means of tracery. 

§ xovu. Of what I stated in the second chapter of the 
“Seven Lamps” respecting the nature of tracery, I need re 
peat here only this much, that it began in the use of penetra- 
tions through the stonework of windows or walls, cut into 
forms which looked like stars when seen from within, and like 


leaves when seen from with- | 


out : the name foil or feuille 
being universally applied to @ag 


the separate lobes of their 


extremities, and the pleas- 
Fre, XVIII. 


ure received from them be- @& 
ing the same as that which — 
we feel in the triple, quad- 
ruple, or other radiated 
leaves of vegetation, joined 
with the perception of a 
severely geometrical order 
and symmetry. A few of ¢ 
the most common forms are ¢ 
represented, unconfused by 
exterior mouldings, in Fig. 
XVIIL, and the best tra- 
ceries are nothing more than <j 
close clusters of such forms, 
with mouldings following 
their outlines. 

§ xcvm1. The term “ foliated,” therefore, is equally descrip. 
tive of the most perfect conditions both of the simple arch and 
of the traceries by which, in later Gothic, it is filled ; and this 
foliation is an essential character of the style. No Gothic is 
either good or characteristic which is not foliated either in its 
arches or apertures. Sometimes the bearing arches are foliated, 
and the ornamentation above composed of figure sculpture ; 
sometimes the bearing arches are plain, and the ornamentation 
above them is composed of foliated apertures. But the ele 


222 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


ment of foliation must enter somewhere, or the style is imper 
fect. And our final definition of Gothic will, therefore, stand 
thus :— 

* Foliated Architecture, which uses the pointed arch for 
the roof proper, and the gable for the roof-mask.” 

§ xorx. And now there is but one point more to be exam- 
ined, and we have done. 

Foliation, while it is the most distinctive and peculiar, is 
also the easiest method of decoration which Gothic architect: 
ure possesses ; and, although in the disposition of the propor 
tions and forms of foils, the most noble imagination may 
be shown, yet a builder without imagination at all, or any 
other faculty of design, 
can produce some effect 
upon the mass of his work 
by merely covering it with 
foolish foliation. Throw 
any number of crossing 
lines together at random, 
as in Fig. XIX., and fill 
their squares and oblong 
openings with quatrefoils 
and cinquefoils, and you 
‘will immediately have 
what will stand, with most 
people, for very satisfac- 
tory Gothic. The slight- 
est possible acquaintance 
with existing forms will enable any architect to vary his patterns 
of foliation with as much ease as he would those of a kaleido« 
scope, and to produce a building which the present European 
public will think magnificent, though there may not be, from - 
foundation to coping, one ray of invention, or any other intel- 
lectual merit, in the whole mass of it. But floral decoration, and 
the disposition of mouldings, require some skill and thought, 
and, if they are to beagreeable at all, must be verily invented, or 
accurately copied. They cannot be drawn altogether at ran- 
dom, without becoming so commonplace as to involve detec 


Fig. XIX, 


LHE NATURE OF GOTHIC. 223 


fion . and although, as I have just said, the noblest imagina- © 
tion may be shown in the dispositions of traceries, there is far 
more room for its play and power when those traceries are 
associated with floral or animal ornament; and it is probable, 
a priori, that, wherever true invention exists, such ornament 
will be employed in profusion. 

§ c. Now, all Gothic may be divided into two vast schools, one 
early, the other late ;* of which the former, noble, inventive, 
and progressive, uses the element of foliation moderately, 
that of floral and figure sculpture decoration profusely ; tke 
Jatter, ignoble, uninventive, and declining, uses foliation im- 
moderately, floral and figure sculpture subordinately. The 
4wo schools touch each other at that instant of momentous 
change, dwelt upon in the “Seven Lamps,” chap. ii., a period 
later or earlier in different districts, but which may be broadly 
stated as the middle of the fourteenth century ; both styles 
being, of course, in their highest excellence at the moment 
when they meet, the one ascending to the point of junction, 
the one declining from it, but, at first, not in any marked 
degree, and only showing the characters which justify its 
being above called, generically, ignoble, as its declension 
reaches steeper slope. 

§ ct. Of these two great schools, the first uses foliation only 
in large and simple masses, and covers the minor members, 
cusps, &c., of that foliation, with various sculpture. The 
latter decorates foliation itself with minor foliation, and breaks 
its traceries into endless and lace-like subdivision of tracery. — 

A few instances will explain the difference clearly. Fig. 2, 
Piate XIL, represents half of an eight-foiled aperture from 
Salisbury ; where the element of foliation is employed in the 
larger disposition of the starry form ; but in the decoration 
of the cusp it has entirely disappeared, and the ornament is 
floral. 

But in fig. 1, which is part of a fringe round one of the 
later windows in Rouen Cathedral, the foliation is first carried 

*Late, and chiefly confined to Northern countries, so that the two 


schools may be opposed either as Harly and Late Gothic, or (in the 
fourteenth century) as Southern and Northern Gothic. 


224 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


’ poldly round the arch, and then each cusp of it divided inte 
other forms of foliation. The two larger canopies of niches 
below, figs. 5 and 6, are respectively those seen at the flanks 
of the two uppermost examples of gabled Gothic in Fig. X., 
p. 213. Those examples were there chosen in order also to 
illustrate the distinction in the character of ornamentation 
which we are at present examining ; and if the reader will 
look back to them, and compare their methods of treatment, 
he will at once be enabled to fix that distinction clearly in his 
mind. He will observe that in the uppermost the element of 
foliation is scrupulously confined to the bearing arches of the 
gable, and of the lateral niches, so that, on any given side of 
the monument, only three foliated arches are discernible. 
All the rest of the ornamentation is ‘‘ bossy sculpture,” set on 
the broad marble surface. On the point of the gable aré set 
the shield and dog-crest of the Scalas, with its bronze wings, 
as of a dragon, thrown out from it on either side; below, an 
admirably sculptured oak-tree fills the centre of the field; 
beneath it is the death of Abel, Abel lying dead upon his face 
on one side, Cain opposite, looking up to heaven in terror: 
the border of the arch is formed of various leafage, alternat- 
ing with the scala shield ; and the cusps are each filled by one 
flower, and two broad flowing leaves. The whole is exquis- 
itely relieved by color; the ground being of pale red. Verona 
marble, and the statues and foliage of white Carrara marble, 
inlaid. f 
§ cu. The figure below it, b, represents the southern lateral 
door of the principal church in Abbeville: the smallness of 
the scale compelled me to make it. somewhat heavier in the 
lines of its traceries than it is in reality, but the door itself is 
one of the most exquisite pieces of flamboyant Gothic in the 
world ; and it is interesting to see the shield introduced here, - 
at the point of the gable, in exactly the same manner as in the 
upper example, and with precisely the same purpose,—to stay 
the eye in its ascent, and to keep it from being offended by 
the sharp point of the gable, the reversed angle of the shield 
being so energetic as completely to balance the upward ten. 
dency of the great convergent lines. It will be seen, however, 


PLATE X{I.— LINEAR AND SuRFACH GOTHIC. 


THE NATURE OF GOTHIC. 295 


as this example is studied, that its other decorations are: alto- 
gether different from those of the Veronese tomb ; that, here, 
the whole effect is dependent on mere multiplications: of 
similar lines of tracery, sculpture being hardly introduced ex- 
cept in the seated statue under the central niche, and, formerly, 
in groups filling the shadowy hollows under the small niches 
in the archivolt, but broken away in the Revolution. And if 
now we turn to Plate XII, just passed, and examine the heads 
of the two lateral niches there given from each of these monu- 
ments on a larger scale, the contrast will be yet more apparent. 
The one from Abbeville (fig. 5), though it contains much 
floral work of the crisp Northern kind in its finial and crock- 
ets, yet depends for all its effect on the various patterns of 
foliation with which its spaces are filled; and it is so cut 
through and through that it is hardly stronger than a piece 
of lace : whereas the pinnacle from Verona depends for its 
effect on one broad mass of shadow, boldly shaped into the 
trefoil in its bearing arch ; and there is no other trefoil on that 
side of the niche. All the rest of its decoration is floral, or 
by almonds and bosses ; and its surface of stone is unpierced, 
and kept in broad light, and the mass of it thick and strong 
enough to stand for as many more centuries as it has already 
stood, scatheless, in the open street of Verona. The figures 3 
and 4, above each niche, show how the same principles are 
carried out into the smallest details of the two edifices, 3 ‘be- 
ing the moulding which borders the gable at Abbeville, and 4, 
that in the same position at Verona; and.as thus in all cases 
the distinction in their treatment remains the same, the one 
attracting the eye to broad sculptured surfaces, the other to 
involutions of intricate lines, I shall hereafter characterize the 
two schools, whenever I have occasion to refer to them, the 
one as Surface Gothic, the other as Linear-Gothic. 

§ cm. Now observe: it is not, at present, the question, 
whether the form of the Veronese niche, and the design of its 
flower-work, be as good as they might have been ; but simply, 
which of the two architectural principles is the greeter and 
better. And this we cannot hesitate for an instant in decid- 
ing. The Veronese Gothic is strong in its masonry, simplé 

Vou, IL—15 


226 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


in its masses, but perpetual in its variety. The late French 
Gothic is weak in masonry, broken in mass, and repeats the 
same idea continually. It is very beautiful, but the Italian 
Gothic is the nobler style. 

§ crv. Yet, in saying that the French Gothic repeats one 
idea, I mean merely that it depends too much upon the folia- 
tion of its traceries. The disposition of the traceries them- 
selves is endlessly varied and inventive ; and indeed, the mind 
of the French workman was, perhaps, even richer in fancy 
than that of the Italian, only he had been taught a less noble 
style. This is especially to be remembered with respect to the 
subordination of figure sculpture above noticed as character- 
istic of the later Gothic. 

It is not that such sculpture is wanting; on the contrary, 
it is often worked: into richer groups, and» carried out with a 
perfection of execution, far greater than those which adorn 
the earlier buildings: but, in the early work, it is vigorous, 
prominent, and essential to the beauty of the whole; in the 
late work it is enfeebled, and shrouded in the veil of tracery, 
from which it may often be removed with little ‘harm to the 
general effect.* 

§ cv. Now the reader may rest assured that no principle of 
art is more absolute than this,—that a composition from 
which anything can be removed without doing mischief. is 
always so far forth inferior. On this ground, therefore, if on 
no other, there can be no question, for a moment, which oi 
the two schools is the greater ; although there are many most 
noble works in the French traceried Gothic, having a sublim- 
ity of their own dependent on theiz extreme richness and 
grace of line, and’ for which we may be most grateful to their 
builders. And, indeed, the superiority of the Surface-Gothiec 
cannot be completely felt, until we compare it with the more. 


* In many of the best French Gothic churches, the groups of figures 
have been all broken away at the Revolution, without much harm to the 
picturesqueness, though with grievous loss to the historical value of the 
architecture : whereas, if from the niche at Verona we were to remove 
its floral ornaments, and the statue beneath it, nothing would remaiy 
but a rude square trefoiled shell, utterly valueless, or even ugly, 


THE NATURE OF GOTHIC, 227 


degraded Linear schools, as, for instance, with our own Eng: 
lish Perpendicular.| The ornaments of the Veronese niche, 
which we have used for our example, are by no means among 
the best of their school, yet they will serve our purpose for 
such a comparison. That of its pinnacle is composed of a 
single upright flowering plant, of which the stem shoots up 
through the centres of the leaves, and bears a pendent blos- 
som, somewhat like that of the imperial 
lily. The leaves are thrown back from the 
stem with singular grace and freedom, and 
foreshortened, as if by a skilful painter, in 
‘the shallow marble relief. Their arrange- 
ment is roughly shown in the little wood- 
cut at the side (Fig. XX.); and if the 
reader will simply try the experiment for 
himself,—first, of covering a piece of paper 
with crossed lines, as if for accounts, and 
filling all the interstices with any foliation 
that comes into his head,as in. Figure 
XIX. above ; and then, of trying to fill the 
point of a gable with a piece of leafage 
like that in Figure XX., putting the 
figure itself aside,—he will presently find 
that more thought and invention are re- 
quired to design this single minute pin- 
nacle, than to cover acres of ground with 
English perpendicular. 

§ cv1. We have now, I believe, obtained 
a sufficiently accurate knowledge both 
of the spirit and form of Gothic archi- 
tecture ; but it may, perhaps, be useful to the general reader, 
if, in conclusion, I set down a few plain and practical rules 
for determining, in every instance, whether a given building 
be good Gothic or not, and, if not Gothic, whether its archi- 
tecture is of a kind which will probably reward the pains of 
careful examination. 

§ cvu. First. Look if the roof rises in a steep gable, high 
above the walls. If it does not do this, there is something 


Fie. XX. 


928 THE STONES OF VIUNICE. 


wrong; the building is not quite pure Gothic, or has been 
altered. 

§ cv. Secondly. Look if the principal windows and doors 
have pointed arches with gables over them. If not pointed 
arches, the building is not Gothic; if they have not any gables 
over them, it is either not pure, or not first-rate. 

If, however, it has the steep roof, the pointed arch, and 
gable all united, it is nearly certain to be a Gothic building of 
a very fine time. 

§ crx. Thirdly. ‘Look if the arches are cusped, or apertures 
foliated. If the building has met the first two conditions, it 
is sure to be foliated somewhere ; but, if not everywhere, the 
parts which are unfoliated are feurpbillect unless they are large 
bearing arches, or small and skarp arches in groups, forming 
a kind of foliation by their own multiplicity, and relieved by 
sculpture and rich mouldings. The upper windows, for in- 
stance, in the east end of Westminster Abbey are imperfect 
for want of foliation. If there be no foliation anywhere, the 
building is assuredly imperfect Gothic. 

§ cx. Fourthly. If the building meets all the first three 
conditions, look if its arches in general, whether of windows 
and doors, or of minor ornamentation, are carried on true 
shafts with bases and capitals. If they are, then the building 
is assuredly of the finest Gothic style. It may still, perhaps, 
be an imitation, a feeble copy, or a bad example of a noble 
style; but the manner of it, having met all these four condi- 
tions, is assuredly first-rate. 

If its apertures have not shafts and capitals, look if they 
are plain openings in the walls, studiously simple, and un- 
moulded at the sides ; as, for instance, the arch in Plate XIX., 
Vol. I. If so, the building may still be of. the finest Gothic, 
adapted to some domestic or military service. But if the 
sides of the window be moulded, and yet there are no capitals 
at the spring of the arch, it is assuredly of an inferior school. 

This is all that is necessary to determine whether the build- 
ing be of a fine Gothic style. The next tests to be applied 
are in order to discover whether it be good architecture or 
not: for it may be very impure Gothic, and yet very noble 


THE NATURE OF GOTHIC. 228 


architecture ; or it may be very pure Gothic, and yet, ifa 
copy, or originally raised by an ungifted builder, very bad 
architecture. 

If it belong to any of the great schools of color, its criticism 
becomes as complicated; and needs as much care, as that of a 
piece of music, and no general rules for it can be given; but 
if not— 

§ oxt. First. See if it looks as if it had been built by 
strong men ; if it has the sort of roughness, and largeness, and 
nonchalance, mixed in places with the exquisite tenderness 
which seems always to be the sign-manual of the broad vis- 
ion, and massy power of men who can see past the work they 
are doing, and betray here and there something like disdain 
for it. If the building has this character, it is much already 
in its favor ; it will go hard but it proves a noble one. If it 
has not this, but is altogether accurate, minute, and scrupu- 
lous in its workmanship, it must belong to either the very 
best or the very worst of schools: the very best, in which ex- 
quisite design is wrought out with untiring and conscientious 
care, as in the Giottesque Gothic; or the very worst, in which 
mechanism has taken the place of design. It is more likely, 
in general, that it should belong to the worst than the best: 
so that, on the whole, very accurate workmanship is to be es- 
teemed a bad sign ; and if there is nothing remarkable about 
the building but its precision, it may be passed at once with 
contempt. 

§ cx. Secondly. Observe if it be irregular, its different . 
parts fitting themselves to different purposes, no one caring 
what becomes of them, so that they do their work. If one 
part always answers accurately to another part, it is sure to 
be a bad building ; and the greater and more conspicuous the 
irregularities, the greater the chances are that it is a good one. 
For instance, in the Ducal Palace, of which a rough woodcut 
is given in Chap. VIIL., the general idea is sternly symmetri- 
eal; but two windows are lower than the rest of the six; and 
if the reader vill count the arches of the small arcade as far 
as to the great balcony, he will find it is not in the centre, but 
set to the right-hand side by the whole width of one of those 


230 THER STONES OF VENICE. 


arches. We may be pretty sure that the building is a good 
one ; none but a master of his craft would have ventured to 
do this. 

§ cxmu. Thirdly. Observe if all the traceries, capitals, and 
other ornaments are of perpetually varied design. If not, the 
work is assuredly bad. 

§ oxtv. Lastly. Read the sculpture. Preparatory to read- 
ing it, you will have to discover whether it is legible (and, if 
legible, it is nearly certain to be worth reading). On a good 
building, the sculpture is always so set, and on such a scale, 
that at the ordinary distance frdém which the edifice is seen, 
the sculpture shall be thoroughly intelligible and interesting. 
In order to accomplish this, the uppermost statues will be ten 
or twelve feet high, and the upper ornamentation will be co- 
lossal, increasing in fineness as it descends, till on the founda- 
tion it will often be wrought as if for a precious cabinet in a 
kine’s chamber ; but the spectator will not notice that the 
upper sculptures are colossal. He will merely feel that he 
can see them plainly, and make them all out at his ease. 

And, having ascertained this, let him set himself to read 
them. Thenceforward the criticism of the building is to be 
conducted precisely on the same principles as that of a book ; 
and it must depend on the knowledge, feeling, and not a lit. 
tle on the industry and perseverance of the reader, whether, 
even in the case of the best works, he either perceive them tc 
be great, or feel them to be entertaining. 


CHAPTER VIL 
GOTHIC PALACES. 


§1. Tux buildings out of the remnants of which we have 
endeavored to recover some conception of the appearance of 
Venice during the Byzantine period, contribute hardly any- 
thing at thisday to the effect of the streets of this city. 
They are too few and too much defaced to attract the eye or 
influence the feelings. The charm which Venice stiil posses 


GOTHIC PALACES. 231 


ses, and which for the last fifty years has rendered it the fa. 
vorite haunt of all the painters of picturesque subject, is 
owing to the effect of the palaces belonging to the period we 
have now to examine, mingled with those of the Renais- 
sance. 

This effect is produced in two different ways. The Renais- 
sance palaces are not more picturesque in themselves than 
the club-houses of Pall Mall; but they become delightful by 
the contrast of their severity and refinement with the rich and 
rude confusion of the sea life beneath them, and of their 
white and solid masonry with the green waves. Remove from 
beneath them the orange sails of the fishing boats, the black 
gliding of the gondolas, the cumbered decks and rough crews 
of the barges of traffic, and the fretfulness of the green 
water along their foundations, and the Renaissance palaces 
possess no more interest than those of London or Paris. But 
the Gothic palaces are picturesque in themselves, and wield 
over us an independent power. Sea and sky, and every other 
accessory might be taken away from them, and still they 
would be beautiful and strange. They are not less striking 
in the loneliest streets of Padua and Vicenza (where many 
were built during the period of the Venetian authority in 
those cities) than in the most crowded thoroughfares of Ven- 
ice itself; and if they could be transported into the midst of 
London, they would still not altogether lose their power over 
the feelings. 

§ u. The best proof of this is in the perpetual attractive- 
ness of all pictures, however poor in skill, which have taken 
for their subject the principal of these Gothic buildings, the 
Ducal Palace. In spite of all architectural theories and teach- 
ings, the paintings of this building are always felt to be de- 
lightful ; we cannot be wearied by them, though often sorely 
tried ; but we are not put to the same trial in the case of the 
palaces of the Renaissance. They are never drawn singly, or 
as the principal subject, nor can they be. The building which 
faces the Ducal Palace on the opposite side of the Piazzetta is 
celebrated among architects, but it is not familiar to our eyes ; 
it is painted only incidentally for the completion, not the 


232 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


subject, of a Venetian scene ; and even the Renaissance ar- 
cades of St. Mark’s Place, though frequently painted, are al- 
ways treated as a mere avenue to its Byzantine church and 
colossal tower. And the Ducal Palace itself owes the peculiar 
charm which we have hitherto felt, not so much to its greater 
size as compared with other Gothic buildings, or nobler de- 
sign (for it never yet hes been rightly drawn), as to its com- 
parative isolation. The other Gothic structures are as much 
injured by the continual juxtaposition of the Renaissance 
palaces, as the latter are aided by it; they exhaust their own 
life by breathing it into the Renaissance coldness : but the 
Ducal Palace stands comparatively alone, and fully expresses 
the Gothie power. 

§ mt. And it is just that it should be so seen, for it is the 
original of nearly all the rest. It is not the elaborate and 
more studied developement of a national style, but the great 
and sudden invention of one man, instantly forming a nationai 
style, and becoming the model for the imitation of every 
architect in Venice for upwards of a century. It was the de- 
termination of this one fact which occupied me the greater 
part of the time I spent in Venice. It had always appeared 
to me most strange that there should be in no part of the 
city any incipient or imperfect types of the form of the Ducal 
Palace ; it was difficult to believe that so mighty a building 
had been the conception of one man, not only in disposition. 
and detail, but in style; and yet impossible, had it been 
otherwise, but that some early examples of approximate 
Gothic form must exist. There is not one. The palaces 
built between the final cessation of the Byzantine style, 
about 1300, and the date of the Ducal Palace (1320-1350), 
are all completely distinct in character, so distinct that I 
at first intended the account of them to form a separate 
section of this volume ; and there is literally no transitional 
“form between them and the perfection of the Ducal Palace. 
Every Gothic building in Venice which resembles the latter is 
a copy of it. Ido not mean. that there was no Gothic in 
Venice before the Ducal Palace, but that the mode of its ap- 
plication to domestic architecture had not been determined 


GOTHIC PALACES. 933 


The real root of the Ducal Palace is the apse of the church of 
the Frari. The traceries of that apse, though earlier and 
ruder in workmanship, are nearly the same in mouldings, and 
precisely the same in treatment (especially in the placing of 
the lions’ heads), as those of the great Ducal Arcade ; and 
the originality of thought in the architect of the Ducal Palace 
consists in his having adapted those traceries, in a more 
highly developed and finished form, to civil uses. In the 
apse of the church they form narrow and tall window lights, 
somewhat more massive than those of Northern Gothic, but 
similar in application: the thing to be done was to adapt 
these traceries to the forms of domestic building necessitated 
by national usage. The early palaces consisted, as we have 
seen, of arcades sustaining walls faced with marble, rather 
broad and long than elevated. This form was kept for the 
Ducal Palace ; but instead of round arches from shaft to shaft, 
the Frari traceries were substituted, with two essential modi- 
fications. . Besides being 
enormously increased in 
scale and thickness, that 
they might better bear the 
superincumbent weight, the 
quatrefoil, which in the 
Frari windows is above the 
arch, as at a, Fig. XXI., was, 
in the Ducal Palace, put be- 
tween the arches, as at b; 
the main reason for this alteration being that the bearing 
power of the arches, which was now to be trusted with the 
weight of a wall forty feet high,* was thus thrown between the 
quatrefoils, instead of under them, and thereby applied at far 
better advantage. And, in the second place, the joints of the 
masonry were changed. In the Frari (as often also in St. John 
and St. Paul’s) the tracery is formed of two simple cross bars or 
slabs of stone, pierced into the requisite forms, and separated 


Fie. XXI. 


* 38 ft. 2 in., without its cornice, which is 10 inches deep, and sus- 
tains pinnacles of stone 7 feet high. 1 was erabled to get the measureg 
by a scaffolding erected in 1851 to repair the front. 


234 THE STONES OF VENIUVR. 


by a horizontal joint, just on a level with the lowest cusp of the 
quatrefoils, as seen in Fig. XXL, a. But at the Ducal Palace 
the horizontal joint is in the centre of the 
quatrefoils, and two others are introduced 
beneath it at right angles to the run of the 
mouldings, as seen in Fig. XXL, b.* The 
Ducal Palace builder was sternly resolute 
in carrying out this rule of masonry. Iu 
the traceries of the large upper windows, 
where the cusps are cut through as in the 
quatrefoil Fig. XXII, the lower cusp is lef 
partly solid, as at a, merely that the joint a 
b may have its right place and direction. 

§1v. The ascertaining the formation of the Ducal Palace 
traceries from those of the Frari, and its priority to all other 
buildings which resemble it in Venice, rewarded me for a 
great deal of uninteresting labor in the examination of mould- 
ings and other minor features of the Gothic palaces, in which 
alone the internal evidence of their date was to be discovered, 
there being no historical records whatever respecting them. 
But the accumulation of details on.which the complete proof 
of the fact depends, could not either be brought within the 
compass of this volume, or be made in anywise interesting to 
the general reader. I shall therefore, without involving my- 
self in any discussion, give a brief account of the develope- 
ment of Gothic design in Venice, as I believe it to have taken 
place. Ishall possibly be able at some future period so to 
compress the evidence on which my conviction rests, as to 
render it intelligible to the public, while, in the meantime, 
some of the more essential points of it are thrown together in 
the Appendix, and in the history of the Ducal Palace given in 
the next chapter. 

§ v. According, then, to the statement just made, the 
Gothic architecture of Venice is divided into two great periods : 
one, in which, while various irregular Gothic tendencies are 


Fie, XXII. 


*T believe the necessary upper joint is vertical, through the upper 
most lobe of the quatrefoil, as in the figure; but I have lost my memo 
randum of this joint, 


GOTHIC PALACES. 235 


exhibited, no consistent type of domestic building was de- 
veloped ; the other, in which a formed and consistent school 
of domestic architecture resulted from the direct imitation of 
the great design of the Ducal Palace. We must deal with 
these two periods separately ; the first of them being that 
which has been often above alluded to, under the name of the 
transitional period. 

We shall consider in succession the general form, the win- 
dows, doors, balconies, and parapets, of the Gothic palaces 
belonging to each of these periods. 

§$ vi. First. General Form. 

We have seen that the wrecks of the Byzantine palaces con- 
sisted merely of upper and lower arcades surrounding cortiles ; 
the disposition of the interiors being now entirely changed, 
and their original condition untraceable. The entrances te 
these early buildings are, for the most part, merely large cir- 
cular arches, the central features of their continuous arcades: 
they do not present us with definitely separated windows and 
doors. 

But a great change takes place in the Gothic period. 
These long arcades break, as it were, into pieces, and coagu- 
late into central and lateral windows, and small arched doors, 
pierced in great surfaces of brick wall. The sea story of a 
Byzantine palace consists of seven, nine, or more arches in a 
continuous line ; but the sea story of a Gothic palace consists 
of a door and one or two windows on each side, as in a mod- 
ern house. The first story of a Byzantine palace consists of, 
perhaps, eighteen or twenty arches, reaching from one side of 
the house to the other ; the first story of a Gothic palace con- 
sists of a window of four or five lights in the centre, and one 
or two single windows on each side. The germ, however, of 
the Gothic arrangement is already found in the Byzantine, 
where, as we have seen, the arcades, though continuous, are 
always composed of a central mass and two wings of smaller 
arches. The central group becomes the door or the middle 
hight of the Gothic palace, and the wings break into its lateral 
windows. 

§ vu. But the most essential difference in the entire an 


236 THE STONHS OF VENTOR. 


rangement, is the loss of the unity of conception which regu 
lated Byzantine composition. How subtle the sense of graaa- 
tion which disposed the magnitudes of the early palaces we 
have seen already, but I have not hitherto noticed that the 
Byzantine work was centralized in its ornamentation as much 
as in its proportions. Not only were the lateral capitals and 
archivolts kept comparatively plain, while the central ones 
were sculptured, but the midmost piece of sculpture, what- 
ever it might be,—capital, inlaid circle, or architrave,—was 
always made superior to the rest. In the Fondaco de’ Turchi, 
for instance, the midmost capital of the upper arcade is the 
key to the whole group, larger and more studied than all the 
rest ; and the lateral ones are so disposed as to answer each 
other on the opposite sides, thus, a being put for the central one, 


FEBCAOCBER, 


a sudden break of the system being admitted in one unique 
capital at the extremity of the series. 

§ vit. Now, long after the Byzantine arcades had been con- 
tracted into windows, this system of centralization was more 
or less maintained ; and in all the early groups of windows of 
five lights the midmost capital is different from the two on 
each side of it, which always correspond. So strictly is this 
the case, that whenever the capitals of any group of windows 
are not centralized in this manner, but are either entirely like 
- each other, or all different, so as to show no correspondence, 
it is a certain proof, even if no other should exist, of the com- 
parative lateness of the building. 

In every group of windows in Venice which I was able to 
examine, and which were centralized in this manner, I found 
evidence in their mouldings of their being anterior to the 
Dueal Palace. That palace did away with the subtle propor- 
tion and centralization of the Byzantine. Its arches are of 
equal width, and its capitals are all different and ungrouped ; 
some, indeed, are larger than the rest, but this is not for the 
sake of proportion, only for particular service when more 
weight is to be borne. But, among other evidences of the 


GOTHIC PALACES. 237 


early date of the sea fagade of that building, is one subtle and 
delicate concession to the system of centralization which is 
finally closed. The capitals of the upper arcade are, as I said, 
all different, and show no arranged correspondence with each 
other ; but the central one is of pure Parian marble, while all 
the others are of Istrian stone. 

The bold decoration of the central window and balcony 
above, in the Ducal Palace, is only a peculiar expression of 
the principality of the central window, which was character- 
istic of the Gothic period not less than of the Byzantine. In 
the private palaces the central windows become of impor- 
tance by their number of lights ; in the Ducal Palace such an 
arrangement was, for various reasons, inconvenient, and the 
central window, which, so far from being more important 
than the others, is every way inferior in design to the two at 
the eastern extremity of the facade, was nevertheless made 
the leading feature by its noble canopy and balcony. 

§ mx. Such being the principai differences in the general 
conception of the Byzantine and Gothic palaces, the particu- 
lars in the treatment of the latter are easily stated. The mar- 
ble facings are gradually removed from the walls ; and the 
bare brick either stands forth confessed boldly, contrasted 
with the marble shafts and archivolts of the windows, or it is 
covered with stucco painted in fresco, of which more here- 
after. The Ducal Palace, as in all other respects, is an exact: 
expression of the middle point in the change. It still retains 
marble facing ; but instead of being disposed in slabs as in 
the Byzantine times, it is applied in solid bricks or blocks of 
marble, 114 inches long, by 6 inches high. 

The stories of the Gothic palaces are divided by string 
courses, considerably bolder in projection than those of the 
Byzantines, and more highly decorated ; and while the angles 
of the Byzantine palaces are quite sharp and pure, those of 
the Gothic palaces are wrought into a chamfer, filled by small 
twisted shafts which have capitals under the cornice of each 
story. 

§ x. These capitals are little observed in the general effect, 
but the shafts are of esseatial importance in giving an aspect 


238 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


of firmness to the angle ; a point of peculiar necessity in Ven. 
ice, where, owing to the various convolutions of the canals, 
the angles of the palaces are not only frequent, but often nec 
essarily acute, every inch of ground being valuable. In other 
cities, the appearance as well as the assurance of stability can 
always be secured by the use of massy stones, as in the fort- 
ress palaces of Florence ; but it must have been always de- 
sirable at Venice to build as lightly as possible, in conse- 
quence of the comparative insecurity of the foundations. 
The early palaces were, as we have seen, perfect models of 
grace and lightness, and the Gothic, which followed, though 
much more massive in the style of its details, never admitted 
more weight into its structure than was absolutely necessary 
for its strength. Hence, every Gothic palace has the appear- 
ance of enclosing as many rooms, and attaining as much 
strength, as is possible, with a minimum quantity of brick 
and stone. The traceries of the windows, which in Northern 
Gothic only support the glass, at Venice support the building ; 
and thus the greater ponderousness of the traceries is only an 
indication of the greater lightness of the structure. Hence, 
when the Renaissance architects give their opinions as to the 
stability of the Ducal Palace when injured by fire, one of 
them, Christofore Sorte, says, that he thinks it by no means 
laudable that the ‘‘Serenissimo Dominio” of the Venetian 
senate “should live in a palace built in the air.”* And 
again, Andrea della Valle says, that + “the wall of the saloon 
is thicker by fifteen inches than the shafts belowit, projecting 
nine inches within, and six without, standing as if in the air, 
above the piazza ;{ and yet this wall is so nobly and strongly 
knit together, that Rusconi, though himself altogether de- 
voted to the Renaissance school, declares that the fire which 
' * “Tice, che non lauda per aleun modo di metter questo Serenissimo 
Dominio in tanto pericolo d’ habitar un palazzo fabricato in aria.”— 
Pareri di XV. Architetti, con illustrazioni dell’ Abbate Giuseppe Oadorin 
(Venice, 1838), p. 104. 

¢ ‘‘Il muro della sala 6 pid grosso delle colonne sott’ esso piedi uno e 
onze tre, et posto in modo che onze sei sta come in aere sopra la piazza 
et onze nove dentro.” — Parert di XV. Architetti, p. 47, 

¢ Compare ‘‘Seven Lamps,” chap. iii. § 7, 


GOTHIC PALACES. 939 


had destroyed the whole interior of the palace had done this 
wall no more harm than the bite of a fly to an elephant. 
“'Troveremo che el danno che ha patito queste muraglie sara 
conforme alla beccatura d’ una mosca fatta ad un elefante.” * 

§ x1. And so in all the other palaces built at the time, con- 
summate strength was joined with a lightness of form and 
sparingness of material which rendered it eminently desirable 
that the eye should be convinced, by every possible expedient, 
of the stability of the building ; and these twisted pillars at 
the angles are not among the least important means adopted 
for this purpose, for they seem to bind the walls together asa 
cable binds a chest. In the Ducal Palace, where they are 
carried up the angle of an unbroken wall forty feet high, they 
are divided into portions, gradually diminishing in length 
towards the top, by circular bands or rings, set with the nail- 
head or dog-tooth ornament, vigorously projecting, and giving 
the column nearly the aspect of the stalk of a reed ; its dimin- 
ishing proportions being exactly arranged as they are by 
Nature in all jointed plants. At the top of the palace, like 
the wheat-stalk branching into the ear of corn, it expands 
into a small niche with a pointed canopy, which joins with the 
fantastic parapet in at once relieving, and yet making more 
notable by its contrast, the weight of massy wall below. The 
arrangement is seen in the woodcut, Chap. VIII. ; the angle 
shafts being slightly exaggerated in thickness, together with 
their joints, as otherwise they would hardly have been intel- 
ligible on so small a scale. 

The Ducal Palace is peculiar in these niches at the angles, 
which throughout the rest of the city appear on churches 
only ; but some may perhaps have been removed by restora- 
tions, together with the parapets with which they were associ- 
ated. 

§ xu. Of these roof parapets of Venice, it has been already 
noticed that the examples which remain differ from those of 
all other cities of Italy in their purely ornamental character. 
(Chap. I. § xm.) They are not battlements, properly so-called ; 
still less machicolated cornices, such as crown the fortress 

* Pareri, p. 21, before quoted, 


940 THER STONES OF VENICE. 


palaces of the great mainland nobles ; but merely adaptations 
of the light and crown-like ornaments which crest the walls of 
the Arabian mosque. Nor are even these generally used on 
the main walls of the palaces themselves. They occur on the 
Ducal Palace, on the Casa d’ Oro, and, some years back, were 
still standing on the Fondaco de’ Turchi; but the majority of 
the Gothic Palaces have the plain dog-tooth cornice under the 
tiled projecting roof (Vol. L Chap. XIV. § 1v.); and the 
highly decorated parapet is employed only on the tops of walls 
which surround courts or gardens, and which, without such 
decoration, would have been utterly devoid of interest. Fig. 


Fia@. XXIII. 


XXIII. represents, at 6, part of a parapet of this kind whick 
surrounds the court-yard of a palace in the Calle del Bagatin, 
between San G. Grisostomo, and San Canzian: the whole is 
of brick, and the mouldings peculiarly sharp and varied ; the 
height of each separate pinnacle being about four feet, crown- 
ing a wall twelve or fifteen feet high : a piece of the moulding 
which surrounds the quatrefoil is given larger in the figure at 
a, together with the top of the small arch below, having the 
common Venetian dentil round it, and a delicate little mould- 
ing with dog-tooth ornament to carry the flanks of the arch, 
The moulding of the brick is throughout sharp and beautiful 
in the highest degree. One of the most curious points about 
it is the careless way in which the curved outlines of the pin- 


GOTHIC PALACES. 241 


nacles are cut into the plain brickwork, with no regard what. 
ever to the places of its joints. The weather of course wears 
the bricks at the exposed joints, and jags the outline a little ; 
but the work has stood, evidently from the fourteenth century, 
without sustaining much harm. 

§ xm. This parapet may be taken as a general type of the 
wall-parapet of Venice in the Gothic period ; some being much 
less decorated, and others much more richly: the most beau- 
tiful in Venice is in the little Calle, opening on tho Campo an‘ 
Traghetto San Samuele ; it has delicately carved devices in 
stone let into each pinnacle. 

The parapets of the palaces themselves were lighter and 
more fantastic, consisting of narrow lance-like spires of marble, 
set between the broader pinnacles, which were in such cases 
generally carved into the form of a fleur-de-lis: the French 
word gives the reader the best idea of the form, though he 
' must remember that this use of the lily for the parapets has 
nothing to do with France, but is the carrying out of the 
Byzantine system of floral ornamentation, which introduced 
the outline of the lily everywhere ; so that I have found it: . 
convenient to callits most beautiful capitals, the lily capitals: 
of St. Mark’s. But the occurrence of this flower, more dis- 
tinctly than usual, on the battlements of the Ducal Palaco, ’ 
was the cause of some curious political speculation in the year 
1511, when a piece of one of these battlements was shaken 
down by the great earthquake of that year. Sanuto notes in 
his diary that “the piece that fell was just that which bore 
the lily,” and records sundry sinister anticipations, founded 
jn this important omen, of impending danger to the adverse 
French power. As there happens, in the Ducal Palace, to be 
a joint in the pinnacles which exactly separates the ‘part 
which bears the lily” from that which is fastened to the cor- 
nice, it is no wonder that the omen proved fallacious. 

§ x1v. The decorations of the parapet were completed by 
attaching gilded balls of metal to the extremities of the leaves 
of the lilies, and of the intermediate spires, so as literally to 
form tor the wall a diadem of silver touched upon the points 
with yuld; the image being rendered still more distinct in the 

VoL, II,—16 


949 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


Casa d’ Oro, by variation in the height of the pinnacles, the 
highest being in the centre of the front. 

Very few of these light roof parapets now remain ; they are, 
of course, the part of the building which dilapidation first 
renders it necessary to remove. That of the Ducal Palace, 
however, though often, I doubt not, restored, retains much of 
the ancient form, and is exceedingly beautiful, though it has 
no appearance from below of being intended for protection, 
but serves only, by its extreme lightness, to relieve the eye 
when wearied by the breadth of wall beneath ; it is neverthe- 
jess a most serviceable defence for any person walking along 
the edge of tho roof. It has some appearance of insecurity, 
owing to the entire independence of the pieces of stone com- 
posing it, which, though of course fastened by iron, look as if 
they stood balanced on the cornice like the pillars of Stone- 
henge ; but I have never heard of its having been disturbed 
by anything short of an earthquake ; and, as we have seen, 
even the great carthquake of 1511, though it much injured 
the Gorne, or battlements at the Casa d’Oro, and threw down 
several statues at St. Mark’s,* only shook one lily from the 
brow of the Ducal Palace. 

§ xv. Although, however, these light and fantastic forms 
appear to have been universal in the battlements meant pri- 
marily for decoration, there was another condition of parapet 
altogether constructed for the protection of persons walking 
on the roofs or in the galleries of the churches, and from 
these more substantial and simple defences, the Batcontxs, to 


* It is a curious proof how completely, even so early as the beginning 
of the sixteenth century, the Venetians had lost the habit of reading the 
religious art of their ancient churches, that Sanuto, describing this in- 
jury, says, that ‘‘ four of the A’vngs in marble fell from their pinnacles 
above the front, at St. Mark’s church ;” and presently afterwards cor- 
rects his mistake, and apologises for it thus: ‘‘ These were four saints, 
St. Constantine, St. Demetrius, St. George, and St Theodore, all Greek 
saints. They look like Kings.” Observe the perfect, because uninten- 
tional, praise given to the old sculptor. 

{ quote the passage from the translation of these precious diaries of 
Sanuto, by my friend Mr. Rawdon Brown, a translation which I hope 
will some day become a standard book in English libraries. 


GOTHIC PALACES. 243 


which the Gothic palaces owe half of their picturesque effect, 
were immeiiately derived ; the balcony being, in fact, nothing 
more than a portion of such roof parapets arranged round 
a projecting window-sill sustained on brackets, as in the cen- 
tral example of the annexed figure. We must, therefore, 
examine these defensive balustrades and the derivative bal- 
conies consecutively. 

§ xvi. Obviously, a parapet with an unbroken edge, upon 
which the arm may rest (a con- ; 
dition above noticed, Vol. I p. § 
166, as essential to the proper 
performance of its duty), can be | 
constructed only in one of three _| 
ways. It must either be (1) of == 
solid stone, decorated, if at all, 
by mere surface sculpture, as in 
the uppermost example in Fig. 
XXIV. ; or (2) pierced into some 
kind of tracery, as in the secc nd; 
or (3) composed of small pillars 
carrying a level bar of stone, as 
in the third ; this last condition 
being, in a diseased and swollen 
form, familiar to us in the balus- 
trades of our bridges.* 

§ xvi. (1.) Of these three 
kinds, the first, which is em- 
ployed for the pulpit at Torcello 
and in the nave of St. Mark’s, et won 
whence the uppermost example is taken, is beautiful when 
sculpture so rich can be employed upon it; but it is liable to 
objection, first, because it is heavy and unlike a parapet when 
seen from below ; and, secondly, because it is inconvenient in 
use. ‘The position of leaning over a balcony becomes cramped 
and painful if iong continued, unless the foot can be some- 
times advanced beneath the ledge on which the arm leans, ie, 
between the balusters or traceries, which of course cannot be 

* ] am not speaking here of iron balconies See below, § xxu, 


944. THR STONES OF VENIOR. 


- done in the solid parapet : it is also more agreeable to be able 
to see partially down through the penetrations, than to be 
obliged to lean far over the edge. The solid parapet was 
rarely used in Venice after the earlier ages. 

§ xvur. (2.) The Traceried Parapet is chiefly used in the 
Gothic of the North, from which the above example, in the 
Casa Contarini Fasan, is directly derived. It is, when well 
designed, the richest and most beautiful of all forms, and 
many of the’ best buildings of France and Germany are de- 
pendent for half their effect upon it; its only fault being a 
slight tendency to fantasticism. It was never frankly received 
in Venice, where the architects had unfortunately returned to 
the Renaissance forms before the flamboyant parapets were 
fully developed in the North; but, in the early stage of the 
Renaissance, a kind of pierced parapet was employed, founded 
on the old Byzantine interwoven traceries ; that is to say, the 
slab of stone was pierced here and there with holes, and then 
an interwoven pattern traced on the surface round them. The 

utd difference in system will be under- 

stood in a moment by comparing 
the uppermost example in the fig- 
ure at the side, which is a Northern 
parapet from the Cathedral of 
Abbeville, with the lowest, from a 
secret chamber in the Casa Foseari. 
jal, It will be seen that the Venetian 
one is far more simple and severe, 
yet singularly piquant, the black 
penetrations telling sharply on the 
plain broad surface. Far inferior 
in beauty, it has yet one point of 
superiority to that of Abbeville, 
nr that it proclaims itself more defi- 
may: nitely to bestone. The other has 

rather the look of lace. 

The intermediate figure is a panel of the main balcony of 
the Ducal Palace, and is introduced here as being an exactly 
transitional condition between the Northern and Venetian 


aT 


Py 


ht 


= " 


Pg Eo 
Sa 


GOTHIC PALACES. 245 


types. It was built when the German Gothic workmen were 
exercising considerable influence over those in Venice, and 
there was some chance of the Northern parapet introducing 
itself.. It actually did so, as above shown, in the Casa Conta- 
rini Fasan, but was for the most part stoutly resisted and kept 
at bay by the Byzantine form, the iowest in the last figure, 
until that form itself was displaced by the common, vulgar, 
Renaissance baluster ; a grievous loss, for the severe pierced 
type was capable of a variety as endless as the fantasticism of 
our own Anglo-Saxon manuscript ornamentation. 

§ xix. (3.) The Baluster Parapet. Long before the idea of 
tracery had suggested itself to the minds either of Venetian 
or any other architects, it had, of course, been necessary to 
provide protection for galleries, edges of roofs, &c. ; and the 
most natural form in which such protection could be obtained 
‘was that of a horizontal bar or hand-rail, sustained upon short 
shafts or balusters, as in Fig. XXIV. p. 248. This form was, 
above all others, likely to be adopted where variations of 
Greek or Roman pillared architecture were universal in the 
larger masses of the building; the parapet became itself a 
small series of columns, with capitals and architraves; and 
whether the cross-bar laid upon them should be simply hori- 
zontal, and in contact with their capitals, or sustained by 
mimic arches, round or pointed, depended entirely on the 
system adopted in the rest of the work. Where the large 
arches were round, the small balustrade arches would be so 
likewise ; where those were pointed, these would become so 
in sympathy with them. 

§ xx. Unfortunately, wherever a balcony or parapet is used 
in an inhabited house, it is, of course, the part of the structure 
which first suffers from dilapidation, as well as that of which 
the security is most anxiously cared for. The main pillars of 
a casement may stand for centuries unshaken under the steady 
weight of the superincumbent wall, but the cement and vari- 
ous insetting of the balconies are sure to be disturbed by the 
irregular pressures and impulses of the persons leaning on 
them ; while, whatever extremity of decay may be allowed in 
other parts of the building, the balcony, as soon as it seemg 


246 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


dangerous, will assuredly be removed or restored. The reades 
will not, if he considers this, be surprised to hear that, among 
all the remnants of the Venetian domestic architecture of the 
eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth centuries, there is not a single 
instance of the original balconies being preserved. The palace 
mentioned below (§ xxxu.), in the piazza of the Rialto, has, 
indeed, solid slabs of stone between its shafts, but I cannot be 
certain that they are of the same period ; if they are, this is 
the only existing example of the form of protection employed 
for casements during this transitional period, and it cannot be 
reasoned from as being the general one. 

§ xxt. It is only, therefore, in the churches of Torcello, 
Murano, and St. Mark’s, that the ancient forms of gallery de- 
fence may still be seen. At Murano, between the pillars of 
the apse, a beautiful balustrade is employed, of which a single 
arch is given in the Plate opposite, fig. 4, with its section, fig. 
5.; and at St. Mark’s, a noble round-arched parapet, with 
small pillars of precisely the same form as those of Murano, 
but shorter, and bound at the angles into groups of four by 
the serpentine knot so often occurring in Lombardic work, 
runs round the whole exterior of the lower story of the church, 
and round great part of its interior galleries, alternating with 
the more fantastic form, fig. 6. In domestic architecture, the 
remains of the original balconies. begin to occur first in the 
beginning of the fourteenth century, when the round arch had 
entirely disappeared ; and the parapet consists, almost with- — 
out exception, of a series of small trefoiled arches, cut boldly 
through a bar of stone which rests upon the shafts, at first 
very simple, and generally adorned with a cross at the point 
of each arch, as in fig. 7 in the last Plate, which gives the 
angle of such a balcony on a large scale ; but soon enriched 
into the beautiful conditions, figs. 2 and 3, and sustained on. 
brackets formed of lions’ heads, as seen in the central example 
of their entire effect, fig. 1. 

§ xxi. In later periods, the round arches return ; then the 
interwoven Byzantine form; and finally, as above noticed, the 
common English or classical balustrade ; of which, however, 
exquisite examples, for grace and variety of outline, are found 


III.—Ba.coniges 


x 


PLATE 


GOTHIC PALACES. 244 


jesigned in the backgrounds of Paul Veronese. I could 
willingly follow out this subject fully, but it is impossible to 
do so without leaving Venice ; for the chief city of Italy, as 
far as regards the strict effect of the balcony, is Verona; and 
if we were once to lose ourselves among the sweet shadows 
of its lonely streets, where the falling branches of the flowers 
stream like fountains through the pierced traceries of the mar- 
ble, there is no saying whether we might soon be able to re- 
turn to our immediate work. Yet before leaving the subject 
of the balcony * altogether, I must allude, for a moment, to 
the peculiar treatment of the iron-work out of which it is 
frequently wrought on the mainland cf Italy—never in Ven- 
ice. The iron is always wrought, not cast, beaten first into 
thin leaves, and then cut either into strips or bands, two or 
three inches broad, which are bent into various curves to form 
the sides of the balcony, or else into actual leafage, sweeping 
and free, like the leaves of nature, with which it is richly dec- 
orated. There is no end to the variety of design, no limit to 
‘the lightness and flow of the forms, which the workman can. 
produce out of iron treated in this manner ; and it is very 
nearly as impossible for any metal-work, so handled, to be 
poor, or ignoble in effect, as it is for cast metal-work to be 
otherwise. 

§ xxm. We have next to examine those features of the 
Gothic palaces in which the transitions of their architecture 
are most distinctly traceable ; namely, the arches of the win- 
dows and doors. 

It has already been repeatedly stated, that the Gothic style 
had formed itself completely on the mainland, while the 
Byzantines still retained their influence at Venice ; and that 
the history of early Venetian Gothic is therefore not that of 
a school taking new forms independently of external influence, 
but the history of the struggle of the Byzantine manner with 
a contemporary style quite as perfectly organized as itself, and 
far more energetic. And this struggle is exhibited partly in 
the gradual change of the Byzantine architecture into other 


* Some details respecting the mechanical structure of the Venetian 
balcony are given in the final Appenix. 


248 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


forms, and partly by isolated examples of genuine Gothis 
taken prisoner, as it were, in the contest ; or rather entangled 
among the enemy’s forces, and maintaining their ground till 
their friends came up to sustain them. Let us first follow the 
steps of the gradual change, and then give some brief account 
of the various advanced guards and forlorn hopes of the 
Gothic attacking force. 

§ xxiv. The uppermost shaded series of six forms of win- 
dows in Plate XIV., opposite, represents, at a glance, the modi- 
fications of this feature in Venetian palaces, from the eleventh 
to the fifteenth century. Fig. 1 is Byzantine, of the eleventh 
and twelfth centuries ; figs. 2 and 3 transitional, of the thir- 
teenth and early fourteenth centuries; figs. 4 and 5 pure 
Gothic of the thirteenth, fourteenth and early fifteenth ; an” 
fig. 6 late Gothic, of the fifteenth century, distinguished b 
its added finial. Fig. 4 is the longest-lived of all these forms . 
it occurs first in the thirteenth century ; and, sustaining modi- 
fications only in its mouldings, is found also in the middle of 
the fifteenth. 

I shall call these the six orders* of Venetian windows, and 
when I speak of a window of the fourth, second, or sixth 
order, the reader will only have to refer to the numerals at the 
top of Plate XIV. 

Then the series below shows the principal forms found in 
each period, belonging to each several order ; except 1b to 1 
c, and the two lower series, numbered 7 to 16, which are types 
of Venetian doors. 


*J found it convenient in my own memoranda to express them simply 
as fourths, seconds, &c. But * order” is an excellent word for any 
known group of forms, whether of windows, capitals, bases, mouldings, 
or any other architectural feature, provided always that it be not under 
stood in any wise to imply peéminence or isolation in these groups. ° 
Thus I may rationally speak of the six orders of Venetian windows, pro- 
vided I am ready to allow a French architect to speak of the six or 
seven, or eight, or seventy or eighty, orders of Norman windows, if so 
many are distinguishable ; and so also we may rationally speak, for the 
sake of intelligibility, of the five orders of Greek pillars, provided only’ 
we understand that there may be five millions of orders as good or bet 
ter, of pillars not Greek, 


ARCHES. 


—THE ORDERS OF VENETIAN 


PLATE XIV. 


GOTHIC PALACKS Ad 


§ xxv. We shall now be able, without any difficulty, to fol. 
low the course of transition, beginning with the first order, 
1 and 1 a, in the second row. The horse-shoe arch, 1 }, is the 
door-head commonly associated with it, and the other three in 
the same row occur in St. Mark’s exclusively ; 1 ¢ being used 
i the nave, in order to give a greater appearance of lightness 
to its great lateral arcades, which at first the spectator sup- 
poses to be round-arched, but he is struck by a peculiar grace 
and elasticity in the curves for which he is unable to account, 
until he ascends into the galleries whence the true form of 
the arch is discernible. The other two—1 d, from the door of 
the southern transept, and 1c, from that of the treasury,— 
sufficiently represent a group of fantastic forms cerived from 
the Arabs, and of which the exquisite decoration is one of the 
most important features in St. Mark’s. Their form is indeed 
permitted merely to obtain more fantasy in the curves of this 
decoration.* The reader can see in a moment, that, as pieces 
of masonry, or bearing arches, they are infirm or useless, and 
therefore never could be employed in any building in which 
dignity of structure was the primal object. It is Just because 
structure is not the primal object in St. Mark’s, because it has 
no severe weights to bear, and much loveliness of marble and 
sculpture to exhibit, that they are therein allowable. They 
are of course, like the rest of the building, built of brick and 
faced with marble, and their inner masonry, which must be 
very ingenious, is therefore not discernible. They have set- 
tled a little, as might have been expected, and the consequence 
is, that there is in every ore of them, except the upright arch 
of the treasury, a small fissure across the marble of the flanks. 

§ xxvi. Though, however, the Venetian builders adopted 
these Arabian forms of arch where grace of ornamentation 
was their only purpose, they saw that such arrangements were 
unfit for ordinary work ; and there is no instance, I believe, in 
Venice, of their having used any of them for a dwelling-house 
in the truly Byzantine period. But so soon as the Gothic in- 
fluence began to be felt, and the pointed arch forced itself 

* Or in their own curves ; as, on a small scale, in the balustrade fig, 
6, Plate XIII., above. 

Stones of Venice—Vol. IIT.—12 


250 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


upon them, their first concession to its attack was the adop 
tion, in preference to the round arch, of the form 3 a (Plata 
XIV., above) ; the point of the Gothic arch forcing itself up, 
as it were, through the top of the semicircle which it was soon 
to supersede. 

§ xxvu. The woodcut, Fig. XXVL, represents the door and 
two of the lateral windows of a house in the Corte del 
Remer, facing the Grand Canal, in the parish of the Apos- 
toli. It isremarkable as having its great entrance on the first 
floor, attained by a bold flight of steps, sustamed on pure 
pointed arches wrought in brick. I cannot tell if these arches 


are contemporary with the building, though it must always 
have had an access of the kind. The rest of its aspect is 
Byzantine, except only that the rich sculptures of its archivolt 
show in combats of animals, beneath the soffit, a beginning of 
the Gothic fire and energy. The moulding of its plinth is of 
a Gothic profile,* and the windows are pointed, not with a re- 
versed curve, but in a pure straight gable, very curiously con- 
trasted with the delicate bending of the pieces of marble - 
armor cut for the shoulders of each arch. There is a two- 
lighted window, such as that seen in the vignette,.on each 
side of the door, sustained in the centre by a basket-worked 


* For all details of this kind, the reader is referred to the final Ap- 
pendix in Vol. III. 


GOTHIC PALACES. QAI 


Byzantine capital: the mode of covering the brick archivolt 
with marble, both in the windows and doorway, is precisely 
like that of the true Byzantine palaces. 

§ xxv. But as, even on a small scale, these arches are 
weak, if executed in brickwork, the appearance of this sharp 
point in the outline was rapidly accompanied e 
by a parallel change in the method of building ; aoe 
and instead of constructing the arch of. brick = 
and coating it with marble, the builders formed 
it of three pieces of hewn stone inserted in =& 
the wall, as in Fig. XXVIII. Not, however, at— 
first in this perfect form. The endeavor to 
reconcile the grace of the reversed arch with the strength 
of the round one, and still to build in brick, ended at first 
in conditions such as that represented at a, Fig. XXVIIL, 


Fie. XXVII. 


a Fie. XXVIII. 


which is a window in the Calle del Pistor, close to the 
church of the Apostoli, a very interesting and perfect ex- 
ample. Here, observe, the poor round arch is still kept to do 
all the hard work, and the fantastic ogee.takes its pleasure 
above, in the form of a moulding merely, a chain of bricks 
cast to the required curve. And this condition, translated into 
stone-work, becomes a window of the second order (b, Fig. 
XXVIIL, or 2, in Plate XIV.); a form perfectly strong and 
serviceable, and of immense importance in the transitionat 
architecture of Venice. 

§ xxix. At b, Fig XXVIII., as above, is given one of ths 
earliest and simplest occurrences of the second order window 


252 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


(in a double group, exactly like the brick transitional form a), 
from a most important fragment .of a defaced house in the 
Salizzada San Lio,.close to the Merceria. It is associated 
with a fine pointed brick arch, indisputably of contemporary 
work, towards the close of the thirteenth century, and it 
is shown to be later than the previous example, a, by the 
ereater developement of its mouldings. The archivolt pro- 
file, indeed, is the simpler of the two, not having the sub- 

arch ; asin the brick example ; but the other 


mouldings are far more developed. Fig. 
XXIX. shows at 1 the arch profiles, at 2 the 
capital profiles, at 3 the basic-plinth profiles, 


of each window, a and 0. 

§ xxx. But the second order window soon 
attained nobler developement. At once 
simple, graceful, and strong, it was received 
into all the architecture of the period, and 

2 ; there is hardly a streetin Venice which does 
not exhibit some important remains of pal- 
aces built with this form of window in many 
stories, and in numerous groups. The most 
extensive and perfect is one upon the Grand 
Canal in the parish of the Apostoli, near the 
Rialto, covered with rich decoration, in the 


3 Byzantine manner, between the windows of 
its first story ; but not completely charac- 
teristic of the transitional period, because 

b @ 


still retaining the dentil in the arch mould- 
ings, while the transitional houses all have 
the simple roll. Of the fully established type, 
one of the most extensive and perfect exam- 
ples is in a court in the Calle di Rimedio, close to the Ponte 
dell’ Angelo, near St. Mark’s Place. Another looks out upon 
a small square garden, one of the few visible in the centre of 
Venice, close by the Corte Salviati (the latter being known to 
every cicerone as that from which Bianca Capello fled). But, 
on the whole, the most interesting to the traveller is that of 
which I have given a vignette opposite. 


Fig, XXIX. 


PLATE XV.—WINDOWS OF THE SECOND ORDER. OASa FATAIBR. 


GOTHIC PALACES. 253 


But for this range of windows, the little piazza SS. Apostoli 
would be one of the least picturesque in Venice; to those, 
however, who seek it on foot, it becomes geographically inter- 
esting from the extraordinary involution of the alleys leading 
to it from the Rialto. In Venice, the straight road is usually 
by water, and the long road by land ; but the difference of 
distance appears, in this case, altogether inexplicable. Twenty 
or thirty strokes of the oar will bring a gondola from the foot 
of the Rialto to that of the Ponte SS. Apostoli ; but the un- 
wise pedestrian, who has not noticed the white clue beneath 
his feet,* may think himself fortunate, if, after a quarter of 
an hour’s wandering among the houses behind the Wondaco 
de’ Tedeschi, he finds himself anywhere in the neighborhood 
of the point he seeks. With much patience, nowever, and 
modest following of the guidance of the msrble thread, he 
will at last emerge over a steep bridge into the open space of 
the Piazza, rendered cheerful in autumn by & perpetual mar- 
ket of pomegranates, and purple gourds, like enormous black 
fies ; while the canal, at its extremity, is half-blocked up by 
barges laden with vast baskets of grapes as black as charcoal, 
thatched over with their own leaves. 

Looking back, on the other side of this canal, he will see 
the windows represented in Plate XV., which, with the arcade 
of pointed arches beneath them, are the remains of the palace 
once belonging to tl.c unhappy doge, Marino Faliero. 

The balcony is, of course, modern, and the series of win- 
dows has been of greater extent, once terminated by a pilas- 
ter on the left hand, as well as on the right; but the terminal 
arches have been walled up. What remains, however, is 
enough, with its sculptured birds and dragons, to give the 
reader a very distinct idea of the second order window in its 


* Two threads of white marble, each about an inch wide, inlaid in 
the dark grey pavement, indicate the road to the Rialto from the 
farthest extremity of the north quarter of Venice. The peasant or 
traveller, lost in the intricacy of the pathway in this portion of the city, 
zannot fail, after a few experimental traverses, to cross these white lines, 
which thenceforward he has nothing to do but to fol ow, though their 
gapricious sinuosities will try his patience not a little, 


954 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


perfect form. The details of the capitals, and other minogs - 
portions, if these interest him, he will find given in the final 
Appendix. 

§ xxx1. The advance of the Gothic spirit was, for a few 
years, checked by this compromise between the round and 
pointed arch. The truce, however, was at last broken, in con- 
sequence of the discovery that the keystone would do duty 
quite as well in the form } as in the form a, Fig. XXX., and 

the substitution of 6, at the head of the arch, 

"oe gives us the window of the third order, 3 b, 3 d, 
and 3 e, in Plate XIV. The forms 3a and 38¢ 

tL % are exceptional ; the first occurring, as we have 
Fia. XXX seen, in the Corte del Remer, and in one other 
palace on the Grand Canal, close to the Church of St. Eustachio ; 
the second only, as far as I know, in one house on the Can- 
na-Regeio, belonging to the true Gothic period. The other 
three examples, 3 b, 3 d, 3 e, are generally characteristic of the 
third order; and it will be observed that they differ not 
merely in mouldings, but in slope of sides, and this latter dif- 
ference is by far the most material. For in the example 3b 
there is hardly any truc Gothic expression ; it is still the pure 
Byzantine arch, with a point thrust up,through it: but the 
moment the flanks slope, as in 3d, the Gothic expression is 
definite, and the entire school of the architecture is changed. 

This slope of the flanks occurs, first, in so slight a degree 
as to be hardly perceptible, and gradually increases until, reach- 
ing the form 3 e at the close of the thirteenth century, the 
window is perfectly prepared for a transition into the fifth 
order. 

§ xxx. The most perfect examples of the third order in 
Venice are the windows of the ruined palace of Marco Querini, 
the father-in-law of Bajamonte Tiepolo, in consequence of 
whose conspiracy against the government this palace was 
ordered to be razed in 1310; but it was only partially ruined, 
and was afterwards used as the common shambles. The Vene- 
tians have now made a poultry market of the lower story (the 
shambles being removed to a suburb), and a prison of the 
upper, though it is one of the most important and interesting 


GOTHIC PALACES. 254 


_ Monuments in the city, and especially valuable as giving us a 

secure date for the central form of these very rare transitional 
windows. For, as it was the palace of the father-in-law of 
Bajamonte, and the later was old enough to assume the leader- 
ship of a political faction in 1280,* the date of the accession to 
the throne of the Doge Pietro Gradenigo, we are secure of 
this palace having been built not later than the middle of the 
thirteenth century. Another example, less refined in work- 
manship, but, if possible, still more interesting, owing to the 


= Li a 
gill 


al 
B i 


variety of its capitals, remains in the little piazza opening te 
the Rialto, on the St. Mark’s side of the Grand Canal. The 
house faces the bridge, and its second story has been built in 
the thirteenth century, above a still earlier Byzantine cornice 
remaining, or perhaps introduced from some other ruined edi- 
fice, in the walls of. the first floor. The windows of the second 
story are of pure third order; four of them are represented 
above, with their flanking pilaster, and capitals varying con- 
stantly in the form of the flower or leaf introduced between 
their volutes. 

§ xxxm. Another most important example exists in the 
lower story of the Casa Sagredo, on the Grand Canal, remark- 
able as having the early upright form (3 6, Plate XIV.) with 
a somewhat late moulding. Many others occur in the frag- 
mentary ruins in the streets: but the two boldest conditions 


* An account of the conspiracy of Bajamonte may be found in almost 
any Venetian history ; the reader may consult Mutinelli, Annali Urbani, 
lib. in. 


956 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


which 1 found in Venice are those of the Chapter-House of . 
the Frari, in which the Doge Francesco Dandolo was buried 
circa 1339; and those of the flank of the Ducal Palace itself 
absolutely corresponding with those of the Frari, and there- 
fore of inestimable value in determining the date of the palace. 
Of these more hereafter. 

§ xxxrv. Contemporarily with these windows of the second 
and third orders, those of the fourth (4a and 4 8, in Plate 
XIV.) occur, at’ first in pairs, and with simple mouldings, pre- 
cisely similar to those of the second order,.but much more 
rare, aS in the example at the 
side, Fig. XXXII, from the 
Salizada San Lid; and then, 
enriching their mouldings as 
shown in the continuous series 
4c¢,4d, of Plate XIV., asso- 
4 ciate themselves with the fifth 

: order windows of the perfect 
Gothic period. There is hard- 
ly a palace in Venice without 
some example, either early or 
late, of these fourth order win- 
dows ; but the Plate opposite (XVI) represents one of their 
purest groups at the close of the thirteenth century, from a 
house on the Grand Canal, nearly opposite the Church of the 
Scalzi. I have drawn it from the side, in order that the great 
depth of the arches may be seen, and the clear detaching of 
the shafts from the sheets of glass behind. The latter, as 
well as “he balcony, are comparatively modern ; but there is 
no doubt that if glass were used in the old window, it was set 
behind the shafts, at the same depth. The entire modification 
of the interiors of all the Venetian houses by recent work has 
however prevented me from entering into any inquiry as to 
the manner in which the ancient glazing was attached to the 
interiors of the windows. 

The fourth order window is found in great richness and 
beauty at Verona, down to the latest Gothic times, as well as 
in the garliest, being then more frequent than any other form. 


Fie. XXXII. 


TH ORDER, 


HEH Four 


—WINDOWS OF T 


TR XVI 


PLA 


GOTHIC PALACKS. 25% 


It occurs, on a grand scale, in the old palace of the Scaligers, 
and profusely throughout the streets of the city. The series 
4a to4e, Plate XIV., shows its most ordinary conditions 
and changes of arch-line: 4a and 4 b are the early Venetian 
forms; 4 ¢, later, is general at Venice ; 4 d, the best and most 
piquant condition, owing to its fantastic and bold projection 
of cusp, is common to Venice and Verona; 4 e is early Vero- 
nese. 

§ xxxv. The reader will see at once, in descending to the 
fifth row in Plate XIV., representing the windows of the fifth 
order, that they are nothing more than a combination of the 
third and fourth. By this union they become the nearest ap- 
proximation toa perfect Gothic form which occurs charac- 
teristically at Venice ; and we shall therefore pause on the 
threshold of this final change, to glance back upon, and 
gather together, those fragments of purer pointed architect- 
ure which were above noticed as the forlorn hopes of the 
Gothic assault. 

The little Campiello San Rocco is entered by a sotto-portico 
behind the church of the Frari. Looking back, the upper 
traceries of the magnificent apse are seen towering above the 
irregular roofs and chimneys of the little square ; and our lost 
Prout was enabled to bring the whole subject into an exquis- 
itely picturesque composition, by the fortunate occurrence of 
four quaint trefoiled windows in one of the houses on the 
right. Those trefoils are among the most ancient efforts of 
Gothic art in Venice. I have given a rude sketch of them in’ 
Fig. XXXII. They are built entirely of brick, except the 
central shaft and capital, which are of Istrian stone. Their 
structure is the simplest possible ; the trefoils being cut out 
of the radiating bricks which form the pointed arch, and the 
edge or upper limit of that pointed arch indicated by a roll 
moulding formed of cast bricks, in length of about a foot, and 
ground at the bottom so as to meet in one, as in Wig. XXXIV. 
The capital of the shaft is one of the earliest transitional 
forms ;* and observe the curious following out, even in thir 
_ minor instance, of the great law of centralization above ex: 
* See account of series of capitals in final Appendix, 


Vou. .—19 


258 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


plained with respect to the Byzantine palaces. There ‘is a 
central shaft, a pilaster on each side, and then the wall. The 
pilaster has, by way of capital, a square flat brick, projecting 
a little, and cast, at the edge, into the form of the first type 
of all cornices (a, p. 75, Vol. L ; the reader ought to glance 
back at this passage, if he has forgotten it); and the shafts 
and pilasters all stand, without any added bases, on a project- 
ing plinth of the same simple profile. These windows have 


Fie. XXXIV. 


been much defaced; but I have not the least doubt that their 
plinths are the original ones: and the whole group is one of 
the most valuable in Venice, as showing the way in which the 
humblest houses, in the noble times, followed out the system 
of the larger palaces, as far as they could, in their rude mate- 
rials. It is not often that the dwellings of the lower orders 
are preserved to us from the thirteenth century. 

§ xxxvr. In the two upper lines of the opposite Plate 
(XVII), Ihave arranged some of the more delicate and fin- 
ished examples of Gothic work of this period. Of these, fig. 
4 is taken from the outer arcade of San Fermo of Verona, to 
show the condition of mainland architecture, from which all 
these Venetian types were borrowed. This arch, together 
with the rest of the arcade, is wrought in fine stone, with a 
band of inlaid red brick, the whole chiselled and fitted with . 
exquisite precision, all Venetian work being coarse in com 


HIC PALACES, 


F THE HARLY GOT 


SO 


. —WINDOW 


PLATE XVII 


GOTHIC PALACES. 259 


parison. Throughout the streets of Verona, arches and win- 
dows of the thirteenth century are of continual occurrence, 
' wrought, in this manner, with brick and stone ; sometimes 
the brick alternating with the stones of the arch, as in the 
finished example given in Plate XIX. of the first volume, and 
there selected in preference to other examples of archivolt 
' decoration, because furnishing a complete type of the master 
school from which the Venetian Gothic is derived. 

§ xxxvu. The arch from St. Fermo, however, fig. 4, Plate 
XVIL., corresponds more closely, in its entire simplicity, with 
the little windows from the Campiello San Rocco ; and with 
the type 5 set beside it in Plate XVII, from a very ancient 
house in the Corte del Forno at Santa Marina (all in brick) ; 
while the upper examples, 1 and 2, show the use of the flat 
but highly enriched architrave, for the connection of which 
with Byzantine work see the final Appendix, Vol. HI., under 
the head “Archivolt.” These windows (figs. 1 and 2, Plate 
XVIL) are from a narrow alley in a part of Venice now exclu- 
sively inhabited by the lower orders, close to the arsenal ;* 
they are entirely wrought in brick, with exquisite mouldings, 
not cast, but moulded in the clay by the hand, so that there is 
not one piece of the arch like another ; the pilasters and 
shafts being, as usual, of stone. 

§ xxxvi. And here let me pause for a moment, to note 
what one should have thought was well enough known in 
England,—yet I could not perhaps touch upon anything less 
considered,—the real use of brick. Our fields of good clay . 
were never given us to be made into oblong morsels of one 
size. They were given us that we might play with them, and 
that men who could not handle a chisel, might knead out of 
them some expression of human thought. In the ancient 
architecture of the clay districts of Italy, every possible 


* If the traveller desire to find them (and they are worth seeking), 
let him row from the FondamentaS. Biagio down the Rio della Tana; and 
look, on his right, for a low house with windows in it like those in the 
woodcut No. XXXI. above, p. 255. Let him goin at the door of the 
portico in the middle of this house, and he will! find himself in a small 
alley, vith the windows in question on each side of him. 


is 


260 THH STONES OF VENICE. 


adaptation of the material is found exemplified: from the 


coarsest and most brittle kinds, used in the mass of the | 


structure, to bricks for arches and plinths, cast in the most 
perfect curves, and of almost every size, strength, and hard- 
ness; and moulded bricks, wrought into flower-work and 
tracery as fine as raised patterns upon china. And, just as 
many of the finest works of the Italian sculptors were exe- 
cuted in porcelain, many of the best thoughts of their archi- 
tects are expressed in brick, or in the softer material of terra 
cotta; and if this were so in Italy, where there is not one city 
from whose towers we may not descry the blue outline of Alp 
or Apennine, everlasting quarries of granite or marble, how 
much more ought it to be so among the fields of England! 
I believe that the best academy for her architects, for some 
half century to come, would be the brick-field; for of this 
they may rest assured, that till they know how to use clay, 
they will never know how to use marble. 

§ xxxrx. And now observe, as we pass from fig. 2 to fig. 3, 
and from fig. 5 to fig. 6, in Plate XVII., a most interesting step 
of transition. As we saw above, § xtv., the round arch yield- 
ing to the Gothic, by allowing a point to emerge at its sum- 
mit, so here we have the Gothic conceding something to the 
form which had been assumed by the round; and _ itself 
slightly altering its outline so as to meet the condescension 
of the round arch half way. At page 142 of the first volume, 
I have drawn to scale one of these minute concessions of the 
pointed arch, granted at Verona out of pure courtesy to the 
Venetian forms, by one of the purest Gothic ornaments in the 
world ; and the small window here, fig. 6, is a similar example 
at Venice itself, from the Campo Santa Maria Mater Domini, 
where the reversed curve at the head of the pointed arch is 
just perceptible and no more. The other examples, figs. 3 and 
7, the first from a small but very noble house in the Merceria, 
the second from an isolated palace at Murano, show more 
advanced conditions of the reversed curve, which, though stil! 
employing the broad decorated architrave of the earlier exam- 
ples, are in all other respects prepared for the transition to the 
simple window of the fifth order. 


GOTHIC PALACES. 261 


§ xu. The next example, the uppermost of the three Jowe: 
series in Plate XVII, shows this order in its early purity , 
associated with intermediate decorations like those of the 
Byzantines, from a palace once belonging to the Erizzo family, 
near the Arsenal. The ornaments appear to be actually of 
Greek workmanship (except, perhaps, the two birds over the 
central arch, which are bolder, and more free in treatment), 
and built into the Gothic fronts ; showing, however, the early 
date of the whole by the manner of their insertion, corre- 
sponding exactly with that employed in the Byzantine palaces, 
and by the covering of the intermediate spaces with sheets of 
marble, which, however, instead of being laid over the entire 
wall, are now confined to the immediate spaces between and 
above the windows, and are bounded by a dentil mould- 
ing. 

In the example below this the Byzantine ornamentation has 
vanished, and the fifth order window is seen in its generic 
form, as commonly employed throughout the early Gothic 
period. Such arcades are of perpetual occurrence ; the one 
in the Plate was taken from a small palace on the Grand 
Canal, nearly opposite the Casa Foscari. One point in it de- 
serves especial notice, the increased size of the lateral window 
as compared with the rest: a circumstance which occurs in | 
a great number of the groups of windows belonging to this 
period, and for which I have never been able to account. 

§ xu1. Both these figures have been most carefully en- 
eraved ; and the uppermost will give the reader a perfectly 
faithful idea of the general effect of the Byzantine sculptures, 
and of the varied alabaster among which they are inlaid, as 
well as of the manner in which these pieces are set together, 
every joint having been drawn on the spot: and the transition 
from the embroidered and silvery richness of this architecture, 
in which the Byzantine ornamentation was associated with the 
Gothic form of arch, to the simplicity of the pure Gothic 
arcade as seen in the lower figure, is one of the most remark- 
able nhenomena in the history of Venetian art. If it had 
securred suddenly, and at an earlier period, it might have 
been traced partly to the hatred of the Greeks, consequent 


262 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


upon the treachery of Manuel Comnenus,* and the fatal war 
to which it led ; butthe change takes place gradually, and not 
till a much later period. JI hoped to have been able to make 
some careful inquiries into the habits of domestic life of the 
Venetians before and after the dissolution of their friendly 
relations with Constantinople ; but the labor necessary for the 
execution of my more immediate task has entirely prevented 
this : and I must be content to lay the succession of the archi- 
tectural styles plainly before the reader, and leave the collat- 
eral questions to the investigation of others ; merely noting 
this one assured fact, that the root of all that is greatest in 
Christian art is struck in the thirteenth century ; that the tem- 
per of that century is the life-blood of all manly work thence- 
forward in Europe ; and I suppose that one of its peculiar 
characteristics was elsewhere, as assuredly in Florence, 2 
singular simplicity in domestic life : 
‘¢ T saw Bellincion Berti walk abroad 

In leathern girdle, and a clasp of bone ; 

And, with no artful coloring on her cheeks, 

His lady leave the glass. The sons I saw 

Of Verli and of Vecchio, well content 

* With unrobed jerkin, and their good dames handling 

The spindlz and the flax. Pane 

One waked to tend tho cradle, hushing it 

With sounds that lulled the parents’ infancy ; 

Another, with her maidens, drawing off 

The tresses from the distaff, lectured them 

Old tales of Troy, and Fesole, and Rome.” + 


* The bitterness of feeling with which the Venetians must have re- 
membered this, was probably the cause of their magnificent heroism in 
the final siege of the city under Dandolo, and, partly, of the excesses 
which disgraced their victory. The conduct of the allied army of the 
Crusaders on this occasion cannot, however, be brought in evidence of 
general barbarism in the thirteenth century: first, because the massés 
of the crusading armies were in great part composed of the refuse of the 
nations of Hurope; and secondly, because such a mode of argument 
might lead us to inconvenient conclusions respecting ourselves, so long 
as the horses of the Austrian cavalry are stabled in the cloister of the 
eonvent which contains the Last Supper of Leonardo da Vinci. See 
Appendix 3, Vol. IIL: ‘‘ Austrian Government in Italy.” 

f Itis generally better to read ten lines of any poet in the original 


‘H ORDER. 


—WINDOWS OF THE Firt 


PLATE XVIII. 


ra 


a 


GOTHIC PALACES. 263 


§ xtu. Such, then, is the simple fact at Venice, that from 
the beginning of the thirteenth century there is found a sin- 
gular increase of simplicity in all architectural ornamentation ; 
the rich Byzantine capitals giving place to a pure and severe 
type hereafter to be described,* and the rich sculptures vanish- 
ing from the walls, nothing but the marble facing remaining. 
One of the most interesting examples of this transitional state 
is a palace at San Severo, just behind the Casa Zorzi. This 
latter is a Renaissance building, utterly worthless in every 
respect, but known to the Venetian Ciceroni ; and by inquir- 
ing for it, and passing a little beyond it down the Fondamenta 
San Severo, the traveller will see, ou the other side of the 
canal, a palace which the Ciceroni never notice, but which is 
unique in Venice for the magnificence of the veined purple ° 
alabasters with which it has been decorated, and for the manly 
simplicity of the foliage of its capitals. Except in these, it 
has no sculpture whatever, and its effect is dependent entirely 
on color. Disks of green serpentine are inlaid on the field 
of purple alabaster ; and the pillars are alternately of red 
marble with white capitals, and of white marble with red 
capitals. Its windows appear of the third order ; and the back 
of the palace, in a small and most picturesque court, shows a 
group of windows which are, perhaps, the most superb ex- 
amples of that order in Venice. But the windows to the front 
have, I think, been of the fifth order, and their cusps have 
been cut away. 

§ xtu. When the Gothic feeling began more decidedly to 
language, however painfully, than ten cantos of a translation. But an 
exception may be made in favor of Cary’s Dante. If no poet ever was 
liable to lose more in translation, none was ever so carefully translated ; 
and I hardly know whether most to admire the rigid fidelity, or the 
sweet and solomn harmony, of Cary’s verse. There is hardly a fault in 
the fragmont quoted above, except the word ‘‘ lectured,” for Dante's 
beautiful ‘‘ favoleggiava ;” and evon in this case, joining the first words 
of ihe following line, the translation is strictly literal. It is true that 
the conciseness and the rivulet-like melody of Dante must continually 
be lost; but if I could only read English, and had to choose, for a li. 
brary narrowed by poverty, between Cary’s Dante and our own origina) 
Milton, I should choose Cary without an instant’s pause. 

* See final Appendix, Vol. III., under head ‘‘ Capitals,” 


264 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


establish itself, it evidently became a question with the Vene 
tian builders, how the intervals between the arches, now left 
blank by the abandonment of the Byzantine sculptures, should 
be enriched in accordance with the principles of the new 
school. Two most important examples are left of the experi- 
ments made at this period: one at the Ponte del Forner, at 
San Cassano, a noble house in which the spandrils of the win- 
dows are filled by the emblems of the four Evangelists, sculpt- 
ured in deep relief, and touching the edges of the arches 
with their expanded wings ; the other now known as the Pa- 
lazzo Cicogna, near the church of San Sebastiano, in the 
quarter called “of the Archangel Raphael,” in which a large 
space of wall above the windows is occupied by an intricate 
’ but rude tracery of involved quatrefoils. Of both these palaces 
I purposed to give drawings in my folio work; but I shall 
probably be saved the trouble by the publication of the beau- 
tiful calotypes lately made at Venice of both; and it is un- 
necessary to represent them here, as they are unique in Vene- 
tian architecture, with the single exception of an unimportant 
imitation of the first of them in a little by-street close to the 
Campo Sta. Maria Formosa. For the question as to the mode 
of decorating the interval between the arches was suddenly 
and irrevocably determined by the builder of the Ducal Palace, 
who, as we have seen, taking his first idea from the traceries 
of the Frari, and arranging those traceries as best fitted his 
own purpose, designed the great arcade (the lowest of the 
three in Plate XVII.), which thenceforward became the estab- 
lished model for every work of importance in Venice. The 
palaces built on this model, however, most of them not till 
the beginning of the fifteenth century, belong properly to the 
time of the Renaissance ;. and what little we have to note re- 
specting them may be more clearly stated in connexion with 
other facts characteristic of that period. 

§ xtrv. As the examples in Plate XVII. are necessarily con- 
fined to the upper parts of the windows, I have given in the 
Plate opposite (XVIIL*) examples of the fifth order window, 


* This Plate is not from a drawing of mine. It has been engraved by 
Mr. Armytage, with great ski, from two daguerreotypes. 


GOTHIC PALACKS, 265 


both in its earliest and in its fully developed form, completed 
from base to keystone. The upper example is a beautiful 
group from a small house, never of any size or pretension, 
and now inhabited only by the poor, in the Campiello della 
- Strope, close to the Church of San Giacomo de Lorio. It is 
remarkable for its excessive purity of curve, and is of very 
early date, its mouldings being simpler than usual.t The 
lower example is from the second story of a palace belonging 
to the Priuli family, near San Lorenzo, and shows one feature 
to which our attention has not hitherto been directed, namely, 
the penetration of the cusp, leaving only a silver thread of 
stone traced on the darkness of the window. I need not say 
that, in this condition, the cusp ceases to have any construc- 
tive use, and is merely decorative, but often exceedingly beau- 
tiful. The steps of transition from the early solid cusp to this 
slender thread are noticed in the final Appendix, under the 
head “ Tracery Bars ;” the commencement of the change be- 
ing in the thinning of the stone, which is not cut through 
until it is thoroughly emaciated.. Generally speaking, the 
condition in which the cusp is found is a useful test of age, 
when compared with other points; the more solid it is, the 
more ancient: but the massive form is often found associated 
with the perforated, as late as the beginning of the fourteenth 
century. In the Ducal Palace, the lower or bearing traceries 
have the solid cusp, and the upper traceries of the windows, 
which are merely decorative, have the perforated cusp, both 
with exquisite effect. 

§ xiv. The smaller balconies between the great shafts in the 
lower examp'e in Plate XVII. are original and characteristic: 
not so the lateral one of the detached window, which has 
been restored ; but by imagining it to be like that represented 
in fig. 1, Plate XTIL, above, which is a perfect window of the 
finest time of the fifth order, the reader will be unable to 
form a complete idea of the external appearance of the prin- 
cipal apartments in the house of a noble of Venice, at the be-. 
ginning of the fourteenth century. 

§ xnv1. Whether noble, or merchant, ov, as frequently hap: 

* Vide final. Appendix, under head ‘‘ Archiyolt.” 


266 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


pened, both, every Venetian appears, at this time, to have 
raised his palace or dwelling-house upon one type. Under 
every condition of importance, through every variation of 
pize, the forms and mode of decoration of all the features 
were universally alike; not servilely alike, but fraternally ; 
not with the sameness of coins cast from one mould, but with 
the likeness of the members of one family. No fragment of 
the period is preserved, in which the windows, be they few 
or many, a group of three or an arcade of thirty, have not 
the noble cusped arch of the fifth order. And they are es- 
pecially to be noted by us at this day, because these refined 
and richly ornamented forms were used in the habitations of 
a nation as laborious, as practical, as brave, and as prudent as 
ourselves ; and they were built at a time when that nation 
was struggling with calamities and changes threatening its 
existence almost every hour. And, farther, they are interest- 
ing because perfectly applicable to modern habitation. The 
refinement of domestic life appears to have been far advanced 
in Venice from her earliest days; and the remains of her 
Gothic palaces are, at this day, the most delightful residences 
in the city, having undergone no change in external form, and 
probably having been rather injured than rendered more con- 
venient by the modifications which poverty and Renaissance 
taste, contending with the ravages of time, have introduced 
in the interiors. So that, in Venice, and the cities grouped 
around it, Vicenza, Padua, and Verona, the traveller may as- 
certain, by actual experience, the effect which would be pro- 
duced upon the comfort or luxury of daily life by the revival 
of the Gothic school of architecture. He can still stand upon 
the marble balcony in the soft summer air, and feel its smooth 
surface warm from the noontide as he leans on it in the twi- 
light; he can still see the strong sweep of the unruined 
traceries drawn on the deep serenity of the starry sky, and 
watch the fantastic shadows of the clustered arches shorten 
in the moonlight on the chequered floor ; or he may close the 
casements fitted to their unshaken shafts against such wintry 
winds as would have made an English house vibrate to its 
foundation, and, in either case, compare their influence on his 


GOTHIC PALACHS. - 267 


daily home feeling with that of the square openings in his 
English wall. 

§ xivm. And let him be assured, if he find there is more 
to be enjoyed in the Gothic window, there is also more to be 
trusted. It is the best and strongest building, as it is the 
most beautiful. I am not now speaking of the particular 
form of Venetian Gothic, but of the general strength of the 
pointed arch as opposed to that of the level lintel of the 
square window; and I plead for the introduction of the 
Gothic form into our domestic architecture, not merely be- 
cause it is lovely, but because it is the only form of faithful, 
strong, enduring, and honorable building, in such materials as 
come daily to our hands. By increase of scale and cost, it is 
possible to build, in any style, what will last for ages; but 
only in the Gothic is it possible to give security and dignity 
to work wrought with imperfect means and materials. And 
I trust that there will come a time when the English people 
may see the folly of building basely and insecurely. It is 
common with those architects against whose practice my writ- 
ings have hitherto been directed, to call them merely theo- 
retical and imaginative. I answer, that there is not a single 
principle asserted either in the “Seven Lamps” or here, but 
is of the simplest, sternest veracity, and the easiest practica- 
bility ; that buildings, raised as I would have them, would 
stand unshaken for a thousand years; and the. buildings 
raised by the architects who oppose them will not stand for 
one hundred and fifty, they sometimes do not stand for an 
hour. There is hardly a week passes without some catas- 
trophe brought about by the base principles of modern build- 
ings ; some vaultless floor that drops the staggering crowd 
through the jagged rents of its rotten timbers ; some baseless 
bridge that is washed away by the first wave of a summer 
flood ; some fungous wall of nascent rottenness that a thunder- 
shower soaks down with its workmen into a heap of slime 
and death.* These we hear of, day by day: yet these indi- 

* “On Thursday, the 20th, the front walls of two of the new houses 


now building in Victoria Street, Westminster, fell to the ground, .. 
The roof was on, and a massive compo coriice was put up at top, ax well 


268 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


cate but the thousandth part of the evil. The portion of the 
national income sacrificed in mere bad building, in the per- 
petual repairs, and swift condemnation and pulling down of 
ill-built shells of houses, passes all calculation. And the 
weight of the penalty is not yet felt; it will tell upon our 
children some fifty years hence, when the cheap work, and 
contract work, and stucco and plaster work, and bad iron 
work, and all the other expedients of modern rivalry, vanity, 
and dishonesty, begin to show themselves for what they are. 
§ xtvin. Indeed, dishonesty and false economy will no more 
build safely in Gothic than in any other style: but of all forms 
which we could possibly employ, to be framed hastily and out 
of bad materials, the common square window is the worst ; 
and its level head of brickwork (a, Fig. XXXYV.) is the weakest 
way of covering a space. Indeed, in the hastily heaped shells 
of modern houses, there may be seen often even a worse man- 
ner of placing the bricks, as at b, supporting them by a bit 
of lath till the mortar dries ; but even when worked with the 
utmost care, and having every brick tapered 
into the form of a voussoir and accurately 
fitted, I have seen such a window-head give 


a way, and a wide fissure torn through all the 
brickwork above it, two years after it was 
built ; while the pointed arch of the Veronese 
Gothic, wrought in brick also, occurs at every 

b corner of the streets of the city, untouched 

Wie. XXXV. since the thirteenth century, and without a 


single flaw. 

§ xxx. Neither can the objection, so often raised against 
the pointed arch, that it will not admit the convenient adjust- 
ment of modern sashes and glass, hold for an instant. There 
is not the smallest necessity, because the arch is pointed, that 


as dressings to the upper windows. The roof is formed by girders and 
4}-brick arches in cement, covered with asphalt to form a flat. The 
failure is attributed to the quantity of rain which has fallen. Others 
suppose that some of the girders were defective, and gave way, carrying 
the walls with them.”— Builder, for January 29th, 1858. The rest’ of 
this volume might be filled with such notices, if we sought for them. 


* GOTHIC PALACES. 269 


the aperture should be so. The work of the arch is to sustain 
the building above; when this is once done securely, the 
pointed head of it may be filled in any way we choose. In 
the best cathedral doors it is always filled by a shield of solid 
stone ; in many early windows of the best Gothic it is filled in 
the same manner, the introduced slab of stone becoming a 
field for rich decoration ; and there is not the.smallest reason 
why lancet windows, used in bold groups, with each pointed 
arch filled by a sculptured tympanum, should not allow as 
much light to enter, and in as convenient a way, as the most 
luxuriously glazed square windows of our brick houses. Give 
the groups of associated lights bold gabled canopies ; charge 
the gables with sculpture and color ; and instead of the base 
and almost useless Greek portico, letting the rain and wind 
enter it at will, build the steeply vaulted and completely shel- 
tered Gothic porch ; and on all these fields for rich decoration 
let the common workman carve what he pleases, to the best 
of his power, and we may have a school of domestic architect- 
ure in the nineteenth century, which will make our children 
grateful to us, and proud of us, till the thirtieth. 

§ 1. There remains only one important feature to be ex- 
arained, the entrance gate or door. We have already observed 
that the one seems to pass into the other, a sign of increased 
Jove of privacy rather than of increased humility, as the Gothic 
palaces assume their perfect form. In the Byzantine palaces 
the entrances appear always to have been rather great gates 
than doors, magnificent semicircular arches opening to the 
water, and surrounded by rich sculpture in the archivolts. 
One of these entrances is seen in the small wood-cut above, 
Fig. XXV., and another has been given carefully in my folio 
work: their sculpture is generally of grotesque animals scat- 
tered among leafage, without any definite meaning ; but the 
great outer entrance of St. Mark’s, which appears to have been 
completed ‘some time after the rest of the fabric, differs from 
all others in presenting a series of subjects altogether Gothic 
in feeling, selection, and vitality of execution, and which show 
the occult entrance of the Gothic spirit before it had yet sue- 
ceeded in effecting any modification of the Byzantine forms. 


270 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


These sculptures represent the moaths of the year employed 
in the avocations usually attributed to them throughout the 
whole compass of the middle ages, in Northern‘architecture 
and manuscript calendars, and at last exquisitely versified by 
Spenser. For the sake of the traveller in Venice, who should 
examine this archivolt carefully, I shall enumerate these sculpt- 
ures in their order, noting such parallel representations. as I 
remember in other work. \ 

§ u1. There are four successive archivolts, one within the 
other, forming the great central entrance of St. Mark’s. The 
first is a magnificent external arch, formed of obscure figures 
mingled among masses of leafage, as in ordinary Byzantine 
work ; within this there is a hemispherical dome, covered witb 
modern mosaic; and at the back of this recess the other three 
archivolts follow consecutively, two sculptured, one plain ; the 
one with which we are concerned is the outermost. 

It is carved both on its front and under-surface or soffit ; 
on the front are seventeen female figures bearing scrolls, from 
which the legends are unfortunately effaced. These figures 
were once gilded on a dark blue ground, as may still be seen 
in Gentile Bellini’s picture of St. Mark’s in the Accademia 
delle Belle Arti. The sculptures of the months are on the 
under surface, beginning at the bottom on the left hand of the 
spectator as he enters, and following in succession round the 
archivolt ; separated, however, into two groups, at its centre, 
by a beautiful figure of the youthful Christ, sitting in the 
midst of a slightly hollowed sphere covered with stars to rep- 
resent the firmament, and with the attendant sun and moon, 
set one on each side to rule over the day and over the 
night. 

§ uu. The months are personified as follows :— 

1. January. Carrying home a noble tree on his shoulders, the 
leafage of which nods forwards, and falls nearly to his feet. 
Superbly cut. This is a rare representation of him. More 
frequently he is represented as the two-headed Janus, sitting 
at a table, drinking at one mouth and eating at the other. 
Sometimes as an old man, warming his feet at a fire, and 
drinking from a bowl ; though this type is generally reserved 


GOTHIC PALACES. O71 


for February. Spenser, however, gives the same symbol as 
that on St. Mark’s: 
‘‘Numbd with holding all the day 
An hatchet keene, wit’: \vhich he felled wood.” 

His sign, Aquarius, is obscurel; indicated in the archivolt 
by some wavy lines representing water, unless the figure has 
been broken away. 

2. Fepruary. Sitting in a carved chair, warming his bare feet 
at a blazing fire. Generally, when lc is thus represented, 
there is a pot hung over the firc, from the top of the chimney. 
Sometimes he is pruning trees, as in Spenser : 

“€'Yot had he by his side 
His plough and harncsse fit to till the ground, 
And tooles to prr-te the trees.” 

Not unfrequently, in the calendars, <413 month is represented 
by a female figure carrying candles, in honor of the Purifica- 
tion of the Virgin. 

His sign, Pisces, is promineni!y carved above him. 

3. Marcu. Here, as almost alway‘ Italy, a warrior: the 
Mars of the Latins being of course, in medizval work, made: 
representative of the military powcr of the place and period; 
and thus, at Venice, having the winged Lion painted upon 
his shield. In Northern work, however, I think March is 
commonly employed in pruninz trecs; or, at least, he is so 
when that occupation is left frco for him by February’s being . 
engaged with the ccremonies of Candlemas. Sometimes, also, 
he is reaping a low and scattered kind of grain; and by 
Spenser, who exactly marks the junction of medieval and 
classical feeling, his military and agricultural functions are 
united, while also, in the Latin manner, he is made the first of 
the months. 

‘* First sturdy March, with brows full sternly bent, 
And arméd strongly, rode upon a Ram, 
The same which over Hollospontus swam ; 
Yet in his hand a spade ho also hent, 


And in a bag all soris of seeds ysame, * 
Which on the earth ho strowed as he went.” 


* “6 Ysame,” coll ected together, 


272 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


His sign, the Ram, is very superbly carved above him ir 
the archivolt. 

4, Arrm Here, carrying a sheep upon his shoulder. A 
rare representation of him. In Northern work he is almost 
universally gathering flowers, or holding them triumphantly 
in each hand. The Spenserian mingling of this medieval 
image with that of his being wet with showers, and wanton 
with love, by turning his zodiacal sign, Taurus, into the bull 
of Kuropa, is altogether exquisite. 


“Upon a Bull he rode, the same which led 
Europa floating through the Argolick fluds: 
His horns were gilden all with golden studs, 
And garnishéd with garlonds goodly dight 
Of all the fairest flowres and freshest buds 
Which th’ earth brings forth ; and wet he seemed in sight 
With waves, through which he waded for his love’ s delight.” 


5. May is seated, while two young maidens crown him with 
flowers. Avery unusual representation, even in Italy ; where, 
.as in the North, he is almost always riding out hunting or 
hawking, sometimes playing on a musical instrument. In 
Spenser, this month is personified as ‘the fayrest mayd on 
ground,” borne on the shoulders of the Twins. 

In this archivolt there are only two heads to represent the 
zodiacal sign. 

The summer and autumnal months are always represented 
in a series of agricultural occupations, which, of course, vary 
with the locality in which they occur ; but genorally in their 
order only. Thus, if June is mowing, July is reaping ; if 
July is mowing, August is reaping; and so on. Ishall give 
a parallel view of some of these varieties presently ; but, mean- 
time, we had better follow the St. Mark’s series, as it is pecu- 
liar in some respects. 

6. Junr. Reaping. The corn and sickle sculptured with 
singular care and precision, in bold relief, and the zodiacal 
sign, the Crab, above, also worked with great spirit. Spenser 
puts plough irons into his hand. Sometimes he is sheep. 
shearing ; and, in English and northern French manuscripts, 


GOTHIC PALACES. 273 


carrying a kind of fagot or barrel, of the meaning of which I 
am not certain. 

7. Jury. Mowing. A very interesting piece of sculpture, 
owing to the care with which the flowers are wrought ctit 
among the long grass. Ido not remember ever finding July 
but either reaping or mowing. Spenser works him hard, and 
puts him to both labors : 


*¢ Behinde his backe a sithe, and by his side 
Under his belt he bore a sickle circling wide.” 


8. Avaust. Peculiarly represented in this archivolt, sitting 
ma cnawr, with his head upon his hand, as if asleep ; the Virgin 
(the zodiacal sign) above him, lifting up her hand. This ap- 
pears to bea peculiarly Italian version of the proper employ- 
ment of. August. In Northern countries he is generally 
threshing, or gathering grapes. Spenser merely clothes him 
with gold, and makes him lead forth 


“the righteous Virgin, which of old 
Lived here on earth, and plenty mado abound.” 


9. Sepremper. Bearing home grapes in a basket. Almost 
always sowing, in Northern work. By Spenser, with his 
usual exquisite ingenuity, employed in gathering in the 
general harvest, and portioning it out with the Scales, his 
zodiacal sign. 

10. Ocrozer. Wearing a conical hat, and digging busily with 
along spade. In Northern work he is sometimes a vintager, 
sometimes beating the acorns out of an oak to feed swine. 
When September is vintaging, October is generally sowing, 
Spenser employs him in the harvest both of vine and olive. 

11. Novemper. Seems to be catching small birds in a net, 
I do not remember him so employed elsewhere. He is nearly 
always killing pigs; sometimes beating the oak for them ; 
with Spenser, fatting them. 

12. Drcempnr, Killing swine. It is hardly ever that this 
employment is not given to one or other of the terminal 

Stones of Venice—Vol. II.—13 


274 THE STONES OF VENICE 


months of the year. If not so engaged, December is usually 
putting new loaves into the oven; sometimes killing oxen. 
Spenser properly makes him feasting and drinking instead of 
January. 

§ um. On the next page I have given a parallel view of the 
employment of the months from some Northern manuscripts, 
in order that they may be more conveniently compared with 
the sculptures of St. Mark’s, in their expression of the varie- 
ties of climate and agricultural system. Observe that the 
letter (f.) in some of the columns, opposite the month of May, 
means that he has a falcon on his fist; being, in those cases, 
represented as riding out, in high exultation, on a caparisoned 
white horse. A series nearly similar to that of St. Mark’s 
occurs on the door of the Cathedral of Lucca, and on that 
of the Baptistery of Pisa; in which, however, if I recollect 
rightly, February is fishing, and May has something resem- 
bling an umbrella in his hand, instead of a hawk. But, in all 
cases, the figures are treated with the peculiar spirit of the 
Gothic sculptors ; and this archivolt is the first expression of 
that spirit which is to be found in Venice. 

§ uv. In the private palaces, the entrances soon admitted 
some concession to the Gothic form also, They pass through 
nearly the same conditions of change as the windows, with 
these three differences : first, that no arches of the fantastic 
fourth order occur in any doorways ; secondly, that the pure 
pointed arch occurs earlier, and much oftener, in doorways 
than in window-heads ; lastly, that the entrance itself, if small, 
is nearly always square-headed in the earliest examples, with- 
out any arch above, but afterwards the arch is thrown across 
above the lintel. The interval between the two, or tympanum, 
is filled with sculpture, or closed by iron bars, with sometimes 
a projecting gable, to form a porch, thrown over the whole, as 
in the perfect example, 7 a, Plate XIV., above. The other 
examples in the two lower lines, 6 and 7, of that Plate are 
each characteristic of an enormous number of doors, variously 
decorated, from the thirteenth to the close of the fifteenth 
century. The particulars of their mouldings are given in the 
final Appendix. 


278 


GOTHIC PALACKS. 


‘OUpas Samy 


f (4 sode3) SuIsse1g 


“Yeo Suryveg 
Buitos 
“Zurdvay 
“SULMOTT 


“Surreays-deayg 


“UOTT[Id uo 


| APEL yItM Burpry, 


“‘SI9M0B ZuLtaqyey | 


“‘spuey SUIULIB AA 


“Suppeg 
‘OUIAS ZUTIST 
“sULMOog 
“Suryqsorqy, 
“surdvay 
“BUIMOPT 

"sjOsBy Burky 
"CD Burpy 


‘sulunig 


‘Suryeg 


*OUIMS Sar 


“dULMOg 


“Burqsery,y, 


‘auldvoy 


“SUIMOWy 


(4 8303e}) Surhireg 


“CP Surpry 


“‘SIOMOB Sulrey eH, 


*£mua9 q7u980qz1,7 


“surdvayy ‘soTpuyd Surki1ep ‘suranig 
"qeoy Suyure *se[puvo Sutrveg 
“BUT48¥0,7 ‘duTjsvoy snuer “qe03 Suture 
| 
*£inqueg *Aanquag 
GyueejInoy Apreq Giaezmog Apres 
“"Ushbug “Sy “YOUadT “Sg 


“YSIWALT “SHE 


“uexo SUIT 
‘OUIAS SUIT DY 
“SulMog 
“OUT Suryuq 
“surldvay 
“SUIMOYT 

*SIDMOD 
pelesrey SULIayey 
“UT[OIA Uo Burkelg 
‘SHOMOP Surraqyey 
‘OxX8 TIM SuryLyg 
“‘sulanIg 


‘oly Surt 
“AHS pus suryurig 


SS 


*Ainquap 
Yeo, aqery 
“‘UuadT Sat 


“aul “OUIMS SuTTTTY!  ‘ourms Sur! ° *“HHaNAO gE 
‘OUrTMS Su Ty “yeosuryvog “Spaiq Suryoqen|-*~ “aa TAO pT 
“480 Suryeog) -soders SuLeyiey “BULS3Iq)|**-- ++ aTLOLIO 
“SULMOg “SULMOG] ‘gsode13 surd1ep)|** waa NaLagg 
‘sedvia Sujreyyey “SulyseIy, “daajsy|***+:: isoony 
“surdvay “surdvayy “BUIMOPT| “+++ 7 +--+ *“KIn¢ 
“SUIMOTT “SUTMO,y “‘Burdvoyy]*<++-++-- TNoPe 
“sIaMOP 
‘CY Surpryz (3) Sarpry/ma poutmory|s sss zVW 
“SIOMOD Suy10y724 ‘SIOMOD SuLlayye5 ‘deeys Surfirep]} +--+ +--+ T1uay 
“BurunIg ‘Burunig) rem 04 Suton]: ------ HOUVyL 
“J00} Sule A ‘Joey SuTULIE A, “Qe0y Suture yA | °° “AuVOugay 
“SUTlsvoy snuep “SuTQsBey Snuve) “poom Surfarep|*::-- AaVONVE 
ae i a ee ee 
*£anquay “£anqueg 
WIUseWIYT, aqey YqmeeWYyT, eqery SOV “tg 
“YOU2adT “SW “YOUadT “ST 
—— 


276 THE STONERS OF VENICE. 


§ xv. It was useless, on the small scale of this Plate, te 
attempt any delineation of the richer sculptures with which 
the arches are filled ; so that I have chosen for it the simplest 
examples I could find of the forms to be illustrated : but, in 
all the more important instances, the door-head charged 
either with delicate ornaments and inlaid pattern} 12 varlous- 
ly colored brick, or with sculptures, consisting alwdYS of the 
shield or crest of the family, protected by an angel. Of these 
more perfect doorways I have given three examples cacefully, 
in my folio work; but I must repeat here one part of th 2 
count of their subjects given in its text, for the convenienco® of 
those to whom the larger work may not be accessible. “h 

§ tvz. “In the earlier ages,.all agree thus far, that the nama 
of the family is told, and together with it there is always ant 
intimation that they have placed their defence and their pros- 
perity in God’s hands ; frequently accompanied with some 
general expression of benediction to the person passing over 
che threshold. This is the general theory of an old Venetian 
doorway ;—the theory of modern doorways remains to be ex- 
plained : it may be studied to advantage in our rows of new- 
built houses, or rather of new-built house, changeless for miles 
together, from which, to each inhabitant, we allot his proper 
quantity of windows, and a Doric portico. The Venetian 
carried out his theory very simply. In the centre of the 
archivolt we find almost invariably, in the older work, the 
hand between the sun and moon in the attitude of blessing, 
expressing the general power and presence of God, the source 
of light. On the tympanum is the shield of the family. Vene- 
tian heraldry requires no beasts for supporters, but usually 
prefers angels, neither the supporters nor crests forming any 
necessary part of Venetian bearings. Sometimes, however, 
human figures, or grotesques, are substituted ; but, in that 
case, an angel is almost always introduced above the shield, 
bearing a globe in his left hand, and therefore clearly intended 
for the ‘ Angel of the Lord,’ or, as it is expressed elsewhere, 
the ‘Angel of His Presence.’ Where elaborate sculpture of 
this kind is inadmissible, the shield is merely represented as 
suspended by a leather thong ; and a cross is introduced above 


GOTHIC PALACES. QU7 


the archivolt. The Renaissance architects perceived the irra- 
tionality of all this, cut away both crosses and angels, and 
substituted heads of satyrs, which were the proper presiding 
deities of Venice in the Renaissance periods, and which in our 
own domestic institutions, we have ever since, with much piety 
and sagacity, retained.” 

§ivu. The habit of employing some religious symbol, or 
writing some religious legend, over the door of the house, 
does not entirely disappear until far into the period of the 
Renaissance. The words “ Peace be to this house” occur on 
one side of a Veronese gateway, with the appropriate and 
veracious inscription S.P.Q.R., on a Roman standard, on the 
other ; and ‘‘ Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the 
Lord,” is written on one of the doorways of a building added 
at the flank of the Casa Barbarigo, in the sixteenth or seven- 
teenth century. It seems to be only modern Protestantism 
which is entirely ashamed of all symbols and wens: that ap- 
pear in anywise like a confession of faith. 

§ tvur. This peculiar feeling is well worthy of aitontite 
analysis. It indeed, in most cases, hardly deserves the name 
of a feeling ; for the meaningless doorway is merely an ig- 
norant copy of heathen models: but yet, if it were at this 
moment proposed to any of us, by our architects, to remove 
the grinning head of a satyr, or other classical or Palladian 
ornament, from the keystone of the door, and to substitute 
for it a cross, and an inscription testifying our faith, I believe 
that most persons would shrink from the proposal with an 
obscure and yet overwhelming sense that things would be 
sometimes done, and thought, within the house which would 
make the inscription on its gate a base hypocrisy. And if so, 
let us look to it, whether that strong reluctance to utter a 
definite religious profession, which so many of us feel, and 
which, not very carefully examining into its dim nature, we 
conclude to be modesty, or fear of hypocrisy, or other such 
form of amiableness, be not, in very deed, neither less nor 
more than In‘idelity ; whether Peter’s ‘I know not the man” 
be not the sum and substance of all these misgivings and hesi- 
tations ; and whether the shamefacedness which we attribute 


278 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


to sincerity and reverence, be not such shamefacedness as may 
at last put us among those of whom the Son of Man shall be 
ashamed. 

§ ux. Such are the principal circumstances to be noted in 
the external form and details of the Gothic palaces ; of their 
interior arrangements there is little left unaltered. The gate- 
ways which we have been examining almost universally lead, 
in the earlier palaces, into a long interior court, round which 
the mass of the palace is built ; and in which its first story is 
reached by a superb external staircase, sustained on four or 
five pointed arches gradually increasing as they ascend, both 
in height and span,—this change in their size being, so far as 
I remember, peculiar to Venice, and visibly a consequence of 
the habitual admission of arches of different sizes in the By- ° 
zantine fagades. These staircases are protected by exquisitely 
carved parapets, like those of the outer balconies, with lions 
or grotesque heads set on the angles, and with true projecting 
balconies on their landing-places. In the centre of the court 
there is always a marble well ; and these wells furnish some 
of the most superb examples of Venetian sculpture. I am 
aware only of one remaining from the Byzantine period ; it is 
octagonal, and treated like the richest of our Norman fonts : 
but the Gothic wells of every date, from the thirteenth cen- 
tury downwards, are innumerable, and full of beauty, though 
their form is little varied ; they being, in almost every case, 
treated like colossal capitals of pillars, with foliage at the 
angles, and the shield of the family upon their sides. 

§ tx. The interior apartments always consist of one noble 
hall on the first story, often on the second also, extending 
across the entire depth of the house, and lighted in front by 
the principal groups of its windows, while smaller apartments 
open from it on either side. The ceilings, where they remain 
untouched, are of bold horizontal beams, richly carved and 
gilded ; but few of these are left from the true Gothic times, 
the Venetian interiors having, in almost every case, been re- 
modelled by the Renaissance architects. This change, how- 
ever, for once, we cannot regret, as the walls and ceilings, 
when so altered, were covered with the noblest works of 


THE DUCAL PALACK 279 


Veronese, Titian, and Tintoret ; nor the interior walls only, 
but, as before noticed, often the exteriors also. Of the color 
decorations of the Gothic exteriors I have, therefore, at. pres- 
ent taken no notice, as it will be more convenient to embrace 
this subject in one general view of the systems of coloring 
of the Venetian palaces, when we arrive at the period of its 
richest development.* The details, also, of most interest, re- 
specting the forms and transitional decoration of their capi- 
tals, will be given in the final Appendix to the next volume, 
where we shall be able to include in our inquiry the whole 
extent of the Gothic period ; and it remains for us, therefore, 
at present, only to review the history, fix the date, and note 
the most important particulars in the structure of the build- 
‘ing which at once consummates and embodies the entire sys- 
tem of the Gothic architecture of Venice,—the Ducat Patace 


CHAPTER VIL 
THE DUCAL PALACE. 


§ 1. Ir was stated in the commencement of the preceding 
chapter that the Gothic art of Venice was separated by the 
building of the Ducal Palace into two distinct periods ; and 
that in all the domestic edifices which were raised for half a 
century after its completion, their characteristic and chiefly 
effective: portions were more or less directly copied from it. 
The fact is, that the Ducal Palace was the great work of 
Venice at this period, itself the principal effort of her imag- 
ination, employing her best architects in its masonry, and her 
best painters in its decoration, for a long series of years ; 
and we must receive it as a remarkable testimony to the in- 
fluence which it possessed over the minds of those who saw it 
- in its progress, that, while in the other cities of Italy every 
palace and chureh was rising in some original and daily more 

*Vol. III. Chap. I. I have had considerable difficulty in the arrange- 


ynent of these volumes, so as to get the points bearing upon each other 
grouped in consecutive and intelligible order. 


980 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


daring form, the majesty of this single building was able te 
give pause to the Gothic imagination in its full career ; stayed 
the restlessness of innovation in an instant, and forbade the 
powers which had created it thenceforth to exert themselves 
in new directions, or endeavor to summon an image more 
attractive. 

§ u. The reader will hardly believe that while the architect- 
ural invention of the Venetians was thus lost, Narcissus-like, 
mm self-contemplation, the various accounts of the progress of 
the building thus admired and beloved are so confused as 
frequently to leave it doubtful to what portion of the palace 
they refer ; and that there is actually, at the time being, a 
dispute between the best Venetian antiquaries, whether the 
main fagade of the palace be of the fourteenth or fifteenth © 
century. The deter»ination of this question is of course 
necessary before we proceed to draw any conclusions from 
the style of the we+k ; and it cannot be determined without a 
careful review of the entire history of the palace, and of all 
the documents “lating to it. I trust that this review may 
not be found /edious,—assuredly it will not be fruitless,— 
bringing mau; facts before us, singularly illustrative of the 
Venetian shsracter. 

§ m1. Pefore, however, the reader can enter upon any in- 
quiry ito the history of this building, it is necessary that.he 
should be thoroughly familiar with the arrangement and names 
of its principal parts, as it at present stands ; otherwise he can. 
not comprehend so much as a single sentence of any of the 
documents referring to it. I must do what I can, by the help 
of a rough plan and bird's-eye view, to give him the necessary 
topographical knowledge : 

Fig. XXXVI. opposite is a rude ground plan of the pula! 
ings ars St. Mark’s Place ; and the following references wil! 
elearly explain their relative positions : 


A. St. Mark’s Place. 

B. Piazzetta, 

P. V. Procuratie Vecchie. 

P. N. (opposite) Procuratie Naove, 
e. L. Libreria Veechia. 


THH DUCAL PALACE. 981 


I. Piazzetta de’ Leoni. 

T. Tower of St. Mark. 

FF. Great Fa:ade of St. Mark’s Church. 

M. St. Mark’s. (it isso united with the Ducal Palace, that the separa 
tion cannot be indicated in the plan, unless all the walls had 
been marked, which would have confused the whole.) 


DDD. Ducal Palace. gs. Giant’s stair. 
C. Court of Ducal Palace. J. Judgment angle. 
c. Porta della Carta a, Fig-tree angle. 


pp. Ponte delia Paglia (Bridge of Straw). 
S. Ponte de’ Sospiri (Bridge of Sighs). 
RR. Riva de’ Schiavoni. 


The reader will observe that the Ducal Palace is arranged 
somewhat in the form of a hollow square, of which one side 
faces the Piazzetta, B, and another the quay called the Riva 
de’ Schiayoni, R BR; the third is on the dark canal called the 
“ Rio del Palazzo,” and the fourth joins the Church of St. Mark. 

Of this fourth side, therefore, nothing can be seen. Of the 
other three sides we shall have to speak constartiy ; and they 
will be respectively called, that towards the Piazzetta, the 
“ Piazzetta Facade ;” that towards the Riva de’ Szbiavoni, the 
“Sea Facade ;” and that towards the Rio cel Palazzo, the 
“Rio Fagade.” This Rio, or canal, is usually looked upon by 
the traveller with great respect, or even horror, because it 
passes under the Bridge of Sighs. It is, owever, one of the 
principal thoroughfares of the city ; and the bridge and its 
canal together occupy, in the mind of a Venetian, very much 
the position of Fleet Street and Temple Bar in that of a Lon- 
doner,—at least, at the time when Temple Bar was occasionally © 
decorated with human heads. The two buildings closely re- 
seinble each other in form. 

§ 1v. We must now proceed to obtain some rough idea of 
the appearance and distribution of the palace itself; but its 
arrangement will be better understood by supposiny vurselves 
raised some hundred and fifty feet above the point in the 
lagoon in front of it, so as to get a general view of the Sea 
Facade and Rio Favade (the latter in very steep perspective), 
and to look down into its interior court. Fig. XXX VIL roughly 
represents such a view, omitting all deta Js on the roofs, in order 


982 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


to avoid confusion. In this drawing we have merely to ni-tice 
that, of the two bridges seen on the right, the uppermost, 
above the black canal, is the Bridge of Sighs; the lower one 
is the Ponte della Paglia, the regular thoroughfare from quay 
to quay, and, I believe, called the Bridge of Straw, because 
the boats which brought straw from the mainland used to seli 
it at this place. The corner of the palace, rising above this 
bridge, and formed by the meeting of the Sea Fagade and Rio 
Facade, will always be called the Vine angle, because it is dec- 
orated by a sculpture of the drunkenness of Noah. The angle 
opposite will be called the Fig-tree angle, becanse it is dec- 
orated by a sculpture of the Fall of Man. The long and nar- 
row range of building, of which the roof is seen in perspective 
behind this angle, is the part of the palace fronting the Piaz- 
zetta ; and the angle under the pinnacle most to the left of 
the two which terminate it will be called, for a reason pres- 
ently to be stated, the Judgment angle. Within the square 
formed by the building is seen its interior court (with one of 
its wells), terminated by small and fantastic buildings of the 
Renaissance period, which face the Giant’s Stair, of which the 
extremity is seen sloping down on the left. 

§ v. The great facade which fronts the spectator looks south- 
ward. Hence the two traceried windows lower than the rest, 
and to the right of the spectator, may be conveniently distin- 
guished as the “ Hastern Windows.” ‘There are two others 
like them, filled with tracery, and at the same level, which 
look upon the narrow canal between the Ponte della Paglia 
and the Bridge of Sighs: these we may conveniently call the 
“Canal Windows.” The reader will observe a vertical line in 
this dark side of the palace, separating its nearer and plainer 
wall from a long four-storied range of rich architecture. This 
more distant range is entirely Renaissance: its extremity is 
not indicated, because I have no accurate sketch of the small 
buildings ancl bridges beyond it, and we shall have nothing 
whatever to do with this part of the palace in our present in- 
quiry. The nearer and undecorated wall is part of the older 
palace, though much defaced by modern opening of common 
windows, refittings of the brickwork, Xe. 


THK DUCAL. PALACE. 283 


_ § vt It will be observed that the facade is composed of a 
smooth mass of wall, sustained on two tiers of pillars, one 
above the other. The manner in which these support the 
whole fabric will be understood at once by the rough section, 
fig. XX XVII., which is supposed to be taken 
right through the palace to the interior court, 
from near the middle of the Sea Facade. 
Here a and d are the rows of shafts, both in 
the inner court and on the Fagade, which 
carry the main walls; 6, care solid walls 
variously strengthened with pilasters. A, B, 
C are the three stories of the interior of the @ & ca 
palace. Fig, XXXVIII. 

The reader sees that itis impossible for any plan to be 
more simple, and that if the inner floors and walls of the stories” 
A, B were removed, there would be left merely the form of a 
basilica,—two high walls, carried on ranges of shafts, and 
roofed by a low gable. 

The stories A, B are entirely modernized, and divided into 
confused ranges of small apartments, among which what ves- 
tiges remain of ancient masonry are entirely undecipherable, 
except by investigations such as I have had neither the time 
nor, as in most cases they would involve the removal of mod- 
ern plastering, the opportunity, to make. With the subdivi- 
sions of this story, therefore, I shall not trouble the reader ; 
but those of the great upper story, C, are highly important. 

§ vu. In the bird’s-eye view above, fig. XXXVIL, it will be 
noticed that the two windows on the right are lower than the 
other four of the fagade. In this arrangement there is one of 
the most remarkable instances I know of the daring sacrifice 
of symmetry to convenience, which was noticed in Chap. VIL 
as one of the chief noblenesses of the Gothic schools. 

The part of the palace in which the two lower windows 
occur, we shall find, was first built, and arranged in four stories 
in order to obtain the necessary number of apartments. Owing 
to circumstances, of which we shall presently give an account, 
it became necessary, in the beginning of the fourteenth cen- 
tury, to provide another large and magnificent chamber for 


284 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


the meeting of the senate. That chamber was added at the 
side of the older building ; but, as only one room was wanted, 
there was no need to divide the added portion into two sto- 
ries. The entire height was given to the single chamber, 
being indeed not too great for just harmony with its enor- 
mous length and breadth. And then came the question how 
to place the windows, whether on a line with the two others, 
or above them. 

The ceiling of the new room was to be adorned by the 
paintings of the best masters in Venice, and it became of 
great importance to raise the light near that gorgeous roof, as 
well as to keep the tone of illumination in the Council Cham- 
ber serene; and therefore to introduce light rather in simple 
masses than in many broken streams. A modern architect, 
terrified at the idea of violating external symmetry, would 
have sacrificed both the pictures and the peace of the council. 
He would have placed the larger windows at the same level 
with the other two, and have introduced above them smaller 
windows, like those of the upper story in the older building, 
as if that upper story had been continued along the fagade. 
But the old Venetian thought of the. honor of the paintings, 
and the comfort of the senate, before his own reputation. 
He unhesitatingly raised the large windows to their proper 
position with reference to the interior of the chamber, and 
suffered the external appearance to take care of itself. And 
I believe the whole pile rather gains than loses in effect by 
the variation thus obtained in the spaces of wall above and 
below the windows. 

§ vir. On the party wall, between the second and third 
windows, which faces the eastern extremity of the Great 
Council Chamber, is painted the Paradise of Tintoret ; and 
this wall will therefore be hereafter called the ‘“‘ Wall of the 
Paradise.” 

In nearly the centre of the Sea Facade, and between the 
first and second windows of the Great Council Chamber, is a 
large window to the ground, opening on a balcony, which is 
one of the chief ornaments of the palace, and will be called 
in future the “Sea Balcony.” 


THE DUCAL PALACH. 285 


The facade which looks on the Piazetta is very nearly like 
this to the Sea, but the greater part of it was built in the 
fifteenth century, when people had become studious of their 
symmetries. Its side windows are all on the same level. 
Two light the west end of the Great Council Chamber, one 
lights a small room anciently called the Quarantia Civil 
Nuova; the other three, and the central one, with a balcony 
like that to the Sea, light another large chamber, called Sala 
del Scrutinio, or “Hall of Enquiry,” which extends to the 
extremity of the palace above the Porta della Carta. 

§ rx. The reader is now well enough acquainted with the 
topography of the existing building, to be able to follow the 
accounts of its history. 

We have seen above, that there were three principal styles 
of Venetian architecture ; Byzantine, Gothic, and Renaissance. 

The Ducal Palace, which was the great work of Venice, 
was built successively in the three styles. There was a By- 
zantine Ducal Palace, a Gothic Ducal Palace, and a Renais- 
sance Ducal Palace. The second superseded the first totally ; 
a few stones of it (if indeed so much) are all that is left. But 
the third superseded the second in part only, and the exist 
ing building is formed by the union of the two. 

We shall review the history of each in succession.* 

1st. The Byzantine Patace. 

-In the year of the death of Charlemagne, 813,} the Vene- 


* The reader will find it convenient to note the following editions of 
the printed books which have been principally consulted in the follow« 
{ng inquiry. The numbers of the manuscripts referred to in the Mar 
eian Library are given with the quotations. 


Sansovino. Venetia Descritta. 4to, Venice, 1663. 

Sansovino. Lettera intorno al Palazzo Ducale. 8vo, Venice, 1829, 
Temanza. Antica Pianta di Venezia, with text. Venice, 1780, 
Cadorin. Pareri di XV. Architetti. S8vo, Venice, i888. 

Filiasi. femorie storiche. 8vo, Padua, 1811. 

Bettio. Lettera discorsiva del Palazzo Ducale. 8vo, Venice, 1887. 
Selvatico. Architettura di Venezia. 8vo, Venice, 1847. 


} The year commonly given is 810, as in the Savina Chronicle (Cod. 
Marcianus), p. 18. ‘‘ Del 810 fece principiar el pallazzo Ducal nel lnoge 


286 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


tians determined to make the island of Rialto the seat of the 
government and capital of their state. ‘Their Doge, Angelo 
or Agnello Participazio, instantly took vigorous means for the 
enlargement of the small group of buildings which were to 
be the nucleus of the future Venice. He appointed persons — 
to superintend the raising of the banks of sand, so as to form 
more secure foundations, and to build wooden bridges over 
the canals. For the offices of religion, he built the Church 
of St. Mark ; and on, or near, the spot where the Ducal Palace 
now stands, he built a palace for the administration of the 
government.* 

The history of the Ducal Palace therefore begins with the 
birth of Venice, and to what remains of it, at this day, is en- 
trusted the last representation of her power. 

§ x. Of the exact position and form of this palace of Par- 
ticipazio little is ascertained. Sansovino says that if was 
“built near the Ponte della Paglia, and answeringly on the 
Grand Canal,” + towards San Giorgio ; that is to say, in the 
place now occupied by the Sea Facade ; but this was merely 


ditto Bruolo in confin di 8S. Moisé, et fece riedificar la isola di Eraclia.” 
The Sagornin Chronicle gives 804; and Filiasi, vol. vi. chap. 1, corrects 
this date to 813. 

* “ Amplio la citta, fornilla di casamenti, e per il culto @ Iddioe? am- 
ministrazione della giustizia eresse la cappella di S. Marco, c il palazzo di 
sua residenza.’’—Pareri, p. 120. Observe, that piety towards God, and 
justice towards man, have becn at least the nominal purposes of every 
act and institution of ancient Venice. Compare also Temanza, p. 24. 
‘*Quello che abbiamo di certo si ¢ che il suddetto Agnello lo incomincid 
da fondamenti, e cost pure la cappella ducale di S. Marco.” 

+ What I call the Sea, was called ‘‘the Grand Canal” by the Vene- 
tians, as well as the great water street of the city ; but I prefer ealling. 
it ‘‘the Sea,” in order to distinguish betweon that street and the broad 
water in front of the Ducal Palace, which, interrupted only by the isl- 
and of San Giorgio, stretches for many milos to the south, and for more 
than two to the boundary of the Lido. It was the deeper channel, just 
in front of the Ducal Palace, continuing the line of the great water 
street itself which the Venetians spoke of as ‘‘ the Grand Canal.” The 
words of Sansovino are: ‘‘ Fu cominciato dove si vede, vicino al ponte 
della paglia, et rispondente sul canal grande.” Filiasi says simply: 
‘“The palace was built where it now is.” ‘‘ Il palazio fu fatto dove ora 


THE DUCAL PALACE, ° 282 


the popular report of his day. We know, however, positively, 
that it was somewhere upon the site of the existing palace; 
and that it had an important front towards the Piazzetta, with 
which, as we shall see hereafter, the present palace at one 
period was incorporated. We know, also, that it was a pile of 
some magnificence, from the account given by Sagornino of 
the visit paid by the Emperor Otho the Great, to the Doge 
Pietro Orseolo II. The chronicler says that the Emperor 
“beheld carefully all the beauty of the palace ;”* and the 
Venetian historians express pride in the building’s being 
worthy of an emperor’s examination. This was after the 
palace had been much injured by fire in the revolt against 
Candiano IV.,+ and just repaired, and richly adorned by Or- 
.seolo himself, who is spoken of by Sagornino as having also 
“adorned the chapel of the Ducal Palace” (St. Mark’s) with 
ornaments of marble and gold.{ There can be no doubt 
whatever that the palace at this period resembled and im- 
pressed the other Byzantine edifices of the city, such as the 


pure esiste.”—Vol. iii. chap. 27. The SavinaChronicle, already quoted, 
says: ‘‘In the place called the Bruolo (or Broglio), that is to say, on the 
Piazzetta.” 

* «¢ Omni decoritate illius perlustrata.” —Sagornino, quoted by Cadorin 
and Temanza. 

+ There is an interesting account of this revolt in Monaci, p. 68. 
Some historians speak of the palace as having been destroyed entirely ; 
but, that it did not even need important restorations, appears from, Sag- 
ornino’s expression, quoted by Cadorin and Temanza. Speaking of the 
Doge Participazio, he says: ‘ Qui Palatii hucusque manentis fuerit fab- 
ricator.’”’ The reparations of the palace are usually attributed to the 
successor of Candiano, Pietro Orseolo I.; but the legend, under the 
picture of that Doge in the Council Chamber, speaks only of his rebuild- 
ing St. Mark’s, and ‘‘ performing many miracles.” His whole mind 
seems to have been occupied with ecclesiastical affairs; and his piety 
was finally manifested in a way somewhat startling to the state, by his 
absconding with a French priest to St. Michael’s, in Gascony, and 
there becoming a monk, What repairs, therefore, were necessary to the 
Ducal Palace, were left to be undertaken by his son, Orseolo II., above 
named. 

t ‘‘ Quam non modo marmoreo, verum aureo compsit ornamento,’’— 
Lemanza, p. 25. 


288 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


Fondaco de Turchi, &c., whose remains have been already de« 
scribed ; and that, like them, it was covered with sculpture, 
and richly adorned with gold and color. 

§ x1. In the year 1106, it was for the second time injured 
by fire,* but repaired before 1116, when it received another 
emperor, Henry V. (of Germany), and was again honored by 
imperial praise.t Between 1173 and the close of the century, 
it seems to have been again repaired and much enlarged by 
the Doge Sebastian Ziani. Sansovino says that this Doge 
not only repaired it, but “enlarged it in every direction ;” f 
and, after this enlargement, the palace seems to have re- 
mained untouched for a hundred years, until, in the com- 
mencement of the fourteenth century, the works of the 
Gothic Palace were begun. As, therefore, the old Byzantine. 
building was, at the time when those works first interfered 
with it, in the form given to it by Ziani, I shall hereafter al- 
ways speak of it as the Zant Palace; and this the rather, 
because the only chronicler whose words are perfectly clear 
respecting the existence of part of this palace so late as the 
year 1422, speaks of it as built by Ziani. The old “ palace, 
of which half remains to this day, was built, as we now see 
it, by Sebastian Ziani.” § 

So far, then, of the Byzantine Palace. 

§ xu. 2nd. The Gorstc Patacz. The reader, doubtless, 
recollects that the important change in the Venetian govern- 
ment which gave stability to the aristocratic power took place 


* “T?anno 1106, uscito fuoco d’una casa privata, arse parte del pa: 
lazzo.”—Sansovino. Of the beneficial effect of these fires, vide Cadorin, 
p. 121, 123. 

+ ‘‘ Urbis situm, «dificiorum decorem, et regiminis exquitatem multi: 
pliciter commendavit.”—Cronaca Dandolo, quoted by Cadorin. 

¢ ‘‘ Non solamente rinov6 il palazzo, ma lo aggrandi per ogni verso.” 

-Sansovino. Zanotto quotes the Altinat Chronicle for account of these 
rapairs. ; 

& “El palazzo che anco di mezzo se vede vecchio, per M. Sebastian 
Ziani fu fatto compir, come el se vede.”— Chronicle of Pietro Dolfino, 
Cod. Ven. p. 47. This Chronicle is spoken of by Sansovino as ‘‘ moltg 
particolare e distinta.”—Sansovino, Venesw descritta, p. 593.—lt ter- 
minates in the year 1422, 


THE DUCAL PALACE. 49 


about the year 1297,* under the Doge Pietro Gradenigo, a 
man thus characterized by Sansovino :—‘ A prompt and pru- 
dent man, of unconquerable determination and great. elo- 
quence, who laid, so to speak, the foundations of the eternity 
of this republic, by the admirable regulations which he intro- 
duced into the government.” 

We may now, with some reason, doubt of their admirable- 
uess; but their importance, and the vigorous will and intel- 
lect of the Doge, are not to be disputed. Venice was in the 
zenith of her strength, and the heroism of her citizens was 
displaying itself in every quarter of the world.t The acqui- 
ascence in the secure establishment of the aristocratic power 
was an expression, by the people, of respect for the families 
which had been chiefly instrumental in raising the common- 
wealth to such a height of prosperity. 

The Serrar del Consiglio fixed the numbers of the Senate 
within certain limits, and it conferred upon them a dignity 
greater than they had ever before possessed. It was natural 
that the alteration in the character of the assembly should be 
attended by some change in the size, arrangement, or decora- 
tion of the chamber in which they sat. 

We accordingly find it recorded by Sansovino, that ‘in 
1301 another saloon was begun on the Rio del Palazzo, under 
the Doge Gradenigo, and finished in 1309, in which year the 
Grand Council first sat in it.” ~ In the first year, therefore, 
of the fourteenth century, the Gothic Ducal Palace of Venice 
was begun; and as the Byzantine Palace was, in its founda- 
tion, coeval with that of the state, so the Gothic Palace was, 
in its foundation, coeval with that of the aristocratic power. 
Considered as the principal representation of the Venetian 
school of architecture, the Ducal Palace is the Parthenon of 
Venice, and Gradenigo its Pericles. 

§ xu. Sansovino, with a caution very frequent among Ve- 
netian historians, when alluding to events connected with the 
Serrar del Consiglio, does not specially mention the cause for 


* See Vol. I. Appendix 3. 
+ Vide Sansovino’s enumeration of those who flourished in the reign 
of Gradenigo, p. 564. + Sansovino, 324, 1, : 
Vou, I,—19 


290 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


the requirement of the new chamber ; but the Sivos Chronicle 
is a little more distinct in expression. ‘‘In 1301, it was deter- 
mined to build a great saloon for the assembling of the Great 
Council, and the room was built which is now called the Sala 
del Scrutinio.” * Now, thatis to say, at the time when the 
Sivos Chronicle was written ; the room has long ago been 
destroyed, and its name given to another chamber on the op- 
posite side of the palace: but I wish the reader to remember 
the date 1301, as marking the commencement of a great archi- 
tectural epoch, in which took place the first appliance of the 
energy of the aristocratic power, and of the Gothic style, to 
the works of the Ducal Palace. The operations then begun 
were continued, with hardly an interruption, during the whole 
period of the prosperity of Venice. We shall see the new 
buildings consume, and take the place of, the Ziani Palace, 
piece by piece: and when the Ziani Palace was destroyed, 
they fed upon themselves; being continued round the square, 
until, in the sixteenth century, they reached the point where 
they had been begun in the fourteenth, and pursued the track 
they had then followed some distance beyond the junction ; 
destroying or hiding their own commencement, as the serpent, 
which is the type of eternity, conceals its tail in its jaws. 

§ xiv. We cannot, therefore, see the extremity, wherein lay 
the sting and force of the whole creature,—the chamber, namely, 
built by the Doge Gradenigo ; but the reader must keep that 
commencement and the date of it carefully in his mind. The 
body of the Palace Serpent will soon become visible to us. 

The Gradenigo Chamber was somewhere on the Rio Fagade, 


* “1301 fu presa parte di fare una sala grande per la riduzione de. 
gran consiglio, e fu fatta quella che ora si chiama dello Serutinio.”— 
Cronaca Sivos, quoted by Cadorin. There is another most interesting 
entry in the Chronicle of Magno, relating to this event ; but the passage 
is so ill written, that I am not sure if I have deciphered it correctly :— 
“ Del 1801 fu preso de fabrichar la sala fo ruina e fu fata (fatta) quella 
ge adoperava a far el pregadi e fu adopera per far el Gran Consegio fin 
1423, che fu anni 122.” This last sentence, which is of great imporr 
tance, is luckily unmistakable :—‘‘ The room was used for the meetings 
of the Great Council until 1428, that is to say, for 122 years.”—Cod 
Ven. tom, i, p. 126. The chronicle extends from 1253 to 1454. 


THE DUCAL PALACR. 991 


behind the present position of the Bridge of Sighs; 1.e. about 
the point marked on the roof by the dotted lines in the wood- 
cut ; it is not known whether low or high, but probably on a 
first story. The great fagade of the Ziani Palace being, as 
above mentioned, on the Piazzetta, this chamber was as far 
back and out of the way as possible ; secrecy and security 
being obviously the points first considered. 

§ xv. But the newly constituted Senate had need of other 
additions to the ancient palace besides the Council Chamber. 
A short, but most significant, sentence is added to Sansovino’s 
account of the construction of that room. ‘There were, neur 
it,” he says, “the Cancellaria, and the Gheba or Gabbia, after- 
wards called the Little Tower.” * 

Gabbia means a “cage ;” and there can be no question 
that certain apartments were at this time added at the top of 
the palace and on the Rio Facade, which were to be used as 
prisons. Whether any portion of the old Torresella still re- 
mains is a doubtful question ; but the apartments at the top 
of the palace, in its fourth story, were still used for prisons 
as late as the beginning of the seventeenth century.t I wish 
the reader especially to notice that a separate tower or range 
of apartments was built for this purpose, in order to clear 
the government of the accusations so constantly made against 
them, by ignorant or partial historians, of wanton cruelty 
to prisoners. The stories commonly told respecting the 
“piombi” of the Ducal Palace are utterly false. Instead of 
being, as usually reported, small furnaces under the leads of 
the palace, they were comfortable rooms, with good flat roofs 
of larch, and carefully ventilated.{ The new chamber, then, 


* “Vi era appresso la Cancellaria, e la Gheba o Gabbia, chiamata poi 
Torresella.”—P. 324. A small square tower is seen above the Vine angle 
in the view of Venice dated 1500, and attributed to Albert Durer. It ap- 
pears about 25 feet square, and is very probably the Torresella in question. 

+ Vide Bettio, Lettera, p. 28. 

t Bettio, Lettera, p. 20. ‘*Those who wrote without having seen 
them described them as covered with lead ; and those who have seen 
them know that, between their flat timber roofs and the sloping leaden 
roof of the palace, the interval is five metres where it is least, and nine 
where it is greatest.” 


292 THE STONES OF Vi#NICE. 


and the prisons, being built, the Great Council first sat 18 
their retired chamber on the Rio in the year 1309. 

§ xvi Now, observe the significant progress of events, 
They had no sooner thus established themselves in power 
than they were disturbed by the conspiracy of the Tiepolos, 
in the year 1310. In consequence of that conspiracy the 
Council of Ten was created, still under the Doge Gradenigo ; 
who, having finished his work and left the aristocracy of Ven- 
ice armed with this terrible power, died in the year 1312, 
some say by poison. He was succeeded by the Doge Marino 
Giorgio, who reigned only one year ; and then followed the 
prosperous government of John Soranzo. There is no men- 
tion of any additions to the Ducal Palace during his reign, 
but he was succeeded by that Francesco Dandolo, the sculpt- 
ures on whose tomb, still existing in the cloisters of the 
Salute, may be compared by any traveller with those of the 
Ducal Palace. Of him it is recorded in the Savina Chronicle: 
“This Doge also had the great gate built which is at the entry 
of the palace, above which is his statue kneeling, with the gon- 
falon in hand, before the feet of the Lion of St. Mark’s.” * 

§ xvu. It appears, then, that after the Senate had com- 
pleted their Council Chamber and the prisons, they required 
a nobler door than that of the old Ziani Palace for their Mag- 
nificences to enter by. This door is twice spoken of in the 
government accounts of expenses, which are fortunately pre- 
served,+ in the following terms :— 


* 1335, June 1. We, Andrew Dandolo and Mark Loredano, 
procurators of St. Mark’s, have paid to Martin the stone- 
cutter and his’ associates$ . . . . for a stone of 
which the lion is made which is put over the gate of the 
palace,” 


* “Questo Dose anche fese far la porta granda che se al intrar del 
Pallazzo, in su la qual vi e la sua statua che sta in zenocchioni conlo 
confalon in man, davanti li pie de lo Lion 8. Marco.”—Sawin Chronicle, 
Cod. Ven p. 120. 

+ These documents I have not examined myself, being satisfied of Ate 
accuracy of Cadorin, from whom I take the passages quoted. 

t ‘* Libras tres, soldos 15 grossorum.”—Cadorin, 189, 1. 


THE DUCAL PALACE. 293 


* 1344, November 4. We have paid thirty-five golden ducata 
for making gold leaf, to gild the lion which is over the 
door of the palace stairs.” 


The position of this door is disputed, and is of no conse 
quence to the reader, the door itself having long ago disap. 
peared, and been replaced by the Porta della Carta. 

§ Xv—l. But before it was finished, occasion had been dis. 
covered for farther improvements. The Senate found their 
new Council Chamber inconveniently small, and, about thirty 
years after its completion, began to consider where a larger 
and more magnificent one might be built. The government 
was now thoroughly established, and it was probably felt that 
there was some meanness in the retired position, as well as 
insufficiency in the size, of the Council Chamber on the Rio. 
The first definite account which I find of their proceedings, 
uncez these circumstances, is in the Caroldo Chronicle : * 

1340. On the 28th of December, in the preceding year, 
Master Marco Erizzo, Nicolo Soranzo, and Thomas Grade- 
nigo, were chosen to examine where a new saloon might be 
built in order to assemble therein the Greater Council. 

On the 3rd of June, 1341, the Great Council elected 
two procurators of the work of this saloon, with a salary of | 
eighty ducatsa year,” 

It appears from the entry still preserved in the Archivio, 
and quoted by Cadorin, that it was on the 28th of December, 
1340, that the commissioners appointed to decide on this im- 
portant matter gave in their report to the Grand Council, and 
that the decree passed thereupon for the commencement of a 
new Council Chamber on the Grand Canal.t 

The room then begun is the one now in existence, and its 
building involved the building of all that is best and most 
beautiful in the present Ducal Palace, the rich arcades of the 

* Cod. Ven., No. cxut. p. 365. 

+ Sansovino is more explicit than usual in his reference to this decree: 
6‘ For it having appeared that the place (the first Council Chamber) was 
not capacious enough, the saloon on the Grand Canal was ordered.” 


* Per cio parendo che il lnogo non fosge capace, fu ordinata la Sala sul 
Canal Grande.” --P. 324. 


294 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


lower stories being all prepared for sustaining this Sala dei 
Gran Consiglic. 

§ xix. In saying that it is the same now in existence, I de 
not mean that it has undergone no alterations ; as we shall 
see hereafter, it has been refitted again and again, and some 
portions of its walls rebuilt ; but in the place and form in 
which it first stood, it still stands; and by a glance at the 
position which its windows occupy, as shown in fig. XXX VIL 
above, the reader willsee at once that whatever can be known 
respecting the design of the Sea Fagade, must be gleaned out 
of the entries which refer to the building of this Great Coun- 
cil Chamber. 

Cadorin quotes two of great importance, to which we shall 
return in due time, made during the progress of the work in 
1842 and 1344; then one of 1349, resolving that the works at 
the Ducal Palace, which had been discontinued during the 
plague, should be resumed ; and finally one in 1362, which 
speaks of the Great Council Chamber as having been neglected 
and suffered to fall into “great desolation,” and resolves that 
it shall be forthwith completed.* 

The interruption had not been caused by the plague only, 
but by the conspiracy of Faliero, and the violent death of the 
master builder.t The work was resumed in 1362, and com- 
pleted within the next three years, at Jeast so far as that 
Guariento was enabled to paint his Paradise on the walls ; f 
so that the building must, at any rate, have been roofed by 
this time. Its decorations and fittings, however, were long in 
completion ; the paintings on the roof being only executed in 
1400. § They represented the heavens covered with stars,} 


* Cadorin, 185, 2. The decree of 1342 is falsely given as of 1345 by 
the Sivos Chronicle, and by Magno; while Sanuto gives the decree to ita 
right year, 1842, but speaks of the Council Chamber as only begun in 
1345. 

+ Calendario. See Appendix 1, Vol. III. 

t ‘‘Il primo che vi colorisse fu Guariento, il quale l’anno 1365 vi fece 
il Paradiso in testa della sala.” —Sansovino. 

§ ‘L’ an poi 1400 vi fece il cielo compartita a quadretti d’ oro, ripient 
di stelle, ch’ era la insegna del Doge Steno.”—Sansovino, lib. vat. 

J :‘In questi tempi si messe in oro il cielo della sala del Gran Consig- 


THE DUCAL PALACE. 295 


this being, says Sansovino, the bearings of the Doge Steno. 
Almost all ceilings and vaults were at this time in Venice cov- 
ered with stars, without any reference ta armorial bearings; 
but Steno claims, under his noble title of Stellifer, an impor- 
tant share in completing the chamber, in an inscription upon 
two square tablets, now inlaid in the walls on each side of the 
great window towards the sea : 


“© VILLE QUADRINGENTI CURREBANT QUATUOR ANNI 


Hoc opus 1nLustris MicaarL DUX STELLIFER AUXIT.” 


And in fact it is to this Doge that we owe the beautiful 
balcony of that window, though the work above it is partly 
of more recent date ; and I think the tablets bearing this im- 
portant inscription have been taken out and reinserted in the 
newer masonry. The labor of these final decorations occupied 
a total period of sixty years. The Grand Council sat in the 
finished chamber for the first time in 1423. In that vear the 
Gothic Ducal Palace of Venice was completed. It had taken, 
to build it, the energies of the entire period which I have 
above described as the central one of her life. 

§ xx. 3rd. The Renaissance Parace. I must go back a 
step or two, in order to be certain that the reader understands 
clearly the state of the palace in 1423. The works of addition 
or renovation had now been proceeding, at intervals, during a 
space of a hundred and twenty-three years. Three genera- 
tions at least had been accustomed to witness the gradual 
advancement of the form of the Ducal Palace into more 
stately symmetry, and to contrast the works of sculpture and 
painting with which it was decorated,—full of the life, knowl- 
edge, and hope of the fourteenth century,—with the rude 
Byzantine chiselling of the palace of the Doge Ziani. The 
magnificent fabric just completed, of which the new Council 
Chamber was the nucleus, was now habitually known in 
Venice as the “Palazzo Nuovo;” and the old Byzantine 


lio et si fece il pergolo del finestra grande chi guarda sul canale, adorm 
ato l’ uno el altro di stelle, ch’ erano l’ insegne del Doge,”—Sansovina 
Mb. xu. Compare also Pareri, p. 129. 


296 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


edifice, now ruinous, and more manifest in its decay by its — 
contrast with the goodly stones of the building which had 
been raised at its side, was of course known as the ‘ Palazzo 
Vecchio.” * That fabric, however, still occupied the principal 
position in Venice. The new Council Chamber had been 
erected by the side of it towards tue Sea ; but there was not 
then the wide quay in front, the Riva dei Schiavoni, which 
now renders the Sea Facade as important as that to the 
Piazzetta. There was only a narrow walk between the pillars 
and the water; and the old palace of Ziani still faced the 
Piazzetta, and interrupted, by its decrepitude, the magnifi- 
cence of the square where the nobles daily met. Every in- 
crease of the beauty of the new palace rendered the discrep- 
ancy between it and the companion building more painful ; 
and then began to arise in the minds of all men a vague idea 
of the necessity of destroying the old palace, and completing 
the front of the Piazzetta with the same splendor as the Sea 
Facade. But no such sweeping measure of renovation had 
been contemplated by the Senate when they first formed the 
plan of their new Council Chamber. First a single additional 
room, then a gateway, then a larger room ; but all considered 
merely as necessary additions to the palace, not as involving 
the entire reconstruction of the ancient edifice. The ex- 
haustion of the treasury, and the shadows upon the political 
horizon, rendered it more than imprudent to incur the vast 
additional expense which such a project involved; and the 
Senate, fearful of itself, and desirous to guard against the 
weakness of its own enthusiasm, passed a decree, like the 
effort of a man fearful of some strong temptation to keep his 
thoughts averted from the point of danger. It was a decree, 
not merely that the old palace should not be rebuilt, but that 
no one should propose rebuilding it. The feeling of the 
desirableness of doing so was too strong to permit fair discus- 
sion, and the Senate knew that to bring forward such a motion 
was to carry it. 

§ xxi. The decree, thus passed in order to guard against 


* Baseggio (Pareri, p. 127) is called the Proto of the New Palace. 
Farther notes will be found in Appendix 1, Vol. IL 


THE DUCAL PALAOR. 29% 


their own weakness, forbade any one to speak of rebuilding 
the old palace under the penalty of a thousand ducats. But 
they had rated their own enthusiasm too low: there was a 
man among them whom the loss of a thousand ducats could 
not deter from proposing what he believed to be for the good 
of the state. 

Some excuse was given him for bringing forward the mo- 
tion, by a fire which occurred in 1419, and which injured both 
the church of St. Mark’s, and part of the old palace fronting 
the Piazzetta. What followed, I shall relate in the words of 
Sanuto.* 

§ xx. ‘Therefore they set themselves with all diligence 
and care to repair and adorn sumptuously, first God’s house ; 
but in the Prince’s house things went on more slowly, for # 
did not please the Doget to restore it in the form in which tt 
was before ; and they could not rebuild it altogether in a bet- 
ter manner, so great was the parsimony of these old fathers; 
because it was forbidden by laws, which condemned in a pen- 
alty of a thousand ducats any one who should propose to 
throw down the old palace, and to rebuild it more richly and 
with greater expense. But the Doge, who was magnanimous, 
and who desired above all things what was honorable to the 
city, had the thousand ducats carried into the Senate Cham- 
ber, and then proposed that the palace should be rebuilt; 
saying: that, ‘since the late fire had ruined in great part the 
Ducai habitation (not only his own private palace, but all the 
places used for public business) this occasion was to be taken. 
for an admonishment sent from God, that they ought to re- 
build the palace more nobly, and in a way more befitting the 
greatness to which, by God’s grace, their dominions had 
reached ; and that his motive in proposing this was neither 
ambition, nor selfish interest: that, as for ambition, they 
might have seen in the whole course of his life, through so 
many years, that he had never done anything for ambition, 
either in the city, or in foreign business ; but in all his actiong 
had kept justice first in his thoughts, and then the advantage 

* Cronaca Sanudo, No. cxxy. in the Marcian Library, p. 568. 
¢ Tomaso Mocenigo, 
Stones of Venice—Vol, II,—14 


298 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


of the state, and the honor of the Venetian name: and that 
as far as regarded his private interest, if it had not been for 
this accident of the fire, he would never have thought of 
changing anything in the palace into either a more sumptuous 
or a more honorable form ; and that during the many years 
in which he had lived in it, he had never endeavored to make 
any change, but had always been content with it, as his prede- 
cessors had left it; and that he knew well that, if they took 
in hand to build it as he exhorted and besought them, being 
now very old, and broken down with many toils, God would 
call him to another life before the walls were raised a pace 
from the ground. And that therefore they might perceive 
that he did not advise them to raise this building for his own 
convenience, but only for the honor of the city and its Duke- 
dom: and that the good of it would never be felt by him, but 
by his successors.’ Then he said, that ‘in order, as he had 
always done, to observe the laws, . . . he had brought 
with him the thousand ducats which had been appointed as 
the penalty for proposing such a measure, so that he might 
prove openly to all men that it was not his own advantage 
that he sought, but the dignity of the state.” There was no 
one (Sanuto goes on to tell us) who ventured, or desired, to 
oppose the wishes of the Doge ; and the thousand ducats were 
unanimously devoted to the expenses of the work. “And 
they set themselves with much diligence to the work; and the 
palace was begun in the form and manner in which it is at 
present seen; but, as Mocenigo had prophesied, not long 
after, he ended his life, and not only did not see the work 
brought to a close, but hardly even begun.” 

§ xxm. There are one or two expressions in the above ex- 
tracts which, if they stood alone, might lead the reader to 
suppose that the whole palace had been thrown down and re- 
built. We must however remember, that, at this time, the 
new Council Chamber, which had been one hundred years in 
building, was actually unfinished, the council had not yet sat 
in it; and it was just as likely that the Doge should then 
propose to destroy and rebuild it, as in this year, 1853, it is 
that any one shoull propose in our House of Commons t¢ 


THE DUCAL PALAOR. 999 


throw down the new Houses of Parliament, under the title of 
the “old palace,” and rebuild them. 

§ xxrv. The manner in which Sanuto expresses himself will 
at once be seen to be perfectly natural, when it is remembered 
that although we now speak of the whole building as the 
‘Ducal Palace,” it consisted, in the minds of the old Vene- 
tians, of four distinct buildings. ‘There were in it the palace, 
the state prisons, the senate-house, and the offices of public 
business; in other words, it was Buckingham Palace, the 
Tower of olden days, the Houses of Parliament, and Downing 
Street, all in one; and any of these four portions might be 
spoken of, without involving an allusion to any other. “I 
Palazzo” was the Ducal residence, which, with most of the 
public offices, Mocenigo did propose to pull down and rebuild, 
and which was actually pulled down and rebuilt. But the 
new Council Chamber, of which the whole facade to the Sea 
consisted, never entered into either his or Sanuto’s mind for 
an instant, as necessarily connected with the Ducal residence. 

I said that the new Councal Chamber, at the time when 
Mocenigo brought forward his measure, had never yet been 
used. It was in the year 1422 * that the decree passed to re- 
build the palace: Mocenigo died in the following year,} and 
Frar’ :sco Foscari was elected in his room. The Great Coun- 
cil Chamber was used for the first time on the day when 
Foscari entered the Senate as Doge,—the 3rd of April, 1423, 
according to the Caroldo Chronicle; { the 23rd, which is prob- 
ably correct, by an anonymous MS., No. 60, in the Correr 
Museum ;§—and, the following year, on the 27th of March, 


* Vide notes in Appendix. 

+ On the 4th of April, 1428, according to the copy of the Zancarol 
Chronicle in the Marcian Library, but previously, according to the 
Caroldo Chronicle, which makes Foscari enter the Senate as Doge on . 
the 3rd of April. 

¢ ‘‘ Nella quale (the Sala del Gran Consiglio) non si fece Gran Consig- 
lio salvo nell’ anno 1423, alli 3 April, et fu il primo giorno che il Duce 
Foscari venisse in Gran Consiglio dopo la sua creatione.”—Copy in 
Marcian Library, p. 365. 

§ ‘Ea di 238 April (1428, by the context) sequente fo fatto Gran Com, 


800 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


the first hammer was lifted up against the old palace of Ziani4 

§ xxv. That hammer stroke was the first act of the period 
properly called the ‘‘ Renaissance.” It was the knell of the 
architecture of Venice,—and of Venice herself: 

The central epoch of her life was past; the decay had 
already begun : I dated its commencement above (Ch. L. Vol. 
L) from the death of Mocenigo. A year had not yet elapsed 
since that great Doge had been called to his account: his 
patriotism, always sincere, had been in this instance mistaken ; 
in his zea], for the honor of future Venice, he had forgotten 
what was due to the Venice of long ago. A thousand palaces’ 
might be built upon her burdened islands, but none of them 
could take the place, or recall the memory, of that which was 
first built upon her unfrequented shore. It fell ; and, as if it 
_ had been the talisman of her fortunes, the city never flourished 
again. 

§ xxv. I have no intention of following out, in their intri- 
cate details, the operations which were begun under Foscari 
and continued under succeeding Doges till the palace assumed 
its present form, for I am not in this work concerned, except 
by occasional reference, with the architecture of the fifteenth 
century: but the main facts are the following. The palace of 
Ziani was destroyed: the existing facade to the Piazzetta built, 
so as both to continue and to resemble, in most particulars, the 
work of the Great Council Chamber. It was carried back 
from the Sea as far as the Judgment angle ; beyond which 
is the Porta della Carta, begun in 1439, and finished in two 
years, under the Doge Foscari ;+ the interior buildings con- 
uected with it were added by the Doge Christopher Moro (the 
Othello of Shakspeare) ¢ in 1462. 


seio in la salla nuovo dovi avanti non esta piu fatto Gran Conseio si che 
el primo Gran Conseio dopo la sua (Foscari’s) creation, fo fatto in la salla 
nuova, nel qual conseio fu el Marchese di Mantoa,” &c., p. 426. 

* Compare Appendix 1, Vol. ITI. 

+“ Tutte queste fatture si compirono sotto il dogado del Fescari, Ret 
1441.” — Puvrert, p. 181. 

{ This identification has been accomplished, and I think conclusively, 
ty my friend Mr. Rawdon Brown, who has devoted all the leisure which, 
during the last twenty years, his manifold offices of kindness to almogy 


THE DUCAL PALACK. 301 


§ xxv. By reference to the figure the reader will see that 
we have now gone the round of the palace, and that the new 
work of 1462 was close upon the first piece of the Gothic 
palace, the new Council Chamber of 1301. Some remnants of 
the Ziani Palace were perhaps still left between the two ex- 
tremities vt the Gothic Palace ; or, as is more probable, the 
last stones’ of it may have been swept away after the fire of 
1419, and replaced by new apartments for the Doge. But 
whatever buildings, old or new, stood on this spot at the time 
of the completion of the Porta della Carta were destroyed by 
another great fire in 1479, together with so much of the palace 
on the Rio that, though the saloon of Gradenigo, then known . 
as the Sala de’ Pregadi, was not destroyed, it became necessary 
to reconstruct the entire fagades of the portion of the palace 
behind the Bridge of Sighs, both towards the court and canal. 
This work was entrusted to the best Renaissance architects of 
the close of the fifteenth and opening of the sixteenth cen- 
turies ; Antonio Ricci executing the Giant's staircase, and on 
his absconding with a large sum of the public money, Pietro 
Lombardo taking his place. The whole work must have been 
completed towards the middle of the sixteenth century. The 
architects of the palace, advancing round the square and led 
by fire, had more than reached the point from which they had 
‘set out; and the work of 1560 was joined to the work of 1301 
—1340, at the point marked by the conspicuous vertical line 
in Figure XXXVIL on the Rio Fagade. 

§ xxv. But the palace was not long permitted to remain 
in this finished form. Another terrific fire, commonly called 
the great fire, burst. out in 1574, and destroyed the inner fit 
tings and all the precious pictures of the Great Council Cham 
ber, and of all the upper rooms on the Sea Facade, and mos. 
of those on the Rio Facade, leaving the building a mere shell, 
shaken and blasted by the flames. It was debated in the 


every English visitant of Venice have left him, in discovering and trans- 
lating the passages of the Venetian records which bear upon English 
history and literature. Ishall have occasion to take advantage here- 
after of a portion of his labors, which I trust will shortly be made 
public, 


3802 THE STONES OF VENICH. 


Great Council whether the ruin should not be thrown down, 
and an entirely new palace built in its stead. The opinions of 
all the leading architects of Venice were taken, respecting the 
safety of the walls, or the possibility of repairing them as they 
stood. These opinions, given in writing, have been preserved, 
and published by the Abbé Cadorin, in the work already so 
often referred to; and they form one of the most important 
series of documents connected with the Ducal Palace. 

I cannot help feeling some childish pleasure in the acci- 
dental resemblance to my own name in that of the architect 
whose opinion was first given in favor of the ancient fabric, 
Giovanni Rusconi. Others, especially Palladio, wanted to 
pull down the old palace, and execute designs of their own; 
but the best architects in Venice, and to his immortal honor, 
chiefly Francesco Sansovino, energetically pleaded for the 
Gothic pile, and prevailed. It was successfully repaired, 
and Tintoret painted his noblest picture on the wall from 
which the Paradise of Guariento had withered before the 
flames. 

§ xxix. The repairs necessarily undertaken at this time 
were however extensive, and interfere in many directions with 
the earlier work of the palace : still the only serious alteration 
in its form was the transposition of the prisons, formerly at 
the top of the palace, to the other side of the Rio del Palazzo ; 
and the building of the Bridge of Sighs, to connect them with 
the palace, by Antonio da Ponte. The completion of this 
work brought the whole edifice into its present form ; with 
the exception of alterations in doors, partitions, and staircases 
among the inner apartments, not worth noticing, and such 
barbarisms and defacements as have been suffered within the 
last fifty years, by, I suppose, nearly every building of im- 
portance in Italy. 

§ xxx. Now, therefore, we are at liberty to examine some of 
the details of the Ducal Palace, without any doubt about their 
dates. I shall not, however, give any elaborate illustrations of 
them here, because I could not do them justice on the scale 
of the page of this volume, or by means of line engraving. I 
believe a new era is opening to us in the art of illustra 


THH DUCAL PALACE. 303 


tion,* and that I shall beable to give large figures of the detailg 
of the Ducal Palace at a price which will enable every person 
who is interested in the subject to possess them ; so that the 
cost and labor of multiplying illustrations here would be al- 
together wasted. I shall therefore direct the reader’s atten- 
tion only to such points of interest as can be explained in the 
text. 

§ xxx1. First, then, looking back to the woodcut at the be- 
ginning of this chapter, the reader will observe that, as the 
building was very nearly square on the ground plan, a peculiar 
prominence and importance were given to its angles, which 
rendered it necessary that they should be enriched and soft- 
ened by sculpture. I do not suppose that the fitness of this 
arrangement will be questioned ; but if the reader will take 
the pains to glance over any series of engravings of church 
towers or other four-square buildings in which great refine- 
ment of form has been attained, he will at once observe how 
their effect depends on some modification of the sharpness of 
the angle, either by groups of buttresses, or by turrets and 
niches rich in sculpture. It is to be noted also that this prin- 
ciple of breaking the angle is peculiarly Gothic, arising partly 
out of the necessity of strengthening the flanks of enormous 
buildings, where composed of imperfect materials, by but- 
tresses or pinnacles ; partly out of the conditions of Gothic 
warfare, which generally required a tower at the angle; partly 
out of the natural dislike of the meagreness of effect in build- 
ings which admitted large surfaces of wall, if the angle were 
entirely unrelieved. The Ducal Palace, in its acknowledg- 
ment of this principle, makes a more definite concession to the 
Gothic spirit than any of the previous architecture of Venice. 
No angle, up to the time of its erection, had been otherwise 
decorated than by a narrow fluted pilaster of red marble, and 
the sculpture’ was reserved always, as in Greek and Roman 
work, for the plane surfaces of the building, with, as far as I 
recollect, two exceptions only, both in St. Mark’s; namely, the 
bold and grotesque gargoyle on its north-west angle, and the 


* See the last chapter of the third volume, 


304 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


angels which project from the four inner angles under the 
main cupola ; both of these arrangements being plainly made 
under Lombardic influence. And if any other instances oc- 
cur, which I may have at present forgotten, I am very sure 
the Northern influence will always be distinctly traceable in 
them. 

§ xxxu. The Ducal Palace, however, accepts the principle 
in its completeness, and throws the main decoration upon its 
angles. The central window, which looks rich and important 
in the woodcut, was entirely restored in the Renaissance time, 
as we have seen, under the Doge Steno; so that we have no | 
traces of its early treatment ; and the principal interest of the 
older palace is concentrated in the angle sculpture, which is 
arranged in the following manner. The pillars of the two 
bearing arcades are much enlarged in thickness at the angles, 
and their capitals increased in depth, breadth, and fulness of 
subject ; above each capital, on the angle of the wall, a sculpt- 
ural subject is introduced, consisting, in the great lower ar- 
cade, of two or more figures of the size of life ; in the upper 
arcade, of a single angel holding a scroll: above these angels 
rise the twisted pillars with their crowning niches, already 
noticed in the account of parapets in the seventh chapter ; 
thus forming an unbroken line of decoration from the ground 
to the top of the angle. 

§ xxx. It was before noticed that one of the corners of 
the palace joins the irregular outer buildings connected with 
St. Mark’s, and is not generally seen. There remain, there- 
fore, to be decorated, only the three angles, above distinguished 
as the Vine angle, the Fig-tree angle, and the Judgment angle ; 
and at these we have, according to the arrangement just ex- 
plained,— 

First, Three great bearing capitals (lower arcade). 

Secondly, Three figure subjects of sculpture above them > 
(lower arcade). 

Thirdly, Three smaller bearing capitals (upper arcade). 

Fourthly, Three angels above them (upper arcade). 

Fifthly, Three spiral shafts with niches. 

§ xxxiy. I shall describe the bearing capitals hereafter, in 


THE DUCAL PALAOR. "805: 


their order, with the others of the arcade ; for the first point 
to which the reader’s attention ought to be directed is the 
choice of subject in the great figure sculptures above them. 
These, observe, are the very corner stones of the edifice, and 
in them we may expect to find the most important evidences 
of the feeling, as well as of the skill, of the builder. If he 
has anything to say to us of the purpose with which he built 
the palace, it is sure to be said here ; if there was any lesson 
which he wished principally to teach to those for whom he 
built, here it is sure to be inculcated ; if there was any senti- 
ment which they themselves desired to have expressed in the 
principal edifice of their city, this is the place in which we 
may be secure of finding it legibly inscribed. 

§ xxxv. Now the first two angles, of the Vine and Fig-tree, 
belong to the old, or true Gothic, Palace ; the third angle be- 
longs to the Renaissance imitation of it: therefore, at the 
first two angles, it is the Gothic spirit which is going to speak 
to us; and, at the third, the Renaissance spirit. 

The reader remembers, I trust, that the most characteristic 
sentiment of all that we traced in the working of the Gothic 
heart, was the frank confession of its own weakness; and I 
must anticipate, for a moment, the results of our inquiry in 
subsequent chapters, so far as to state that the principal ele- 
ment in the Renaissance spirit, is its firm confidence in its 
own wisdom. 

Hear, then, the two spirits speak for themselves. 

The first main sculpture of the Gothic Palace is on what I 
have called the angle of the Fig-tree : 

Its subject is the Farn or Man. 

The second sculpture is on the angle of the Vine: 

Its subject is the DrunxEnness or Noau. 

The Renaissance sculpture is on the Judgment angle: 

Its subject is the Jupamunt or Sotomon. 

It is impossible to overstate, or to regard with too much 
admiration, the significance of this single fact. It is as if the 
palace had been built at various epochs, and preserved unin- 
iured to this day, for the sole purpose of teaching us the dif 
ference in the temper of the two schools. 

VoL. Ii —20 


806 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


§ xxxvi. I have called the sculpture on the Fig-tree angie 
the principal one; because it is at the central bend of the 
palace, where it turns to the Piazzetta (the facade upon the 
Piazzetta being, as we saw above, the more important one in 
ancient times). The great capital, which sustains this Fig- 
tree angle, is also by far more elaborate than the head of the 
pilaster under the Vine angle, marking the preéminence of 
the former in the architect's mind. It is impossible to say 
which was first executed, but that of the Fig-tree angle is 
somewhat rougher in execution, and more stiff in the design 
of the figures, so that I rather suppose it to have been the 
earliest completed. . 

§ xxxvu. In both the subjects, of the Fall and the Drunk- 
enness, the tree, which forms the chiefly decorative portion 
of the sculpture,—fig in the one case, vine in the other,—was 
a necessary adjunct. Its trunk, in both sculptures, forms the 
true outer angle of the palace; boldly cut separate from the 
stonework behind, and branching out above the figures so as 
to enwrap each side of the angle, for several feet, with its 
deep foliage.: Nothing can be more masterly or superb than 
the sweep of this foliage on the Fig-tree angle; the broad 
leaves lapping round the budding fruit, and sheltering from 
sight, beneath their shadows, birds of the most graceful form 
and delicate plumage. The branches are, however, so strong, 
and the masses of stone hewn into leafage so large, that, not- 
withstanding the depth of the undercutting, the work remains 
nearly uninjured ; not so at the Vine angle, where the natural 
delicacy of the vine-leaf and tendril having tempted the sculp- 
tor to greater effort, he has passed the proper limits of his 
‘art, and cut the upper stems so delicately that half of them 
have been broken away by the casualties to which the situ- 
ation of the sculpture necessarily exposes it. What remains 
is, however, so interesting in its extreme refinement, that I 
have chosen it for the subject of the opposite illustration 
rather than the nobler masses of the fig-tree, which ought to 
be rendered on a larger scale. Although half of the beauty 
of the composition is destroyed by the breaking away of its 
central masses, there is still enough in the distribution of the 


THE DUCAL PALACE. 30% 


variously bending leaves, and in the placing of the birds on 
the lighter branches, to prove to us the power of the designer. 
I have already referred to this Plate as a remarkable instance 
of the Gothic Naturalism ; and, indeed, it is almost impossi- 
ble for the copying of nature to be carried farther than in the 
filres of the marble branches, and the careful finishing of the 
tendrils : note especially the peculiar expression of the knotty 
joints of the vine in the light branch which rises highest. 
Yet only half the finish of the work can be seen in the Plate: 
for, in several cases, the sculptor has shown the under sides 
of the leaves turned boldly to the light, and has literally 
carved every rib and vein upon them, in relief ; not merely the 
main ribs which sustain the lobes of the leaf, and actually 
project in nature, but the irregular and sinuous veins which 
~ chequer the membranous tissue between them, and which the 
sculptor has represented conventionally as relieved like the 
others, in order to give the vine leaf its peculiar tessellated 
effect upon the eye. 

§ xxxvir. As must always be the case in early sculpture, 
the figures are much inferior to the leafage ; yet so skilful in 
many respects, that it was a long time before I could persuade 
snyself that they had indeed been wrought in the first half of 
the fourteenth century. Fortunately, the date is inscribed 
upon a monument in the Church of San Simeon Grande, 
bearing a recumbent statue of the saint, of far finer workman- 
ship, in every respect, than those figures of the Ducal Palace, 
yet so like them, that I think there can be no question that 
the head of Noah was wrought by the sculptor of the palace 
in emulation of that of the statue of St. Simeon. In this 
latter sculpture, the face is represented in death ; the mouth 
partly open, the lips thin and sharp, the teeth carefully sculpt- 
ured beneath ; the face full of quietness and majesty, though 
very ghastly ; the hair and beard flowing in luxuriant wreaths, 
disposed with the most masterly freedom, yet severity, of de- 
sign, far dovn upon the shoulders ; the hands crossed upon 
the body, carefully studied, and the veins and sinews per- 
fectly and easily expressed, yet without any attempt at ex. 
treme finish or display of technical skill. This monument 


830e THE STONES OF VENICE. 


bears date 1317, * and its sculptor was justly proud of it; - 
thus recording his name : 


‘Crnavir Marcus opus Hoc INSIGNE Romanis, 
Lavpipus NON PARCUS EST SUA DIGNA MANUS.” 


§ xxxrx. The head of the Noah on the Ducal Palace, evi: 
dently worked in emulation of this statue, has the same pro- 
fusion of flowing hair and beard, but wrought in smaller and 
harder curls; and the veins on the arms and breast are more 
sharply drawn, the sculptor being evidently more practised in 
keen and fine lines of vegetation than in those of the figure ; 
so that, which is most remarkable in a workman of this early 
period, he has failed in telling his story plainly, regret and 
wonder being so equally marked on the features of all the | 
three brothers that it is impossible to say which is intended 
for Ham. Two of the heads of the brothers are seen in the 
Plate ; the third figure is not with the rest of the group, but 
set at a distance of about twelve feet, on the other side of the 
arch which springs from the angle capital. 

§ xt. It may be observed, as a farther evidence of the date 
of the group, that, in the figures of all the three youths, the 
feet are protected simply by a bandage arranged in crossed 
folds round the ankle and lower part of the limb ; a feature 
of dress which will be found in nearly every piece of figure 
sculpture in Venice, from the year 1300 to 1380, and of which 
the traveller may see an example within three hundred yards 
of this very group, in the bas-reliefs on the tomb of the Doge 
Andrea Dandolo (in St. Mark’s), who died in 1354. 

§ xu. The figures of Adam and Eve, sculptured on each 
side of the Fig-tree angle, are more stiff than those of Noah 
and his sons, but are better fitted for their architectural ser- 
vice ; and the trunk of the tree, with the angular body of the 
serpent writhed around it, is more nobly treated as a terminal 
group of lines than that of the vine. 


* “Tn XRI—NOIE AMEN ANNINCARNATIONIS MCCOXVII. INESETBR.® 
“Tn the name of Christ, Amen, in the year of the incarnation, ark iy 
the month of September,” &e, 


PLATE XIX.—LEAFAGE OF THE VINE ANGLE. 


aes 


ote 


THE DUCAL PALACH. 309 


The Renaissance sculptor of the figures of the Judgment 
of Solomon has very nearly copied the fig-tree from this angle, 
placing its trunk between the executioner and the mother, 
who leans forward to stay his hand. But, though the whole 
group is much more free in design than those of the earlier 
palace, and in many ways excellent in itself, so that it always 
strikes the eye of a careless observer more. than the others, it 
is of immeasurably inferior spirit in the workmanship ; the 
leaves of the tree, though far more studiously varied in flow 
than those of the fig-tree from which they are partially copied, 
have none of its truth to nature ; they are ill set on the stems, 
bluntly defined on the edges, and their curves are not those 
of growing leaves, but of wrinkled drapery. 

§ xtu. Above these three sculptures are set, in the upper 
arcade, the statues of the archangels Raphael, Michael, and 
Gabriel: their positions will be understood by reference to 
the lowest figure in Plate XVII, where that of Raphael above 
the Vine angle is seen on the right. A diminutive figure of 
Tobit follows at his feet, and he bears in his hand a scroll 
with this inscription : 

EFICE Q 

SOFRE 

TUR AFA 

EL REVE 

RENDE 

QUIETU 
ie. Effice (queso ?) fretum, Raphael reverende, quietum.* I 
could not decipher the inscription on the scroll borne by the 
angel Michael ; and the figure of Gabriel, which is by much 
the most beautiful feature of the Renaissance portion of the 
palace, has only in its hand the Annunciation lily. 

* “Oh, venerable Raphael, make thou the gulf calm, we beseech 
thee.” The peculiar office of the angel Raphael is, in general, accord- 
ing to tradition, the restraining the harmful influences of evil spirits. 
Sir Charles Eastlake told me, that sometimes in this office he is repre- 
sented bearing tae gall of the fish caught by Tobit; and reminded me 
of the peculiar superstitions of the Venetians respecting the raising of 


storms by fiends, as embodied in the well-known tale of the Fisherman 
and St. Mark’s ring. 


310 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


§ x1am. Such are the subjects of the main sculptures deco. 
rating the angles of the palace; notable, observe, for their 
simple expression of two feelings, the consciousness of human 
frailty, and the dependence upon Divine guidance and pro- 
tection ; this being, of course, the general purpose of the in- 
troduction of the figures of the angels; and, I imagine, in- 
tended to be more particularly conveyed by the manner in 
which the small figure of Tobit follows the steps of Raphael, 
just touching the hem of his garment. We have next to ex- 
amine the course of divinity and of natural history embodied 
by the old sculpture in the great series of capitals which sup- 
port the lower arcade of the palace; and which, being at a 
height of little more than eight feet above the eye, might be 
read, like the pages of a book, by those (the noblest men in 
Venice) who habitually walked beneath the shadow of this 
great arcade at the time of their first meeting each other for 
morning converse. 

§ xttv. The principal sculptures of the capitals consist of 
personifications of the Virtues and Vices, the favorite subjects 
of decorative art, at this period, in all the cities of Italy ; and 
there is so much that is significant in the various modes of 
their distinction and general representation, more especially 
with reference to their occurrence as expressions of praise to 
the dead in sepulchral architecture, hereafter to be examined, 
that I believe the reader may both happily and profitably rest 
for a little while beneath the first vault of the arcade, to re- 
view the manner in which these symbols of the virtues were 
first invented by the Christian imagination, and the evidence 
they generally furnish of the state of religious feeling in those 
by whom they were recognized. 

§ xiv. In the early ages of Christianity, there was little 
care taken to analyze character. One momentous question 
was heard over the whole world,—Dost thou believe in the 
Lord with all thine heart? There was but one division among 
men,—the great unatoneable division between the disciple and 
adversary. The love of Christ was all, and in all; and in pro- 
portion to the nearness of their memory of His person and 
teaching, men understood the infinity of the requirements of 


THE DUCAL PALACE. 31y 


the moral law, and the manner in which it alone could be 
fulfilled. The early Christians felt that virtue, like sin, was a 
subtle universal thing, entering into every act and thought, 
appearing outwardly in ten thousand diverse ways, diverse 
according to the separate framework of every heart in which 
it dwelt; but one and the same always in its proceeding from 
the love of God, as sin is one and the same in proceeding from 
hatred of God. And in their pure, early, and practical piety, 
they saw there was no need for codes of morality, or systems 
of metaphysics. Their virtue comprehended everything, en- 
tered into everything ; it was too vast and too spiritual to be 
defined ; but there was no need of its definition. For through 
faith, working by love, they knew that all human excellence 
would be developed in due order; but that, without faith, 
neither reason could define, nor effort reach, the lowest phase 
of Christian virtue. And therefore, when any of the Apostles 
have occasion to describe or enumerate any forms of vice or 
virtue by name, there is no attempt at system in their words. 
They use them hurriedly and energetically, heaping the 
thoughts one upon another, in order as far as possible to fill 
the reader’s mind with a sense of the infinity both of crime 
and of righteousness. Hear St. Paul describe sin: “ Being 
filled with all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covet- 
ousness, maliciousness ; full of envy, murder, debate, deceit, 
malignity ; whisperers, backbiters, haters of God, despiteful, 
proud, boasters, inventors of evil things, disobedient to par- 
ents, without understanding, covenant breakers, without 
natural affection, implacable, unmerciful.” There is evidently 
here an intense feeeling of the universality of sin; and in 
order to express it, the Apostle hurries his words confusedly 
together, little caring about their order, as knowing all the 
vices to be indissolubly connected one with another. It would 
be utterly vain to endeavor to arrange his expressions as if 
they had been intended for the ground of any system, or to 
give any philosophical definition of the vices.* So also hear 


* In the original, the succession of words is evidently suggested partly 
by similarity of sound; and the sentence is made weighty by an alliter 


312 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


him speaking of virtue: “ Rejoice in the Lord. Let your 
moderation be known unto all men. Be careful for nothing, 
but in everything let your requests be made known unto God; 
and whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, 
whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, 
whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, 
and if there be any praise, think on these things.” Observe, 
he gives up all attempt at definition ; he leaves the definition 
to every man’s heart, though he writes so as to mark the 
overflowing fulness of his own vision of virtue. And so it is 
in all writings of the Apostles; their manner of exhortation, 
and the kind of conduct they press, vary according to the 
persons they address, and the feeling of the moment at which 
they write, and never show any attempt at logical precision. 
And, although the words of their Master are not thus irregu- 
larly uttered, but are weighed like fine gold, yet, even in His 
teaching, there is no detailed or organized system of morality ; 
but the command only of that faith and love which were to 
embrace the whole being of man: “On these two command- 
ments hang all the law and the prophets.” Here and there 
an incidental warning against this or that more dangerous 
form of vice or error, ‘“‘ Take heed and beware of covetous- 
ness,” ‘‘ Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees ;” here and 
there a plain example of the meaning of Christian love, as in 
the parables of the Samaritan and the Prodigal, and His own 
perpetual example: these were the elements of Christ’s con- 
stant teaching ; for the Beatitudes, which are the only approxi- 
mation to anything like a systematic statement, belong to 
different conditions and characters of individual men, not to 
abstract virtues. And all early Christians taught in the same 


manner. They never cared to expound the nature of this or. 


that virtue ; for they knew that the believer who had Christ, 
had all. Did he need fortitude? Christ was his rock: 
Equity? Christ was his righteousness: Holiness? Christ 
was his sanctification: Liberty? Christ was his redemption : 
ation which is quite lost in our translation ; but the very allowance of 


influence to these minor considerations is a proof how little any meta 
physical order or system was considered necessary in the statement. 


VHE DUCAL PALAOR. 313 


Temperance? Christ was his ruler: Wisdom? Christ was 
his light: Truthfulness? Christ was the truth: Charity? 
Christ was love. 

§ xtvi Now, exactly in proportion as the Christian religion 
became less vital, and as the various corruptions which time 
and Satan brought into it were able to manifest themselves, 
the person and offices of Christ were less dwelt upon, and 
the virtues of Christians more. The Life of the Believer 
became in some degree separated from the Life of Christ ; and 
his virtue, instead of being a stream flowing forth from the 
throne of God, and descending upon the earth, began to be 
regarded by him as a pyramid upon earth, which he had 
to build up, step by step, that from the top of it he might 
reach the Heavens. It was not possible to measure the waves 
of the water of life, but it was perfectly possible to measure 
the bricks of the Tower of Babel; and gradually, as the 
thoughts of men were withdrawn from their Redeemer, and 
fixed upon themselves, the virtues began to be squared, and 
counted, and classified, and put into separate heaps of firsts 
and seconds; some things being virtuous cardinally, and 
other things virtuous only north-north-west. It is very 
curious to put in close juxtaposition the words of the Apostles 
and of some of the writers of the fifteenth century touching 
sanctification. For instance, hear first St. Paul to the Thes- 
salonians: ‘“‘The very God of peace sanctify you wholly ; and 
I pray God your whole spirit and soul and body be preserved 
blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Faithful 
is he that calleth you, who also will do it.” And then the 
following part of a prayer which I translate from a MS. of the 
fifteenth century : ‘May He (the Holy Spirit) ‘govern the five 
Senses of my body; may He cause me to embrace the Seven 
Works of Mercy, and firmly to believe and observe the Twelve 
Articles of the Faith and the Ten Commandments of the Law, 
and defend me from the Seven Mortal Sins, even to the 
end.” 

§ xiv. I do not mean that this quaint passage is generally 
characteristic of the devotion of the fifteenth century: the 
very prayer out of which it is taken is in other parts exceed- 


814 THR STONES OF VENICE. 


ingly beautiful: * but the passage is strikingly illustrative of 
the tendency of the later Romish Church, more especially 
in its most corrupt condition, just before the Reformation, to 
throw all religion into forms and ciphers ; which tendency, as 
it affected Christian ethics, was confirmed by the Renaissance 
enthusiasm for the works of Aristotle and Cicero, from whom 
the code of the fifteenth century virtues was borrowed, and 
whose authority was then infinitely more revered by all the 
Doctors of the Church than that either of St. Paul or St. 
Peter. 


* It occurs in a prayer for the influence of the Holy Spirit, ‘‘ That He 
may keep my soul, and direct my way; compose my bearing, and form 
my thoughts in holiness; may He govern my body, and protect my 
mind ; strengthen me in action, approve my vows, and accomplis! my 
desires ; cause me to lead an honest and honorable life, and give me 
good hope, charity and chastity, humility and patience: may He govern 
the Five Senses of my body,” &c. The following prayer is also very 
characteristic of this period. It opens with a beautifu’ address to Christ 
upon the cross; then proceeds thus: ‘‘ Grant to us, O Lord, we beseech 
thee, this day and ever, the use of penitence, of abstinence, of humility, 
and chastity ; and grant to us light, judgment, understanding, and true 
knowledge, even to the end.” One thing I note in comparing old 
prayers with modern ones, that however quaint, or however erring, 
they are always tenfold more condensed, comprehensive, and to their 
purpose, whatever that may be. There is no dilution in them, no vain 
or monotonous phraseology. They ask for what is desired plainly 
and earnestly, and neyer could be shortened bya syllable. The follow- 
ing series of ejaculations are deep in spirituality, and curiously to our 
present purpose in the philological quaintness of being built upon prep- 
ositions: — 

** Domine Jesu Christe, sancta cruce tua apud me sis, ut me defendas. 

Domine Jesu Christe, pro veneranda cruce tua post me sis, ut me 
gubernes. 

Domine Jesu Christe, pro benedicta cruce tua intra me sis, ut me re- 
ficeas. 

Domine Jesu Christe, pro benedicta cruce tua circa me sis, ut me con * 
serves, 

Domine Jesu Christe, pro gloriosa cruce tua ante me sis, ut me de- 
duces. 

Domine Jesu Christe, pro landanda cruce tua super me sis, ut bene 
dicas. 

Domine Jesu Christe, pro magnifica cruce tua in me sis, ut me ad 
regnum tuum perducas, per D. N. J.C. Amen.” 


THE DUCAL PALACR. 315 


§ xtvur. Although, however, this change in the tone of the 
Christian mind was most distinctly manifested when the re: 
vival of literature rendered the works of the heathen philoso- 
phers the leading study of all the greatest scholars of the 
period, it had been, as I said before, taking place gradually 
from the earliest ages. It is, as far as I know, that root of 
the Renaissance poison-tree, which, of all others, is: deepest 
struck ; showing itself in various measures through the writ- 
ings of all the Fathers, of course exactly in proportion to the 
respect which they paid to classical authors, especially to 
Plato, Aristotle, and Cicero. The mode in which the pestilent 
study of that literature affected them may be well illustrated 
by the examination of a single passage from the works of one 
of the best of them, St. Ambrose, and of the mode in which that 
passage was then amplified and formulized by later writers. 

§ xix. Plato, indeed, studied alone, would have done no one 
any harm. He is profoundly spiritual and capacious in all 
his views, and embraces the small systems of Aristotle and 
Cicero, as the solar system does the Earth. He seems to me 
especially remarkable for the sense of the great Christian virtue 
of Holiness, or sanctification ; and for the sense of the pres- 
ence of the Deity in all things, great or small, which always 
runs in a solemn undercurrent beneath his exquisite playful- 
ness and irony ; while all the merely moral virtues may be 
found in his writings defined in the most noble manner, as a 
great painter defines his figures, without outlines. But the 
imperfect schclarship of later ages seems to have gone to 
Plato, only to find in him the system of Cicero; which indeed 
was very definitely expressed by him. For it having been 
quickly felt by all men who strove, unhelped by Christian 
faith, to enter at the strait gate into the paths of virtue, 
that there were four characters of mind which were protective 
or preservative of all that was best in man, namely, Prudence, 
Justice, Courage, and Temperance,* these were afterwards, 


* This arrangement of the cardinal virtues is said to have been first 
made by Archytas. See D’Ancarville’s illustration of the three figures 
of Prudence, Fortitude, and Charity, in Selvatico’s * Cappellina degli 
Scrovegni,” Padae,, 


316 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


with most illogical inaccuracy, called cardinal virtues, Pru: 
dence being evidently no virtue, but an intellectual gift: but 
this inaccuracy arose partly from the ambiguous sense of the 
Latin word ‘virtutes,” wLich sometimes, in medieval lan- 
cuage, signifies virtues, sometimes powers (being occasionally 
used in the Vulgate for the word “hosts,” as in Psalm ciii. 21, 
exlviiil. 2, &e., while “ fortitudines” and “ exercitus” are used 
for the same word in other places), so that Prudence might 
properly be styled a power, though not properly a virtue ; and 
partly from the confusion of Prudence with Heavenly Wisdom. 
The real rank of these four virtues, if so they are to be called, 
is however properly expressed by the term “cardinal.” They 
are virtues of the compass, those by which all others are di- 
rected and strengthened ; they are not the greatest virtues, 
but the restraining or modifying virtues, thus Prudence re- 
strains zeal, Justice restrains mercy, Fortitude and Temper- 
ance guide the entire system of the passions; and, thus un- 
derstood, these virtues properly assumed their peculiar leading 
or guiding position in the system of Christian ethics. But in 
Pagan ethics, they were not only guiding, but comprehensive. 
They meant a great deal more on the lips of the ancients, 
than they now express to the Christian mind. Cicero’s Justice 
includes charity, beneficence, and benignity, truth, and faith 
in the sense of trustworthiness. His Fortitude includes cour- 
age, self-command, the scorn of fortune and of all temporary 
felicities. His Temperance includes courtesy and modesty. 
So also, in Plato, these four virtues constitute the sum of ed- 
ucation. Ido not remember any more simple or perfect ex- 
pression of the idea, than in the account given by Socrates, 
in the “ Alcibiades L,” of the education of the Persian kings, 
for whom, in their youth, there are chosen, he says, four 
tutors from among the Persian nobles; namely, the Wisest, 
the most Just, the most Temperate, and the most Brave of 
them. Then each has a distinct duty: ‘* The Wisest teaches 
the young king the worship of the gods, and the duties of a 
king (something more here, observe, than our ‘ Prudence !’) ; 
the most Just teaches him to speak all truth, and to act out 
all truth, through the whole course of his life; the most Tem<« 


THE DUCAL PALACE, 317 


perate teaches him to allow no pleasure to have the mastery 
of him, so that he may be truly free, and indeed a king ; and 
the most Brave makes him fearless of all things, showing him 
that the moment he fears anything, he becomes a slave.” 

§ u. All this is exceedingly beautiful, so far as it reaches ; 
but the Christian divines were grievously led astray by their 
endeavors to reconcile this system with the nobler law of love. 
At first, as in the passage Iam just going to quote from St. 
Ambrose, they tried to graft the Christian system on the four 
branches of the Pagan one ; but finding that the tree would 
not grow, they planted the Pagan and Christian branches 
side by side ; adding, to the four cardinal virtues, the three 
called by the schoolmen theological, namely, Faith, Hope, 
and Charity: the one series considered as attainable by the 
Heathen, but the other by the Christian only. Thus Virgil 
to Sordello : 


“ Loco e Jaggi, non tristo da martiri 
Ma di tenebre solo, ove i lamenti 
Non suonan come guai, ma son sospiri: 


Quivi sto io, con quei che le tre sante 
Virti non si vestiro, e senza vizio 
Conobber Vl altre, e seguir, tutte quante.” 


sriias) «fe “There I with those abide 
Who the Three Holy Virtues put not on, 
But understood the rest, and without blame 


Followed them all.’’ 
CARY. 


§ u, This arrangement of the virtues was, however, pro- 
ductive of infinite confusion and error: in the first place, 
because Faith is classed with its own fruits,—the gift of God, 
which is the root of the virtues, classed simply as one of them ; 
in the second, because the words used by the ancients to 
express the several virtues had always a different meaning 
from the same expressions in the Bible, sometimes a more 
extended, sometimes a more limited one. Imagine, for in- 
atance, the confusion which must have been introduced inty 


318 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


the ideas of a student who read St. Paul and Aristotle alter 
nately ; considering that the word which the Greek writer 
uses for Justice, means, with St. Paul, Righteousness. And 
lastly, it is impossible to overrate the mischief produced in 
former days, as well as in our own, by the mere habit of 
reading Aristotle, whose system is so false, so forced, and so 
confused, that the study of it at our universities is quite 
enough to occasion the utter want of accurate habits of 
thought which so often disgraces men otherwise well-edu- 
cated. In a word, Aristotle mistakes the Prudence or Tem- 
perance which must regulate the operation of the virtues, 
for the essence of the virtues themselves ; and, striving to 
show that all virtues are means between two opposite vices, 
torments his wit to discover and distinguish as many pairs 
of vices as are necessary to the completion of his system, not 
disdaining to employ sophistry where invention fails him. 

And, indeed, the study of classical literature, in general, 
not only fostered in the Christian writers the unfortunate 
love of systematizing, which gradually degenerated into every 
species of contemptible formulism, but it accustomed them 
to work out their systems by the help of any logical quibble, . 
or verbal subtlety, which could be made available for their 
purpose, and this not with any dishonest intention, but in a 
sincere desire to arrange their ideas in systematical groups, 
while yet their powers of thought were not accurate enough, 
nor their common sense stern enough, to detect the fallacy, 
or disdain the finesse, by which these arrangements were fre- 
quently accomplished. 

§ uu. Thus St. Ambrose, in his commentary on Luke vi 
20, is resolved to transform the four Beatitudes there de- 
scribed into rewards of the four cardinal Virtues, and sets 
himself thus ingeniously to the task : 

“Blessed be ye poor.’ Here you have Temperance. 
‘Blessed are ye that hunger now.’ He who hungers, pities 
those who are an-hungered ; in pitying, he gives to them, 
and in giving he becomes just (largiendo fit justus). ‘Blessed 
are ye that weep now, for ye shall laugh.’ Here you have 
4'vudence, whose purt it is to weep, so far as present things 


THE DUCAL PALACE. 319 


are concerned, and to seek things which are eternal. ‘ Bless- 
ed are ye when men shall hate you.’ Here you have Forti- 
tude.” 

§ uu As a preparation for this profitable exercise of wit, we 
have also a reconciliation of the Beatitudes as stated by St. 
Matthew, with those of St. Luke, on the ground that “in 
those eight are these four, and in these four are those eight ;” 
with sundry remarks on the mystical value of the number 
eight, with which I need not trouble the reader. With St. 
Ambrose, however, this puerile systematization is quite sub- 
ordinate to a very forcible and truthful exposition of the real 
nature of the Christian life. But the classification he em- 
ploys furnishes ground for farther subtleties to future divines ; 
and in a MS. of the thirteenth century I find some expres- 
sions in this commentary on St. Luke, and in the treatise on 
the duties of bishops, amplified into a treatise on the “Steps 
of the Virtues: by which every one who perseveres may, by 
a straight path, attain to the heavenly country of the Angels.” 
(“Liber de Gradibus Virtutum: quibus ad patriam ange- 
lorum supernam itinere recto ascenditur ab omni perseve- 
rante.”) These Steps are thirty in number (one expressly for 
each day of the month), and the curious mode of-their asso- 
ciation renders the list well worth quoting : 


§ Liv. Primus gradus est Fides Recta. Unerring faith. 
Secundus ‘ Spes firma. Firm hope. 
Tertius ss Caritas perfecta. Perfect charity. — 

4 Be Patientia vera. True patience. 

5. «§ Humilitas sancia, Holy humility. 

6. a Mansuetudo. Meekness, 

7. ‘«¢ * «Intelligentia. Understanding. 

8 £6 Compunctio cordis. Contrition of heart. 

9 ES Oratio. Prayer. 
10. ie: Confessio pura. Pure confession. 
11. h Penitentia digna. Fitting penance. * 
12. a Abstinentia. Abstinence (fasting), 
13. Ji Timor Dei. Fear of God. 
14. “s Virginitas. Virginity. 


* Oy Penitence; but I rather think this is understood only in Com 
punctio cordis, 


320 THE STONES OF VENIOE. 


15. gradus est Justicia. Justice. 

16. “ Misericordia. Mercy. 

1%. st Elemosina. Almsgiving. 

18. ss Hospitalitas. Hospitality. 

19. Lo Honor parentum. Honoring of parents 

20. ce Silencium. Silence. 

21. ee Consilium bonum. Good counsel. 

22. o Judicium rectum. Right judgment. 

23. sg Exemplum bonum. Good example. 

24. ce Visitatio infrmorum. Visitation of the sick. 

26. se Frequentatio sancto- Companying with 
rum. saints. 

26. ee Oblatio justa. Just oblations. 

27. Decimas Deo solvere. Paying tithes to God. 

28. $¢ Sapientia. Wisdom. 

29. £¢ Voluntas bona, Goodwill. 

380. ‘s Perseverantia. Perseverance. 


§ tv. The reader will note that the general idea of Christian 
virtue embodied in this list is true, exalted, and beautiful ; the 
points of weakness being the confusion of duties with virtues, 
and the vain endeavor to enumerate the various offices of 
charity as so many separate virtues ; more frequently arranged 
as seven distinct works of mercy. This general tendency toa 
morbid accuracy of classification was associated, in later times, 
with another very important element of the Renaissance mind, 
the love of personification ; which appears to have reached its 
greatest vigor in the course of the sixteenth century, and is 
expressed to all future ages, in a consummate manner, in the 
poem of Spenser. It is to be noted that personification is, in 
some sort, the reverse of symbolism, and is far less noble. 
Symbolism is the setting forth of a great truth by an imperfect 
and inferior sign (as, for instance, of the hope of the resurrec- 
tion by the form of the phcenix); and it is almost always 
employed by men in their most serious moods of faith, rarely 
in recreation. Men who use symbolism forcibly are almost 
always true believers in what they symbolize. But Personifi 
cation is the bestowing of a human or living form upon an ab. 
stract idea : it is, in most eases, a mere recreation of the fancy, 
and is apt to disturb the belief in the reality of the thing per. 


THE DUCAL PALACH. 321 


sonified. Thussymbolism constituted the entire system of the 
Mosaic dispensation: it occurs in every word of Christ’s 
teaching ; it attaches perpetual mystery to the last and most 
solemn act of His life. But Ido not recollect a single instance 
of personification in any of His words. And as we watch, 
thenceforward, the history of the Church, we shall find the 
declension of its faith exactly marked by the abandonment of 
symbolism,* and the profuse employment of personification,— 
even to such an extent that the virtues came, at last, to be 
confused with the saints ; and we find in the later Litanies, 
St. Faith, St. Hope, St. Charity, and St. Chastity, invoked im-, 
mediately after St. Clara and St. Bridget. 

§ tvz. Nevertheless, in the hands of its early and earngst 
masters, in whom fancy could not overthrow the foundations 
of faith, personification is often thoroughly noble and lovely ; 
the earlier conditions of it being just as much more spiritual 
and vital than the later ones, as the still earlier symbolism was 
more spiritual than they. Compare, for instance, Dante’s 
burning Charity, running and returning at the wheels of the 
chariot of God,— 


‘¢So ruddy, that her form had scarce 
Been known within a furnace of clear flame,” 


with Reynolds’s Charity, a nurse in a white dress, climbed 
upon by three children.t And not only so, but the number 
and nature of the virtues differ considerably in the statements 
of different poets and painters, acccording to their own views 
of religion, or to the manner of life they had it in mind to 
illustrate. Giotto, for instance, arranges his system altogether 
differently at Assisi, where he is setting forth the monkish 
life, and in the Arena Chapel, where he treats of that of 
mankind in general, and where, therefore, he gives only the 
so-called theological and cardinal virtues; while, at Assisi, 


* The transformation of a symbol into reality, observe, as in transub: 
stantiation, is as much an abandonment of symbolism as the aa ond 
ness of symbolic meaning altogether. 

+ On the window of New College, Oxford. 

Stones of Venice—Vol, II,—15 


322 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


the three principal virtues are those which are reported te 
have appeared in vision to St. Francis, Chastity, Obedience, 
and Poverty: Chastity being attended by Fortitude, Purity, 
and Penance ; Obedience by Prudence and Humility ; Poverty 
by Hope and Charity. The systems vary with almost every 
writer, and in almost every important work of art which 
embodies them, being more or less spiritual according to the 
power of intellect by which they were conceived. The most 
noble in literature are, I suppose, those of Dante and Spenser : 
and with these we may compare five of the most interesting 
series in the early art of Italy ; namely, those of Orcagna, 
Giotto, and Simon Memmi, at Florence and Padua, and those 
of, St. Mark’s and the Ducal Palace at Venice. Of course, 
in the richest of these series, the vices are personified together 
with the virtues, as in the Ducal Palace ; and by the form or 
name of opposed vice, we may often ascertain, with much 
greater accuracy than would otherwise be possible, the par- 
ticular idea of the contrary virtue in the mind of the writer 
or painter. Thus, when opposed to Prudence, or Prudentia, 
on the one side, we find Folly, or Stultitia, on the other, it 
shows that the virtue understood by Prudence, is not the 
mere guiding or cardinal virtue, but the Heavenly Wisdom,* 
opposed to that folly which “hath said in its heart, there is 
no God ;” and of which it is said, ‘ the thought of foolishness 
is sin ;” and again, ‘“‘ Such as be foolish shall not star-] in thy 
sight.” This folly is personified, in early painting and illumi- 
nation, by a half-naked man, greedily eating an apple or other 
fruit, and brandishing a club ; showing that sensuality and 
violence are the two principal characteristics of Foolishness, 
and lead into atheism. The figure, in early Psalters, always 
forms the letter ‘D, which commences the fifty-third sie 
“ Dixil insipiens.” 

§ ivi. In reading Dante, this mode of reasoning from 
contraries isa great help, for his philosophy of the vices is 
the only one which admits of classification ; his descriptions 
of virtue, while they include the ordinary formal divisions 

“Uniting the three ideas expressed by the Greek philosophers unde 
the terms ppdvné, copia, and émorhun ; and part of the idea of cwppogun 


THE DUCAL PALACE. oud 


are far too profound and extended to be brought under Cefi- 
nition. Every line of the “Paradise” is full of the most 
exquisite and spiritual expressions of Christian truth ; and 
that poem is only less read than the ‘“ Inferno” because it 
requires far greater attention, and, perhaps, for its full enjoy- 
ment, a holier heart. 

§ tvm. His system in the “Inferno” is briefly this. The 
whole nether world is divided into seven circles, deep within 
deep, in each of which, according to its depth, severer punish- 
ment is inflicted. These seven circles, reckoning them down- 
wards, are thus allotted : 


1. To those who have lived virtuously, but knew not Christ. 
2. To Lust. 

. To Gluttony. 

. To Avarice and Extravagance. ’ 

To Anger and Sorrow. 

. To Heresy. 

. To Violence and Fraud. 


ADO 


_ This seventh circle is divided into two parts; of which the 
first, reserved for those who have been guilty of Violence, is 
again divided into three, apportioned severally to those who 
have committed, or desired to commit, violence against their 
neighbors, against themselves, or against God. 

The lowest hell, reserved for the punishment of Fraud, is 
itself divided into ten circles, wherein are severally punished 
the sins of,— 


. Betraying women. 

. Flattery. 

Simony. 

. False prophecy. 

. Peculation. 

Hypocrisy. 

Theft. 

. False counsel. 

. Schism and Imposture. 

. Treachery to those who repose entire trust in the traitor 


SCUOMARAAPWNE 


—" 


324 THR STONES OF VENICE. 


§ ux. There is, perhaps, nothing more notable in this most 
interesting system than the profound truth couched under the 
attachment of so terrible a penalty to sadness or sorrow. It 
is true that Idleness does not elsewhere appear in the scheme, 
and is evidently intended to be included in the guilt of sadness 
by the word “accidioso ;” but the main meaning of the poet 
is to mark the duty of rejoicing in God, according both to St. 
Paul’s command, and Isaiah’s promise, “Thou meetest him 
that rejoiceth and worketh righteousness.”* Ido not know 
words that might with more benefit be borne with us, and set 
in our hearts momentarily against the minor regrets and re- 
belliousnesses of life, than these simple ones : 


‘“'Tristi fummo 
Nel aer dolce, che del sol s’ allegra, 
Os ci attristiam, nella belletta negra.” 


‘““We once were sad, 
In the sweet air, made gladsome by the sun, 
Now in these murky settlings are we sad.” + CARy. 


The virtue usually opposed. to this vice of sullenness is 
Alacritas, uniting the sense of activity and cheerfulness. 
Spenser has cheerfulness simply, in his description, never 
enough to be loved or praised, of the virtues of Womanhood ; 
first feminineness or womanhood in specialty ; then,— 


** Next to her sate goodly Shamefastnesse, ' 
Ne ever durst her eyes from ground upreare, 
Ne ever once did looke up from her desse, { 
As if some blame of evill she did feare 
That in her cheekes made roses oft’appeare : 
And her against sweet Cherefulnesse was placed, 
Whose eyes, like twinkling stars in evening cleare, 
Were deckt with smyles that all sad humours chaced. 


* Tsa, Ixiv. 5. 

{ I can hardly think it neccessary to point out to the reader the assos 
ciation between sacred clfeerfulness and solemn thought, or to explain 
any appearance of contradiction between passages in which (as above in 
Chap. V.) I have had to oppose sacred pensiveness to unholy mirth, an? 
those in which I have to oppose sacred cheerfulness to unholy sorrow. 

+ “ Desse,’’ seat. 


eo 
> 


THE DUCAL PALACR. 


% And next to her sate sober Modestie, 
Holding her hand upon her gentle hart; 
And her against, sate comely Curtesie, 
That unto every person knew her part ; 
And her before was seated overthwart 
Soft Silence, and submisse Obedience, 
Both linckt together never to dispart.” 


§ ux. Another notable point in Dante’s system is the inten- 
sity of uttermost punishment given to treason, the peculiar 
sin of Italy, and that to which, at this day, she’attributes her 
own misery with her own lips. An Italian, questioned as to 
the causes of the failure of the campaign of 1848, always 
makes one answer, “ We were betrayed ;” and the most mel- 
ancholy feature of the present state of Italy is principally this, 
that she does not see that, of all causes to which failure might 
be attributed, this is at once the most disgraceful, and the 
most hopeless. In fact, Dante seems to me to have written 
almost prophetically, for the instruction of modern Italy, and 
chiefly so in the sixth canto of the “ Purgatorio.” 

§ txt. Hitherto we have been considering the system of the 
“Inferno” only. That of the “Purgatorio” is much simpler, 
it being divided into seven districts, in which the souls are 
severally purified from the sins of Pride, Envy, Wrath, Indif- 
ference, Avarice, Gluttony, and Lust ; the poet thus implying 
in opposition, and describing in various instances, the seven 
virtues of Humility, Kindness,* Patience, Zeal, Poverty, Ab- 
stinence, and Chastity, as adjuncts of the Christian character, 
in which it may occasionally fail, while the essential group of 
the three theological and four cardinal virtues are represented 
as in direct attendance on the chariot of the Deity; and all 
the sins of Christians are in the seventeenth canto traced to 
the deficiency or aberration of Affection, 


* Usually called Charity: but this virtue in its full sense fs one of the 
attendant spirits by the Throne; the Kindness here meant is Charity 
with a special object; or Friendship and Kindness, as opposed to Envy, 
which has always, in like manner, a special object. Hence the love of 
Orestes and Pylades is given as an instance of the virtue of Fziendship ; 
and the Virgin’s, ‘‘ They have no wine,” at Cana, of general kindness 
and sympathy with others’ pleasure. 


$26 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


§ xu. The system of Spenser is unfinished, and exceedingly 
complicated, the same vices and virtues occurring under differ- 
ent forms in different places, in order to show their different 
relations to each other. I shall not therefore give any gen- 
eral sketch of it, but only refer to the particular personifica- 
tion of each virtue in order to compare it with that of the 
Ducal Palace.* The peculiar superiority of his system is in 
its exquisite setting forth of Chastity under the figure of 
Britomart ; not monkish chastity, but that of the purest Love. 
In completeness of personification no one can approach him; 
not even in Dante do I remember anything quite so great as 
the description of the Captain of the Lusts of the Flesh : 


** As pale and wan as ashes was his looke ; 
His body lean and meagre as a rake ; 
And skin all withered like a dryed rooke ; 
Thereto as cold and drery as a snake; 
That seemed to tremble evermore, and quake: 
All in a canvas thin he was bedight, 
And girded with a belt of twisted brake : 
Upon his head he wore an helmet light, 
Made of a dead man’s skull.” 


He rides upon a tiger, and in his hand is a bow, bent; 


‘¢ And many arrows under his right side, 
Headed with flint, and fethers bloody dide.” 


The horror and the truth of this are beyond everything that 
f know, out c‘ the pages of Inspiration. Note the heading of 
the arrows with flint, because sharper and more subtle in the 
edge than steel, and because steel might consume away with 
rust, but flint not ; and consider in the whole description how 
the wasting away of body and soul together, and the coldness: 


* The ‘‘ Faerie Queen,” like Dante’s ‘‘ Paradise,” iz only half esti- 
mated, because few persons take the pains to think out its meaning. I 
have put a brief analysis of the first book in Appendix 2, Vol. IIL ; 
which may perhaps induce the reader to follow out the subject for him: 
self No time devoted to profane literature will be pvetter rewarded 
than that spent earnestly on Spenser. 


THE DUCAL PALACE. 827 


of the heart, which unholy fire has consumed into ashes, and 
the loss of all power, and the kindling of all terrible impae 
tience, and the implanting of thorny and inextricable griefs, 
are set forth by the various images, the belt of brake, the 
tiger steed, and the light helmet, girding the head with death. 

§ txm. Perhaps the most interesting series of the Virtues 
expressed in Italian art are those above mentioned of Simon 
Memmi in the Spanish chapel at Florence, of Ambrogio di 
Lorenzo in the Palazzo Publico of Pisa, of Orcagna in Or San 
Michele at Florence, of Giotto at Padua and Assisi, in mosaic 
on the central cupola of St. Mark’s, and in sculpture on the 
pillars of the Ducal Palace. The first two series are carefully 
described by Lord Lindsay ; both are too complicated for 
comparison with the more simple series of the Ducal Palace ; 
the other four of course agree in giving first the cardinal and 
evangelical virtues ; their variations in the statement of the 
rest will be best understood by putting them in a parallel ar- 
rangement. 


Sr. MARK’s. ORCAGNA. GIOTTO. Duca PALACE, 
Constancy. Perseverance, Constancy. 
Modesty. Modesty. 
Chastity. Virginity. Chastity. Chastity. 
Patience. Patience. Patience. 
Mercy. 

Abstinence. Abstinence ? 
Piety.* Devotion. 
Benignity. 
Humility. Humility. Humility. Humility. 
Obedience. Obedience. Obedience, 
Docility. 
Caution. 
Poverty. Honesty. 
Liberality 
' Alacrity. 


* Inscribed, I believe, Pietas, meaning general reverence and godiy 
fear. 


828 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


§ uxiv. It is curious, that in none of these lists do we find 
either Honesty or Industry ranked as a virtue, except in the 
Venetian one, where the latter is implied in Alacritas, and 
opposed not only by ‘ Accidia ” or sloth, but by a whole series 
of eight sculptures on another capital, illustrative, as I believe, 
of the temptations to idleness ; while various other capitals, ~ 
as we shall see presently, are devoted to the representation of 
the active trades. Industry, in Northern art and Northern 
morality, assumes a very principal place. I have seen in 
French manuscripts the virtues reduced to these seven, Char- 
ity, Chastity, Patience, Abstinence, Humility, Liberality, 
and Industry : and I doubt whether, if we were but to add 
Honesty (or Truth), a wiser or shorter list could be ‘made 
out. 

§ uxv. We will now take the pillars of the Ducal Palace 
in their order. It has already been mentioned (Vol. I Chap. 
L § xnvi.) that there are, in all, thirty-six great pillars sup- 
porting the lower story ; and that these are to be counted from 
right to left, because then the more ancient of them come first : 
and that, thus arranged, the first, which is not a shaft, but a 
pilaster, will be the support of the Vine angle ; the eighteenth 
will be the great shaft of the Fig-tree angle ; and the thirty- 
sixth, that of the Judgment angle. 

§ rxvi. All their capitals, except that of the first, are octag- 
onal, and are decorated by sixteen leaves, differently enriched 
in every capital, but arranged in the same way ; eight of them 
rising to the angles, and there forming volutes ; the eight 
others set between them, on the sides, rising half-way up the 
bell of the capital; there nodding forward, and showing 
above them, rising out of their luxuriance, the groups or 
single figures which we have to examine.* In some instances, 
the intermediate or lower leaves are reduced to eight sprays 
of foliage ; and the capital is left dependent for its effect on 
the bold position of the figures. In referring to the figures 


*T have given one of these capitals carefully already in my folio 
work, and hope to give most of the others in due time. It was of no use 
to draw them here, as the scale would have been too small to allow ma 
to show the expression of the figures. 


THE DUCAL PALACE, * 829 


on the vctagonal capitals, I shall call the outer side, fronting 
either the Sea or the Piazzetta, the first side ; and so count 
round from left to right ; the fourth side being thus, of course, 
the innermost. As, however, the first five arches were walled 
up after the great fire, only three sides of their capitals.are left 
visible, which we may describe as the front and the eastern 
and western sides of each. 

§ uxvu. First Carrran: ie. of the pilaster at the Vine 
angle. ; 

In front, towards the Sea. A child holding a bird before 
him, with its wings expanded, covering his breast. 

On its eastern side. Children’s heads among leaves. 

On its western side. A child carrying in one hand a comb; 
in the other, a pair of scissors. 

It appears curious, that this, the principal pilaster of the 
facade, should have been decorated only by these graceful: 
erotesques, for I can hardly suppose them anything more. 
There may be meaning in them, but I will not venture to con- 
jecture any, except the very plain and practical meaning con- 
veyed by the last figure to all Venetian children, which it 
would be well if they would act upon. For the rest, I have 
seen the comb introduced in grotesque work as early as the 
thirteenth century, but generally for the purpose of ridiculing 
too great care in dressing the hair, which assuredly is not its 
purpose here. The children’s heads are very sweet and full 
of life, but the eyes sharp and small, 

§ txvit. Srconp Carrrat. Only three sides of the origina 
work are left unburied by the mass of added wall. Each side 
has a bird, one web-footed, with a fish, one clawed, with a ser- 
pent, which opens its jaws, and darts its tongue at the bird’s 
breast ; the third pluming itself, with a feather between the 
mandibles of its bill. Itis by far the most beautiful uf the 
three capitals decorated with birds. 

Tatrp Caprran. Also has three sides only left. They have 
three heads, large, and very ill cut ; one female, and crowned. 

Fourts Carrrat. Has three children. The eastern one is 
defaced : the one in front holds a small bird, whose plumage 
is beautifully indicated, in its right Land; and with its left 


830 THH STONES OF VENICR. 


holds up half a walnut, showing the nut inside: the third 
holds a fresh fig, cut through, showing the seeds. 

The hair of all the three children is differently worked : the 
first has luxuriant flowing hair, and a double chin; the 
second, light flowing hair falling in pointed locks on the 
forehead ; the third, crisp curling hair, deep cut with drill 
holes. 

This capital has been copied on the Renaissance side of the 
palace, only with such changes in the ideal of the children as 
the workman thought expedient and natural. It is highly 
interesting to compare the child of the fourteenth with the 
child of the. fifteenth century. The early heads are full of 
youthful life, playful, humane, affectionate, beaming with sen- 
sation and vivacity, but with much manliness and firmness, 
also, not a little cunning, and some cruelty perhaps, beneath 
‘all; the features small and hard, and the eyes keen. There is 
the making of rough and great men in them. But the chil- 
dren of the fifteenth century are dull smooth-faced dunces, 
without a single meaning line in the fatness of their stolid 
cheeks ; and, although, in the vulgar sense, as handsome as 
the other children are ugly, capable of becoming nothing but 
perfumed coxcombs. 

Firra Caprrrat. Still three sides only left, bearing three 
half-length statues of kings; this is the first capital which 
bears any inscription. In front, a king with a sword in his 
right hand points to a handkerchief embroidered and fringed, 
with a head on it, carved on the cavetto of the abacus. His 
name is written above, ‘‘ TITUS VESPASIAN IMPERATOR ” (contracted 


LPAT.). 


On the eastern side, “ TRAJANUS IMPERATOR.” Crowned, @ 
sword in right hand, and sceptre in left. 

On western, “ (ocr)AVIANUS AUGUSTUS IMPERATOR.” The 
“oor” is broken away. He bears a globe in his right hand, 
with “ muNpus pacts” upon it; a sceptre in his left, which I 
think has terminated in a human figure. He has a flowing 
beard, and a singularly high crown ; the face is much injured, 
but has once been very noble in expression. 


THE DUCAL PALACE, 831 


Srxra Carrman, Has large male and female heads, very 
soarsely cut, hard, and bad. 

§ uxrx. Sevenra Carrran. This is the first of the series 
which is complete ; the first open arch of the lower arcade 
being between it and the sixth. It begins the representation 
of the Virtues. 

First side. Largitas, or Liberality: always distinguished 
from the higher Charity. A male figure, with his lap full of 
money, which he pours out of his hand. The coins are plain, 
circular, and smooth; there is no attempt to mark device 
upon them. The inscription above is, “‘ LARGITAS ME ONORAT.” 

In the copy of this design on the twenty-fifth capital, in- 
stead of showering out the gold from his open hand, the fig- 
ure holds it ina plate or salver, introduced for the sake of 
disguising the direct imitation. The changes thus made in 
the Renaissance pillars are always injuries. 

This virtue is the proper opponent of Avarice ; Dioush it 
does not occur in the systems of Orcagna or Gatto; being in- 
cluded in Charity. It was a leading virtue with haiti and 
the other ancients. 

§ uxx. Second side. Constaicy; not very characteristic. 
An armed man with a sword in his hand, inscribed, “ con- 
STANTIA SUM, NIL TIMENS.” 

This virtue is one of the forms of fortitude, and Giotto 
therefore sets as the vice opponent to Fortitude, “ Inconstan- 
tia,” represented as a woman in loose drapery, falling from a 
rolling globe. The vision seen in the interpreter’s house in 
the Pilgrim’s Progress, of the man with a very bold counte- 
nance, who says to him who has the writer’s ink-horn by his 
side, “Set down my name,” is the best personification of the 
Venetian “ Constantia ” of which Iam aware in literature. It 
would be well for us all to consider whether we have yet 
given the order to the man with the ink-horn, “Set down my 
name.” 

§ uxxt. Third side. Discord; holding up her finger, but 
needing the inscription above to assure us of her meaning, 
“ DISCORDIA SUM, DISCORDANS.” In the Renaissance copy she ig 
@ meek and nun-like person with a veil, 


332 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


She is the Até of Spenser; “mother of debate,” thus de 
scribed in the fourth book : 


‘Her face most fowle and filthy was to see, 
With squinted eyes contrarie wayes intended ; 
And loathly mouth, unmeete a mouth to bee, 
That nought but gall and venim comprehended, 
And wicked wordes that God and man offended : 
Her lying tongue was in two parts divided, 
And both the parts did speake, and both contended ; 
And as her tongue, so was her hart discided, 
That never thoght one thing, but doubly stil was guided.” 


Note the fine old meaning of “ discided,” cut in two ; it is 
a great pity we have lost this powerful expression. We 
might keep “ determined ” for the other sense of the word. 

§ uxxi. Fourth side. Patience. A female figure, very ex- 
pressive and lovely, in a hood, with her right hand on her 
breast, the left extended, inscribed ‘‘ PATIENTIA MANET MECUM.” 

She is one of the principal virtues in all the Christian sys- 
tems: a masculine virtue in Spenser, and beautifully placed 
as the Physician in the House of Holinesse. The opponent 
vice, Impatience, is one of the hags who attend the Captain 
of the Lusts of the Flesh ; the other being Impotence. In 
like manner, in the “Pilgrim’s Progress,” the opposite of 
Patience is Passion; but Spenser’s thought is farther carried. 
His two hags, Impatience and Impotence, as attendant upon 
the evil spirit of Passion, embrace all the phenomena of hu- 
man conduct, down even to the smallest matters, according 
to the adage, ‘“‘ More haste, worse speed.” 

§ uxxm. Fifth side. Despair. <A female figure thrusting a 
dagger into her throat, and tearing her long hair, which flows 
down among the leaves of the capital below her knees. One 
of the finest figures of the series ; inscribed ‘‘prspERacto més 
(mortis?) crupEtis.” In the Renaissance copy she is totally 
devoid of expression, and appears, instead of tearing her 
hair, to be dividing it into long curls on each side. 

This vice is the proper opposite of Hope. By Giotto she 
ie represented as a woman hanging herself, a fiend coming fox 


THE DUCAL PALAOE, 33a 


her soul. Spenser’s vision of Despair is well known, it being 
indeed currently reported that this part of the Faerie Queen 
was the first which drew to it the attention of Sir Philip Sid- 
ney. : 
§ uxxiv. Sixth side. Obedience: with her arms folded 

meek, but rude and commonplace, looking at a little dog 
standing on its hind legs and begging, with a collar round its 
neck. Inscribed “opeprentt * * ;” the rest of the sentence 


is much defaced, but looks like *{’Q) no GRIBEO . Lsup- 


pose the note of contraction above the final A has disappeared 
and that the inscription was “‘ Obedientiam domino exhibeo.” 

This virtue is, of course, a principal one in the monkish 
systems ; represented by Giotto at Assisi as ‘an angel robed 
in black, placing the finger of his left hand on his mouth, and 
passing the yoke over the head of a Franciscan monk kneeling 
at his feet.” * 

Obedience holds a less principal place in Spenser. We 
have seen her above associated with the other peculiar virtues 
of womanhood. 

§ uxxv. Seventh side. Infidelity. A man in a turban, with 
a small image in his hand, or the image of a child. Of the 
inscription nothing but “ AXeIDMLITATE ***” and some frag- 
mentary letters, ‘11, ceRO,” remain. 

By Giotto Infidelity is most nobly symbolized « as a woman 
helmeted, the helmet having a broad rim which keeps the 
light from her eyes. She is covered with heavy drapery, 
stands infirmly as if about to fall, 1s bound by a cord round 
her neck to an image which she carries in her hand, and has 
flames bursting forth at her feet. 

In Spenser, Infidelity is the Saracen knight Sans Fey,— 


‘Pull large of limbe and every joint 
He was, and caréd not for God or man a point.” 


For the part which he sustains in the contest with Godly Feat. 
or the Red-cross knight, see Appendix 2, Vol. TIL 


* Lord Lindsay, vol. ii. p. 226. 


B34 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


§ uxxvi. Eighth side. Modesty ; bearing a pitcher. (In the 
Renaissance copy, a vase like a coffee-pot.) Inscribed ‘‘moprst1a 


ROBUOBT INGO.” 


I do not find this virtue in any of the Italian series, except 
that of Venice. In Spenser she is of course one of those 
attendant on Womanhood, but occurs as one of ’h; tenants 
of the Heart of Man, thus portrayed in the second book : 


‘¢ Straunge was her tyre, and all her garment blew, 
Close rownd about her tuckt with many a plight: 
Upon her fist the bird which shonneth vew. 


And ever and anone with rosy red 

The bashfull blood her snowy cheekes did dye, 
That her became, as polisht yvory 

Which cunning craftesman hand hath overlayd 
With fayre vermilion or pure castory.” 


§ uxxvii. Exauru Carrrat. It has no inscriptions, and its 
subjects are not, by themselves, intelligible ; but they appear 
to be typical of the degradation of human instincts. 

First side. A caricature of Arion on his dolphin ; he wears 
a cap ending in a long proboscis-like horn, and plays a violin 
with a curious twitch of the bow and wag of the head, very 
graphically expressed, but still without anything approaching 
to the power of Northern grotesque. His dolphin has a goodly 
row of teeth, and the waves beat over his back. 

Second side. A human figure, with curly hair and the legs 
of a bear; the paws laid, with great sculptural skill, upon the 
fotiage. It plays a violin, shaped like a guitar, with a bent 
double-stringed bow. 

Third side. A figure with a serpent’s tail and a monstrous 
head, founded on a Negro type, hollow-cheeked, large-lipped, 
and wearing a cap made of a serpent’s skin, holding a fir-cone 
in its hand. 

Fourth side. A monstrous figure, terminating below in a 
tortoise. It is devouring a gourd, which it grasps greedily 
with both hands ; it wears a cap ending in a hoofed leg. 


THER DUCAL PALAOR. 338 


Fifth side. A centaur wearing a crested helmet, and hold. 
ing a curved sword. 

Sixth side. A knight, riding a headless horse, and wearing 
chain armor, with a triangular shield flung behind his back, 
and a two-edged sword. 

Seventh side. A figure like that on the fifth, wearing a 
round helmet, and with the legs and tail of a horse. He bears 
a long mace with a top like a fir-cone. 

Eighth side. A figure with curly hair, and an acorn in itg 
hand, ending below in a fish, 

§ uxxvaz. Nuyta Caprran. First side. Faith. She has her 
left hand on her breast, and the crosson her right. Inscribed 
‘* FIDES OPTIMA IN DEO.” The Faith of Giotto holds the cross 
in her right hand; in her left, a -croll with the Apostles’ 
Creed. She treads upon cabalistic books, and has a key sus- 
pended to her waist. Spenser’s Faith (Fidelia) is still more 
spiritual and noble : 


*¢ She was araied all in lilly white, 
And in her right hend bore a cup of gold, 
With wine and water fild up to the hight, 
In which a serpent did himselfe enfold, 
That horrour made to all that did behold ; 
But she no whitt did chaunge her constant mood ¢ 
And in her other hand she fast did hold 
- A booke, that was both signd and seald with blood ; 
Wherein darke things were writt, hard to be understood.” 


§ xxix. Second side. Fortitude. A long-bearded mar 
{Samson ?] tearing open a lion’s jaw. The inscription is il- 
legible, and the somewhat vulgar personification appears to 
belong rather to Courage than Fortitude. On the Renais- 
‘ gance copy it is inscribed “‘Frorritupo sum virtuis.” The 
- Latin word has, perhaps, been received by the sculptor as 
merely signifying “Strength,” the rest of the perfect idea of 
this virtue having been given in ‘ Constantia” previously. 
But both these Venetian symbols together do not at all ap- 
proach the idea of Fortitude as given generally by Giotto and 
the Pisan sculptors ; clothed with a lion’s skin, knotted about 
her neck, and falling to her feet in deep folds; drawing back 


336 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


her right hand, with the sword pointed towards her enemy 
and slightly retired behind her immovable shield, which, with 
Giotto, is square, and rested on the ground like a tower, cov- 
ering her up to above her shoulders ; bearing on it a lion, and 
with broken heads of javelins deeply infixed. 

Among the Greeks, this is, of course, one of the principal 
virtues ; apt, however, in their ordinary conception of it to 
degenerate into mere manliness or courage. 

§ uxxx. Third side, Temperance; bearing a pitcher of 
water and a cup. Inscription, illegible here, and on the 
Renaissance copy nearly so, “TEMPERANTIA sum” (INOM’ LS) ? 
only left. In this somewhat vulgar and most frequent con- 
ception of this virtue (afterwards continually repeated, as by 
Sir Joshua in his window at New College) temperance is 
confused with mere abstinence, the opposite of Gula, or elut- 
tony ; whereas the Greek Temperance, a truly cardinal virtue, 
is the moderator of all the passions, and so represented by 
Giotto, whuv has placed a bridle upon her lips, and a sword 
in her hand, the hilt of which she is binding to the scabbard. 
In his system, she is opposed among the vices, not by Gula 
or Gluttony, but by Ira, Anger. So also the Temperance of 
Spenser, or Sir Guyon, but with mingling of much sternness: 


** A. goodly knight, all armed in harnesse meete, 
That from his head no place appeared to his feete, 
His carriage was full comely and upright ; 

His countenance demure and temperate ; 
But yett so sterne and terrible in sight, 
That cheard his friendes, and did his foes amate.” 


The Temperance of the Greeks, cwdpootvyn, involves the 
idea of Prudence, and is a most noble virtue, yet properly — 
marked by Plato as inferior to sacred enthusiasm, though nec. 
essary for its government. He opposes it, under the name 
“ Mortal Temperance ” or ‘the Temperance which is of men,” 
to divine madness, pavic, or inspiration ; but he most justly 
and nobly expresses the general idea of it under the term 
UBprs, which, in the “ Pheedrus,” is divided into various intem- 
perances with respect to various objects, and set forth undez 


THE DUCAL PALACR. 337 


the image of a black, vicious, diseased and furious horse, yoked 
by the side of Prudence or Wisdom (set forth under the 
figure of a white horse with a crested and noble head, like 
that which we have among the Elgin Marbles) to the chariot 
of the Soul. The system of Aristotle, as above stated, is 
throughout a mere complicated blunder, supported by so- 
phistry, the laboriously developed mistake of Temperance for 
the essence of the virtues which it guides. Temperance in the 
medizeval systems is generally opposed by Anger, or by Folly, 
or Gluttony : but her proper opposite is Spenser’s Acrasia, the 
principal enemy of Sir Guyon, at whose gates we find the sub- 
ordinate vice “ Excesse,” as the introduction to Intemperance ; 
a graceful and feminine image, necessary to illustrate the more 
dangerous forms of subtle intemperance, as opposed to the 
brutal “ Gluttony” in the first book. She presses grapes into 
a cup, because of the words of St. Paul, “ Be not drunk with 
wine, wherein is excess;” but always delicately, 


** Into her cup she scruzd with daintie breach 
Of her fine fingers, without fowle empeach, 
That so faire winepresse made the wine more sweet.” 


The reader will, I trust, pardon these frequent extracts 
from Spenser, for it is nearly as necessary to point out the 
profound divinity and philosophy of our great English poet, 
as the beauty of the Ducal Palace. 

§ uxxxt. Mourth side. Humility ; with a veil upon her head, 
carrying a lamp in her lap. Inscribed in the copy, “ HummLr 
LAS HABITAT IN ME.” 

This virtue is of course a peculiarly Christian one, hardly 
recognized in the Pagan systems, though carefully impressed 
upon the Greeks in early life in a manner which at this day 
it would be well if we were to imitate, and, together with an 
almost feminine modesty, giving an exquisite grace to the 
conduct and bearing of the well-educated Greek youth. It is, 
of course, one of the leading virtues in all the monkish sys- 
tems, but [ have not ary notes of the manner of its represen- 
Si sa 

g ixxxm Fifth side. Charity. A woman with her lap full of 

Vou, II.—22. 


538 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


loaves (?), giving one to a child, who stretches his arm out 
for it across a broad gap in the leafage of the capital. 

Again very far inferior to the Giottesque rendering of this 
virtue. In the Arena Chapel she is distinguished from all the 
other virtues by having a circular glory round her head, and 
a cross of fire ; she is crowned with flowers, presents with her 
right hand a vase of corn and fruit, and with her left receives 
treasure from Christ, who appears above ner, to provide her 
with the means of continual offices of beneficence, while she 
tramples under foot the treasures of the earth. 

The peculiar beauty of most of the Italian conceptions of 
Charity, is in the subjection of mere munificence to the glow- 
ing of her love, always represented by flames ; here in the 
form of a cross round her head ; in Orcagna’s shrine at Flor- 
ence, issuing from a censer in her hand ; and, with Dante, in- 
flaming her whole form, so that, in a furnace of clear fire, she 
could not have been discerned. 

Spenser represents her as a mother surrounded by happy 
children, an idea afterwards grievously hackneyed and vulgar- 
ized by English painters and sculptors. : 

§ uxxxim. Sixth side. Justice. Crowned, and with sword. 
Inscribed in the copy, ‘‘ REX SUM JUSTICIE.” 

This idea was afterwards much amplified and adorned in 
the cnly good capital of the Renaissance series, under the 
Judgment angle. Giotto has also given his whole strength to 
the painting of this virtue, representing her as enthroned 
under a noble Gothic canopy, holding scales, not by the beam, 
but one in each hand; a beautiful idea, showing that the 
equality of the scales of Justice is not owing to natural laws, 
but to her own immediate weighing the opposed causes in 
her own hands. In one scale is an executioner beheading a 
criminal; in the other an angel crowning a man who seems 
(in Selvatico’s plate) to have been working at a desk or table. 

Beneath her feet is a small predella, representing various 
persons riding securely in the woods, and others dancing to 
the sound of music. 

Spenser’s Justice, Sir Artegall, is the hero of an entire 
book, and the betrothed knight of Britomart, or chastity, 


THE DUCAL PALACE. 339 


§ uxxxiv. Seventh side. Prudence. A man with a book and 
& pair of compasses, wearing the noble cap, hanging down 
towards the shoulder, and bound in a fillet round the brow, 
which occurs so frequently during the fourteenth century in 
Italy in the portraits of men occupied in any civil capacity. 

This virtue is, as we have seen, conceived under very differ- 
ent degrees of dignity, from mere worldly prudence up to 
heavenly wisdom, being opposed sometimes by Stultitia, some- 
times by Ignorantia. I do not find, in any of the representa- 
tions of her, that her truly distinctive character, namely, 
forethought, is enough insisted upon : Giotto expresses her vigi- 
lance and just measurement or estimate of all things by paint- 
ing her as Janus-headed, and gazing into a convex mirror, 
with compasses in her right hand; the convex mirror showing 
her power of looking at many things in small compass. But 
forethought or anticipation, by which, independently of greater 
or less natural capacities, one man becomes more prudent than 
another, is never enough considered or symbolized. 

The idea of this virtue oscillates, in the Greek systems, 
between Temperance and Heavenly Wisdom. | 

§ uxxxv. Highth side. Hope. A figure full of devotional 
expression, holding up its hands as in prayer, and looking to 
a hand which is extended towards it out of sunbeams. In the 
Renaissance copy this hand does not appear. 

Of all the virtues, this is the most distinctively Christian (it 
could not, of course, enter definitely into any Pagan scheme) ; 
and above all others, it seems to me the testing virtue,—that 
by the possession of which we may most certainly determine 
whether we are Christians or not ; for many men have charity, 
that is to say, general kindness of heart, or even a kind of 
faith, who have not any habitual hope of, or longing for, 
heaven. The Hope of Giotto is represented as winged, rising 
in the air, while an angel holds a crown before her. I do not 
know if Spenser was the first to introduce our marine virtue, 
leaning ou an anchor, a symbol as inaccurate as it is vulgar: 
for, in the first place, anchors are not for men, but for ships ; 
and in the second, anchorage is the characteristic not of Hope, 
but of Faith, Faith is dependent, but Hope is aspirant 


840 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


Spenser, however, introduces Hope twice,—the first time at 
the Virtue with the anchor; but afterwards fallacious Hopa 
far more beautifully, in the Masque of Cupid : 


‘She always smyld, and in her hand did hold 
An holy-water sprinckle, dipt in deowe.” 


§ nxxxvi. Tent Carrran. First side. Luxury (the opposite 
of chastity, as above explained). A woman with a jewelled 
chain across her forehead, smiling as she looks into a mirror, 
exposing her breast by drawing down her dress with one 
hand. Inscribed ‘‘ LuxuRIA suM IMENSA.” 

These subordinate forms of vice are not met with so fre- 
quently in art as those of the opposite virtues, but in Spenser 
we find them all. His Luxury rides upon a goat: 


‘<Tn a greene gowne he clothed was full faire, 
Which underneath did hide his filthinesse, 
And in his hand a burning hart he bare.” 


But, in fact, the proper and comprehensive expression of 
this vice is the Cupid of the ancients; and there is not any 
minor circumstance more indicative of the intense difference 
between the medieval and the Renaissance spirit, than the 
mode in which this god is represented. 

I have above said, that all great European art is rooted in 
the thirteenth -century ; and it seems to me that there isa 
kind of central year about which we may consider the energy 
of the middle ages to be gathered; a kind of focus of time 
which, by what is to my mind a most touching and impressive 
Divine appointment, has been marked for us by the greatest 
writer of the middle ages, in the first words he utters ; namely, 
the year 1300, the “mezzo del cammin” of the life of Dante. 
Now, therefore, to Giotto, the contemporary of Dante, and 
who drew Dante’s still existing portrait in this very year, 1300, 
we may always look for the central mediseval idea in any sub- 
ject : and observe how he represents Cupid ; as one of three, 
a terrible trinity, his companions being Satan and Death ; and 
ne himself “a lean scarecrow, with bow, quiver, and fillet, and 


THE DUCAL PALACE. 341 


feet ending in claws,” * thrust down into Hell by Penance, 
from the presence of Purity and Fortitude. Spenser, who haa 
been so often noticed as furnishing the exactly intermediate 
type of conception between the medizval and the Renaissance, 
indeed represents Cupid under the form of a beautiful winged 
god, and riding on a lion, but still no plaything of the Graces, 
but full of terror : 


‘With that the darts which his right hand did straine 
Full dreadfully he shooke, that all did quake, 
And clapt on hye his coloured wingés twaine, 
That all his many it afraide did make.” 


His many, that is to say, his company ; and observe what a 
company it is. Before him go Fancy, Desire, Doubt, Danger, 
Fear, Fallacious Hope, Dissemblance, Suspicion, Grief, Fury, 
Displeasure, Despite, and Cruelty. After him, Reproach, Re- 
pentance, Shame, 


‘¢ Unquiet Care, and fond Unthriftyhead, 
Lewd Losse of Time, and Sorrow seeming dead, 
Inconstant Chaunge, and false Disloyalty, 
Consuming Riotise, and guilty Dread 
Of heavenly vengeaunce ; faint Infirmity, 
Vile Poverty, and lastly Death with infamy.” 


Compare these two pictures of Cupid with the Love-god of 
the Renaissance, as he is represented to this day, confused 
with angels, in every faded form of ornament and allegory, in 
our furniture, our literature, and our minds. 

§ uxxxvu. Second side. Gluttony. A woman in a turban, 
with a jewelled cup in her right hand. In her left, the clawed 
limb of a bird, which she is gnawing. Inscribed “cuLa sINE 

aDINE SUM.” 

Spenser’s Gluttony is more than usually fine : 


‘His belly was upblowne with luxury, 
And eke with fatnesse swollen were his eyne, 
And like a crane his necke was long and fyne, 
Wherewith he swallowed up excessive feast, 
For want whereof poore people oft did pyne.” 


* Lord Lindsay, vol. ii. letter Iv. 


842 THH STONES OF VENICE. 


He rides upon a swine, and is clad in vine-leaves, with ¢ 
garland of ivy. Compare the account of Prine above, ag 
opposed to Temperance. 

§ uxxxvu. Third side. Pride. A knight, with a heavy and 
stupid face, holding a sword with three edges: his armor 
covered with ornaments in the form of roses, and with two 
ears attached to his helmet. The inscription indecipherable, 
all but “ supERpra.” 

Spenser has analyzed this vice with great care. He first 
represents it as the Pride of life; that is to say, the pride 
which runs in a deep under current through all the thoughts 
and acts of men. As such, it is a feminine vice, directly op- 
posed to Holiness, and mistress of a castle called the House 
of Pryde, and her chariot is driven by Satan, with a team o? 
beasts, ridden by the mortal sins. In the throne chamber c? 
her palace she is thus described : 


**So proud she shyned in her princely state, 
Looking to Heaven, for Earth she did disdayne ; 
And sitting high, for lowly she did hate: 

Lo, underneath her scornefull feete was layne 
A dreadfull dragon with an hideous trayne ; 
And in her hand she held a mirrhour bright, 
Wherein her face she often vewed fayne.” 


The giant Orgoglio is a baser species of pride, born of the 
Earth and Eolus ; that is to say, of sensual and vain conceits. 
His foster-father and the keeper of his castle is Ignorance. 
(Book I. canto vim.) 

Finally, Disdain is introduced, in other places, as the form 
of pride which vents itself in insult to others. 

§ uxxxix. Fourth side. Anger. A woman tearing her dress _ 
open at her breast. Inscription here undecipherable ; but in 
the Renaissance copy it is “IRA CRUDELIS EST IN ME.” 

Giotto represents this vice under the same symbol ; but it 
is the weakest of all the figures in the Arena Chapel. The 
“Wrath” of Spenser rides upon a lion, brandishing ‘a fire 
brand, his garments stained with blood. Rage, or Furor, 
occurs subordinately in other places. It appears to me very 


THE DUCAL PALACE. 843 


strange that neither Giotto nor Spenser should have given 
any representation of the restrained Anger, which is infinitely 
the most terrible ; both of them make him violent. 

§ xc. Fifth side. Avarice. An old woman with a veil ovet 
her forehead, and a bag of money in each hand. A figure 
very marvellous for power of expression. The throat is all 
made up of sinews with skinny channels deep between them, 
strained as by anxiety, and wasted by famine; the features 
hunger-bitten, the eyes hollow, the look glaring and intense, 
yet without the slightest caricature. Inscribed in the Renais- 
gance copy, “ AVARITIA IMPLETOR.’ __ 

Spenser’s Avarice (the vice) is much feebler than this; but 
the god Mammon and his kingdom have been described by 
him with his usual power. Note the position of the house of 
Richesse : 


‘¢ Betwixt them both was but a little stride, 
That did the House of Richesse from Hell-mouth divide.” 


It is curious that most moralists confuse avarice with covet- 
ousness, although they are vices totally different in their 
operation on the human heart, and on the frame of society. 
The love of money, the sin of Judas and Ananias, is indeed 
the root of all evil in the hardening of the heart; but ‘‘ covet- 
ousness, which is idolatry,” the sin of Ahab, that is, the inor- 
dinate desire of some seen or recognized good,—thus destroy- 
ing peace of mind,—is probably productive of much more 
misery in heart, and error in conduct, than avarice itself, only 
covetousness is not so inconsistent with Christianity : for cov- 
etousness may partly proceed from vividness of the affections 
and hopes, as in David, and be consistent with much charity ; 
not so avarice. é 

§ xc1. Sixth side. Idleness. Accidia. A figure much 
broken away, having had its arms round two branches of 
trees. 

I do not know why Idleness should be represented as 
among trees, unless, in the Italy of the fourteenth century, 
forest country was considered as desert, and therefore the 


844 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


domain of Idleness. Spenser fastens this vice especially upon 
the clergy,— 


‘¢ Upon a slouthfull asse he chose to ryde, 
Arayd in habit blacke, and amis thin, 
Like to an holy monck, the service to begin. 
And in his hand his portesse still he bare, 
That much was worne, but therein little redd.” 


And he properly makes him the leader of the train of the 
vices : 
‘‘ May seem the wayne was very evil ledd, 
When such an one had guiding of the way.” 


Observe that subtle touch of truth in the “wearing” of the 
portesse, indicating the abuse of books by idle readers, so 
thoroughly characteristic of unwilling studentship from the 
schoolboy upwards. 

§ xou. Seventh-side. Vanity. She is smiling complacently 
as she looks into a mirror in her lap. Her robe is embroid- 
ered with roses, and roses form her crown. Undecipherable. 

There is some confusion in the expression of this vice, be- 
tween pride in the personal appearance and lightness of pur- 
pose. The word Vanitas generally, I think, bears, in the 
medieval period, the sense given it in Scripture. ‘Let not 
him that is deceived trust in Vanity, for Vanity shall be his 
recompense.” ‘Vanity of Vanities.” ‘The Lord knoweth 
the thoughts of the wise, that they are vain.” It is difficult: 
to find this sin,—which, after Pride, is the most universal, per- 
haps the most fatal, of all, fretting the whole depth of our 
humanity into storm “to waft a feather or to drown a fly,”— 
lefinitely expressed in art. Even Spenser, I think, has only . 
partially expressed it under the figure of Phedria, more 
properly Idle Mirth, in the second book. The idea is, how- 
ever, entirely worked out in the Vanity Fair of the ‘“ Pilgrim’s 
Progress.” 

§ xem. Mighth side. Envy. One of the noblest pieces of 
expression in the series. She is pointing malignantly with 
her finger ; a serpent is wreathed about her head like a cap, 


THE DUCAL PALACR. 345 


another forms the girdle of her waist, and a dragon rests in 
her lap. 

Giotto has, however, represented her, with still greater 
subtlety, as having her fingers terminating in claws, and rais- 
ing her right hand with an expression partly of impotent. re- 
egret, partly of involuntary grasping ; a serpent, issuing from 
her mouth, is about to bite her between the eyes; she has 
long membranous ears, horns on her head, and flames con- 
suming her body. The Envy of Spenser is only inferior to 
that of Giotto, because the idea of folly and quickness of hear- 
ing is not suggested by the size of the ear: in other respects 
it is even finer, joining the idea of fury, in the wolf on which 
he rides, with that of corruption on his lips, and of discolora- 
tion or distortion in the whole mind : 


‘¢ Malicious Envy rode 
Upon a ravenous wolfe, and still did chaw 
Between his cankred teeth a venemous tode, 
That all the poison ran about his jaw. 
All in a kirtle of discolourd say 
He clothed was, ypaynted full of ees, 
And in his bosome secretly there lay 
An hatefull snake, the which his taile uptyes 
In many folds, and mortall sting implyes.” 


He has developed the idea in more detail, and still more 
foathsomely, in the twelfth canto of the fifth book. 

§ xcrv. Exevenru Carrtau. Its decoration is composed of 
eight birds, arranged as shown in Plate V. of the “Seven 
Lamps,” which, however, was sketched from the Renaissance 
copy. These birds are all varied in form and action, but not 
so as to require special description. 

§ xov. Twenrra Carrrat. This has been very interesting, 
but is grievously defaced, four of its figures being entirely 
broken away, and the character of two others quite undeci- 
pherable. It is fortunate that it has been copied in the thirty- 
third capital of the Renaissance series, from which we are able 
to identify the lost figures. 

First side. Misery. A man witk 2 wan face, seemingly 

Stones of Venice- Vol, Ti.—** 


346 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


pleading with a child who has its hands crossed on its breast, 
There is a buckle at his own breast in the shape of a cloven 
heart. Inscribed “ misErta.” 

The intention of this figure is not altogether apparent, as it 
is by no means treated asa vice ; the distress seeming real, 
and like that of a parent in poverty mourning over his child. 
Yet it seems placed here as in direct opposition to the virtue 
of Cheerfulness, which follows next in order ; rather, however, 
I believe, with the intention of illustrating human life, than 
the character of the vice which, as we have seen, Dante placed 
in the circle of hell. The word in that case would, I think, 
have been “ Tristitia,” the “ unholy Griefe” of Spenser— 


* All in sable sorrowfully clad, 
Downe hanging his dull head with meat uel chere: 


A pair of pincers in his hail he ee 
With which he pinched people to the heart.” 
He has farther amplified the idea under another figure in 
the fifth canto of the fourth book : 


‘‘ His name was Care ; a blacksmith by his trade, 
That neither day nor night from working spared ; 
But to small purpose yron wedges made : 
Those be unquiet thoughts that carefull minds invade. 
Rude was his garment, and to rags all rent, 
Ne better had he, ne for better cared ; 
With blistered hands among the cinders brent.” 


It is to be noticed, however, that in the Renaissance copy 
this figure is stated to be, not Miseria, but ‘‘ Misericordia.” 
The contraction is a very moderate one, Misericordia being 
in old MS. written always as ‘“‘ Mia.” If this reading be right, 
the figure is placed here rather as the companion, than the 
opposite, of Cheerfulness ; unless, indeed, it is intended to: 
unite the idea of Mercy and Compassion with that of Sacred 
Sorrow. 

§ xcvi. Second side. Cheerfulness. A woman with long 
flowing hair, crowned with roses, playing on a tambourine, 
and with open lips, as singing. Inscribed “ avacrrras.” 

We have already met with this virtue among those espe 


THE DUCAL PALACE. 847 


cially set by Spenser to attend on Womanhood. It is inscribed 
in the Renaissance copy, “ ALACHRITAS CHANIT MECUM.” Note 
the gutturals of the rich and fully developed Venetian dialect 
now affecting the Latin, which is free from them in the earlier 
capitals. 

§ xcvu. Third side. Destroyed ; but, from the copy, we 
find it has been Stultitia, Folly ; and it is there represented 
simply as a man riding, a sculpture worth the consideration 
of the English residents who bring their horses to Venice. 
Giotto gives Stultitia a feather, cap, and club. In early man- 
uscripts he is always eating with one hand, and striking with 
the other ; in later ones he has a cap and bells, or cap crested 
with a cock’s head, whence the word ‘“ coxcomb.” 

§ xcvm. Fourth side. Destroyed, all but a book, which 
identifies it with the ‘ Celestial Chastity” of the Renaissance 
copy ; there represented as a woman pointing to a book (con- 
necting the convent life with the pursuit of literature ?). 

Spenser’s Chastity, Britomart, is the most exquisitely 
wrought of all his characters ; but, as before noticed, she is 
not the Chastity of the convent, but of wedded life. 

§ xcrx. Fifth side. Only a scroll is left; but, from the 
copy, we find it has been Honesty or Truth. Inscribed “‘Hon- 
ESTATEM DiLIco.” It is very curious, that among all the Chris- 
tian systems of the virtues which we have examined, we should 
find this one in Venice only. 

The Truth of Spenser, Una, is, after Chostity. the most ¢ ex- 
quisite character in the “Faerie Queen.” 

§ co. Siath side. Falsehood. An old woman leaning on a 
crutch ; and inscribed in the copy, ‘‘ FALSITAS IN ME SEMPER 
ust.” The Fidessa of Spenser, the great enemy of Una, or 
Truth, is far more subtly conceived, probably not without 
special reference to the Papal deceits. In her true form she 
is a loathsome hag, but in her outward aspect, 


‘A goodly lady, clad in scarlot red, 
Puifled with gold and pearle ; 
Her wanton palfrey all was overspred 
With tinsell trappings, woven like a wave, 
Whose bridle rung with golden bels and bosses brave ™ 


548 THE STONES Of VENICE. 


Dunte’s Fraud, Geryon, is the finest personification of all, 
but the description (Inferno, canto xv.) is too long to be 
quoted. 

§ ct. Seventh side. Injustice. An armed figure holding a 
halbert ; so also in the copy. The figure used by Giotto 
with the particular intention of representing unjust govern- 
ment, is represented ot the gate of an embattled castle in a 
forest, between rocks, while various deeds of violence are com- 
mitted at his feet. Spenser’s “Adicia” is a furious hag, at 
last transformed into a tiger. 

Eighth side. A man with a dagger looking sorrowfully at 
a child, who turns its back to him. I cannot understand this 
figure. It is inscribed in the copy, “ astmnecta (Abstinentia ?) 
OPITIMA ?” 

§ co. Tumrrentu Carrrat. It has lions’ heads all round, 
coarsely cut. 

Fourrerents Carrrat. It has various animals, each sitting 
on its haunches. ‘Three dogs, one a greyhound, one long- 
haired, one short-haired with bells about its neck; two 
monkeys, one with fan-shaped hair projecting on each side of 
its face; a noble boar, with its tusks, hoofs, and_ bristles 
sharply cut ; and a lion and lioness. 

§ om. Frrreenri Carrrat. The pillar to which it belongs is 
thicker than the rest, as well as the one over it in the upper 
arcade. . 

The sculpture of this capital is also much coarser, and 
seems to me later than that of the rest ; and it has no inscrip- 
tion, which is embarrassing, as its subjects have had much 
tneaning ; but I believe Selvatico is right in supposing it to 
have been intended for a general illustration of Idleness. 

First side. A woman with a distaff; her girdle richly 
decorated, and fastened by a buckle. ; 

‘Second side. A youth ina long mantle, with a rose in his 
hand. 

Third side. A woman in a turban stroking a puppy which 
she holds by the haunches, 

Fourth side. A man with a parrot. 

Fifth side. A woman in a very rich costume, with braided 


THE DUCAL PALACR. 349 


hair, and dress thrown into minute folds, holding a rosary (?) 
in her left hand, her right on her breast. 

Sixth side. A man with a very thoughtful face, laying his 
hand upon the leaves of the capital. 

Seventh side. A crowned lady, with a rose in her hand. 

Highth side. A boy with a ball in his left hand, and his 
right laid on his breast. 

§ crv. Srxreenra Carrrat. It is decorated with eight large 
heads, partly intended to be grotesque,* and very coarse and 
bad, except only that in the sixth side, which is totally dif- 
ferent from all the rest, and looks like a portrait. It is thin, 
thoughtful and dignified ; thoroughly fine in every way. It 
wears a cap surmounted by two winged lions ; and, therefore, 
I think Selvatico must have inaccurately written the list given 
in the note, for this head is certainly meant to express the 
superiority of the Venetian character over that of other na- 
tions. Nothing is more remarkable in all early sculpture, 
than its appreciation of the signs of dignity of character in 
the features, and the way in which it can exalt the principal 
figure in any subject by a few touches. 

§ cv. Srvenreenty Carrrat. This has been so destroyed by 
the sea wind, which sweeps at this point of the arcade round 
the angle of the palace, that its inscriptions are no longer 
legible, and great part of its figures are gone. Selvatico 
states then as follows: Solomon, the wise; Priscian, the 
grammarian ; Aristotle, the logician ; Tully, the orator ; Py- 
thagoras, the philosopher ; Archimedes, the mechanic ; Or- 
pheus, the musician ; Ptolemy the astronomer. The frag- 
ments actually remaining are the following : 

First side. A figure with two books, in a robe richly dec- 
orated with circles of roses. Inscribed ‘“ saLomon (saP)r1ENs.” 

Second side. A man with one book, poring over it: he has 
had a long stick or reed in his hand. Of inscription only the 
letters “‘ GRAMMATIC” remain. 


* Selvatico states that these are intended to be representative of eight 
nations, Latins, Tartars, Turks, Hungarians, Greeks, Goths, Egyptians, 
and Persians. Hither the inscriptions are now defaced or I have care 
lessly omitted to note them. 


850 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


9 


Third side. ‘“artsrorte:” so inscribed. He has a peaked 
double beard and a flat cap, from under which his long hair 
falls down his back. 

Fourth side. Destroyed. 

Fifth side. Destroyed, all but a board with three (couaters ?) 
on it. 

Sixth side. A figure with compasses. Inscribed “ Gxo- 
wer * *” 

Seventh side. Nothing is left but a guitar with its handle 
wrought into a lion’s head. 

Highth side. Destroyed. 

§ ovr. We have now arrived at the Eieurrenrn Carrraz, tne 
most interesting and beautiful of the palace. It represents 
the planets, and the sun and moon, in those divisions of the 
zodiac known to astrologers as their ‘ houses ;” and perhaps 
indicates, by the position in which they are placed, the period 
of the year at which this great corner-stone was laid. The in- 
scriptions above have been in quaint Latin rhyme, but are 
now decipherable only in fragments, and that with the more 
difficulty because the rusty iron bar that binds the abacus has 
broken away, in its expansion, nearly all the upper portions 
of the stone, and with them the signs of contraction, which 
are of great importance. I shall give the fragments of them 
that I could decipher ; first as the letters actually stand (put- 
ting those of which I am doubtful in brackets, with a note of 
interrogation), and then as I would read them. 

§ cv. It should be premised that, in modern astrology, the 
houses of the planets are thus arranged : 


The house of the Sun, is Leo. 
‘ Moon, ** Cancer. 
sf of Mars, ** Aries and Scorpio. 
cs Venus, * Taurus and Libra. 
a Mercury, ‘ Gemini and Virgo. 
7 Jupiter, ‘ Sagittarius and Pisces 
-* Saturn, ** Capricorn. 


- Herschel, ‘ Aquarius. 


THE DUCAL PALACKR. 351 


The Herschel planet being of course unknown to the old 
astrologers, we have only the other six planetary powers, to- 
gether with the sun; and Aquarius is assigned to Saturn as 
his house. I could not find Capricorn at all; but this sign 
may have been broken away, as the whole capital is grievously 
defaced. The eighth side of the capital, which the Herschel 
planet would now have occupied, bears a sculpture of the 
Creation of Man: it is the most conspicuous side, the one set 
diagonally across the angle ; or the eighth in our usual mode 
of reading the capitals, from which I shall not depart. 

§ cvur. The first side, then, or that towards the Sea, has 
Aquarius, as the house of Saturn, represented as a seated fig- 
ure beautifully draped, pouring a stream of water out of an 
amphora over the leaves of the capital. His inscription is: 


‘ET SATURNE DOMUS (ECLOCERUNT ?) 18 7BRE.” 


§ crx. Second side. Jupiter, in his houses Sagittarius and 
Pisces, represented throned, with an upper dress disposed in 
radiating folds about his neck, and hanging down upon his 
breast, ornamented by small pendent trefoiled studs or bosses. 
He wears the drooping bonnet and long gloves ; but the folds 
about the neck, shot forth to express the rays of the star, are 
the most remarkable characteristic of the figure. He raises 
his sceptre in his left hand over Sagittarius, represented as the 
centaur Chiron ; and holds two thunnies in his right. Some- 
thing rough, like a third fish, has been broken away below 
them ; the more easily because this part of the group is en- 
tirely undercut, and the two fish glitter in the light, relieved 
on the deep gloom below the leaves. The inscription is : 


“INDE JOVI’ * DONA PISES SIMUL ATQ® CIRONA.” 


Or, 
“Inde Jovis dona 
Pisces simul atque Chirona.” 


*The comma in these inscriptions stands for a small cuneiform mark, 
I believe of contraction, and the small * for a zigzag mark of the same 
kind. The dots or periods are similarly marked on the stone. 


352 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


Domus is, I suppose, to be understood before Jovis : “Then 
the house of Jupiter gives (or governs?) the fishes and 
Chiron.” 

§ cx. Third side. Mars, in his houses Aries and Scorpio. 
Represented as a very ugly knight in chain mail, seated side- 
ways on the ram, whose horns are broken away, and having a 
large scorpion in his left hand, whose tail is broken also, to 
the infinite injury of the group, for it seems to have curled 
across to the angle leaf, and formed a bright line of light, like 
the fish in the hand of Jupiter. The knight carries a shield, 
on which fire and water are sculptured, and bears a banner 
upon his lance, with the word ‘“pEFERosuM,” which puzzled 
me for some time. It should be read, I believe, “ De ferro 
sum ;” which would be good Venetian Latin for ‘‘I am of 
iron.” 

§ oxt. Fourth side. The Sun, in his house Leo. Repre- 
sented under the figure of Apollo, sitting on the Lion, with 
rays shooting from his head, and the world in his hand. 
The inscription : 


“‘TU ES DOMU’ SOLIS (QUo*?) SIGNE LEONI.” 


I believe the first phrase is, “ I'unc est Domus solis ;” but 
there is a letter gone after the “quo,” and I have no idea 
what case of signum “signe ” stands for. 

§ oxu. Fifth side. Venus, in her houses Taurus and Libra. 
The most beautiful figure of the series. She sits upon the 
bull, who is deep in the dewlap, and better cut than most of 
the animals, holding a mirror in her right hand, and the scales 
in her left. Her breast is very nobly and tenderly indicated 
under the folds of her drapery, which is exquisitely studied in, 
its fall. What is left of the inscription, runs : 


‘LIBRA CUMTAURO DOMUS * * * PURIOR AUR *.” 
§ oxm. Sixth side. Mercury, represented as wearing a 


pendent cap, and holding a book: he is supported by three 
ehildren in reclining attitudes, representing his houses Gemini 


THE DUCAL PALACE. 353 


and Virgo. But I cannot understand the inscription, though 
more than usually legible. 


**OCCUPAT ERIGONE STIBONS GEMINUQ’ LACONE.”’ 


§ oxiv. Seventh side. The Moon, in her house Cancer, This 
sculpture, which is turned towards the Piazzetta, is the most 
picturesque of the series. The moon is represented as a 
woman in a boat, upon the sea, who raises the crescent in her 
right hand, and with her left draws a crab out of the waves, 
up the boat’s side. The moon was, I believe, represented in 
Egyptian sculptures as in a boat; but I rather think the Vene- 
tian was not aware of this, and that he meant to express the 
peculiar sweetuess of the moonlight at Venice, as seen across 
the lagoons. Whether this was intended by putting the planet 
in the boat, may be questionable, but assuredly the idea was 
meant to be conveyed by the dress of the figure. Fora llthe 
draperies of the other figures on this capital, as well as on the 
rest of the fagade, are disposed in severe but full folds, show- 
ing little of the forms beneath them ; but the moon’s drapery 
ripples down to her feet, so as exactly to suggest the trembling 
of the moonlight on the waves. This beautiful idea is highly 
characteristic of the thoughtfulness of the early sculptors: 
five hundred men may be now found who could have cut the 
drapery, as such, far better, for one who would have disposed 
its folds with this intention. The inscription is: 


‘“‘TUNE CANCER DOMU T. PBET IORBE SIGNORU.” 


§ cxv. Highth side. God creating Man. Represented as a 
throned figure, with a glory round the head, laying his left 
hand on the head of a naked youth, and sustaining him with 
his right hand. The inscription puzzled me for a long time ; 
but except the lost r and m of “ formavit,” and a letter quite 
undefaced, but to me unintelligible, before the word Eva, in 
the shape of a figure of 7, I have safely ascertained the rest. 


‘-DELIMO DSADA DECO sTAFO ** avrr7EVA.” 
Or 
‘De limo Dominus Adam, de costa fo(rm) avit Evam ;” 
From the dust the Lord made Adam. and from the rib Eve, 
Vou. 11.—28 


854 THE STONES OF VENICR. 


IT imagine the whole of this capital, therefore—the principal 
one of the old palace,—to have been intended to signify, first, 
the formation of the planets for the service of man upon the 
earth ; secondly, the entire subjection of the fates and fortune 
of man to the will of God, as determined from the time when 
the earth and stars were made, and, in fact, written in the 
volume of the stars themselves. 

Thus interpreted, the doctrines of judicial astrology were 
not only consistent with, but an aid to, the most spiritual and 
humble Christianity. 

In the workmanship and grouping of its foliage, this capital 
1s, on the whole, the finest I know in Europe. The sculptor 
has put his whole strength into it. I trust that it will appear 
among the other Venetian casts lately taken for the Crystal 
Palace ; but if not, I have myself cast all its figures, ara two 
of its leaves, and I intend to give drawings of them on a large 
scale in my folio work. 

§ oxvir. Ninereents Carirat. This is, of course, the second 
counting from the Sea, on the Piazzetta side of the palace, 
ealling that of the Fig-tree angle the first. 

It is the most important capital, as a piece of evidence in 
point of dates, in the whole palace. Great pains have been 
taken with it, and in some portion of the accompanying fur- 
niture or ornaments of each of its figures a small piece of 
colored marble has been inlaid, with peculiar significance : 
for the capital represents the arts of sculpture and architecture ; 
and the inlaying of the colored stones (which are far too small 
to be effective at a distance, and are found in this one capital 
only of the whole series) is merely an expression of the archi- 
t-c’’s feeling of the essential importance of this art of inlaying, 
and o: the value of color generally in his own art. 

oxvi. First side. “st, stmpiictus”: so inscribed, A 
figure working with a pointed chisel on a small oblong block 
of green serpentine, about four inches long by one wide, inlaid 
in the capital. The chisel is, of course, in the left hand, but 
the right is held up open, with the palm outwards. 

Second side, A crowned figure, carving the image of a 
child on a small statue, with a ground of red marble. The 


THE DUCAL PALACE. 855 


sculptured figure is highly finished, and is in type of head 
much like the Ham or Japheth at the Vine angle. Inscription 
effaced. 

Third side. An old man, uncrowned, but with curling hair, 
at work on a small column, with its capital complete, and a 
little shaft of dark red marble, spotted with paler red. The 
capital is precisely of the form of that found in the palace of 
the Tiepolos and the other thirteenth century work of Venice. 
This one figure would be quite enough, without any other evi- 
dence whatever, to determine the date of this flank of thee 
Dueal Palace as not later, at all events, than the first half of 
the fourteenth century. Its inscription is broken away, all 
but “ pisrPuLo.” 

Fourth side. A crowned figure ; but the object on which 
it has been working is broken away, and all the inscription 
except “st. E(N?)as.” 

Fifth side. A man with a turban, and a sharp chisel, at ~ 
work on a kind of panel or niche, the back of which is of red 
marble. 

Sixth side. A crowned figure, with hammer and chisel, 
employed on a little range of windows of the fifth order, hay- 
ing roses set, instead of orbicular ornaments, between the 
spandrils, with a rich cornice, and a band of marble inserted 
above. This sculpture assures us of the date of the fifth order 
window, which it shows to have been universal in the early 
fourteenth century. 

There are also five arches in the block on which the sculp- 
tor is working, marking the frequency of the number five in 
the window groups of the time. 

Seventh side. A figure at work on a pilaster, with Lombar- 
dic thirteenth century capital (for account of the series of forms 
in Venetian capitals, see the final Appendix of the next vol- 
ume), the shaft of dark red spotted marble. 

Highth side. A figure with a rich open crown, working on 
a delicate recumbent statue, the head of which is laid ona 
pillow covered with a rich chequer pattern ; the whole sup- 
ported on a block of dark red marble. Inscription broken 
away, all but “sr. sym. (Symmachus?) rv * * anvs.” There 


856 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


appear, therefore, altogether to have been five saints, two of 
them popes, if Simplicius is the pope of that name (three in 
front, two on the fourth and sixth sides), alternating with the 
three uncrowned workmen in the manual labor of sculpture. 
I did not, therefore, insult our present architects in saying 
above that they “ought to work in the mason’s yard with 
their men.” It would be difficult to find a more interesting 
expression of the devotional spirit in which all great work was 
undertaken at this time. 

* §cxvm. Twenrters Carrrar, It is adorned with heads of 
animals, and is the finest of the whole series in the broad 
massiveness of its effect ; so simply characteristic, indeed, of 
the grandeur of style in the entire building, that I chose it for 
the first Plate in my folio work. In spite of the sternness of 
its plan, however, it is wrought with great care in surface de- 

_ tail; and the ornamental value of the minute chasing obtained 
by the delicate plumage of the birds, and the clustered bees 
on the honey-comb in the bear’s mouth, opposed to the strong 
simplicity of its general form, cannot be too much admired. 
There are also more grace, life, and variety in the sprays of 
foliage on each side of it, and under the heads, than in any 
other capital of the series, though the earliness of the work- 
manship is marked by considerable hardness and coldness iz 
the larger heads. A Northern Gothic workman, better ac. 
quainted with bears and wolves than it was possible to become 
in St. Mark’s Place, would have put far more life into these 
heads, but he could not have composed them more skilfully. 

§ oxrx. First side. A lion with a stag’s haunch in his mouth, 

Those readers who have the folio plate, should observe the 
peculiar way in which the ear is cut into the shape of a ring, 
jagged or furrowed on the edge; an archaic mode of treat- 
ment peculiar, in the Ducal Palace, to the lions’ heads of the 
fourteenth century. The moment we reach the Renaissance 
work, the lions’ ears are smooth. Inscribed simply, “ Eo.” 

Second side. A wolf with a dead bid in his mouth, its 
body wonderfully true in expression of the passiveness of 
death. The feathers are each wrought with a central quill 
and radiating filaments. Inscribed “ Lurus ” 


THE DUCAL PALACR. B57 


Third side. A fox, not at all like one, with a dead eock in 
his mouth, its comb and pendent neck admirably designed se 
as to fall across the great angle leaf of the capital, its tail hang- 
- ing down on the other side, its long straight feathers exqui- 
sitely cut. Inscribed “ (vuLP?)1s.” 

Fourth side. Entirely broken away. ' 

Fifth side. ‘arzr.” Well tusked, with a head of maize in 
his mouth ; at least I suppose it to be maize, though shaped 
like a pine-cone. 

Siath side. “cuants.” With a bone, very ill cut; and a 
bald-headed species of dog, with ugly flap ears. 

Seventh side. ‘‘muscrputus.” With a rat (?) in his mouth. 

Eighth side.‘ ursus.” With a honeycomb, covered with 
large bees. 

§ oxx. T'weni--First Caprrat. Represents the principal in- 
ferior professions. 

First side. An old man, with his brow deeply wrinkled, and 
very expressive features, beating in a kind of mortar with a 
hammer. Inscribed ‘‘ Lapicripa sum.” 

Second side. I believe, a goldsmith ; he is striking a small 
flat bowl or patera, on a pointed anvil, with a light hammer. 
The inscription is gone. 

Third side. A shoemaker with a shoe in his hand, and an 
instrument for cutting leather suspended beside him. In- 
scription undecipherable. 

Fourth side. Much broken. A carpenter planing a beam 
resting on two horizontal logs. Inscribed “ carPENTaRI : suM. 

Fifth side. A figure shovelling fruit into a tub ; the latter 
very carefully carved from what appears to have been an ex- 
cellent piece of cooperage. Two thin laths cross each other 
over the top of it. The inscription, now lost, was, according 
to Selvatico, ‘‘ mmNsuRATOR ” ? 

Sixth side. A man, with a large hoe, breaking the ground, 
which lies in irregular furrows and clods before him. Now 
undecipherakle, but according to Selvatico, ‘ acricHona.” 

Seventh side. A man, in a pendent cap, writing on a large 
scroll which falls over his knee. Inscribed ‘‘ norartus sum.” 

Eighth side. A man forging a sword, or scythe-biade : he 


858 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


wears a large skull-cap; beats with a large hammer on a solid 
anvil ; and is inscribed “ FraBER SUM.” 

§ oxxr. Twenry-seconp Carrran, The Ages of Man ; and 
the influence of the planets on human life. 

First side. The moon, governing infancy for four. years, 
according to Selvatico. Ihave no note of this side, having, I 
suppose, been prevented from raising the ladder against it by 
some fruit-stall or other impediment in the regular course of 
“my examination ; and then forgotten to return to it. 

Second side. A child with a tablet, and an alphabet in- 
scribed on it. The legend above is 


‘“MBCUREU*? DNT. PUERICIE PAN. &.” 


Or. ‘‘Mercurius dominatur pueritiz per annos X.” (Selvatico 
reads VII.) “Mercury governs boyhood for ten (or seven) 
years.” 

Third side. An older youth, with another tablet, but 
broken. Inscribed 


‘CADOLOSCENCIE * * * Pp, AN. VII.” 


Selvatico misses this side altogether, as I did the first, se 
that the lost planet is irrecoverable, as the inscription is now 
defaced: Note the o fore in adolescentia: so also we con- 
stantly find u for o; showing, together with much other in- 
contestable evidence of the same kind, how full and: deep the 
old pronunciation of Latin always remained, and how ridicu- 
lous our English mincing of the vowels would have sounded 
to a Roman ear. 

Fourth side. A youth with a hawk on his fist. 


‘STUVENTUTI DNT SOL. P. AN. XIX.” 
The sun governs youth for nineteen years. 


Fifth side. A man sitting, helmed, with a sword over hia 
shoulder. Inscribed 


** SENECTUTI DNT MARS. P. AN. XV.” 
Mars governs manhood for fifteen years. 


THE DUCAL PALACE. 359 


Siath side. A very graceful and serene figure, in the pen 
dent cap, reading. 


‘“C SENICIE DNT JUPITER, P. ANN, XI.” 
Jupiter governs age for twelve years. 


Seventh side. An old man in a skull-cap, praying. 


** DECREPITE DNT SATN UQ* ADMOTE.” (Saturnus usque ad mortem.! 
Saturn governs decrepitude until death. 


Eighth side. The‘dead body lying on a mattress. 


‘‘ ULTIMA EST MORS PENA PECCATI.” 
Last comes death, the penalty of sin. 


§ cxx Shakspeare’s Seven Ages are of course merely the 
expression of this early and well known system. He has de. 
prived ‘the dotage of its devotion ; but I think wisely, as the 
Jialian system would imply that devotion was, or should be, 
always delayed until dotage. 

Twenry-ruirp Carrrat. I agree with Selvatico in thinking 
this has been restored. It is decorated with large and vulgar 
heads. 

§ oxxmm. Twenty-rourts Caprirat. This belongs to the large 
shaft which sustains the great party wall of the Sala del Gran 
Consiglio. The shaft is thicker than the rest; but the cap- 
ital, though ancient, is coarse and somewhat inferior in design 
to the others of the series. It represents the history of mar- 
riage : the lover first seeing his mistress at a window, then 
addressing her, bringing her presents; then the bridal, the 
birth and the death of a child. But I have not been able to 
examine these sculptures properly, because the pillar is en- 
cumbered by the railing which surrounds the two guns set 
before the Austrian guard-house. 

§ oxxrv. Twenty-rirru Caprrat. We have here the employ- 
ments of the months, with which we ar2 already tolerably 
acquainted. There are, however, one or two varieties worth 
noticing in this series. 

First side. March. Sitting triumphantly in a rich dress, 
as the beginning of the year. 


360 JHE STONES OF VENICE. 


Second side. April and May. April with a lamb: May 
with a feather fan in her hand. 

Third side. June. Carrying cherries in a basket. 

I did not give this series with the others in the previous 
chapter, because this representation of-June is peculiarly 
Venetian. It is called ‘‘the month of cherries,” mese delle 
ceriese, in the popular rhyme on the conspiracy of Tiepolo, 
quoted above, Vol. L 

The cherries principally grown near Venice are of a deep 
red color, and large, but not of high flavor, though refreshing. 
They are carved upon the pillar with great care, all their 
stalks undercut. 

Fourth side. July and August. The first reaping; the 
leaves of the straw being given, shooting out from the tubular 
stalk. August, opposite, beats (the grain ?) in a basket. 

Fifth side. September. A woman standing in a wine-tub, 
and holding a branch of vine. Very beautiful. 

Sixth side.. October and November. I could not make out 
their occupation ; they seem to be roasting or boiling some 
root over a fire. 

Seventh side. December. Killing pigs, as usual. 

Highth side. January warminy his feet, and February 
frying fish. This last employment is again as characteristic 
of the Venetian winter as the cherries are of the Venetian 
summer. 

The inscriptions are undecipherable, except a few letters 
here and there, and the words MARCIUS, APRILIS, and FEBRU- 
ARIUS. 

This is the last of the capitals of the early palace ; the next, 
or twenty-sixth capital, is the first of those executed in the 
fifteenth century under Foscari; and hence to the Judgment 
angle the traveller has nothing to do but to compare the base 
copies of the earlier work with their originals, or to observe 
the total want of invention in the Renaissance sculptor, 
wherever he has depended on his own resources. This, how- 
ever, always with the exception of the twenty-seventh and of 
the last capital, which are both fine. 

I shall merely enumerate the subjects and point out the 


TRE DUCAL PALACE. 361 


plagiarisms of these capitals, as they are not worth descrip 
tion. 

§ oxxv. Twenry-srxrs Caprrat. Gopied from the fifteenth, 
merely changing the succession of the figures. 

Twenty-sEventTH Capitan. Ithink it possible that this may 
be part of the old work displaced in joining the new palace 
with the old ; at all events, it is well designed, though a little 
coarse. It represents eight different kinds of fruit, each in a 
basket ; the characters well given, and groups well arranged, 
but without much care or finish. The names are inscribed 
above, though somewhat unnecessarily, and with certainly as 
much disrespect to the beholder’s intelligence as the sculp- 
tor’s art, namely, ZEREXIS, PIRI, CHUCUMERIS, PERSICI, ZUCHE, 
MOLONI, Ficl, HUVA. Zerexis (cherries) and Zuche (gourds) 
both begin with the same letter, whether meant for z, s, or 6 
Iam not sure. The Zuche are the common gourds, divided 
into two protuberances, one larger than the other, like a 
bottle compressed near the neck; and the. Moloni are the 
‘long water-melons, which, sbastda) form a staple food of 
the Venetians to this day. 

S cxxvi Twenty-rienTa Carrrat. Copied from the seventh. 

Twenry-nintH Caprrat. Copied from the ninth, 

Tarrtiera Carrrat. Copied from the tenth. The “ Accidia” 
is noticeable as having the inscription complete, ‘‘ accrpia ME 
strinait ;” and the * Luxuria” for its utter want of expres- 
sion, having a severe and calm face, a robe up to the neck, 
and her hand upon her breast. The inscription 3 also differ. 
ent: “ LUXURIA SUM STERC® (?) INFERI” (?). 

Turrry-rirst Caprrat. Copied from the eighth. 

Turrry-seconp Caprratu. Has no inscription, only fully 
robed figures laying their hands, without any meaning, on 
their own shoulders, heads, or chins, or on the leaves around 
them. 

Turry-rarrp Carrran. Copied from the twelfth. 

Turrry-rcorta Carrrat. Copied from the eleventh. 

Turrty-rirra OCaprran. Has children, with birds or fruit, 
pretty in features, and utterly inexpressive, like the cherubs 
of the eighteenth century. 


862 THE STONES OF VHNICK. 


§ cxxvu. Tumry-srxra Cariran. This is the last of the 
Piazzetta facade, the elaborate one under the Judgment angle. 
Its foliage is copied from the eighteenth at the opposite side, 
with an endeavor on the part of the Renaissance sculptor ta 
refine upon it, by which he has merely lost some of its truth 
and force. This capital will, however, be always thought, at 
first, the most beautiful of the whole series: and indeed it is 
’ very noble ; its groups of figures most carefully studied, very 
graceful, and much more pleasing than those of the earlier 
work, though with less real power in them ; and its foliage is 
only inferior to that of the magnificent Fig-tree angle. * It 
represents, on its front or first side, Justice enthroned, seated 
on two lions ; and on the seven other sides examples of acts 
of justice or good government, or figures of lawgivers, in the 
following order : 

Second side. Aristotle, with two pupils, giving laws. In- 


scribed ; 
‘¢ aRISTOT * * CHE DIE LEGE.” 
Aristotle who declares laws. 


Third side. Ihave mislaid my note of this side: Selvatice 
and Lazari call it “ Isidore ” (?).* 
Fourth side. Solon with his pupils. Inscribed : 
‘*SAL° UNO DEI SETE SAVI DI GRECIA CHE DIE LEGE.” 

Solon, one of the seven sages of Greece, who declares laws. 
Note, by the by, the pure Venetian dialect used in this capi- 
tal, instead of the Latin in the more ancient ones. One of the 
seated pupils in this sculpture is remarkably beautiful in the 
sweep of his flowing drapery. 

Fifth side. The chastity of Scipio. Inscribed : 


‘“TSIPIONE A CHASTITA CH * * * & LA FIA (e la figlia ?) * * ARE.” 


A soldier in a plumed bonnet presents a kneeling maiden te 
the seated Scipio, who turns thoughtfully away. 
Sixth side. Numa Pompilius building churches. 


‘NUMA POMPILIO IMPERADOR EDIFICHADOR DI TEMPI IE CHIESE.” 


* Can they have mistaken the IsIPIONE of the fifth side for the word 
Isidore ? 


THE DUCAL PALACE. 363 


Numa, in a kind of hat with a crown above it, directing a 
soldier in Roman armor (note this, as contrasted with the 
mail of the earlier capitals). They point to a tower of three 
‘stories filled with tracery. 

Seventh side. Moses receiving the law. Inscribed : 


‘‘ QUANDO MOSE RECEVE LA LEGE I SUL MONTE.” 


Moses kneels on a rock, whence springs a beautifully fancied 

tree, with clusters of three berries in the centre of three leaves, 

sharp and quaint, like fine Northern Gothic. The half figure 

of the Deity comes out of the abacus, the arm meeting that of 

Moses, both at full stretch, with the stone tablets between. 
Highth side, Trajan doing justice to the Widow. 


‘¢TRAJANO IMPERADOR CHE FA JUSTITIA A LA VEDOVA.’’ 


He is riding spiritedly, his mantle blown out behind: the 
widow kneeling before his horse. 

§ oxxvut. The reader will observe that this capital is of 
peculiar interest in its relation to the much disputed question 
of the character of the later government of Venice. It is the 
assertion by that government of its belief that Justice only 
could be the foundation of its stability ; as these stones of 
Justice and Judgment are the foundation of its halls of council. 
And this profession of their faith may be interpreted in two 
ways. Most modern historians would call it, m common 
with the continual reference to the principles of justice :in the 
political and judicial language of the period,* nothing more 
than a cloak for consummate violence and guilt ; and it may 
easily be proved to have been so in myriads of instances. But 
in the main, I believe the expression of feeling to be genuine. 
I do not believe, of the majority of the leading Venetians of 
this period whose portraits have come down to us, that they 
were deliberately and everlastingly hypocrites. I see no 
hypocrisy in their countenances. Much capacity cf it, much 
subtlety, much natural and acquired reserve ; but no meanness, 


* Compare the speech of the Doge Mocenigo, above, —‘‘ first justice, 
_ gnd then the interests of the state: ” and see Vol. HI, Chap. IL. § Lr, 


864 THE STONES OF VENIOR. 


On the contrary, infinite grandeur, repose, courage, and the 
peculiar unity and tranquillity of expression which come of 
sincerity or wholeness of heart, and which it would take much 
demonstration to make me believe could by any possibility be 
seen on the countenance of an insincere man. I trust, there- 
fore, that these Venetian nobles of the fifteenth century did, in 
the main, desire to do judgment and justice to all men ; but, 
as the whole system of morality had been by this time under 
mined by the teaching of the Romish Church, the idea of 
justice had become separated from that of truth, so that dis- 
simulation in the interest of the state assumed the aspect of 
duty. We had, perhaps, better consider, with some careful- 
ness, the mode in which our own government is carried on, 
and the occasional difference between parliamentary and pri- 
vate morality, before we judge mercilessly of the Venetians 
in this respect. The secrecy with which their political and 
criminal trials were conducted, appears to modern eyes like a 
confession of sinister intentions ; but mav it not also be con- 
sidered, and with more probability, as vue result of an en- 
deavor to do justice in an age of violence ?—the only means by 
which Law could establish its footing in the midst of feudalism. 
Might not Irish juries at this day justifiably desire to conduct 
their proceedings with some greater approximation to the 
judicial principles of the Council of Ten? Finally, if we 
examine, with critical accuracy, the evidence on which our 
present impressions of Venetian government are founded, we 
shall discover, in the first place, that two-thirds of the tradi- 
tions of its cruelties are romantic fables: in the second, that 
the crimes of which it can be proved to have been guilty, 
differ only from those committed by the other Italian powers 
in being done less wantonly, and under profounder conviction 
of their political expediency : and lastly, that the final degra- 
dation of the Venetian power appears owing not so much to 
the principles of its government, as to their being forgotten in 
the pursuit of pleasure. 

§ oxxix. We have now examined the portions of the palace 
which contain the principal evidence of the feeling of ita 
builders. The capitals of the upper arcade are exceedingly 


THE DUCAL PALACE. 365 


various in their character ; their design is formed, as in the 
lower series, of eight leaves, thrown into volutes at the an- 
gles, and sustaining figures at the flanks; but these figures 
have no inscriptions, and though evidently not without mean- 
ing, cannot be interpreted without more knowledge than I 
possess of ancient symbolism. Many of the capitals toward 
the Sea appear to have been restored, and to be rude copies 
of the ancient ones ; others, though apparently original, have 
been somewhat carelessly wrought ; but those of them, which 
are both genuine and carefully treated, are even finer in com- 
position than any, except the eighteenth, in the lower arcade. 
The traveller in Venice ought to ascend into the corridor, 
and examine with great care the series of capitals which 
extend on the Piazzetta side from the Fig-tree angle to the 
pilaster which carries the party wall of the. Sala del Gran 
Consiglio. As examples of graceful composition in massy 
capitals meant for hard service and distant effect, these are 
among the finest thingsI know in Gothic art ; and that above 
the fig-tree is remarkable for its sculptures of the four winds; 
each on the side turned towards the wind represented. Le- 
vante, the east wind ; a figure with rays round its head, to 
show that it is always clear weather when that wind blows, 
raising the sun out of the sea: Hotro, the south wind; 
crowned, holding the sun in its right hand: Ponente, the 
west wind ; plunging the sun into the sea: and Tramontana, 
the north wind ; looking up at the north star. This capital 
should be carefully examined, if for no other reason than to 
attach greater distinctness of idea to the magnificent verbiage 
of Milton : 


‘““ Thwart of these, as fierce, 
Forth rush the Levant and the Ponent winds, 


Eurus, and Zephyr ; with their lateral noise, 
Sirocco and Libecchio.” 


{ may also especially point out the bird feeding its three 
young ones on the seventh pillar on the Piazzetta side ; but 
there is no end to the fantasy of these sculptures ; and the 
traveller ought to observe them all carefully, until he comes 
to the great Pilaster or complicated pier which sustains the 


866 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


party wall of the Sala del Consiglio ; that is to say, the forty. 
seventh capital of the whole series, counting from the pilaster 
of the Vine angle inclusive, as in the series of the lower ar- 
cade. The forty-eighth, forty-ninth, and fiftieth are bad 
work, but they are old ; the fifty-first is the first Rerais.cnce 
capital of the upper arcade: the first new lion’s head with 
smooth ears, cut in the time of Foscari, is over the fiftieth 
capital ; and that capital, with its shaft, stands on the apex 
of the eighth arch from the Sea, on the Piazzetta side, of 
which one spandril is masonry of the fourteenth and the other 
of the fifteenth century. 

§ cxxx. The reader who is not able to examine the build- 
sng on the spot may be surprised at the definiteness with 
which the point of junction is asecrtainable ; but a glance at 
the lowest range of leaves in the opposite Plate (XX.) will 
enable him to judge of the grounds on which the above state- 
ment is made. Fig. 12 is a cluster of leaves from the capital 
of the Four Winds ; early work of the finest time. Fig. 13 
is a leaf from the great Renaissance capital at the Judgment 
angle, worked in imitation of the older leafage. Fig. 14 is a 
leaf from one of the Renaissance capitals of the upper arcade, 
which are all worked in the natural manner of the period. 
It will be seen that it requires no great ingenuity to distine 
guish between such design as that of fig. 12 and that of fig. 
14. 

§ oxxx1. It is very possible that the reader may at first like 
fig. 14 the best. I shall endeavor, in the next chapter, to 
show why he should not ; but it must also be noted, that fig. 
12 has lost, and fig. 14 gained, both largely, under the hands 
of the engraver. All the bluntness and coarseness of feeling 
in the workmanship of fig. 14 have disappeared on this small 
scale, and all the subtle refinements in the broad masses of 
fig. 12 have vanished. They could not, indeed, be rendered 
in line engraving, unless by the hand of Albert Durer ; and I 
have, therefore, abandoned, for the present, all endeavor te 
represent any more important mass of the early sculpture of 
the Ducal Palace : but I trust that, in a few months, casts of 
many portions will be within the reach of the inhabitants of 


PLATE XX.—LEAFAGE OF THE VENETIAN CAPITALS. 


THE DUCAL PALACE. 367 
London, and that they will be able to judge for themselves of 
their perfect, pure, unlabored naturalism ; the freshness, elas- 
ticity, and softness of their leafage, united with the most 
noble symmetry and severe reserve,—no running to waste, no . 
loose or experimental lines, no extravagance, and no weakness. 
Their design is always sternly architectural; there is none of 
the wildness or redundance of natural vegetation, but there is 
all the strength, freedom, and tossing flow of the breathing 
leaves, and all the undulation of their surfaces, rippled, as 
they grew, by the summer winds, as the sands are by the sea. 

§ cxxxu. This early sculpture of the Ducal Palace, then, 
represents the state of Gothic work in Venice at its central 
and proudest period, i. e. circa 1350. After this time, all is 
decline,—of what nature and by what steps, we shall inquire 
in the ensuing chapter ; for as this investigation, though still 
referring to Gothic architecture, introduces us to the first 
symptoms of the Renaissance influence, I have considered it 
as properly belonging to the third division of our subject. 

§ cxxxm. And as, under the shadow of these nodding 
leaves, we hid farewell to the great Gothic spirit, here also we 
may cease our examination of the details of the Ducal Palace ; 
for above its upper arcade there are only the four traceried 
windows,* and one or two of the third order on the Rio 
Facade, which can be depended upon as exhibiting the origi- 
nal workmanship of the older palace. I examined the capitals 
of the four other windows on the fagade, and of those on the: 
Piazzetta, one by one, with great care, and I found them all 
to be of far inferior workmanship to those which retain their 
traceries: I believe the stone framework of these windows 
must have been so cracked and injured by the flames of the 
great fire, as to render it necessary to replace it by new 
traceries ; and that the present mouldings and capitals are 
base imitations of the original ones. The traceries were at 
first, however, restored in their complete form, as the holes 


* Some further details respecting these portions, as well as some nec- 
cessary confirmations of my statements of dates, are, however, given in 
Appendix 1, Vol. III, I feared wearying the general reader by intro 
ducing them into the text. 


868 THR STONES OF VENICKH. 


for the belts which fastened the bases of their shafts are still 
to be seen in the window-sills, as well as the marks of the 
inner mouldings on the soffits)s How much the stone facing 
_ of the fagade, the parapets, and the shafts and niches of the 
angles, retain of their original masonry, it is also impossible 
to determine; but there is nothing in the workmanship of any 
of them demanding especial notice ; still less in the large 
central windows on each facade, which are entirely of Renais- 
sanee execution. All that is admirable in these portions of 
the building is the disposition of their various parts and 
masses, which is without doubt the same asin the original 
fabric, and calculated, when seen from a distance, to produce 
the same impression. 

§. cxxxiv. Not so in the interior. All vestige of the earlier 
modes of decoration was here, of course, destroyed by the 
fires ; and the severe and religious work of Guariento and 
Bellini has been replaced by the wildness of Tintoret and the 
luxury of Veronese. But in this case, though widely different 
in temper, the art of the renewal was at least intellectually as 
ereat as that which had perished: and though the halls of the 
Ducal Palace are no more representative of the character of 
the men by whom it was built, each of them is still a colossal 
casket of priceless treasure ; a treasure whose safety has till 
now depended on its being despised, and which at this mo- 
ment, and as I write, is piece by piece being destroyed for 
ever. 

§ oxxxv. The reader will forgive my quitting our more im- 
mediate subject, in order briefly to explain the causes and 
the nature of this destruction ; for the matter is simply the 
most important of all that can be brought under our present 
consideration respecting the state of art in Europe. 

The fact is, that the greater number of persons or societies 
throughout Europe, whom wealth, or chance, or inheritance 
has put in possession of valuable pictures,.do not know a 
good picture from a bad one,* and have no idea in what the 


* Many persons, capable of quickly sympathizing with any excellence, 
when once pointed out to them, easily deceive themselves into the sup: 


THE DUCAL PALAOE. 369 


value of a picture really consists. The reputation of certain 
works is raised, partly by accident, partly by the just testi. 
mony of artists, partly by the various and generally bad taste 
of the public (no picture, that I know of, has ever, in modern 
times, attained popularity, in the full sense of the term, with- 
out having some exceedingly bad qualities mingled with its 
good ones), and when this reputation has once been com- 
pletely established, it little matters to what state the picture 
may be reduced : few minds are so completely devoid of im- 
agination as to be unable to invest it with the beauties which 
they have heard attributed to it. 

§ oxxxvi. This being so, the pictures that are most valued 
are for the most part those by masters of established renown, 
which are highly or neatly finished, and of a size small enough 
to admit of their being placed in galleries or saloons, so as to 
be made subjects of ostentation, and to be easily seen by a 
crowd. For the support of the fame and value of such pict- 
ures, little more is necessary than that they should be kept 
bright, partly by cleaning, which is incipient destruction, and 
partly by what is called “restoring,” that is, painting over, 
which is of course total destruction. Nearly all the gallery 
pictures in modern Europe have been more or less destroyed 
by one or other of these operations, generally exactly in pro- 
portion to the estimation in which they are held ; and as, 
originally, the smaller and more highly finished works of any 
great master are usually. his worst, the contents of many of. 
our most celebrated galleries are by this time, in reality, of 
very small value indeed. 

§ oxxxvu. On the other hand, the most precious works of 
any noble painter are usually those which have been done 
quickly, and in the heat of the first thought, on a large scale, 
for places where there was little likelihood of their be'ng well 
seen, or for patrons from whom there was little prospect of 
rich remuneration. In general, the best things are done in 


position that they are judges of art. There is only one real test of such 
power of judgment. Can they, at a glance, discover a good picturs 
obscured by the filth, and confused among the rubbish, of the pawn: 
broker’s or dealer's garret ? 

Stones of Venice—Vol. II.—17 


370 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


this way, or else in the enthusiasm and pride of accomplishing 
some great purpose, such as painting a cathedral or a campo- 
santo from one end to the other, especially when the time has 
been short, and circumstances disadvantageous. 

§ cxxxvmm. Works thus executed are of course despised, on 
account of their quantity, as well as their frequent slightness, 
in the places where they exist; and they are too large to 
be portable, and too vast and comprehensive to be read on 
the spot, in the hasty temper of the present age. They are, 
therefore, almost universally neglected, whitewashed by cus- 
todes, shot at by soldiers, suffered to drop from the walls 
piecemeal in powder and rags by society in general; but, 
which is an advantage more than counterbalancing all this 
evil, they are not often “restored.” What is left of them, 
however fragmentary, however ruinous, however obscured and 
defiled, is almost always the real thing ; there are no fresh 
readings: and therefore the greatest treasures of art which 
Europe at this moment possesses are pieces of old plaster on 
ruinous brick walls, where the lizards burrow and bask, and 
which few other living creatures ever approach ; and torn 
sheets of dim canvas, in waste corners of churches ; and 
mildewed stains, in the shape of human figures, on the walls 
of dark chambers, which now and then an exploring traveiler 
causes to be unlocked by their tottering custode, looks hastily 
round, and retreats from in a weary satisfaction at his accom- 
plished duty. 

§ oxxxix. Many of the pictures on the ceilings and walls 
of the Ducal Palace, by Paul Veronese and Tintoret, have 
been more or less reduced, by neglect, to this condition, 
Unfortunately they are not altogether without reputation, and 
their state has drawn the attention of the Venetian authorities 
and academicians. It constantly happens, that public bodies: 
who will not pay five pounds to preserve a picture, will pay 
fifty to repaint it:* and when I was at Venice in 1846, there 


* This is easily explained. Thereare, of course, in every place and at 
all periods, bad painters who conscientiously believe that they can im- 
prove every picture they touch ; and these men are generally, in their 
presumption, the most influential over the innocence, whether of mor 


THE DUCAL PALACE. : 37) 


were two remedial operations carrying on, at one and the 
same time, in the two buildings whick contain the pictures of 
greatest value in the city (as pieces of color, of greatest value 
in the world), curiously illustrative of this peculiarity in hu- 
man nature. Buckets were set on the floor of the Scuola 
di San Rocco, in every shower, to catch the rain which came 
through the pictures of Tintoret on the ceiling; while in the 
Ducai Palace, those cf Paul Veronese were themselves laid 
on the floor to be repainted ; and I was myself present at the 
re-illumination of the breast of a white horse, with a brush, at 
the end of a stick five fest long, luxuriously dipped in a com: 
mon house-painter’s vessel of paint. 

This was, of course, a large picture. The process has 
already been continued in an equally destructive, though 
somewhat more delicate manner, over the whole of the hum- 
bler canvases on the ceiling of the Sala del Gran Consiglio ; 
and I heard it threatened when I was last in Venice (1851-2) 
to the “ Paradise” at its extremity, which is yet in tolerable 
condition,—the largest work of Tintoret, and the most won- 
derful piece of pure, manly, and masterly oil-painting in the 
world. 

§ oxi. I leave these facts to the consideration of the Ku- 
ropean patrons of art. Twenty years hence they will be 
acknowledged and regretted ; at present, I am well aware, 
that it is of little use to bring them forward, except only to 
explain the present impossibility of stating what pictures are, 
and what were, in the interior of the Ducal Palace. Ican 
only say, that in the winter of 1351, the “ Paradise ” of Tin- 
toret was still comparatively uninjured, and that the Camera 
di Collegio, and its antechamber, and the Sala de’ Pregadi 
were full of pictures by Veronese and Tintoret, that made 
their walls as precious as so many kingdoms; so precious 
indeed, and so full of majesty, that sometimes when walking 
at evening on the Lido, whence the great chain of the Alps, 
crested with silver clouds, might be seen rising above the 


archs or municipalities. The carpenter and slater have little influence 
in recommending the repairs of the roof ; but {he bad painter has great 
influence, as weal as interest, in recommending those of the picture, 


372 . THE STONES OF VENICE. 


front of the Ducal Palace, I used to feel as much awe in 
gazing on the building as on the hills, and could believe that 
God had done a greater work in breathing into the narrow- 
ness of dust the mighty spirits by whom its haughty walls 
had been raised, and its burning legends written, than in 
lifting the rocks of granite higher than the clouds of heaven, 
and veiling them with their various mantle of purple flower 
and shadowy pine. . 


APPENDIX. 


1. THE GONDOLIER’S ORY. 


Mosr persons are now well acquainted with the general as 
pect of the Venetian gondola, but few have taken the pains t 
understand the cries of warning uttered by its boatmen, al- 
though those cries are peculiarly characteristic, and very im- 
pressive to a stranger, and have been even very sweetly intro- 
duced in poetry by Mr. Monckton Milnes. It may perhaps 
be interesting to the traveller in Venice to know the general 
method of management of the boat to which he owes so many 
happy hours. ; 

A gondola is in general rowed only by one man, standing at 
the stern; those of the upper classes having two or more 
boatmen, for greater speed and magnificence. In order to 
raise the oar sufficiently, it rests, not on the side of the boat, 
but on a piece of crooked timber like the branch of a tree, ris- 
ing about a foot from the boat’s side, and called -a “fércola.” 
The forcola is of different forms, according to the size and 
uses of the boat, and it is always somewhat complicated in its 
parts and curvature, allowing the oar various kinds of resta 
and catches on both its sides, but perfectly free play in all 
cases ; as the management of the boat depends on the gondo- 
lier’s being able in an instant to place his oar in any position 
The forcola is set on the right-hand side of the boat, some six - 
feet from the stern: the gondolier stands on a little flat plat- 
form or deck behind it, and throws nearly the entire weight 
of his body upon the forward stroke. The effect of this stroke 
would be naturally to turn the boat’s head round to the left, 
as well as to send it forward ; but this tendency is corrected 
by keeping the blade of the oar under the water on the return 


B74 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


stroke, and raising it gradually, as a full spoon is raised out 
of any liquid, so that the blade emerges from the water only 
an instant before it again plunges. A downward and lateral 
pressure upon the forcola is thus obtained, which entirely 
counteracts the tendency given Ly the forward stroke; and 
the effort, after a littie practice, becomes hardly conscious, 
though, as it adds some Jabor to the back stroke, rowing a 
gondola at speed is hard and breathless work, though it ap- 
pears easy and graceful to the looker-on. 

If then the gondola is to be turned to the left, the forward 
impulse is given without the return stroke ; if it is to be turned 
to the right, the plunged oar is brought forcibly up to the 
surface ; in either case a single strong stroke being enough to 
turn the light and flat-bottomed boat. But as it has no keel, 
when the turn is made sharply, as out of one canal into an- 
other very narrow one, the impetus of the boat in its former 
direction gives it an enormous lee-way, and it drifts laterally 
up against the wall of the canal, and that so forcibly, that if 
it has turned at speed, no gondolier can arrest the motion 
merely by strength or rapidity of stroke of oar; but it is 
checked by a strong thrust of the foot against the wall itself, 
the head of the boat being of course turned for the moment 
almost completely round to the opposite wall, and greater ex- 
ertion made to give it, as quickly as possible, impulse in the 
new direction. 

The boat being thus guided, the cry “Premi” is the order 
from one gondolier to another that he should “press” or 
thrust forward his oar, without the back stroke, so as to send 
the boat’s head round fo the left ; and the ery “Stali” is the 
order that he should give the return or upward stroke which 
sends the boat’s head round to the right. Hence, if two gon- 
doliers meet under any circumstances which render it a mat- 
ter of question on which side they should pass each other, the 
gondolier who has at the moment the least power over his 
boat, cries to the other, ‘‘ Premi,” if he wishes the boats te 
pass with their right-hand sides to each other, and “Stali,” if 
with their left. Now, in turning a corner, there is of course 
tisk of collision between boats coming from opposite sides 


APPHNDIX, 375 


znd warning is always clearly and loudly given on approach- 
ing an angle of the canals. It is of course presumed that the 
boat which gives the warning will be nearer the turn than the 
one which receives and answers it; and therefore will not 
have so much time to check itself or alter its course. Hence 
the advantage of the turn, that is, the outside, which allows 
the fullest swing and greatest room for lee-way, is always 
yielded to the boat which gives warning. Therefore, if the 
warning boat is going to turn to tha right, as it is to have the 
outside position, it will keep its own right-hand side to the 
boat which it meets, and the cry of warning is therefore 
*‘Premi,” twice given ; first as soon as it can be heard round 
the angle, prolonged and loud, with the accent on the e, and 
another strongly accented e added, a kind of question, ‘“ Pré- 
mi-é,” followed at the instant of turning, with “Ah Premji,” 
with the accent sharp on the finali. If, on the other hand, 
the warning boat is going to turn to the left, it will pass with 
its left-hand side to the one it meets; and the warning cry is, 
“Stali-é, Ah Stal.” Hence the confused idea in the mind of 
the traveller that Stali means.“ to the left,” and ‘ Premi” to 
the right ;. while they mean, in reality, the direct reverse ; the 
Stali, for instance, being the order to the unseen gondolier 
who may be behind the corner, coming from the left-hand 
side, that he should hold as much as possible to his own right ; 
this being the only safe order for him, whether he is going to 
turn the corner himself, or to go straight on ; for as the warn- 
ing gondola will always swing right across the canal in turn- 
ing, a collision with it is only to be avoided by keeping well 
within it, and close up to the corner which it turns. 

There are several other cries necessary in the management 
of the gondola, but less frequently, so that the reader will 
hardly care for their interpretation ; except only the “sciar,” 
which is the order to the opposite gondolier to stop the boat 
as suddenly as possible by slipping his oar in front of the for- 
cola. Thc cry is never heard except when the boatmen have 
got into some unexpected position, involving a risk of col- 
lision ; but the action is seen constantly, when the gondola ig 
rowed by two or more men (for if performed by the single 


3876 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


gondolier it only swings the boat’s head sharp round to the 
right), in bringing up at a landing-place, especially when 
there is any intent of display, the boat being first urged to ita 
full speed and then stopped with as much foam about the oar- 
blades as possible, the effect being much like that of stopping 
a horse at speed by pulling him on his haunches. 


2. OUR LADY OF SALVATION. 


“Santa Maria della Salute,” Our Lady of Health, or of 
Safety,-would be a more literal translation, yet not perhaps 
fully expressing the force of the Italian word in this case. 
The church was built between 1630 and 1680, in acknowledg- 
ment of the cessation of the plague ;—of course to the Virgin, 
to whom the modern Italian has recourse in all his principal 
distresses, and who receives his gratitude for all principal de- 
liverances. 

The hasty traveller is usually enthusiastic in his admiration 
of this building ; but there is a notable lesson to be derived 
from it, which is not often read. On the opposite side of the 
broad canal of the Giudecca is a small church, celebrated 
among Renaissance architects as of Palladian design, but 
which would hardly attract the notice of the general observer, 
unless on account of the pictures by John Bellini which it con- 
tains, in order to see which the traveller may perhaps remem- 
ber having been taken across the Giudecca to the Church of 
the “ Redentore.” But he ought carefully to compare these 
two buildings with each other, the one built “to the Virgin,” 
the other ‘“ to the Redeemer ” (also a votive offering after the 
cessation of the plague of 1576); the one, the most conspicu- 
ous church in Venice, its dome, the principal one by which 
she is first discerned, rising out of the distant sea: the other, 
small and contemptible, on a suburban island, and only be- 
' coming an object of interest because it contains three small 
pictures! For in the relative magnitude and conspicuous- 
ness of these two buildings, we have an accurate index of the 
relative importance of the ideas of the Madonna and of Christ, 
in the modern Italian mind. 


APPENDIX. 3Tt 


Some turther account of this church is given in the final 
Index to the Venetian buildings at the close of the third 
Volume. 


3. TIDES OF VENICE, AND MEASURES AT TORCELLO, 


The lowest and highest tides take place in Venice at differ- 
ent periods, the lowest during the winter, the highest in the 
summer and autumn. During the period of the highest tides, 
the city is exceedingly beautiful, especially if, as is not unfre- 
quently the case, the water rises high enough partially to 
flood St. Mark’s Place. Nothing can be more lovely or fan- 
tastic than the scene, when the Campanile and the Golden 
Church are reflected in the calm water, and the lighter gon- 
dolas floating under the very porches of the fagade. On the 
other hand, a winter residence in Venice is rendered peculiarly 
disagreeable by the low tides, which sometimes leave the 
smaller canals entirely dry, and large banks of mud beneath 
the houses, along the borders of even the Grand Canal. The 
difference between the levels of the highest and lowest tides I 
saw in Venice was 6 ft. 3 in. The average fall rise is from 
two to three feet. 


The measures of Torcello were intended for Appendix 4 ; 
but having by a misprint referred the reader to Appendix 3, I 
give them here. The entire breadth of the church within the 
walls is 70 feet ; of which the square bases of the pillars, 3 feet 
on each side, occupy 6 feet ; and the nave, from base to base, 
measures 31 ft. 1 in. ; the aisles from base to wall, 16 feet odd 
inches, not accurately ascertainable on account of the modern 
wainscot fittings. The intervals between the bases of the pil- 
lars are 8 feet each, increasing toward the altar to 8 ft. 3 in., in 
order to allow for a corresponding diminution in the diameter 
of the bases from 3 ft. to 2 ft. 11 in. or 2 ft. 10. in. This 
subtle dimainution of the bases is in order to prevent the eye 
from feeling the greater narrowness of the shafts in that part 
of the nave, their average circumference being 6 ft. 10 in. ; 


B78 THE STONES OF VENICH. 


and one, the second on the north side, reaching 7 feet, while 
those at the upper end of the nave vary from 6 ft. 8 in. to 6 ft. 
4in. Itis probable that this diminution in the more distant 
pillars adds slightly to the perspective effect of length in the 
body of the church, as it is seen from the great entrance : but 
whether this was the intention or not, the delicate adaptation of 
this diminished base to the diminished shaft is a piece of fas- 
tidiousness in proportion which I rejoice in having detected ; 
and this the more, because the rude contours of the bases them- 
selves would little induce the spectator to anticipate any such 
refinement. 


4, DATE OF THE DUOMO OF TORCELLO. 


The first flight to the lagoons for shelter was caused by the 
invasion of Attila in the fifth century, so that in endeavoring 
to throw back the thought of the reader to the former solitude 
of the islands, I spoke of them as they must have appeared 
“1300 years ago.” Altinum, however, was not finally de- 
stroyed till the Lombard invasion in 641, when the episcopal 
seat was removed to Torcello, and the inhabitants of the main- 
land city, giving up all hope of returning to their former 
homes, built their Duomo there. It is a disputed point among 
Venetian antiquarians, whether the present church be that 
which was built in the seventh century, partially restored in 
1008, or whether the words of Sagornino, “ ecclesiam jam 
vestustate consumptam recreare,” justify them in assuming 
an entire rebuilding of the fabric. I quite agree with the 
Marchese Selvatico, in believing the present church to be the 
earlier building, variously strengthened, refitted, and modified 
by subsequent care ; but, in all its main features, preserving 
its original aspect, except, perhaps, in the case of the pulpit 
and chancel screen, which, if the Chevalier Bunsen’s conclu- 
sions respecting early pulpits in the Roman basilicas be cor- 
rect (see the next article of this Appendix), may possibly have 
been placed in their present position in the tenth century, 
and the fragmentary character of the workmanship of the 
latter, noticed in §§ x. and xt, would in that case have been 
the result of innovation, rather than of haste. The question 


APPENDIX. 3879 


howeyer, whether they are of the seventh or eleventh century, 
does not in the least affect our conclusions, drawn from the 
design of these portions of the church, respecting pulpits in 
general. 


5. MODERN PULPITS. 


There is no character of an ordinary modern English church 
which appears to mé more to be regretted than the peculiar 
pompousness of the furniture of the pulpits, contrasted, as it 
generally is, with great meagreness and absence of color in 
the other portions of the church ; a pompousness, besides, al- 
together without grace or meaning, and dependent merely on 
certain applications of upholstery ; which, curiously enough, 
are always in worse taste than even those of our drawing- 
rooms. Nor do I understand how our congregations can en- 
dure the. aspect of the wooden sounding-board attached only 
by one point of its circumference to an upright pillar behind 
the preacher ; and looking asif the weight of its enormous 
leverage must infallibly, before the sermon is concluded, tear 
it from its support, and bring it down upon the preacher’s 
head, These errors in taste and feeling will however, I believe, 
be gradually amended as more Gothic churches are built ; but 
the question of the position of the pulpit presents a more dis- 
putable ground of discussion. I can perfectly sympathise with 
the feeling of those who wish the eastern extremity of the 
church to form a kind of holy place for the communion table ; 
nor have I often received a more painful impression than on 
seeing the preacher at the Scotch church in George Street, 
Portman Square, taking possession of a perfect apse ; and 
occupying therein, during the course of the service, very 
nearly the same position which the figure of Christ does in 
that of the Cathedral of Pisa. But I nevertheless believe that 
the Scotch congregation are perfectly right, and have restored 
the real arrangement of the primitive churches, The Cheva, 
lier Bunsen informed me very lately, that, in all the early 
basilicas he has examined, the lateral pulpits are of more re. 
cent date than the rest of the building ; that he knows a 
none placed in the position which they now occupy, both i 


880 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


the basilicas and Gothic cathedrals, before the ninth cen — 
tury ; and that there can be no doubt that the bishop always 
preached or exhorted, in the primitive times, from his throne 
in the centre of the apse, the altar being always set at the 
centre of the church, in the crossing of the transepts. His 
Excellency found by experiment in Santa Maria Maggiore, the 
largest of the Roman basilicas, that the voice could be heard 
more plainly from the centre of the apse than from any other 
spot in the whole church ; and, if this be so, it will be another 
very important reason for the adoption of the Romanesque 
(or Norman) architecture in our churches, rather than of the 
Gothic. The reader will find some farther notice of this ques- 
tion in the concluding chapter of the third volume. 

Before leaving this subject, however, I must be permitted to 
say one word to those members of the Scotch Church who are 
severe in their requirement of the nominal or apparent extem- 
porization of all addresses delivered from the pulpit. Whether 
they do right in giving those among their ministers who cannot 
preach extempore, the additional and useless labor of commit- 
ting their sermons to memory, may be a disputed question ; 
but it can hardly be so, that the now not unfrequent habit of 
making a desk of the Bible, and reading the sermon stealthily, 
by slipping the sheets of it between the sacred leaves, so that 
the preacher consults his own notes on pretence of consulting 
the Scriptures, is a very unseemly consequence of their over- 
strictness. 


6. APSE OF MURANO. 


The following passage succeeded in the original text to § xv. 
of Chap. I. Finding it not likely to interest the general 
reader, I have placed it here, as it contains matter of some in- 
terest to architects. 


“On this plinth, thus carefull studied in relations of mag- 
nitude, the shafts are set at the ancles, as close to each other as 
possible, as seen in the ground-plan. These shafts are founded 
on pure Roman tradition ; their bas=s have no spurs, and the 
shaft itself is tapered in a bold curve, according to the classical 


APPENDIX. 381 


model. But, in the adjustment of the bases to each other, we 
have a most curious instance of the first beginning of the Gothic 
principle of aggregation of shafts. They have a singularly 
archaic and simple profile, composed of a single cavetto and 
roll, which are circular, on a square plinth. Now when these 
bases are brought close to each other at the angles of the apse, 
their natural position would be as in fig. 3, Plate L, leaving an 
awkward fissure between the two square plinths. This offend- 
ed the architect’s eye ; so he cut part of each of the bases 
away, and fitted them close to each other, as in fig. 5, Plate L, 
which is their actual position. As before this piece of rough 
harmonization the circular mouldings reached the sides of the 
squares, they were necessarily cut partly away in the course of 
the adjustment, and run into each other as in the figure, so as 
to give us one of the first Venetian instances of the continuous 
Gothic base. 
“The shafts measure on the average 2 ft. 83 in. in circum- 
ference, at the base, tapering so much that under the lowest 
fillet of their necks they measure only 2 feet round, though 
their height is only 5 ft. 6 in., losing thus eight inches of girth 
in five feet and a half of height. They are delicately curved 
all the way up; and are 24 in. apart from each other where 
they are nearest, and about 5 in, at the necks of their capitals.” 


7. EARLY VENETIAN DRESS. 


Sansovino’s account of the changes in the dress of the Vene- 
tians is brief, masterly, and full of interest ; one or two pas- 
sages are deserving of careful notice, especially the introduc: 
tory sentence. ‘For the Venetians from their first origin, 
having made it their aim to be peaceful and religious, and to 
keep on an equality with one another, that equality might in- 
duce stability and concord (as disparity produces confusion 
and ruin), made their dress a matter of conscience, .. . ; 
and our ancestors, observant lovers of religion, upon which ail 
their acts were founded, and desiring that their young mer 
should direct themselves to: virtue, the true soul of all human 
action, and above all to peace, invented a dress conformable ta 


$82 THE STONES OF VHANICEH. 


their gravity, such, that in clothing themselves with it, they 
might clothe themselves also with modesty and honor. And 
because their mind was bent upon giving no offence to any 
one, and living quietly as far as might be permitted them, it 
seemed good to them to show to every one, even by external 
signs, this their endeavor, by wearing a long dress, which was 
in no wise convenient for persons of a quick temperament, or 
nf eager and fierce spirits.” 

Respecting the color of the women’s dress, it is noticeable 
that blue is called “ Venetian color” by Cassiodorus, translated 
“turchino” by Filiasi, vol. v. chap. iv. It was a very pale 
blue, as the place in which the word occurs is the description 
by Cassiodorus of the darkness which came over the sun’s disk 
at the time of the Belisarian wars and desolation of the Gothic 
kingdom. 


8. INSCRIPTIONS AT MURANO. 


There are two other inscriptions on the border of the con- 
cha ; but these, being written on the soffit of the face arch, 
which, as before noticed, is supported by the last two shafts 
of the chancel, could not be read by the congregation, and only 
with difficulty by those immediately underneath them. One 
of them is in black, the other in red letters. The first: 


‘Mutat quod sumsit, quod sollat crimina tandit 
Et quod sumpsit, vultus vestisq. refulsit.” 


The second : 


“ Discipuli testes, prophete certa videntes 
Et cernunt purum, sibi credunt ese futurum.” 


I have found no notice of any of these inscriptions in any Ttal- 
ian account of the church of Murano, and have seldom seen 
even Monkish Latin less intelligible. There is no mistake in 
the letters, which are all large and clear; but wrong letters 
may have been introduced by ignorant restorers, as has often 
happened in St. Mark’s. 


APPENDIX. 383 


9. SHAFTS OF ST. MARK. 


The principal pillars which carry the nave and transepts, 
fourteen in number, are of white alabaster veined with grey 
and amber ; each of a single block, 15 ft. high, and 6 ft. 2 in. 
round at the base. I in vain endeavored to ascertain their 
probable. value. Every sculptor whom I questioned on this 
subject told me there were no such pieces of alabaster in the 
market, and that they were to be considered as without price. 

On the fagade of the church alone are two great ranges of 
shafts, seventy-two in the lower range, and seventy-nine in the 
upper ; all of porphyry, alabaster, and verd-antique or fine 
marble; the lower about 9 ft., the upper about 7 ft. high; and 
of various circumferences, from 4 ft. 6 in. to 2 ft. round. 

There are now so many published engravings, and, far better 
than engravings, calotypes, of this fagade, that I may point 
out one or two circumstances for the reader’s consideration 
without giving any plate of it here. And first, we ought to 
note the relations of the shafts and wall, the latter being first 
sheeted with alabaster, and then the pillars set within two or 
three inches of it, forming such a grove of golden marble that 
the porches open before us as we enter the church like glades 
in a deep forest. The reader may perhaps at first question 
the propriety of placing the wall so close behind the shafts 
that the latter have nearly as little work to do as the statues 
in a Gothic porch ; but the philosophy of this arrangement is 
briefly deducible from the principles stated in the text. The 
builder had at his disposal shafts of a certain size only, not fit 
to sustain the whole weight of the fabric above. He therefore 
turns just as much of the wall veil into shaft as he has strength 
of marble at his disposal, and leaves the rest in its massive 
form, And that there may be no dishonesty in this, nor any 
appearance in the shafts of doing more work than is really 
allotted to them, many are left visibly with half their capitals 
projecting beyond the archivolts they sustain, showing that the 
wall is very slightly dependent on their co-operation, and that 
many of them are little more than mere bonds or connecting 
rods between the foundation and cornices. If any architect 


384 THE STONES OF VENICH. 


ventures to blame such an arrangement, let him look at our 
much vaunted early English piers in Salisbury Cathedral or 
Westminster Abbey, where the small satellitic shafts are intro- 
duced in the same gratuitous manuer, but with far less excuse 
or reason : for those small shafts have nothing but their delicacy 
and purely theoretical connection with the archivolt mould- 
ings to recommend them ; but the St. Mark’s shafts have an in- 
trinsic beauty and value of the highest order, and the object 
of the whole system of architecture, as above stated, isin great 
part to set forth the beauty and value of the shaft itself. 
Now, not only is this accomplished by withdrawing it occa- 
sionally from servile work, but the position here given to it, 
within three or four inches of a wall from which it neverthe- 
less stands perfectly clear all the way up, is exactly that which 
must best display its color and quality. When there is much 
vacant space left behind a pillar, the shade against which it is 
relieved is comparatively indefinite, the eye passes by the 
shaft, and penetrates into the vacancy. But when a broad 
surface of wall is brought near the shaft, its own shadow is, 
in almost every effect of sunshine, so sharp and dark as to 
throw out its colors with the highest possible brilliancy ; if 
there be no sunshine, the wall veil is subdued and varied by 
the most subtle gradations of delicate half shadow, hardly less 
advantageous to the shaft which it relieves. And, as far as 
regards pure effect in open air (all artifice of excessive dark- 
ness or mystery being excluded), I do not know anything 
whatsoever in the whole compass of the European architecture 
I have seen, which can for a moment be compared with the 
quaint shade and delicate color, like that of Rembrandt and 
Paul Veronese united, which the sun brings out, as his rays 
move from porch to porch along the St. Mark’s facade. I 
And, as if to prove that this was indeed the builder’s inten- 
tion, and that he did not leave his shafts idle merely because 
he did not know how to set them to work safely, there are 
two pieces of masonry at the extremities of the facade, which 
are just as remarkable for their frank trust in the bearing 
power of the shafts as the rest are for their want of confidence 
in them. But, before we come to these, we must say a word 


APPENDIX. 885 


or two respecting the second point named above, the superior 
position of the shafts. 

It was assuredly not in the builder’s power, even had he bash 
so inclined, to obtaii shafts high enough to sustain the whole 
external gallery, as it is sustained in the nave, on one arcade. 
He had, as above noticed, a supply of shafts of every sort and 
size, from which he chose the largest for his nave shafts ; the 
smallest were set aside for windows, jambs, balustrades, sup- 
ports of pulpits, niches, and such other services, every con- 
ceivable size occurring in different portions of the building ; 
and the middle-sized shafts were sorted into two classes, of 
which on the average one was about two-thirds the length of 
the other, and out of these the two stories of the facade and 
sides of the church are composed, the smaller shafts of course 
uppermost, and more numerous than the lower, according to 
the ordinary laws of superimposition adopted by all the 
Romanesque builders, and observed also in a kind of archi- 
tecture quite as beautiful as any we are likely to invent, that 
of forest trees. 

Nothing is more singular than the way in which this kind 
of superimposition (the only right one in the case of shafts) 
will shock a professed architect. He has been accustomed to 
see, in the Renaissance designs, shaft put on the top of shaft, 
three or four times over, and he thinks this quite right ; but 
the moment he is shown a properly subdivided superimposi- 
tion, in which the upper shafts diminish in size and multiply . 
in number, so that the lower pillars would balance them safely 
even without cement, he exclaims that it is “against law,” 
as if he had never seen a tree in his life. 

Not that the idea of the Byzantine superimposition was 
taken from trees, any more than that of Gothic arches. Both 
are simple compliances with laws of nature, and, therefore, 
approximations to the forms of nature. 

There is, however, one very essential difference between 
tree structare and the shaft structure in question ; namely, 
that the marble branches, having no vital connection with the 

‘stem, must be provided with a firm tablet or second founda- 
tion whereon to stand. This intermediate plinth or tablet 
| Vou. 11.—25 


386 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


runs along the whole facade at one level, is about eighteen 
inches thick, and left with little decoration as being meant 
for hard service. The small portieos, already spoken of as 
the most graceful pieces of composition’ with which I am ac- 
quainted, are sustained on detached clusters of four or five 
columns, forming the continuation of those of the upper se- 
ries, and each of these clusters is balanced on one grand de- 
tached shaft ; as much trust being thus placed in the pillars 
here, as is withdrawn from them elsewhere. The northern 
portico has only one detached pillar at its outer angle, which 
sustains three shafts and a square pilaster; of these shafts 
the one at the outer angle of the group is the thickest (so as 
to balance the pilaster on the inner angle), measuring 3 ft. 2 
in. round, while the others measure only 2 ft. 10 in. and 2 ft. 
11in. ; and in order to make this increase of diameter, and 
the importance of the shaft, more manifest to the eye, the old 
builders made the shaft shorter as well as thicker, increasing 
the depth both of its capital and the base, with what is to the 
thoughtless spectator ridiculous incongruity,'and to the ob- 
servant one a most beautiful expression of constructive genius. 
Nor is this all. Observe: the whole strength of this angle 
depends on accuracy of poise, not on breadth or strength of 
foundation. It is a balanced, not a propped structure : if the 
balance fails, it must fall instantly ; if the balance is main- 
tained, no matter how the lower shaft is fastened into the 
ground, all will be safe. And to mark this more definitely, 
the great lower shaft has a different base frum all the others of 
the facade, remarkably high in proportion to the shaft, on a 
circular instead of a square plinth, and without spurs, while 
all the other bases have spurs without exception. Glance 
back at what is said of the spurs at p. 80 of the first volume, | 
and reflect that all expression of grasp in the foot of the pillar 
is here useless, and to be replaced by one of balance merely, 
and you will feel what the old builder wanted to say to us, 
and how much he desired us to follow him with our under- 
standing as he laid stone above stone. 

And this purpose of his is hinted to us once more, even 
b> the position of this base in the ground plan of the foun- 


APPENDIX. 387 


dation of the portico ; for, though itself circular, it sustains 
a hexagonal plinth set obliquely to the walls of the church, 
as if expressly to mark to us that it did not matter how 
the base was set, so only that the weights were justly dis- 
posed above it. 


10. PROPER SENSE OF THE WORD IDOLATRY. 


Ido not intend, in thus applying the word “Idolatry” to 
certain ceremonies of Romanist worship, to admit the pro- 
priety of the ordinary Protestant manner of regarding those 
ceremonies as distinctively idolatrous, and as separating the 
Romanist from the Protestant Church by a gulf across which 
we must not look to our fellow-Christians but with utter repro- 
bation and disdain. The Church of Rome does indeed distinct- 
ively violate the second commandment; but the true force 
and weight of the sin of idolatry are in the violation of the 
first, of which we are all of us guilty, in probably a very equal 
‘degree, considered only as members of this or that commun- 
ion, and not as Christians or unbelievers. Idolatry is, both 
literally and verily, not the mere bowing down before sculpt- 
ures, but the serving or becoming the slave of any images or 
imaginations which stand between us and God, and it is other- 
wise expressed in Scripture as “ walking after the Jmagina- 
tion” of our own hearts. And observe also that while, at 
least on one occasion, we find in the Bible an indulgence 
granted to the mere external and literal violation of the second 
commandment, “When I bow myself in the house of Rimmon, 
the Lord pardon thy servant in this thing,” we find no indul- 
gence in any instance, or in the slightest degree, granted to 
“covetousness, which is idolatry ” (Col. iii. 5 ; no casual asso- 
ciation of terms, observe, but again energetically repeated in 
Ephesians, v. 5, ‘‘No covetous man, who is an idolater, hath 
any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ”) ; nor any to that 
denial of God, idoiatry in one of its most subtle forms, fol- 
lowing so often on the possession of that wealth against which 
Agur prayed so earnestly, ‘Give me neither poverty nor 


888 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


riches, lest I be full and deny thee, and say, ‘ Who is the 
Lord ?’” 

And in this sense, which of us is not an idolater? Which 
of us has the right, in the fulness of that better knowledge, in 
spite of which he nevertheless is not yet separated from the 
service of this world, to speak scornfully of any of his brethren, 
because, in a guiltless ignorance, they have been accustomed 
to bow their knees before a statue? Which of us shall say 
that there may not be a spiritual worship in their apparent 
idolatry, or that there is not a spiritual idolatry in our own 
apparent worship ? 

For indeed it is utterly impossible for one man to judge of 
the feeling with which another bows down before an image. 
From that pure reverence in which Sir Thomas Brown wrote, 
“T can dispense with my hat at the sight of a cross, but not. 
with a thought of my Redeemer,” to the worst superstition of 
the most ignorant Romanist, there is an infinite series of 
subtle transitions ; and the point where simple reverence and 
the use of the image merely to render conception more vivid, 
_and feeling more intense, change into definite idolatry by the 
attribution of Power to the image itself, is so difficultly deter- 
minable that we cannot be too cautious in asserting that such 
a change has actually taken place in the case of any individual. 
Even when it is definite and certain, we shall oftener find it 
the consequence of dulness of intellect than of real alienation 
of heart from God; and I have no manner of doubt that half 
of the poor and untaught Christians who are this day lying 
prostrate before crucifixes, Bambinos, and Volto Santos, are 
finding more acceptance with God, than many Protestants who 
idolize nothing but their own opinions or their own interests. 
I believe that those who have worshipped the thorns of Christ's 
crown will be found at last to have been holier and wiser than - 
those who worship the thorns of the world’s service, and that 
to adore the nails of the cross is a less sin than to adore the 
hammer of the workman. 

But, on the other hand, though the idolatry of the lower 
orders in the Romish Church may thus be frequently exeus- 
able, the ordinary subterfuges by which it is defended are not 


APPENDIX. | 389 


so. It may be extenuated, but cannot be denied ; and the 
attribution of power to the image,* in which it consists, is 
not merely a form of popular feeling, but a tenet of priestly 
instruction, and may be proved, over and over again, from any 
book of the Romish Church services. Take for instance the 
following prayer, which occurs continually at the close of the 
service of the Holy Cross : 


‘‘Saincte vraye Croye aourée, 
Qui du corps Dieu fu aournée 
Et de sa sueur arrousée, 
Et de son sane enluminée, 
Par ta vertu, par ta puissance, 
Defent mon corps de meschance, 
Et montroie moy par ton playsir 
Que vray confes puisse mourir.” 


‘*Oh holy, true, and golden Cross, which wast adorned with God’s 
body, and watered with His sweat, and illuminated with His 
blood, by thy healing virtue and thy power, defend my body 
from mischance ; and by thy good pleasure, let me make a good 
confession when I die.” 


There can be no possible defence imagined for the mere 
terms in which this prayer and other such are couched: yet 
it is always to be remembered, that in many cases they are 
rather poetical effusions than serious prayers ; the utterances 
of imaginative enthusiasm, rather than of reasonable con- 
viction ; and as such, they are rather to be condemned as 
illusory and fictitious, than as idolatrous, nor even as such, 
condemned altogether, for strong love and faith are often the 
roots of them and the errors of affection are better than the 
accuracies of apathy. But the unhappy results, among all 
religieus sects, of the habit of allowing imaginative and poeti- 


* T do not like to hear Protestants speaking with grossand unchari- 
table contempt even of the worship of relics. Elisha once trusted his 
own staff too ‘ar ; nor can I see any reasonable ground for the scorn, or 
the unkind rebuke, of those who have been taught from their youth 
upwurds that to hope even in the hem of the garment may sometimea 
be better than to spend the living on physicians, 


& 


390 THE STONKS OF VHRNICE. 


eal belief to take the place of deliberate, resolute, and prosai¢ 
belief, have been fully and admirably traced by the author ot 
tne “Natural History of Enthusiasm.” 


11. srruaTIONS OF BYZANTINE PALACES. 


(1.) The Terraced House. 


The most conspicuous pile in the midmost reach of the 
Grand Canal is the Casa Grimani, now the Post-Office. Let- 
ting his boat lie by the steps of this great palace, the traveller 
will see, on the other side of the canal, a building with a small 
terrace in front of it, and a little court with a door to the 
water, beside the terrace. Half of the house is visibly 
modern, and there is a great seam, like the edge of a scar, 
between it and the ancient remnant, in which the circular 
bands of the Byzantine arches will be instantly recognized. 
This building not having, as far as I know, any name except 
that of its present proprietor, I shall in future distinguish it 
simply as the Terraced House. 


(2.) Casa Busineilo. 


To the left of this edifice (looking from the Post-Office) 
there is a modern palace, on the other side of which the By- 
zantine mouldings appear again in the first and second stories 
of a house lately restored. It might be thought that the shafts 
and arches had been raised yesterday, the modern walls having 
been deftly adjusted to them, and all appearance of antiquity, 
together with the ornamentation and proportions of the fabric, 
having been entirely destroyed. I cannot, however, speak 
with unmixed sorrow of these changes, since, without his be- 
ing implicated in the shame of them, they fitted this palace to 
become the residence of the kindest friend I had in Venice, 
It is generally known as the Casa Businello. 


(3.) The Braided House. 


Leaving the steps of the Casa Grimani, and turning the 
gondola away from the Rialto, we will pass the Casa Businello, 


APPENDIX. 391 


and the three houses which succeed it on the right. The 
fourth is another restored palace, white and conspicuous, but 
retaining of its ancient structure only the five windows in its 
second story, and an ornamental moulding above them which 
appears to be ancient, though it is inaccessible without scaf- 
folding, and I cannot therefore answer for it. But the five 
central windows are very valuable ; and as their capitals differ 
from most that we find (except in St. Mark’s), in their plaited 
or braided border and basket-worked sides, I shall call this 
house, in future, the Braided House.* 


(4.) The Madonnetta House. 


On the other side of this palace is the Traghetto called 
“Della Madonnetta ;” and beyond this Traghetto, still facing 
the Grand Canal, a small palace, of which the front shows 
mere vestiges of arcades, the old shafts only being visible, 
with obscure circular seams in the modern plaster which 
covers the arches. The side of it is a curious agglomeration 
of pointed and round windows in every possible position, and 
of nearly every date from the twelfth to the eighteenth cen- 
tury. It is the smallest of the buildings we have to examine, 
but by no means the least interesting : I shall call it, from the 
name of its Traghetto, the Madonnetta House. 


& 
(5.) The Rio Foscari House. 


We must now descend the Grand Canal as far as the Palazzo 
Foscari, and enter the narrower canal, called the Rio di Ca’ 
Foscari, at the side of that palace. Almost immediately after 
passing the great gateway of the Foscari courtyard, we shall 
see on our left, in the ruinous and time-stricken walls which 
totter over the water, the white curve of a circular arch coy- 
ered with sculpture, and fragments of the bases of small pil- 
lars, entangled among festoons of the Erba della Madonna. I 
have already, in the folio plates which accompanied the first 
volume, partly illustrated this building. In what references 
have to make to it here, I shall speak of it as the Rio Foscaii 
House. 

* Casa Tiepolo (?) in Lazari’s Guide. 


392 THE STONES OF VENICE. 


(6. Casa Farsetti. 


We have now to reascend : the Grand Canal, and approach 
the Rialto. As soon as we have passed the Casa Grimani, the 
traveller will recognize, on his right, two rich and extensive 
masses of building, which form important objects in almost 
every picturesque view of the noble bridge. Of these, the finst, 
that farthest from the Rialto, retains great part of its ancient 
maierials in a dislocated form. It has been entirely modern- 
ized in its upper stories, but the ground floor and first floor 
have nearly all their original shafts and capitals, only they have 
been shifted hither and thither to give room for the introduc- 
tion of various small apartments, and present, in consequence, 
marvellous anomalies in proportion. This building is known 
in Venice as the Casa Farsetti. . 


(7.) Casa Loredan. 


The one next to it, though not conspicuous, and often passed 
with neglect, will, I believe, be felt at last, by all who examine 
it carefully, to be the most beautiful palace in the whole ex- 
tent of the Grand Canal. It has been restored often, once in 
the Gothic, once in the Renaissance times,—some writers say, 
even rebuilt; but, if so, rebuilt in its old form. The Gothie 
additions harmonize exquisitely with its Byzantine work, and 
it is easy, as we examine its lovely central arcade, to forget 
the Renaissance additions which encumber it above, Itis 
known as the Casa Loredan. 


The eighth palace is the Fondaco de’ Turchi, described in 
the text. A ninth existed, more interesting apparently than 
any of these, near the Church of San Moisé, but it was thrown 
down in the course of “improvements” a few yearsago. A’ 
woodeut of it is given in M. Lazari’s Guide. | 


12. MoDERN PAINTING ON GLASS. 


Of a)l the various principles of art which, in modern days, 
we have defied or forgotten, none are more indisputable, and 
few of more practical importance than this, which I shail have 


APPENDIX. 393 


occasion again and again to allege in support of many future 
deductions : 

*‘ All art, working with given patatiale must propose to 
itself the objects which, with those materials, are most per 
fectly attainable ; and becomes illegitimate and debased if it 
propose to itself any other objects, better attainable with other 
materials.” 

Thus, great slenderness, lightness, or intricacy of structure, 
—as in ramifications of trees, detached folds of drapery, or 
wreaths of hair,—is easily and perfectly expressible in metal- 
work or in painting, but only with great difficulty and imper- 
fectly expressible in sculpture. All sculpture, therefore, which 
professes as its chief end the expression of such characters, is 
debased ; and if the suggestion of them be accidentally re- 
quired of it, that suggestion is only to be given to an extent 
compatible with perfect ease of execution in the given material, 
not to the utmost possible extent. For instance: some of the 
most delightful drawings of our own water-color painter, Hunt, 
have been of birds’ nests ; of which, in painting, it is perfectly 
possible to represent the intricate fibrous or mossy structure ; 
therefore, the effort is a legitimate one, and the art is well 
employed, But to carve a bird’s nest out of marble would be 
physically impossible, and to reach any approximate expres- 
sion of its structure would require prolonged and intolerable 
labor. Therefore, all sculpture which set itself to carving birds’ 
nests as an end, or which, if a bird’s nest were required of it, 
carved it to the utmost possible point of realization, would be 
debased. Nothing but the general form, and as sae of the 
fibrous structure as could be with perfect ease represented, 
ought to be attempted at all. 

But more than this. The workman has not done his duty, 
and is not working on safe principles, unless he even so far 
honors the materials with which he is working as to set himself 
to bring out their beauty, and to recommend and exalt, as far 
as he can, their peculiar qualities. If he is working in marble, 
he should insist upon and exhibit its transparency and solidity ; 
if in iron, its strength and tenacity ; if in gold, its ductility ; 
and be will invariably find the material grateful, and that his 

Stones of Venice—Vol, II.—18 


394 THH STONES OF VENICE. 


work is all the nobler for being eulogistic of the substance of 
which it is made. But of all the arts, the working of glass is 
that in which we ought to keep these principles most vigor- 
ously in mind. For we owe itso much, and the possession 
of it is so great a blessing, that all our work in it should be 
completely and forcibly expressive of the peculiar characters 
which give it so vast a value. 

These are two, namely, its pucrrirry when heated, and 
TRANSPARENCY when cold, both nearly perfect. In its employ- 
ment for vessels, we ought always to exhibit its ductility, and 
in its employment for windows, its transparency. All work 
in glass is bad which does not, with loud voice, proclaim one 
or other of these great qualities. 

Consequently, all cut glass is barbarous: for the cutting 
conceals its ductility, and confuses it with crystal. Also, all 
very neat, finished, and perfect form in glass is barbarous: for 
this fails in proclaiming another of its great virtues ; namely, 
the ease with which its light substance can be moulded or 
blown into any form, so long as perfect accuracy be not re- 
quired. In metal, which, even when heated enough to be 
thoroughly malleable, retains yet such weight and consistency 
as render it susceptible of the finest handling and retention 
of the most delicate form, great precision of workmanship is 
admissible ; but in glass, which when once softened must be 
blown or moulded, not hammered, and which is liable to lose, 
by contraction or subsidence, the fineness of the forms given 
to it, no delicate outlines are to be attempted, but only such 
fantastic and fickle grace as the mind of the workman can con- 
ceive and execute on the instant. The more wild, extravagant, 
and grotesque in their gracefulness the forms are, the better. 
No material is so adapted for giving full play to the imagina. 
tion, but it must not be wrought with refinement or painful-— 
ness, still less with costliness. For as in gratitude we are to 
proclaim its virtues, so in all honesty we are to confess its im- 
perfections ; and while we triumphantly set forth its trans- 
parency, we are also frankly to admit its fragility, and there- 
fore not to waste much time upon it, nor put any real art into 
it when intended for daily use. No workman ought ever 


APPENDIX. 395 


to spend more than an hour in the making of any glass ves- 
sel. . 

Next in the case of windows, the points which we have to 
insist upon are, the transparency of the glass and its suscepti- 
bility of the most brilliant colors; and therefore the attempt to 
turn painted windows into pretty pictures is one of the most 
gross and ridiculous barbarisms of this pre-eminently bar- 
barous century. It originated, I suppose, with the Germans, 
who seem for the present distinguished among European 
nations by the loss of the sense of color ; but it appears of late 
to have considerable chance of establishing itself in England: 
and it is a two-edged error, striking in two directions ; first 
at the healthy appreciation of painting, and then at the healthy 
appreciation of glass. Color, ground with oil, and laid ona 
solid opaque ground, furnishes to the human hand the most 
exquisite means of expression which the human sight and in- 
vention can find or require. By its two opposite qualities, 
each naturally and easily attainable, of transparency in shadow 
and opacity in light, it complies with the conditions of nature ; 
and by its perfect governableness it permits the utmost pos- 
sible fulness and subtlety in the harmonies of color, as well 
as the utmost perfection in the drawing. Glass, considered 
asa material for a picture, is exactly as bad as oil paint is 
good. It sets out by reversing the conditions of nature, by 
making the lights transparent and the shadows opaque ; and 
the ungovernableness of its color (changing in the furnace), | 
and its violence (being always ona high key, because produced 
by actual light), render it so disadvantageous in every way 
that the result of working in it for pictorial effect would in- 
fallibly be the destruction of all the appreciation of the noble 
qualities of pictorial color. 

In the second place, this modern barbarism destroys the 
true appreciation of the qualities of glass. It denies, and en- 
deavors as far as possible to conceal, the transparency, which 
is not only its great virtue in a merely utilitarian point of 
view, but its great spiritual character ; the character by which 
in church architecture it becomes most touchingly impressive, 
as typical of the entrance of the Holy Spirit into the heart of 


B96 THE STONES OF VENICH. 


man ; a typical expression rendered specific and intense ty) 
the purity and brilliancy of its sevenfold hues ; * and therefore 
in endeavoring to turn the window into a picture, we at once 
lose the sanctity and power of the noble material, and employ 
it to an end which is utterly impossible it should ever worthily 
attain. The true perfection of 2 painted window is to be se- 
rene, intense, brilliant, like flaming jewellery ; full of easily 
legible and quaint subjects, and exquisitely subtle, yet simple, 
in its harmonies. In a word, this perfection has been con: 
summated in the designs, never to be surpassed, if ever again 
to be approached by human art, of the French windows of 
the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. 


* T do not think that there is anything more necessary to the progress 
of European art in the present day than the complete understanding of 
this sanctity of Color. I had much pleasure in finding it, the other day, 
fully understood and thus sweetly expressed in a little volume of poems 
by a Miss Maynard : 


*¢ For still in every land, though to Thy name 
Arose no temple,—still in every age, 
Though heedless man had quite forgot Thy praise, 
We praise Thee ; and at rise and set of sun 
Did we assemble duly, and intone 
A choral hymn that all the lands might hear. 
In heaven, on earth, and in the deep we praised Thes, 
Singly, or mingled in sweet sisterhood. 
But now, acknowledged ministrants, we come, 
Co-worshippers with man in this Thy house, 
We, the Seven Daughters of the Light, to praise 
Thee, Light of Light! Thee, God of very God!” 
‘ A Dream of Fair Colors. 


These poems seem to be otherwise remarkable for a very unobtrusive 
and pure religious feeling in subjects connected with art. 


DATE DUE 


— 


3 
& 


= - | 
120.945 

R95s 
vel=2 

Mee WITHDRAWN 

| OWENS LIBRARY 

| 

| 

| NORTHWEST MISSOURI STATE 

\ UNIVERSITY LIBRARY 


MARYVILLE, MISSOURI 64468 


. ‘ar. — ? oe et 
en: 
= SE See at = 
= eae Ce er eae 


