Studies in the Scriptures, Vol. 3: Thy Kingdom Come (C.T. Russell, 1891)
==========================================================
Russell's 1891 Thy Kingdom Come — volume 3; the papacy, prophecy, and the coming kingdom. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

don near 


aw Simp reoresezesaae 


| >FOR= 
r BIBLE SI STUDENTS & a 


ENTERED AS 


SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER 
AT P.O., ALLEGHENY, PA 


SPECIAL ISSUE 


~—_ OF — 


ZION’S 


Uatch Gower. 


REPRESENTING 


NO. 6, JUNE, VOL, XH, 1894. 


COMPANION WORKS 


“Bhe Plan of the SFges’’ 


Presents a Harmonious View of the Word of God as a 
whole ; Establishes Faith in God; Vindicates his Character ; 
Explains why Evil was Permitted ; Shows the Object of our 
Lord’s Return to be for the Blesssing of the World of Man- 
kind during the Times of Restitution (Acts 3: 19-21); and 
Points out from the Scriptures that these Blessings will be In- 
troduced by a Period of Social Revolution. 


“he Sime is at Jiand’ 


PRESENTS EVIDENCES THAT— 
Six Thousand Years from Adam ended with A. D. 1872. 
The ‘‘Seventy Weeks’’ of Israel’s favor ended A. D. 36. 
The Jewish Age ‘‘ Harvest’’ was 4o years, A. D. 30 to 70. 
The Christian Age ‘‘ Harvest,’’ 40 years, A. D. 1875-1914. 
The Jewish Jubilees were Typical of the ‘Times of Res- 
titution of all Things.’’—A¢ts 3: 19-21. 
The Typical Jubilees Mark the Date of their Antitype. 
The ‘ Times of the Gentiles’? will End with A. D. 1914. 
The Jewish Age, in Its Length, Its Ceremonies, etc., ‘T'yp- 
ified the Realities of the Christian Age and Its Length. 
The Antichrist Has Come!—What ? When? Where? 


“hy Jpingdom Gome’’ 


ELUCIDATES, AMONG OTHER SUBJECTS— 

The Harvest of the Gospel Age and its Responsibilities. 

The Cleansing of the Sanétuary.—Dan. 8: 10-25. 

The Glorification of the Gospel Church in the Near Future. 

The Restoration of Fleshly Israel as Foretold. 

The Great Pyramid of Egypt. This wonderful stone wit- 
ness is found to be a very storehouse of truth—scien- 
tific, historic and prophetic. Examined critically with the 
Word shows it to merit the title, ‘‘The Stone Bible.’’ 
UNIFORM size. CLOTI! ROUND, $1.00; LEATHERETTE, §0 CTS. 

IN PAPER COVERS, 2§ CENTS—ALL POST FREE, 


Address-TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
BIBLE HOUSE, ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U. S. A. 


Special Issue or ZION’S WATCIL TOWER, VoL. X11, JUNE, 1891, 


COMMENDATION 
FOR “THE PLAN OF THE AGES,” 


Great Southern Philosopher, 


ASSOCIATE EDITOR OF THE 
ATLANTA CONSTITUTION. 


«Tt is impossible to read this book without loving the 
writer and pondering his wonderful solution of the great 
mysteries that have troubled us all our lives. There is hard- 
ly a family to be found that has not lost some loved one 
who died outside the Church—outside the plan of salvation, 
and, if Calvinism be true, outside of all hope and_ inside of 
eternal torment and despair. We smother our feelings and 
turn away from the horrible picture. We dare not deny 
the faith of our fathers, and yet can it be possible that the 
good mother and her wandering child are forever sepa- 
rated ?—forever and forever ? 

«I believe it is the rigidity of these teachings that makes 
atheists and infidels and skeptics—makes Christians unhap- 

py and brings their gray hairs down in sorrow to the grave 
—a lost child, a lost soul! * * * * 

“This wonderful book makes no assertions that are not 
well sustained by the Scriptures. It is built up stone by 
stone, and upon every stone is the text, and it becomes a 
pyramid .of God’s love, and mercy, and wisdom. There 
is nothing in the Bible that the author denies or doubts, 
but there are many texts upon which he throws a flood of 
light that dispels many dark and gloomy forebodings. I 
see that editors of leading journals, and many orthodox 
ministers of different denominations, have indorsed it and 
have confessed to this new and comforting light that has 
dawned upon the interpretation of God’s book. Then let 
every man read and ponder and take comfort, for we are all 
prisoners of hope. This is an age of advanced thought, 
and more thinking is done than ever before—men dare 
to think now. Light~more light, is the watchword.’ 

C. T. Smity. (‘B. Arp.’’) 


- PRICE ONLY 25 COUNTS IN PAPER CVERS. 


Address TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 


BIBLE HOUSE, ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA. U. % A. 


| 


: Subtertnaes 1 
\ Chamber = 
High Wile Level intaesap 4 


High Nile Level in 470 BG. = 
Low Nile Level i 1865 AD 


Low Nile Level in. 2170 BO 


abe JO“) 4q.p5 


; 


“ee SEA LEVEL tt 1305 AD 


~ MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. 


“THE PATH OP THE JUST 1S AS THE SHINING LIGHT, WHICH 
AND MORE UNTO THE PERFEC® DAY.”” 


SHINETH MORE 


VOLUME III. 


Rhy Jingdom Come. 


90th FHEUSAND. 


‘© AND THT KINGDOM AND DOMINION, AND THE GREATNESS OF THE KINGDOM UN- 
DER THF WHOLE HEAVEN, SHALL BE GIVEN TO THE PROPLE OF THR SAINTS 
or THE Most HiGH, WHOSE KINGDOM IS AN EVERLASTING KING- 
DOM, AND ALL DOMINIONS SHALL SERVE AND OBEY HIM.” 
. —DAN. 7:27; REV. 5:10. 


: 1891, 
| TOWER PUBLISHING CO., 
ALLEGHENY PA., 
U.S.A. 


ae a on 


‘1U THE KING OF KINGS AND LORD OF LORDS: 


IN THE INTEREST OF 


HIS CONSECRATED “SAINTS,” 


WAITING FOR THE ADOPTION, 
—AND OF— 


“ALL THAT IN EVERY PLACE CALL UPON THE LORD,” 


“THE HOUSEHOLD OF FAITH,” 
—AND OF— 


THE GROANING CREATION, TRAVAILING AND WAITING FOR THE 


MANIFESTATION OF THEE SONS OF GOb, 


THIS WERK 1S DEDICATED. 


«« To make all see what is the fellowship of the mystery which from the beginning 
of the world hath been hid in God.”’ ** Wherein He hath abounded toward 
us in all wisdom and prudence, having made known unto us the 
mystery of His will, according to His good pleasure which 
He hath purposed in Himself; that in the dispen- 
sation of the fulness of the times He might 
gather together in one all things, 
under Christ.’” 
Eph. 3:4,5,93 1: 8-10. 


COPYRIGHT 18qr. 


TOWER PUBLISHING CO., 


ALLEGHENY, PA. 


PREFACE. 


In presenting this, the third voluime of the MILLENNIAL 
Dawn series, to those who have already read the preceding 
volumes, Zhe Plan of the Ages and The Time is at 
land, we feel that we are for the most part handing it to’ 
friends ; for our experience justifies us in supposing that 
only the friends of our God and the friends of the Truth 
would be interested enough to pursue the study further. To 
such we offer Christian greeting, and express the trust that 
they have made the subjects already treated their own, by a 
careful and prayerful examination of them in the light of 
God’s Word, to such an extent that the ‘‘ strong meat ’’ of 
present truth will be not only digestible, but also palatable 
and strengthening—‘‘ meat in due season.’’ 

Such readers need not be urged to read this volume con- 
nectedly, closely, critically ; for we have heard from many 
how they have read. the preceding volumes, some twice or 
three times, others eight, ten and even twelve times, with 
increasing interest and profit. Nor is this to be wondered 
at when we remember that, to his holy ones, God’s Word 
is always new every morning, and fresh every evening, and 


that the volumes of MILLENNIAL Dawn present merely the 
Ir 


12 Preface. 


harmonious arrangement of the teachings of the Word of 
the Lord. 

Some have urged greater haste in the writing and pub- 
lishing of the several volumes of this series, and, to a large 
extent, I have shared the same feelings of impatience ; but 
my observations of the Lord’s dealings and leadings and 
unfoldings of his plan are gradually convincing me that he 
has not shared our impatience. Indeed, I can clearly trace 
his hand in some of the hindrances encountered, and can 
realize that by the delay I have been enabled to grasp the 
subjects more thoroughly, and to present them more fully, 
than if the work had been hastened more. 

Not only has this delay thus worked for my good and 
yours, but in another way also. It has afforded time for a 
more thorough digestion of the truths of each volume, and 
thereby has given to the faithful student the very necessary 
preparation for that which was to follow. And not only so, 
_but it has also given opportunity for practicing the lessons 
learned, and for exercising the talents of each in spreading 
the advancing light before others of God’s saints. 

To how great an extent this use of your talents in serv- 
ing the Truth has progressed, few can know, and for your 
encouragement, I must tell you: One hundred thousand 
copies of the first volume had been published before the 
second volume was ready; and now, before the third volume 
is published, the issues of the first volume have run over two 
hundred thousand copies, and of the second volume over 
thirty-six thousand copies. 

These. figures, however, only feebly express the thought 
we would impress ; for other books (though very few) have 
had as great arun as these. The difference is that other 
books are generally sold through book-stores, merely as a 
matter of merchandise ;. while, there being almost no demand 
for such reading matter among either Christians or worldly 


—_, 


Preface. 13 


people—the former not being sufficiently awake to appre- 
ciate the deep things of God’s Word, and the latter wholly 
indifferent—not five hundred copies of the above two hun- 
dred and thirty-six thousand were sold through book-stores. 
How then, you ask, were so-many disposed of ? 

Those who have become deeply interested in the truths 
therein presented have disposed of the others. Some get 
them in quantities and send them to their friends in all parts 
of the world, writing them letters to awaken their interest, 
so that they too may read and know the ‘good tidings 
of great joy.’’ Others purchase in quantities, and, taking 
what time they can spare each week, visit house after house 
and loan a copy of VoL. 1. for a week or two, saying a few 
words to awaken or deepen an interest in the subject. One 
lady, beginning in a small way, has now over one hundred 
copies of VoL. I. constantly on loan in the hands of ever- 
changing readers. 

Others, so situated that they can do so, have sacrificed 
their prospects for earthly riches, or fame, or ease, or self- 


_ish, earthly pleasures, and, accepting the arrangement of 


the Zower Trac? Society for their mere living necessities, 
have left all to preach the gospel as colporteurs, seeking to 
put these books into the hands of God’s consecrated people 
everywhere. Others, unable to devote as much time as 
they would like to the service of good tidings, have volun- 
tarily given financial aid to the spread of the work. 

Thus, variously, some in one way and some in another, 
all who love and appreciate the truth are constantly serving 


-it, and feel that they can never do enough—that they can 


never do all’ that they wish they could do to spread the 
knowledge and honor of so gracious a God, so mighty a 
Savior and so wonderful a plan of salvation for the Church 
and for the world. 

These, dear friends, are the honored agencies which God 


14 Preface. 


is raising up to scatter these harvest truths—to reap the 
ripe wheat of his Church, now, in the harvest of the Gos- 
pel age, and to do a work also for the Millennial age—as it 
i$ written, ‘‘’Fhe plowman shall overtake the reaper.’’ To 
be employed by the Lord in any part of his work is certainly 
an inestimable favor and blessing to such as know this joy, 
even though they be misunderstood by others and their 
motives impugned by those whom the God of this world 
has blinded by error, superstition and selfishness. 

The Scripture quotations of this volume are not always 
those of the common version, which is not always the best. 
We have followed it in the main, however, departing from 
it only in cases where clearness of sense demanded. 

That the study of the truths herein presented may prove 
as great a blessing to the reader as their presentation has 
been to the writer and his helpmate; and that. all may ap- 
preciate the fact that the real author of these jewels of truth 
is God, who now makes them known to such as have “an 
ear to hear,’’ at the hands of his willing servants, because 
the due time has come; and that each, as he hears the good 
tidings that God’s Kingdom is come, may thereby be 
strengthened and enabled to become a more faithful serv- 
ant of the Lord, in heralding the truth, and in overcoming 
the worldly sectarian spirit of our time, is the desire and 
prayer of 

Your servant in Christ, 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL. 


Allegheny, Pa. U.S. A. 
May 1st, 1894, 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER I. 


Importance oF THE Kincpom.—C.asses ar MEN INTERESTED IN IT.—CLASSES 
Orrosep To It, AND WHY oPPOsED.—PRoxIMITY OF THE Kincpom.—Its 
Griory Heaventy.—Its Present EstaBLisHMENT. Psa’ fax wae C89 


CHAPTER II. 
“THE ‘TIME OF THE END,” 


OR “DAY OF HIS PREPARATION.” 
— DANIEL Xl.— 


Tue Time or THE Env.—Its CoMMENCEMENT, A. D. 1799.—ITs Close, A. D. 
1914.—-WHAT ts TO BE PREPARED, AND THE Oxjgct.—I'HE WorLD’s History 
PROPHETICALLY TRACED THROUGH 1TS CHIBF RULERS.—FROM B. C. 405 TO 
‘Tus Day oF PREPARATION.—THE BEGINNING OF THE TIME OF THE Env Dzr- 
INITELY MARKED, YET WiTHOUT NAMES oR DarEs. . ‘ . . + 23 


CHAPTER III. 


DAYS OF WAITING FOR THE KINGDOM. 
— DANIEL XII.— 


Tus Kincpom Worx Epitomizep.— THE WAITING Pgriop To BE MARKED BY 
Great INCREASE oF KNOWLEDGE AND OF TRAVEL.—SirR Isaac Newton's 
Foreview OF RAILROADING.—THE 1260 Days.—THE FLoop From THB MouTH 

’ oF THE Dracon.—THE 1290 Days MARK THE SFREAD OF AN UNDERSTANDING 
OF THE Vision, PARTIALLY CorrgECT.— THE DISAPPOINTMENT, TRIAL AND 
ConsgQugnces.—T He 1335 Days.—TuHe Bressinc THEN UPON THE FAITHFUL 
“Warttnc”’ Ongs.—Tue Lorp’s Rergsrence To Tuxse Wartinc Days, 1x 
Tue Parables oF THE TN Virgins, 86 wee 


CHAPTER IV. 
THE CLEANSING OF THE SANCTUARY. 
2300 DAYS.— DAN. 8:10-26. ¢ 


Tue True Sanctuary.—THe Derrrement.—THE Base or Founpation.—How 
“* Cast Down.”’— EvipENCcES oF THis CiTEp FRoM RoMAN CATHOLIC Writ- 
INGS.—THE CLEANSING WILL NOT BE ACCOMPLISHED Unrit 2300 YEARS AFTER 
THE Viston.—How anv Wrere Becun, AnD Wuen Due To BB CoMPLETED.— 
** Go_tpgn Vassats,’’ TruTHS, Must sz REPLACED. . bs 95 


CHAPTER V. 


THE TIME OF HARVEST. 


Tue Curonovocicat Location or THE Harvest.— Its Opject AND GREAT 
ImporTANCE.— Tue Focus oF Time PROPHECIES.— PREPARATIONS FOR THE 
Harvest.— SIGNIFICANCE OF THE CONVERGENCE OF PROPHETIC TESTIMONY.— 
Tue Loxrp’s Presence.— REASONABLE OBJECTIONS ANSWERED.— ENTERING 
THE Joys or Our Lorp. 3 ¥ : . . 2 . 12K 


CHAPTER. VI. 


THE WORK OF HARVEST. 


CHARACTER OF THE Harvest Work.—GATHERING THE WHBAT.—BUNDLING AND 
BINDING AND BurRNING THE TARES.—THEIR ORIGIN AND PROLIFIC GROWTH.— 
ConsuMED Like THE CHAFF OF THE Jewish Harvest.— TIME CorRESPONDEN- 
cigs Notgp.—THe Castinc orr, GraDuat Fatt AND Finat DmsTRUcTION OF | 
Basyton.—THE SEALING OF THE SERVANTS oF Gop Bgrore THR PLAGUES 
Comg upon BABYLON.—JUDGMENT OK TRIAL, BotH As SysTEMs AND INDIVID- 
UALLY.— Tug Test oF THE JewisH Svstem TypicaL.—THe TESTING AND 
SirTinc oF THE WHEAT.—THE WIsr, SEPARATED FROM THE FoouisH VIRGINS, 
Go 1Nn To THE Feast.—“‘AND THE Door was SHvut.’’—A FuRTHER INSPECTION, 
AND THE CasTinG Out oF Somr.—WHv? ann How?—Tue Ciose oF THE 
“High Cauiinc.”—THe Timg 1s SHort.—‘ Let no Man Taxg Tuv 
Crown "—E.eventH Hour Servants AND OVERCOMERS. a “ 135 


CHAPTER VII. 


THE DELIVERANCE AND EXALTATION 
OF THE CHURCH. 


Tue Deviverance op THe Cuurcn Nrar.—It Witt Be Tug HARBINGER 
or Deuiverance To ALL Manxinp.—ITs Date ApproximaATep.—How Tue 
Saints Witt Escarg THost Txincs Cominc on THE Worip.—How ant 
When Gop Witt Herp Her.—Tus Manner anv Circumstances or Her 


Finact Depiverancs.— Tre Detiverance First oF THoss wHo Sieep ne 
Jesus.—THe CHANGE OF THE Livinc MeMBERs oF THE CHURCH.—WiILL THEY 
Dre ?—Bvsssep THE Deap who Dig in THE Lorp From HENCEFORTH. . 987 


CHAPTER VIII. 
THE RESTORATION OF ISRAEL. 


Tue Ra-ESTABLISHMENT OF JSRAKL IN PALESTINE, AN Event To 38 Expaectep 
Within Tus’ Harvesy Periov.—How, asp to Wnat Extent, ann WiTH 
Wuat Crass, We SHourp Exeect ‘THis Restoxation.—Daty or its Bs- 
GINNING, AND Evipences oF 11s ACTUAL ProGress Since. —WrHv MILLENNIAL 
Bressrnes, INTENDED FoR ALL MANKIND, Witt Reach ann Revive THE Jew 
First.—TuHe Revivac or Jewtsn Hopes.—Ossexvations oF Leapine Jawish 
AND GENTILE Writers.— THe HarMony oF THESE WiTH PRopHECY.—ISRAEL’S 
Buinpness ResprctinG CHRIST ALREADY TURNING AWAY.—THE SPREAD AND 
Momentum oF THE Movement.—Gop Witt Hecp ‘bh Hest.—Tue AnGio-Isra- 
EL QUBSTION. : 5 é as is . i . 243 


CHAPTER IX. 
THY GOD REIGNETII! 


A Resumes or THe Propuetic Evivences WHick SHow THE Presence oF Ime 
MANUBL, AND THAT His KinNGDOM Is IN Process oF ESTABLISHMENT. . 30% 


CHAPTER X. 
THE TESTIMONY OF GObD’s STONE WITNESS AND 
PROPHET, THE GREAT PYRAMID IN EGYPT. 


Generac Description oF THE GRBAT PyrRAMip.—WHy OF SPECIAL INTEREST TO 
Curistians.—I'ne Great Pyramip A StTorenouse oF TRUTH—SCIRNTIFIC, 
Historic AND Propuetic.—Biste Attusions to [t.-Wuy, WHEN AND BY 
Wom Buiit.—Importance oF tts Location.—Its Scientiric Lessons.—Its 
Testimony CONCERNING THE PLAN oF REDEMPTION—THE PLAN OF THE AGES. 
—Tux Dzatn anv THE Resurrection oF Curist Inpicatep.—THe Down- 
WARD Cours OF THE Wor.p, ENDING 1N A GRRAT TIMR OF TROUBLE.—THE 
Naturg or THE Trousts. —Tue Great RerorMaTION Movement MARKED. 
—Lenetx or tus Jewish Acs Inpicatep.—Tue “ Hicn Catuinc” oF THE 
Gospet Cuurcn SHown.—Tue Course oF THE CHuRCH’s CONSECRATION, — 
Tue Enp oF tHE Hic Carutnc Markep.—Date or THE SECOND ADVENT 
or Curist.—How Restitution BLessincs For THR WorLD Ang INDICATED.— 
Tue Course or THE Wortp DurinG THE MILLENNIAL AGE.—ITs ENp.—Con- 
TRAST OF THE Two ConpiTions, HUMAN AND SPIRITUAL, AS INDICATED IN THR 
Pyramip.—THs Pyramip ReruTes ATHBISM, INFIDELITY AND Atl EVOLUTION 
THEoRigS, AND VERIFIES BOTH THE PLAN OF THE BiBLE AND ITS APPOINTED 
Times AnD SEASONS. , J 3 é . . : 313 

2c 


Digitized Google . 


“TITY KINGDOM COME.” 
CHAPTER 1. 


Importance or THe KinGpom.—Crasses op Men INTERESTED IN IT.—CLasses 
Opposep To It, AND Wuy opposev.—Proximity of THE Kincpom.—lIrs 
Grory Heavenry.—Its Present EstTABiisHment. 


‘Tee most momentous event of earth’s history is the es- 

tablishment of God’s Kingdom among men, in the 
hands of our Lord Jesus and his selected joint-heirs, the 
overcomers of the Gospel Church. ‘This great event, to- 
ward which, as shown in previous volumes of MILLENNIAL 
Dawy, all of God’s promises and types point, we now see 
to be not only at hand, but just upon us. None of those 
awake to these facts, and who properly or even partially re- 
alize them, and whose hearts are in full sympathy with God’s 
great plan of the ages, and who see that God’s panacea for 
the sin and misery and dying of the groaning creation is to 
be applied by this Kingdom, can possibly feel other than 
an absorbing.interest in the fact, the time and the manner 
of its establishment. 

All who trust implicitly for the fulfilment of the prayer 
our Lord himself taught us to offer—‘‘’Thy Kingdom come, 
Thy will be done on earth as it is done in heaven’’—must 
feel the liveliest interest in the fulfilment of their request, 
if they prayed from the heart—in spirit and in truth. 

- We can see that even the world, if it could but realize 
the true character of this Kingdom, would hail it at once, 


as they finally will, as the long sought blessing, bringing 
19 


20 Thy Kingdon: Come. 


with it the precious favors of the golden Millennial age, so 
long desired. 

But one general class could possibly be opposed to this 
rule of righteousness. This class embraces all who love not 
the golden rule of love, and who, instead of loving others 
as themselves, are willing to see others crushed, oppressed 
and denied their rights and the reasonable rewards and com- 
forts of toil in order that they may luxuriate extravagantly, 
“‘wantonly’’ (James 5:1—9), in more than heart could wish 
or reason ask. ‘These hold to the present arrangement of 
society with a death clutch, and seem instin¢tively to dread 
the promised kingdom of Messiah. And, with these, the 
wish is father to the thought, that it will never come. 
As David said, ‘“‘ Their inward thought is, that their houses — 
[families] are to be forever, their dwelling-places from gen- 
eration to generation ; they call them by their own names 
in [various] countries. . . . This their way is their folly.: 
yet their posterity approve their sayings.’’—Psa. 49:11, 13. 

Disbelieving or ignoring the multiplied testimony of the 
prophets touching this Kingdom—for it was always the 
theme of them all: ‘Spoken by the mouth of all his holy 
prophets since the world began ’’ (Acts 3:21)—many seem 
to dread the Kingdom, and to instinctively feel the truth, 
that if God should establish his Kingdom it would rule in 
justice ; and that if justice were meted out, many of earth’s 
rulers would change places with their subjects, or, perhaps, 
be put into prison ; and many of the great and lordly and 
purse-proud and flattered would be stripped of glory and 
honor and wealth ill-gotten, and be seen in their true light, 
as ignoble. These dread, though they do not believe the 
testimony, that ‘* There is nothing covered that shall not be 
revealed, and hid, that shall not be known.’’ (Matt. 10:26.) 
And with these ignoble ones—unjust stewards of wealth and 
power, in the final use of which they are not ‘‘wise’’ as the 


Thy Kingdom Come. 21 


one commended for prudence in the parable (Luke 16: 1-9) 

_—stands a yet larger class, without whom they would fall. 
This large class, which has not, perhaps, at present more 
than its reasonable share of honor, office, wealth and com- 
fort, has hope, however slim, of some day being able to roll 
in luxury, the envied patrons of the ‘‘common herd.’’ 
Ignoble these: the slaves of selfish vanity and toys of fickle 
fortune. And of these—alas ! ’tis trne—are some who wear 
the name of Christ, the poor man’s friend, and who with 
their lips ask only daily bread, and pray with solemn 
mockery, ‘‘ Thy Kingdom come,”’ while in their every look 
and aét and dealing with their fellow-men they show how 
much they love the present unjust rule, and how, rejoicing 
in unrighteousness, they would not gladly have Christ’s 
Kingdom come. 

Strange it is—in marked contrast to the attitude of many 
of God’s professed children—that not infrequently we find 
some ‘‘ Socialists’ and others—who reject ‘‘Churchianity,”’ 
and with it too frequently the Bible, and all faith in a re- 
vealed religion, yet who really grasp some of the fundamental 
principles of righteousness — recognizing man’s common 
brotherhood, etc., as some of their writings most beauti- 
fully show. They seem to be expecting and striving for 
the social equality and generally favorable conditions re- 
peatedly promised in Scripture as the result of the estab- 
lishment of Christ’s Kingdom among men, when God’s 
will shall be done on earth. And yet, poor Socialists, it 
would appear that often their advocacy of liberal dealings . 
and equality is largely the offspring of their poverty and 
appreciated lack of the average comforts and advantages, 
rather than the outgrowth of principle; for, let one of 
them inherit or acquire great wealth, and he is almost sure 
to abandon his socialistic theories. 

Very circumspeétly ought those saints to walk who pray, 


22 Thy Ki ingdom Come. 


“Thy Kingdom come, ‘Thy will be done on earth,’’ lest 
their prayers be mere mockeries of lip-service, to which 
their hearts and lives do not consent. ‘Out of thine own 
mouth will I judge thee,’’ represents one of the most 
searching and severe reproofs which the Judge will pro- 
nounce against some who have professed to be his servants 
and to long for his Kingdom of love and justice. Let all 
who thus pray for and believe in the coming reign of right- 
eousness even now square their actions and words by its 
just precepts, as far as in them lies. , 

Those who have caught the force of the lessons of the 
preceding volumes will see that God’s Kingdom will not 
be one of outward, visible, earthly splendor, but of power 
and divine glory. This Kingdom has already come into 
executive authority, although it has not yet conquered and 
displaced the kingdoms of this world, whose lease of power 
has not yet expired. Hence it has not yet come into full 
control of earthly dominion. Its establishment is in prog- 
ress, however, as indicated by the signs of the times, as well 
as by the prophecies considered in the previous volume 
and others examined in this volume. 

Succeeding chapters will present prophecies marking 
various stages of the preparation of the nominal church and 
the world for the Kingdom, and call attention to some of 
those most momentous changes foretold to take place dur- 
ing the time of its establishment—than which nothing could 
be more important or more deeply interesting to those liv- 
ing saints who are longing for the promised joint-heirship 
in this Kingdom, and seeking to be engaged in co-operation 
with the Master, the Chief-Reaper and King, in the work 
now due and in progress. 


CHAPTER II. 


“THE TIME OF THE END,” 
OR “DAY OF HIS PREPARATION.” 


— DANIEL XI.— 


‘Tug Time oF THR Enp.—ITs ComMENCEMENT, A. D. 1799.—ITS CLOSE, A. D. 
1914.—WHAT IS TO BR PREPARED, AND THE OpjecT.—IH& WorRLD’s History 
PropHericALty TrRAcED THROUGH ITs Corer RuLers.—FROM B. C. 405 TO 
THis Day oF PRePARATION.—THE BgGINNING OF THE TIME OF THE Env Drr- 
INITELY Markep, YET WitHout Names or Dates. 


HE ‘Time of the End,”’ a period of one hundred and 
fifteen (115) years, from A. D. 1799 to A. D. 1914, is 
particularly marked in the Scriptures. ‘‘ The Day of His 
Preparation ’’ is another name given to the same period, 
because in it a general increase of knowledge, resulting in 
discoveries, inventions, etc., paves the wav to the coming 
Millennium of favor, making ready the mechanical devices 
which will economize labor, and provide the world in gen- | 
eral with time and conveniences, which under Christ’s 
reign of righteousness will be a blessing to all and.aid in . 
filling the earth with the knowledge of the Lord. And it . 
is a day or period of preparation in another sense also ; for 
by the increase of knowledge among the masses, giving to 
all a taste of liberty and luxury, before Christ’s rule is estab- 
lished to rightly regulate the world, these blessings will, 
gradually become agencies of class-power and will result in 
the uprising of the masses and the overthrow of corporative. 
Trusts, etc., with which will fall also all the present domin- , 


ions of earth, civil and ecclesiastical. And thus the pres- 
23 


24 Thy Kingdom Come. 


ent is a day of preparation (through such an overthrow) 
for the establishment of the universal dominion of the 
Kingdom of God so long prayed for. 

The last forty years of the Time of the End is called 
the ‘‘ End’”’ or ‘‘ Harvest ’’ of the Gospel age, as we read, 
‘The HARVEST zs the END of the age.’’ (Matt. 13:39.) 
To the foretold general character and events of this period 
we will shortly call particular attention, reserving the spe- 
cial features of the harvest, however, for a subseqent chapter. 

Though our information pointing out the date of this 
period is furnished in Daniel’s prophecy, we know that he 
understood nothing at all concerning it, as he said: ‘I 
heard, but I understood not.’’ (Dan. 12:8.) In answer to 
his anxious inquiries he was told that the words were closed 
up and sealed wxft/ the Time of the End. _ It follows, there- 
fore, that no one could understand the prophecy before 
1799; and before leaving the subject we shall show that the 
prophecy indicates that it would not deg?z to be understood 
before 1829, nor reach a clear unfolding until 1875. 

Chapter xi. of Daniel’s prophecy is devoted to the nota- 
ple events leading down to this period, the Time of the 
End, while chapter xii. leads on from there to the End or 
Harvest. Students of prophecy will notice the peculiar 
manner in which the date of the beginning of the Time of 
the End is given—a manner remarkable both for its exact- 
ness in fixing the date, and also for its concealment, until 
the appointed time for it to be understood. And after this 
point of time is thus peculiarly marked in chapter xi., with- 
out a name or a date being stated, chapter xii. produces three 
periods of time, 1260, 1290 and 1335 prophetic days, which 
‘corroborate and establish the lesson of chapter xi., that the 
beginning of the Time of the End was in the year 1799. 

And, although chapter xi. touches upen some of the 
most prominent characters and events of history, as we 


The Time of the End. 25 


shall show, yet its testimony is still sealed to very many pro- 
phetic students because the central ttem of the prophecy, 
upon which much depends, has already had a seeming ful- 
filment. This manner of covering or hiding a prophecy 
until its due time to be revealed is by no means uncommon. 
And so confident have some prophetic students of the past 
felt that this central item has already been fulfilled, that in 
our English Bibles, common version, the marginal reference 
reads —‘‘ Fulfilled 171 to 168 B.c.’’ The passage (Dan. 11: 
31) reads, ‘‘Arms shall stand on his part, and they shall de- 
file the Sanétuary of strength and shall take away the daily 
[literally, she continual ] sacrifice, and they shall place [or 
set up] the abomination that maketh desolate [or the des- 
olating abomination].”’ 

The claim is that this prophecy was fulfilled by Antio- 
chus Epiphanes, a Syrian king, when he forcibly entered 
Jerusalem and stopped the sacrificings to God in the ‘fem- 
ple, and placed. in the temple the idol of Jupiter Olympus. 
- This seeming fulfilment of the prophecy is sufficient to 
satisfy the general student, contented to believe what he is 
told; and it causes him to lose interest in the prophecy as 
one fulfilled in the far past and of no special interest to him. 
But the earnest student will note that it was foretold (verse 
14) that the robbers of Daniel’s people would indeed av- 
temp? to fulfil the vision (or would seemingly fulfil it), but 
would fail; and, further, that the Time of the End was a 
fixed time (verse 35); and that a full and correct interpre- 
tation could not be had wz:7 then. Hence such will not 
expect correct interpretations from the past. And neither 
will the careful student overlook the fact that our Lord 
drew attention to this very prophecy two hundred years 
after its claimed fulfilnient, and told us to expect its fulfil- 
ment future, saying, ‘*Ye shall see [future] the abomina- 
tion of desolation standing in the holy place.’’ (Matt. 24: 


26 Thy Kingdom Come. 


3, 15-) Our Lord even added a caution, that we should 
take heed and not be mistaken regarding the real abomina- 
tion, saying, ‘‘ Whoso readeth let him understand.”’ 

We trust that the evidences presented in the preceding 
volume have made clear the fact that the great Papal sys- 
tem is the desolating abomination which for centuries has 
despoiled both the world and the Church, in the name of 
Christ’s kingdom. ‘Truly it has long been “standing in 
the holy place’’—in the temple of God, the Christian 
Church. Thank God for the privilege of seeing its abom- 
inable characteristics more and more clearly, that we may 
flee from all its errors. Thank God that its days are num- 
bered, and that the cleansed san¢tuary (Dan. 8:14) will 
soon be exalted and filled with the glory of God. 

With this introduction, we proceed to examine Daniel 
xi. in consecutive order. 

Verse 2 begins with the Medo-Persian empire, the fourth 
and last king being Darius III. Codomanus. 

The mighty king of verse 3 is Alexander the Great, of 
Greece, concerning whom the following scrap of history 
from Willard will be read with interest. He says :— , 


‘¢ Alexander the Great, having invaded Judea, sent a man- 
date to Jerusalem to furnish his army with provisions and 
troops. Jaddus, then the high-priest, returned for answer, 
that he had sworn allegiance to the king of Persia, and 
could not desert his cause while he lived. Alexander, as 
soon as the siege of Tyre was completed, marched to Jeru- 
salem to take vengeance for this refusal. Apprised of his 
purpose, and utterly unable to contend with him, the high- 
priest in his distress cried to heaven for protection. Be- 
ing instructed by a vision in the night, he threw open the 
gates of the cityand strewed the way with flowers. Clothing 
himself in the splendid vestments of the Levitical priest- 
hood, he went forth to meet the conqueror, followed by all 
the priests robed in white. Alexander met him, bowed, 
and worshiped. Being asked by his astonished friend, why 
he, whom others adored, should adore the high-priest, he 


The Time of the End. 27 


answered, ‘I do not adore him, but the God whose min- 
ister he is. I knew him, as soon as I| saw his habit, to be the 
same whom I saw in a vision in Macedonia, when I medi- 
tated the conquest of Persia; and he then assured me that 
his God would go before me and give me success.’ Alex- 
ander then embraced the priests, walking in the midst of 
them, and thus entering Jerusalem; where, in the most 
solemn manner, he offered sacrifices in the temple. Zhe 
high-priest then showed him the prophecy of Dantel, and in- 
terpreted tt to foreshow that the Persian power should be 
overthrown by him.” 


Though Alexander conquered the world in theshort period 
of thirteen years, the kingdom did not continue as one na- 
tion in his family after his death, but was divided by his 
four generals and broken into fragments generally, as stated 
in verse 4. 

Notice here the correspondence of this prophecy with 
that of Dan. 8:3-9, 20-25. Here it is shown that out of 
one of the divisions of Alexander’s empire (compare verses 
8, 9 and 21) would come forth a ‘little horn’’ or power, 
which would become exceedingly great. ‘This evidently re- 
fers to Rome, which rose to influence upon the ruins of 
Greece. From being an insignificant subje¢t whose ambas- 
sadors hastened to acknowledge the Grecian supremacy, 
and to become part of the empire at the feet of Alexander 
the Great, Rome rose gradually to supremacy. 

The history which is told in few words in Dan. 8:9, 10 
is related with greater detail in chapter 11:5-19. In this de- 
tailed account, Ayvft is spoken of as the King of the South ; 
while the Grectans, and afterward the Romans, their suc- 
cessors in power, or the new horn out of Greece, are desig- 
nated the King of the North. Woven between these, linked 
now with the one and again with the other, is the history 
of God’s people—Daniel’s people—in whose ultimate bless- 
ing, as promised by God, Daniel trusted. It is tedious and 
unnecessary to trace this history in its many details of con- 


28 Thy Kingdom Come. 


flicts between Alexander's generals and their successors, until 
verse 17, which refers toCleopatra,queen of Egypt. Andsince 
all are agreed thus far, we need go no farther into the past. 

At verse 18 those who claim that verse 31 applies to An- 
tiochus Epiphanes continue to apply the prophecy to the 
little squabbles and battles between Seleucus, Philopater, 
Antiochus Epiphanes and Ptolemeus Philomater down to 
the end of the chapter—as the Jews were evidently accus- 
tomed to apply it. The Jews, continuing this interpreta- 
into chapter xii., would have strong grounds for expecting 
deliverance by Messiah speedily ; and so we read that at 
the time of our Lord’s birth ‘<all men were in expectation”’ 
of him, and through him of their deliverance from the Ro- 
man yoke. But from verse 18 onward, we who see the 
real ‘¢ abomination’’ part company from them, and under- 
stand the prophecy merely to touch prominent, characters 
down to Papacy ; and then, touching and identifying it, to 
pass on to the end of its power to persecute, and to mark 
that date by a detailed account of one of the most noted 
characters of history—Napoleon Bonaparte. 

But it may be asked, Why this change of the particular 
method of the preceding verses, to touch only prominent 
features of history. We answer, that this has been part of 
God’s method of sealing and closing the prophecy. Be- 
sides, every thing in prophecy was so arranged as not to 
stumble Israel at the first advent. Had the minutiz and 
detail of twenty centuries been spread out as is that pro- 
‘phecy contained in verses 3 to 17 of this chapter, it would 
have been long, tedious and beyond comprehension ; and 
it would have given the Jews and the early Christian church 
an idea of the length ef time before the Kingdom of God 
should come; and this was not God’s purpose. 

Proceeding, then, we understand verses 17-19 to apply 
to the times and incidents in which Mark Antony and Cle- 


The Time of the Enid. 29 


opatra figured, when Antony fell, and Egypt (‘‘ King of 
the South’’) was swallowed up in the Roman empire. Verse 
20 we apply to Augustus Cesar, who was noted for his sys- 
tematic collection of large taxes from all tributary nations, 
and whose exactions of taxes, in Judea and throughout the 
then civilized world, are noted in Scripture in connection 
with the birth of our Lord. (Luke 2:1.) ‘The statement, 
‘Caesar Augustus sent forth a decree that all the world 
should be taxed,’’ corresponds faithfully to the description 
—‘* There shall stand up in his estate @ raiser of taxes in the 
glory of the kingdom.’’ This latter part of the description 
also fits exactly ; for the period of Augustus Ceesar’s reign is 
noted in history as the most glorfous epoch of the great Ro- 
man empire, and is called ‘* the golden age of Rome.”’ 

Another translation of verse 20 reads: ‘‘ There will stand 
up in his place one who will cause the exactor of taxes to 
pass through the glorious land of the kingdom.”’ ‘This would 
seem to apply specially to Palestine, and would make this 
fit exactly to the record in Luke. But both applications are 
corre&t: It was the glorious time of the Roman Empire, 
and tax collectors were caused to pass through the land of 
Palestine—the glorious land of the kingdom. Furthermore, 
be it noted that Augustus Ceesar was the first ruler to intro- 
duce to the world a systematized taxation. 

We read further of this prominent ruler—“Within few 
days he shall be broken, neither in anger nor in battle.’’ 
Of Augustus Ceesar it is recorded that he died a quiet death, 
while his predecessor and his seven successors in imperial 
power died violent deaths. His death was within a few 
years after he had reached the zenith of his power and had 
caused ‘‘ the exa¢tor of taxes to pass through the glorious 
land of the kingdom.”’ 

Verse 21 fitly describes Tiberius Czesar, the successor of 
Augustus: ‘ There will stand up in his place a despicable 


30 : Thy Kingdom Come. 


person, to whom they shall not give the Aonor of the king- 
dom; but he shall come in peaceably and obtain the king- 
dom by flatteries.’’ Let us here note how the historic ac- 
count of Tiberius agrees with the above by the prophet. 


Says White: ‘‘ Tiberius was fifty-six years old when he 
ascended the throne, professing great unwillingness to take 
upon him its important cares... . . All restraint being now 
removed, the tyrant gave loose reign to his cruel and sen- 
sual passions.’’ 

Says Willard: ‘‘At first he dissembled and appeared to 

govern with moderation ; but the mask soon dropped. . 
The senate, to whom he transferred all the political rights 
of the people; had become degraded, and thus obsequiously 
san¢tioned his acts and offered the incense of perpetual 
flattery to the man who filled their streets with blood. It 
was under the administration of shis most debased of men, 
that’our Lord Jesus Christ was crucified in Judea.’’ 


These pictures fit exactly the prophet’s description, 
and are further confirmed by the next verse—22. “With 
the powers of an overflow [flood] will they [all opposers] 
be swept away before him, and be broken; yea, also the 
Prince of the Covenant.’’ ‘This last statement seems unmis- 
takably to refer to our Lord Jesus, who, as above noted by 
the historian, was crucified under the administration of Ti- 
berius by his representative, Pilate, the Roman governor 
of Judea, and by Roman soldiers. 

«And after the league made with him [the Senate recog- 
nizing him as emperor] he shall work deceitfully ; for he 
will come up and become strong with a small number of 
people. [Tiberius organized the Pretorian Guard, at 
first of 10,000, afterward doubled. ‘This small number of 
people, as the emperor’s body-guard, was continually at 
Rome and under his control. By it he overawed the peo- 
ple and the senate, abolished popular elections, assemblies, 
etc.] He shall enter peaceably even upon the fattest 
places of the province, and he shall do that which his 


The Time of the End. 31 


fathers have not done, nor his father’s fathers; he shall 
scatter among them the prey, and spoil, and riches: and 
he shall think thoughts against the strong holds, even for 
a time.’’—Verses 23, 24. 

It was the policy of both Augustus and his successors to 
preserve peacefully the control of the dominions previously 
gained, rather than to seek by conquest further additions ; 
and, to secure this hold, it was their policy to azide the 
spoil by appointing local governors, with dignity and author- 
itv, whose tenure of office was made to depend upon the 
preservation of order in their provinces, their fealty to the 
Ceesars and the prompt colleétion of taxes. ‘They no longer, 
as at first, pursued the policy of sacking and plundering the 
world merely to carry the spoils as trophies to Rome. By 
this diplomatic policy, by thus ‘‘forecasting devices,’’ Rome 
now ruled the world more completely and with greater 
prestige than when her armies went hither and thither. 

It should be recognized that while the prophecy has par- 
ticularized, and in the cases of Augustus and Tiberius has 
almost individualized the account, yet this has been only 
ameans toanend. The end to be accomplished is to mark 
the time of transfer of universal dominion, from Greece to 
Rome, from the four generals of Alexander the Great, rep- 
resenting four divisions of that empire (the ‘‘ four horns’ 
of the Grecian ‘‘ goat’’ mentioned in Daniel 8:8), to the 
Roman empire, which was at that time and previously a 
part of Grecia. These four generals who succeeded Alex- 
ander the Great are no less distinétly marked in history 
than in prophecy.* ‘The historian + says :— 

‘« The [Grecian] empire was now divided into four parts, 
and one part assigned to each of the generals who formed 


*The division among these four is distinétly referred to in Daniel 
8:8 and 11:4, 5. 
¢Willard’s Universal Ilistory, page 100. 


32 Thy Kingdom ‘Come. - 


the league. Ptolemy assumed the regal power in Egyf¢; 
Seleucus, in Svvia and Upper Asia; Lysimachus, in Thrace 
and Asia Minor as far as Taurus; and Cassander took as 
his share Mucedontia.”’ 


In this division Italy belonged to Cassander’s depart- 
ment, which was the northern division, designated ‘‘ King 
of the North,’’ while Egypt was the southern division, or 
‘«King of the South.’’ Gradually the Roman influence 
prevailed, and piece by picce the territory originally held 
by Seleucus, Lysimachus and Cassander was brought into 
subjection to Rome, which was part of the northern divi- 
sion, and left only Egypt, the southern division. This king 
of the south, Egypt, became subject to the power of the 
northern division, as above narrated, in the days of Cleo- 
patra,.Antony and Augustus Ceesar, partly by the will of 
the father of Cleopatra, who, dying while his children were 
young, left the kingdom under the protection of the Roman 
Senate, and partly by Mark Antony’s defeat. For a while, 
indeed, the ‘‘ King of the South,’’ Egypt, was quite as pow- 
erful as the ‘ King of the North,’’ Rome. Historians tell 
us that ‘‘it was the greazes¢t mercantile nation then existing;’’ 
that it had ‘‘ 33,000 cities ;’’ and that its annual revenue 
‘*amounted to 14,800 silver talents,’’ about $20,000,000. 

Recognizing the sense and design of the prophecy, we 
should not expect detailed, personal accounts of the mon- 
archs of these kingdoms, but by ‘‘ King of the North’’ we 
should understand the Roman empire’s representative, and 
by ‘‘ King of the Sonth’’ a representative of Egypt’s king- 
dom. With this explanation we proceed with the prophecy. 

Verse 25: ‘‘And he [Rome] will stir up his power and 
’ courage against the King of the South [Egypt]. with a great 
army; and the King of the South shall be stirred up for 
the war with a very great and mighty army; but he shall 
not stand; for they will [treacherously] devise | plans 
against him.”’ 


The Time of the End. 33 


From the year B. C. 30, when Augustus Caesar made Egypt 
a Roman province, no hostilities occurred between the two 
countries until Queen Zenobia, a descendant of Cleopatra, 
about A. D. 269, claimed and exercised its control. Her 
reign was short; Aurelian, the Roman emperor, conquer- 
ing her in a. D. 272. The historian says: ‘‘ Syria, Egypt 
and Asia Minor acknowledged the sway of Zenobia, Queen 
of Palmyra. But she’had to cope with the superior force 
of the empire and the military skill of the first captain of 
the age. Yet Aurelian writes of her,.‘The Roman people 
speak in contempt of the war, which I am waging against 
a woman. ‘They are ignorant beth of the character and 
fame of Zenobia. It is impossible to describe her warlike 
preparations and her desperate courage.’’’ Firmus, the 
ally of Zenobia in Egypt, was speedily vanquished and put 
to death, and Aurelian returned to Rome covered with 
honor and with great wealth as described in verse 28—‘‘ Then 
will he return into his land with great riches, and his heart 
will be against the holy covenant, and he shall do [various] 
exploits and return to his own land.”’ 


As an evidence of the riches he accumulated, note an ex- 
tract from Gibbon’s account of his march of triumph through 
the streets of Rome. He says:— 


‘The wealth of Asia, the arms and ensigns of conquered 
nations, and the magnificent plate and wardrobe of the Sy- 
rian queen, were disposed in exact symmetry or artful dis- 
order. . . . The beautiful figure of Zenobia was confined 
in fetters of gold; a slave'supported the gold chain which 
encircled her neck, and she almost fainted under the intol- 
erable weight of jewels. She preceded on foot the magni- 
ficent chariot in which she once hoped to enter the gates 
of Rome.”’ 

As to the Prophet’s statement, that on his return his 
heart would be against the holy covenant [Christianity], 


Mosheim says :— 
36 


34 Thy Kingdom Come. 


«¢ Aurelian, although immoderately given to idolatry, and 
possessing a strong aversion to the Christians, yet devised 
no measure for their injury during four years. But in the 
fifth year of his reign, either from his own superstition, or 
prompted by the superstition of others, he prepared to per- 
secute them: and, had he lived, so cruel and ferocious was 
his disposition, and so much was he influenced by the priests 

.and the admirers of the gods, that his persecution would 

have been more cruel than any of the preceding. But be- 
fore his new edicts had reached all the provinces he was 
assassinated ; and therefore only a few Christians suffered 
for their piety under him.’’ * 


This persecuting spirit against Christianity was manifested 
after his return from the conquest, as indicated in the proph- 
ecy. Aurelian was a worshipper of the sun, and he ascribed 
his victory over Zenobia to the sun; and immediately after 
the battle he repaired to the magnificent temple, dedicated 
to the sun, to acknowledge the favor. As the Christians 
deemed the sun unworthy of worship, it is presumed that 
their refusal to participate in this sun-worship was the prov- 
ocation of his sudden and violent opposition. 

Verse 26: ‘Yea, they that eat of his food will bring his 
downfall: and his army shall overflow: and many shall fall 
down slain.’’ Aurelian was assassinated by his own gen- 
erals; his army was successful, though many were slain. 

Verse 27 applies not to Rome and Egypt, but to ‘wo 
kings or Jowers in the Roman empire—the Imperial power 
gradually dying, and the Clerical power slowly coming to 
life and ambition. Each sought to use the other for its own 
selfish ends, while denying such designs. It reads: <‘And 
the heart of the two kings shall be to do mischief, and they 
shall speak lies at one table; but it shall not prosper [then], - 
because as yet the end is unto another time.’’ Or, to express 
the thought more plainly, a certain period of 1260 years 
had been appointed of God as the length of Papacy’s per- 

* History of Christianity, Vol. IL, page ror, 


The Time of the End. 35 


secuting power; hence the union or league between the 
clergy and the civil power could “ not prosper’’ then, be- 
cause the 1260 years counted from that date would bring © 
“«the end’’ too soon ; therefore it must be put off, or held 
back, and allowed to come about gradually by the decay 
of the empire in Italy. We see on the pages of ecclesiast- 
ical history the scheming of the Christian bishops for power 
in the Roman empire ; and evidently the emperors debated 
much whether it would not be to their advantage to recog- 
nize the new religion. Apparently Constantine merely acted 
out, at a riper time, what others had more or less thought 
of. But even Constantine was hindered by the temper of 
the people from accomplishing at once and as rapidly as 
was desired a union of the forces of church and state. 

We regard verses 29 and 30 as a parenthesis, thrown in 
to conceal the meaning for a time by breaking the order of 
the narrative, and believe it to apply to a then far future 
collision between the representatives of the Roman empire 
and Egypt. No further conflict between these would occur 
except one, and it would be just at ‘‘ the time appointed”’ 
—the time of the end, 1799. For this reason we will leave 
the examination of these verses until considering that last 
battle between them, as detailed in verses 4o—45. 

Verse 31 connects with the thought of verse 27, and we 
recognize it as referring to the more successful of the two 
powers in the Roman empire—Papacy. Having traced his- 
tory through notable individual rulers down to Aurelian, 
and having introduced -us to the two antagonistic rulerships 
—civil and ecclesiastical—which arose shortly after, the 
predominance of Papacy, its character and its work, as re- 
lated to God’s truth and Church, are next pointed out,—be- 
ing represented as one king or power, regardless of its va- 
rious and changing popes or heads. We know that in the 
contest between the civil and religious rulers Papacy was 


36 . Thy Kingdom Come. 


victorious ; and the prophecy reads, ‘‘Arms shall stand on 

his part [or, ‘“strong ones out of him stand up’’— Young’s 
; translation], and shall pollute the sanctuary of strength, and 
shall take away the continual sacrifice, and they will seT uP 
the desolating abomination.” 

This we interpret to mean that, though neither the church 
nor the civil power succeeded in swallowing up the other, 
as at one time seemed probable, yet ‘strong ones’’ arose, 
who polluted the fundamental principles both of the civil 
government and also of true religion. The ‘‘santuary 
of strength,’’ the sacred precinéts of civil authority, 
which for the time God had delivered over to the Gentiles, 
to the kingdoms of this world, was undermined by those in 
the Church who thirsted for present dominion, and who 
sought by every device to obtain civil power to help forward 
their ecclesiastical schemes; and the sanctuary of God (his 
sacred dwelling—the Church) was defiled and degraded by 
the persistent efforts of these ‘‘strong ones’’ to obtain power 
with the. civil rulers, and numbers, and influence with the. 
people. ‘This was Papacy in embryo, scheming to set itself 
up in power as a sacerdotal empire. 

We cannot wonder that these heady, ‘‘strong ones,”’ 
having disregarded God’s plan, which provides for our 
present submission to ‘‘ the powers that be’’ (which are or- 
dained of God for our present trial and our preparation for 
future exaltation to power, glory and the dominion of the 
world), ‘and having decided to reign, if possible, before 
God’s time, were so far out of harmony with God’s plan 
that they lost the very essence and kernel of the truth, and 
retained only the form, the outward appearance. A most 
decisive step of the apostasy was to ‘‘ remove the continual 
sacrifice.’? This, the climax of doctrinal degeneracy, rep- 
resented in the Romish doctrines of Transubstantiation and 
the Sacrifice of the Mass, we merely name here, leaving it 


The Time of the End. 37 


for fuller examination in connection with another prophecy 
in a later chapter. From the introduction of this fatal and 
blasphemous error, God calls the system an abontination ; 
and its subsequent exaltation to power is here referred to 
as, ‘‘the desolating abomination set xp.’’ How well Pa- 
pacy has earned this name, and how blighting has been its 
baneful influence, are well attested by the history of the 
‘¢ dark ages,’’ glimpses of which we have given in the pre- 
ceding volume. 

Verse 32: ‘‘ And such as do wickedly against the cove- 
nant shall be corrupt by flatteries.’” Those in the Church 
who failed to live up to their covenant with the Lord fell an 
easy prey to the flatteries, honors, titles, etc., held before 
them by the Papal hierarchy as it began to have influence. 
But though many yielded to the errors, all did not ; for we 
read, ‘‘ But the people that do know their God shall be 
strong and deal valiantly ; and they that understand among 
the people shall instruét many.’’ ‘Thus is shown a division 
of the Church into two marked classes, distinguished in 
Dan. 8:11-14 as the sanctuary and the host: one class, cor- 
rupted by the flattering honors of the world, violated its 
covenant with God, while the other class was really strength- 
ened by the persecutions to which their loyalty to God ex- 
posed them. Among the latter class were some who under- 
stood the situation, and taught the faithful that thus it was 
written in the Scriptures that the Antichrist, or Man of Sin, 
would develope from a great falling away in the Church. 

Numbers and power were in the hands of the forsakers of 
the covenant, who became joined to the empire; and the 
faithful few were persecuted—hunted, imprisoned, racked, 
tortured, and put to death in hundreds of revolting forms, 
as the pages of history plainly attest, and as here foretold 
by the prophet, who said, ‘Yet they shall fall by the sword, 
and by flame, by captivity and by spoil—days,’’—[Here 


38 Thy Kingdom Come. 


another parenthesis of verse 34 and part of 35 interrupts] 
—‘‘to the time of the end ; because it is yet [future] fora 
time appointed.’’ The length of time this persecution was 
to continue is not stated here, except that it will be con- 
cluded as appointed, at the Time of the End. From other 
Scriptures we learn that it was a period of 1260 years, which 
ended with A. D. 1799, a date prominently noted by Daniel 
and the Revelator as well as in history. 

Verses 34, 35: ‘‘ Now when they shall fall, they shall be 
holpen with a little help.’’ The full period of the perse- 
cutor’s (Papacy’s) power, 1260 years, would not end until 
1799; but before its end God granted a little help through 
the Reformation movement, which, though at first it rather 
increased persecution, afterward gave some comfort and 
protection to those falling because of fidelity to God’s Word. 
The Reformation prevented the coinplete crushing out of 
the truth from the world. But, alas! with the little help 
came the ‘ flatterers’’ again. As soon as persecution be- 
gan to abate the adversary resorted to the same device, by 
which he Rad formerly succeeded in corrupting and degrad- 

‘ing the church, to now overcome the reform movements. 
Kings and princes began to give honors and titles to Pro- 
testants and to unite with Protestantism; and this led to 
serious evil results and deflection from the covenant, as we 
read: ‘* But many shall cleave to them with flatteries ; and 
some of them of understanding [leaders, reformers, teachers, 
who had been able to instru¢ét many concerning Papacy’s 
errors] shall fall; to try them [the faithful few] and to purge 
and to make them white.’’ 

Tracing the prophecy further, we find that as the-previ- 
‘ous verses pointedly describe the leading chara¢ters prom- 
inently connected with the transfer of dominion to Greece 
and then to Rome, and then craftily, gradually, stealthily 
to Papacy as a power which grew up out of civil Rome, so 


. 


The Time of the End. 39 


.also when it comes to the very important point of noting 
where Papal dominion was broken,* it is but reasonable to 
expect that Napoleon, the leading character associated with 
this change, should be marked out ; and that, too, not by 
a description of his personal appearance, but by a descrip- 
tion of his peculiar charadteristics, just as Augustus and 
Tiberius Caesar were indicated. Such a description we 
do find; and Napoleon Bonaparte’s career corresponds ex- 
actly with that description. Verses 31-35 describe Pa- 
pacy, its errors and abominations, and the Reformation and 
its ‘little help’’ yet partial failure through flatteries; and 
these verses bring us down to the ‘‘ Time of the End,” and 
show us that, notwithstanding the little help afforded, some 
would fad/ by persecution wnit/ the Time of the End. And 
so it was: in all the countries subje¢ét to Papacy—Spain, 
France, etc.—persecution through the terrible Inquisition 
continued, until broken effectually by Napoleon. 

Next follow the verses descriptive of Napoleon, the in- 
strument employed by Providence to break Papacy’s power 
and to begin her torture, which will end in utter destruction, 
to be accomplished later on ; as it is written, ‘“Whom the 
‘Lord shall destroy with the bright shining of his presence.” 
—2: Thes. 2:8. : 

*Itis proper to say that Papal dominion passed away at the begin- 
ning of the present century; for after the French Revolution the authority 
of Rome over rulers and kingdoms (and even over its own territory in 
Italy) was only xomina/ and not real. It should be remembered, too, 
that until that time France had been, of all the nations, the most faithful 
and subservient to the Papul authority. It was her kings and princes 
and nobles and people who most readily obeyed the behests of the 
pope—organized crusades, went to war, etc., etc., in obedience to the 
pope’s command, and who were so loyal as not to permit a Protestant 
to live on her soil after the massacre of St. Bartholomew’s night. No 
other nation, therefore, cou/d have struck Papacy so stunning and de- 
structive a blow as the French. 


40 Thy Kingdom Come. 


The public career of Napoleon Bonaparte, who was rec- 
ognized even in his own day as ‘‘ the man of destiny,’’ is 
so clearly portrayed by the prophetic statement as to posi- 
tively fix the date of ‘‘ the time appointed.’’ This method 
of fixing a date is accurate. And if we shall show that the 
events here mentioned in prophecy agree with Napoleon’s 
career in history, we can determine the date as certainly as 
we could the beginning of the reign of Augustus Cesar, or 
Tiberius, or Cleopatra—described in verses 17, 20 and 21. 
Napoleon’s career, in the light of prophecy, marked a. p. | 
1799 ag the close of the 1260 years of papal power, and the 
beginning of the period called the ‘‘Time of the End.’’ 
The prophetic description runs thus: 

Verse 36: ‘And the king shall do according to his will, 
and he shall exalt himself and magnify himself above every 

‘god, and shall speak marvelous things against the god of 
gods, and shall prosper till the wrath is accomplished ;— 
for that which is determined shall be done.’’ Napoleon 
was not a king, but the term king is a general one to indi- 
cate a powerful ruler. He did, perhaps, as nearly ‘‘accord- 
tng to his will’’ as any man that ever lived ; he was noted 
for his wilfulness and determination, which conquered al- 
most insurmountable difficulties. To get the proper mean- 
ing of the above verse, it must be remembered that the word 
‘“‘eod”’ signifies a mighty one; and that it is frequently used 
in Scripture in referring to kings and rulers, as in this verse: 
‘god of gods.’’* Here the word ‘‘gods’’ refers to rulers, 
kings and princes, and the expression, ‘‘god of gods,”’ or 
ruler of rulers, refers to the pope. Most men have acknowl- 
edged some. religious superior, but Napleon acknowledged 
none. He had a will of his own, and a plan of his own, 
which was to exalt himself above every other ruler. Even 
the ‘‘ god of gods” (7. ¢., the ruler of rulers—the pope) he 


*See MILLENNIAL Dawn, VOL. 11., pp. 274 and 275. 


The Time of the Feud. | 41 


addressed in a marvelous way; commanding his obedience. 
as his servant, in a manner which shocked the superstitions 
of the world at that day, and the dignity of the papal hic- 
rarchy as well. And, as here declared, he prospered until 
he had accomplished his mission of scourging Papacy and 
breaking its influence over the minds of the people. In 
proof of this, history * says :— 

‘Whilst the secular princes who had concluded treaties 
with the French adhered to them in good faith, and paid 
the contributions stipulated, the sovereign Pontiff was guilty 
of the most unwise violations of his engagements. Sur- 
rounded by priests who were his only counsellors, the Pope 
had resource to his old expedients of artifice and pious 
frauds ; and great efforts were made to inflame the minds 
of the people against the French. . . . The priests pre- 
tended that heaven had interfered, and it was. positively 
asserted that various miracles had been performed in the 
different, churches in vindication of the holy catholic faith 
of Papal supremacy, showing the displeasure of heaven at 
the conduct of the French. Bonaparte, perceiving that 
such was the infatuation of the Court of Rome that all his, 
efforts for peace would be unavailing, took inmediate steps 
to bring ‘ His Holiness’ to his senses. 


“« He ordered General Victor to invade the Papal terri- 
tories, who scattered the army of the Pope ‘like chaff be- 
fore the.wind,’ and spread a general panic through the ec- 
clesiastical states. ... ‘His Holiness,’ finding that St. 
Peter afforded him no assistance in this emergency, . . 
dispatched plenipotentiaries to Bonaparte to supplicate for 
peace. Peace was obtained, but tipon conditions sufficient- 
ly humiliating: In addition to complying with the provi- 
sional treaty previously entered into and infraéted by the 
Pape, he was obliged to cede a part of his territory and pay 
a sum of money amounting to about thirty millions of 
French livres [about six million dollars], as an atonement 
for the last rupture.’’ 


This, added to the first assessment, made in all over ten 


* Campaigns of Napoleon, pp. 89, 95, 96. 


42 Thy Kingdom Come. 


million dollars that the Pope paid to France in gold and 
silver, besides other valuables,—statuary, paintings, etc. 
A Roman Catholic writer declares that ‘‘The fulfilment of 
these conditions brought the Pope to the verge of ruin.’’ 
This treaty was concluded February 19, 1797. 

It may be thought that this summary and successful over- 
turning of Papal power would be sufficient to prove to the 
world that its claims to divine right to rule kings, etc., were 
mere assumptions ; but if not, surely the final touches were 
added the following year, when the French general, Berthier, 
entered Rome, organized there a Republic, on February 
15, 1798, and five days later carried the pope a prisoner to 
France, where he died the following year. From that time 
until the present, Papal dominion over the kingdoms of 
earth has been merely a shadow of its former self. Since 
then, it has scarcely mentioned its assumed right to make 
and unmake kings. In fa&, the pope who succeeded in 
1800, under the title Pius VII., ‘‘ published an address in 
which he declared it to be the doctrine of the gospel that 
all should obey established governments,’’ which of course 
included himself. 

Verse 37: ‘‘ He shall neither regard the god [ruler] of 
his fathers, nor the desire of women, nor regard any god . 
[ruler] ; for he shall exalt himself in opposition to all.”’ 

Not only did Napoleon not respect the god of his fathers, 
Papacy, but neither did he regard favorably any of the 
Protestant sects, here represented as women.* In fa¢t, 
nothing but his own personal ambition controlled him. 

Verse 38: ‘‘ But in his place [instead of any of these 
gods] he shall honor the god of forces [military power]: 
and a god whom his fathers knew not, shall he honor with 


*As the one true Church is symbolically called the Bride of Christ, 
and as the Church of Rome in unfaithful alliance with earthly empire is 
called a harlot, so the various Protestant sects are called “women.” 


Lhe Time of the End. 43 


gold, and silver, and with precious stones, and things de- 
sired.” 

Other great warriors made some acknowledgment to some 
supernatural powers for victories achieved. Alexander 
the Great visited the heathen temples, and thus’ cele- 
brated victories; so did the Czsars; and in later times, 
under Papacy, it was the custom for both sides in a war to 
appeal to God, to saints, to the Virgin and to the popes for 
blessings and viétory ; and at least to pretend to accept 
victory as God-given. But Napoleon did nothing of the 
sort: he ascribed his success to himself and his own genius. 

. Armies were his reliance; in brave men, quick maneuver- 
ing and able generals he put his trust ; and to these he ad- 
dressed his petitions. The form of his oath to the French 
“« Council of the Ancients,’’ on assuming command of the 
armies of France upon his return from Egypt, shows that 
his reliance was upon himself and his armies. He swore 
neither by God, nor by the Bible, nor by the Pope, nor by 
France; but he said: ‘I swear it! I swear it in my own 
name, and in the name of my brave comrades!’’ While 
serving his own ambition, he claimed to serve the people ; 
and the treasures of Rome, and of other cities and countries 

“which he spoiled, were turned over to the people of France, 
of whom himself and his soldiers were a part. 

Verse 39: ‘‘And he shall do this to strengthen his hold 
with the strange [new] god: Whoever will acknowledge him, 
him will he give much honor; and he will cause such to 
rule over many, and he will divide the land gratis.”’ 

Napoleon put his friends and trusty generals into places 
of power among all the conquered nations of Europe. These 
offices were his gifts, yet they were held upon condition of 
fealty to him. They were “ gratis,’’ and yet the price of 
their loyalty to him. Of this history * says: — 

*Willard’s Universal History, page 452. 


44 Thy Kingdom Come. 


‘«The ambitious views of Napoleon became still more ap- 
parent. Holland had the previous year been formed into 
a kingdom, of which his brother, Louis Bonaparte, was 
made king. Naples was now given to Joseph Bonaparte, - 
the elder brother, who was also invésted with the title of 
King of the two Sicilies. Several provinces were consti- 
tuted duchies or grand fiefs of the empire, and given to the 
Emperor’s relations and favorites. His sister Pauline was 
made princess of Guastalla; his brother-in-law, Murat, grand 
duke of Berg and Cleves; while Eugene Beauharnais, the 
son of his Empress Josephine by a former marriage, was 
sent viceroy to Italy. Fourteen provinces in the south 
and west of Germany were formed into the Confederation 
of the Rhine. They were separated from the Germanic 
body, and recognized Napoleon as their head, under the 
title of Protector. . . . Switzerland was also brought under 
the dominion of France, Napoleon declaring himself its 
‘ Mediator.’ ”’ 


The policy of Napoleon also led him to establish various 
honorable and honorary orders among the officers and sol- 
diers, such, for instance, as the ‘‘ Legion of Honor,’”’ ‘‘The 
Order of the Iron Crown,”’ etc., etc. 3 

Having thus furnished grounds for establishing the iden- 
tity of this character (Napoleon), whose deeds mark the 
beginning of the ‘‘ Time of the End,’’ the prophecy pro- 
ceeds to show which particu/ar event of that time is to be 
understood as definitely marking the exac? date of the be- 
ginning of the ‘‘ Time of the End.’’ This event is shown 
to be Napoleon’s invasion of Egypt, which covered a pe- 
riod of a year and nearly five months. He sailed May, 
1798 and, returning, landed in France Oct. 9, 1799. This 
campaign is graphically described in few words in verses 
40-44. , : 

Verse 40: ‘‘And at the [fixed] Time of the End shall the 
king of the South [Egypt] fight against him, and the king 
of the North [England] shall come against him like a tem- 
pest, with chariots and with horsemen [the Egyptian Mam- 


The Time of the End. 45 


elukes, etc.] and with a great navy. [The English forces 
consisted of a navy under Admiral Nelson.] And he [Na- 
- poleon] shall enter into the countries, and shall destroy 
and pass through [victoriously].”’ 

History informs us that the Egyptian army under Murat 
Bey ‘‘after a most determined struggle was repulsed; . . . 
the success of the French struck terror far into Asia and 
Africa; and the surrounding tribes submitted to the con- 
queror. . . . But fortune was preparing for him a terrible 
reverse. His fleet, consisting of thirteen ships of the line 
[war vessels], besides frigates, was found in Aboukir bay by 
Nelson, the English admiral, who had long been in pursuit, 
and was attacked on the evening of Aug. 1, 1798, witha 
degree of vigor and activity [‘ like a whirlwind ’’] which 
was never surpassed in naval warfare.’’ 

Verses 41-43: ‘‘ He shall enter also into the glorious land 
[Palestine], and many shall fall: but these shall escape out 
of his hand, even Edom and Moab, and the principality of 
the children of Ammon. [Napoleon kept to the coast, and 
did not enter but passed by these lands.] He shall stretch 
forth his hand upon the countries, and Egypt shall not 
escape. And he shall have power over the treasures of gold 
and of silver, and over all the precious things of Egypt ; 
and the Libyans and the Ethiopians will follow at his steps.”’ 

Verses 44-45: ‘‘And he shall plant the tabernacles of his 
palace [his palatial tents] between the seas, in the glorious 
holy mountain.’’ This statement might refer to either of 
two mountains—Mt. Tabor or Mt. Sinai—both of which 
might be called glorious and holy. On Mt. Tabor, glori- 
ous and holy as the place of our Lord’s transfiguration, and 
called by Peter ‘‘ the holy mount,’’ Napoleon’s tents were 
pitched, one of his most important battles being fought 
there. Mt. Sinai, holy and glorious as being the place 
where the Law Covenant between God and Israel was rati- 


46 Thy Kingdom Come. 


fied, was visited by Napoleon and his ‘scientific corps ’’ 
and seleét guard. 

“* But tidings out of the East and out of the North shall 
trouble him: therefore he shall go forth with great fury to 
destroy, and utterly to make away many [nations]. Yet he 
shall come to his end, and none shall help him.’’ 

While in Egypt tidings of fresh alliance against France 
reached Napoleon, and he at once set out for France. With 
reference to this history * says, ‘‘ Intelligence from Europe 
now induced him to abandon Egypt; and, leaving his 
army under Kleber, he returned to France with secrecy 
and dispatch. . . . A reverse of fortune had taken place 
in French affairs, a second coalition had formed against 
France, composed of England, Russia, Naples, the Otto- 
man Porte and Austria.’? Compare these words of history 
with those of prophecy: ‘ But tidings out of the Hast and 
out of the /Vorth shall trouble him; therefore shall he go 
forth with great fury to destroy, and utterly to make away 
many [nations].’’ Napoleon’s great fury, and his attempted 
destruction of all the nations of Europe, are too well known 
to require repetition here. He almost succeeded in his 
ambitious designs ; yet, as predicted by the Prophet, in a 
few years this most notable man of his day died an exile, 


forsaken by all. 
As verse 4o declares that this invasion of Egypt would 


be ‘‘at the Time of the End”’ or (as the Douay version 
renders it) ‘‘at the time prefixed,’’ so do verses 29 and 30, 
which refer to the same event and which were previously 
introduced as a parenthesis. It will be remembered that 
we have found verses 25-28 to refer to a previous invasion of 
Egypt; and in verses 29 and 30 it is intimated that the next 
great invasion of Egypt would be ‘‘at the Aime appointed,” 
z. ¢., at the ‘ Time of the End,”’ as described in verses 40-45. 


* Willard’s Universal History, page 446. 


The Time of the End. 47 


‘‘At the time appointed he shall return, and come to- 
ward the south; but it shall not be as the former or as the 
latter’? invasions. Napoleon’s invasion of Egypt did not 
result either like that in the days of Cleopatra, or like that 
in the days of her descendant, Queen Zenobia. Napoleon, 
though successful as a general in Egypt, achieved no such 
victories as his predecessors ; and the reason is described 
in the next verse,—‘‘ For the ships of Chittim [‘‘of the 
Romans’’— Douay] shall come against him.’’ The English 
“navy harassed Napoleon and hindered his conquest. Since 
England as well as France had been a part of the old Ro- 
man Empire, and since France was at war with the re- 
mainder of that empire, endeavoring to conquer it, we see 
the propriety of these being called Roman ships. ‘‘ There- 
fore he [Napoleon] shall be grieved, and return and have 
indignation against the holy covenant: and he shall succeed.” 

On his return from Egypt, Napoleon abandoned his 
former policy of violent opposition to Papacy, and signed 
a Concordat or agreement with the pope, by which the Ro- 
man Catholic religion was re-established in France. This 
was an action against the truth ; but he seemed to see that 
by this policy he could best succeed in overturning the 
Republic and in establishing himself in power as Emperor. 
And he dd ‘‘succeed.’’ But this policy did not last long 
after he obtained imperial power: he soon began again to 
work against that system called the ‘‘ Man of Sin,”’ as the . 
prophecy describes in the following words: ‘‘And he [Na- 
poleon] shall return [change about] and shall devise against 
them that have forsaken the covenant of the sanctuary ;’’s.¢., 
he began to scheme and operate against the apostate church 
of Rome. In this also he succeeded. 

Thus pointedly does Daniel xi. trace the world’s history, 
by its most notable characters, from the kingdom of Persia 
down to the overthrow of Papal dominion. Though cov- 


48 Thy Kingdom Come. 


ering the long period of twenty-four hundred years, it accom- 
plishes its purpose of clearly marking the very year of the 
beginning of the Time of the End—1799. With that year 
terminated the limit of Papacy’s 1260 years-of power to 
oppress, and the Time of the End began. And let it not 
be overlooked that this was also the last year of Papacy’s 
millennium, or one thousand years reign, which began, as 
shown in the previous volume, with the year 800. But 
1799 was only the beginning of the period known as “the 
Time of the End,’’ within the limits of which every vestigé 
of that system shall pass away. 

Notice how in the few words of verses 34 and 35 the de- 
cline of the Reformation and its cause are described. The 
love of the world and a desire to be in power, influence 
and ease were the snares which first seduced the church and 
brought forth Papacy ; and the same desires and endeav- 
ors interrupted the Reformation. [Luther and his com- 
panions at first boldly denounced, among other of the pa- 
pal errors, the union of church and state; but when, after 
some years of brave resistance to powerful opposition, the 
Reformation began to have some influence because of num- 
bers, when kings and princes began to flatter the reformers, 
and avenues to social and political preferment opened be- 
fore them, the evils of church and state union, which once 
they saw and opposed in Papacy, were lost sight of. The 
_ reformed churches in Germany, Switzerland, etc., stepped 
into the very shoes of Rome, and stood ready to unite with 
and favor any political party, or prince, or government, 
willing to own and recognize them. Thus some of under- 
standing fell, and from being leaders of reform they became 
leaders into temptation. Thus the reform movement, well 
begun, was greatly checked. 

But all this could not frustrate God’s plan. By his wis- 
dom it was overruled for good. It served, as Papacy’s error 


The Time of the End. 49 


had done, to further ‘test the true saints, to prove whether 
they were really followers of men or of God. It has served 
this purpose all the way down, from that time to this—‘‘to 
try them, and to purge, and to make them white.’’ 

If we are correct in placing the beginning of the Time 

of the End at 1799, we should expect that there the fall- 
ing into the error of church and state union would measur- 
ably cease, though it night require long years for the full 
recovery out of that snare of the devil. Looking back, we 
find that faéts exactly correspond with this. Since that 
date there havé been separations between empires and 
churches, but no new unions. Really, this date marks a 
“new reformation on a more substantial basis. The influ- 
ence of Papacy over the kingdoms of Europe had previ- 
ously been so great that its curses were dreaded by the na- 
tions as a withering blight, and its blessings desired for 
national prosperity. When Protestants separated from Pa- 
pacy, they were received by the world as being merely a 
less corrupt substitute for the Papacy; and their favor, ad- 
vice or sanétion was often very similarly sought. But 
when Napoleon boldly ignored both the blessings and the 
curses of ‘Papacy, and yet prospered phenomenally, his 
course not only greatly weakened the Papal influence over 
civil governments, but it also weakened the influence of the 
various Protestant systems, in matters civil and political— 
which influence had grown very strong in two and a half 
centuries. : 

The new reformation, which dated from Napoleon’s day, 
was no less thorough than the reformation brought about 
by Luther and his colleagues, though it was not a religious 
movement, nor in any way animated by religious zeal ; nor 
were the actors in it aware of the fact that they were ac- 
complishing a: work marked out for them in prophecy cent- 
uries before. Napoleon and his co-workers were godless 

4c 


5° Thy Kingdom Come. 


men, animated by their own selfish ambitions for power ; 
but God, unknown to them, was overruling their course 
and causing it to work out his own designs, which it effeét- 
ually did. Had the reformation which God first started: 
within the Church itself continued, had the reformers and 
their descendants continued faithful to the Truth, his great 
designs might have been accomplished through their hon- 
ored instrumentality. But when they succumbed to the 
flatteries of the world, God showed that he had other ways 
and means for accomplishing his purposes. 

Napoleon’s work, together with the French Revolution, 
broke the spell of religious superstition, humbled the pride 
of self-exalted religious lords, awakened the world to a fuller 
sense of the powers and prerogatives of manhood and broke 
the Papal dominion against which the religious Reforma- 
tion had previously struck a death-blow, but which its after 
course had healed. (Rev. 13:3.) The era closing with 
A.D. 1799, marked by Napoleon’s Egyptian campaign, sealed 
and defined the limit of Papal dominion over the nations. 
There, the time appointed (1260 years of power) having 
expired, the predicted judgment against that system began, 
which must finally ‘‘consume and destroy it unto the end.’”’ 
—Dan. 7:26. 

This date also clearly marks the beginning of a new era 
of liberty of thought, and the realization of individual 
rights and privileges, and has already been distinguished 
by its rapid strides of progress toward the full accomplish- 
ment of the work mapped out for this Time of the End. 
As a single illustrationgnotice the rise and work of the va- 
rious Bible Societies—‘ pestiferous Bible Societies,’’ Rome 
calls them, though it cannot now hinder them. And the 
sacred volume which once she confined in chains, kept 
covered in dead languages, and forbade her deluded sub- 
jects to read, is now scattered by the million in every nation 


The Timp of the End. gr 


and language. The British and Foreign Bible Society was 
established in 1803; the New York Bible Society in 1804; 
the Berlin-Prussian Bible Society in 1805; the Philadelphia 
Bible Society in 1808 ; and the American Bible Society in 
1817. The extent of the work done by these societies dur- 
ing this century is wonderful. Bibles by the million are 
published yearly and sold at low prices, and many thow 
’ sands are given away to the poor. It is difficult to estimate 
the wide influence of this work. While much is doubtless 
lost, the result in general is to break the bonds of slavery 
and superstition, political and ecclesiastical. Its quiet 
teaching—that popes, priests and laity, as well as kings, 
generals and beggars, must all render an account to one 
Lord—is the greatest of all levelers and equalizers. 
Though the religious reformation movement throughout 
Europe had severely shaken Papacy’s influence, yet the re- 
formed churches had so closely imitated her policy of state- 
craft, affiliation with earthly empires, and claims of cleri- 
cal authority over the people (that the ‘‘ clergy’’ constitute 
a special and divinely appointed rulership in the world), 
that the first effect of that reformation became greatly 
modified, and left the people and the civil rulers largely 
under superstitious awe and subserviency to every thing 
called church authority. The reform divided among several 
sects much of the superstitious and unwholesome veneration 
formerly concentrated upon Papacy alone. But the polit- 
ical reform witnessed during this Nineteenth Century, dat- 
ing particularly from 1799, the ‘‘ Time of the End,’’ though 
very different from the former, is nune the less a reforma- 
tion. The revolution and independence of the American 
colonies—the successful establishment of a prosperous Re- 
public, a government by the people and for the people, 
without the interference of either royalty or priest-craft— 
had set a new lesson before the now awaking people, who 


52 Thy Kingdom Come. 


for so many centuries had slumbered in ignorance of their 
God-given rights, supposing that Ged had appointed the 
church to the supreme rulership of earth, and that the were 
bound to obey those kings and emperors sanétioned by the 
church, no matter how unjust their demands, because she 
had declared them to be apporuted by God, through her. 

* Toa long down-trodden and priest-ridden people, Amer- 
ica became a source of wonderment. Trily it was ‘‘ Liberty 
enlightening theworld.’’ Finally, oppressed by priest-craft, 
royal extravagance, etc., augmented by repeated failures of 
the crops, which impoverished and almost famished them, 
the people of France arose in desperation and accomplished 
that most terrible revolution which lasted for fourteen years, 
from 1789 to 1804. 

Awful as were those scenes of anarchy and violence, they 
were but the legitimate fruit, the reactionary effect, of the 
awakening of a long oppressed people to a realization of 
their shame and degradation. It was the reaping of a 
whirlwind by the civil and religious powers, which zz the 
name of God and of truth had been blinding and binding, 
‘for their own aggrandizement, people for whom Christ died. 

Of course such a reaction from such a cause would be to 
infidelity. France suddenly became thoroughly infidel un- 
the influence of Voltaire and his associates, who deluged 
the country with their writings, hurling contempt and rid- 
icule upon Christianity, or rather upon the apostate Church 
of Rome, which was the only Christianity with which the. 
French people were acquainted. They pointed out its false- 
hoods, its absurdities, its hypocrisies, its immoralities, its 
cruelties and all its wickedness, until the French people 
became as inflamed in their zeal to exterminate Catholicism 
and all religion as they had formerly been zealous to up- 
hold it. And miserable, deluded France, for a thousand 
years completely under the influence of the Papacy, sup- 


The Time of the End. 53 


posing that the real Christ and not the Antichrist had been 
her despicable master, cried out in the words of Voltaire, 
‘* Down with the wretch ;’’ and their efforts to down the 
execrable Antichrist resulted in all the horrors of the French 
Revolution—a wonderful illustration of retributive justice 
when viewed in comparison with the dreadful massacres of 
St. Bartholomew’s day, and similar occasions incited and 
rejoiced over by the Papacy. Z 

Infidel France suddenly rose in its might, destroyed the 
Bastile, issued its declaration of the rights of man, executed 
the king and queen and declared war against all kings and 
sympathy with all revolutionists everywhere, Meanwhile the 
tulers of the world with bated breath dreaded lest the revo- 
lutionary contagion should break out among their subjects ; 
and, fearful of world-wide anarchy, they organized alliances 
for their mutual protection against their subjects, who in- 
deed were scarce restrained. The French renounced Chris- 
tianity, and confiscated all the vast estates and revenues of 
the Roman Catholic Church, as well as the estates of the 
king and the nobility. The streets of Paris again ran with 
blood, but it was the blood of priests and nobles and their 
supporters, instead of that of Protestants. The number of 
the executed is estimated at 1,022,000. These perished by 
hundreds of processes invented for the occasion. During 
the hunting and the slaughter, the priests were taunted with . 
reminders of the similar course of Papists toward Protes- 
tants, and of their own do@trine—that ‘‘the end justifies 
the means.’’ The Revolutionists claimed the ed sought to 
be human liberty, political and religious; and that the death 
of those opposed to this was needful, as the only sure means. 

Like all such things, the French Revolution was a great 
evil, and caused much distress to millions of people; yet 
~ like some others, too, it was a partial redress of a great 
wrong ; and, like some others, it was overruled by God for 


54 Thy Kingdom Come. 


good, for the increase of knowledge and the forwarding of 
his plans as pointed out in prophecy. . We here intrude the 
remark that the French Revolution is prominently pointed 
out in the Book of Revelation, which clearly shows that the 
closing trouble upon all the nations of ‘‘ Christendom’’ was 
illustrated in that reign of terror. That pestilence of Infi- 
-delity and Anarchism, which spread from France the world 
over, was fed and fattened upon the false, unscriptural doc- 
trines and practices of ‘‘ Christendom,’’ represented not 
only in Papacy but in ‘‘ Orthodoxy’’ generally. Nominal 
Christianity has not cured this malady, and is powerless to 
avert its further.outbreak, predicted in the Scriptures to be 
the greatest trouble ever to be known to earth. 

The influence of the French infidels was carried over 
Europe by the armies under Napoleon, and greatly under- 
mined the power both of kings and priests. But the rough 
handling of Papacy by Napoleon, acting as the head and 
representative of Infidel France, capped the climax, and 
more than all else helped to break the fetters of superstitious 
veneration, by which the ‘‘ clergy ’’ class had so long held 
the ‘common people’’ under them. But when the intrepid 
Napoleon not only defied the anathemas of Pope Pius VI. 
but laid penalties upon him for violation of his (Napoleon’s) 
orders, and finally compelled him to cede back to France 
the papal territories granted a thousand years before by 
Charlemagne (whose successor Napoleon claimed to be), it 
opened the eyes of the people as well as of the monarchs of 
Europe to the falsity of Papacy’s claim to authority. The 
great revolution of public opinion at this time, regarding 
papal authority, may be seen in the fact that Napoleon, upon 
assuming the title and proclaiming himself Roman Emperor 
as successor of Charlemagne,* did not go to Rometo have the 


* Napoleon’s great European wars were but his attempts to re-unite 
that empire as it existed under Charlemagne. 


The Time of the End. 58 


pope crown him, as did Charlemagne and others, but com- 
manded the pope to come to France to attend his corona- 
tion. And even then the successful chief, who more than 
once had pillaged, impoverished and humbled the Papacy, 
would not consent to be crowned by the pope, and thus to 
accept the imperial dignity with any acknowledgment of 
papal authority, but merely had the pope (Pius VII.) present, 
to sanction and acknowledge the ceremony, and to bless 
the crown which Napoleon then took from the altar and put 
upon his own head. The historian says, ‘‘ He then put the 
diadem on the head of his empress, as if to show that Ars 
authority was the child of his own actions ’’—the result of 
his own civil and military successes. Nor has the pope ever 
been since requested to bestow the crown of the Roman 
empire. A Roman Catholic writer *says of this coronation: — 
‘‘A ting differently from Charlemagne and other monarchs, 
who had repaired to Rome on similar occasions, he [Napo- 
leon] insisted in his arrogance that the holy father should 
come to Paris to crown him. The pope felt extreme reluc- 
_ tance to depart thus from the ancient usage. In fact, he 
considered it derogatory to his exalted office.” 
Concerning the humiliations heaped upon Papacy by 
Napoleon, history f says :— 
_ «An armistice was concluded [June 23, 1796] with the 
Pope [Pius VI.], the terms of which were sufficiently hu- 
miliating to the head of the church, once the most powerful 
sovereign in Europe.—The pontiff, who once trod on the 
necks of kings, made and unmade sovereigns, disposed of 
states and kingdoms, and, as the great high-priest and vice- 
gerent of the Almighty on earth, established an authority 
as lord paramount, and reigned over the heads of other sov- 
ereigns, was constrained to drink to the very dregs the cup 
of humiliation. If the draught was bitter, it was one which 
his predecessors had liberally dealt out to others. He was 
compelled to open his ports to French vessels, and to ex- 
" *Chair of St. Peter, page 433-.—=~*~C*=“‘<;7C*+S*<“‘“‘C~O 
¢ Campaigns of Napoleon, pp. 89, 90. 


56 Thy Kingdom Come. 


clude the flags of all nations at war with that Republic; to 
permit the French army to continue in possession of the le- 
gations of Bolognaand Ferrara ; to surrender the citadel of 
Ancona; to give to the French 100 paintings, busts, vases 
or statues to be selected by commissioners sent from Paris 
to Rome; also 500 (ancient and valuable) manuscripts to 
_ be selected in the same way ; and, to sweeten the whole, his 
holiness was to pay to the Republic 21,000,000 French livres, 
most of which was to be in specie, or gold and silver ingots.’’ 

For the nonfulfilment of these penalties promptly, the 
money fine was increased to 50,000,000 livres, and certain 
papal territories were compelled to be ceded to France; 
and the pope was finally made a prisoner and taken to 
France, where he died. 

Even Pius VII., who had been restored to pontifical 
honors, and who in 1804 attended the crowning of Napo- 
leon, was afterward by decree of Napoleon (1808-1809) 
‘bereft of every shred of temporal power ; and the monuments _ 
and art treasures of Rome were taken under French protec- 
tion. The language used by Napoleon was that ‘‘ the dona- 
tion of territories by our illustrious predecessor, Charle-. 
magne, to the Holy See, . . . Urbino, mncona, Macerata, 
be forever united to the kingdom of Italy.’ 

The import of this is thus told by a Roman Catholic 


writer * :— 

‘*To this it was added, that the pope should continue to 
be the bishop of Rome, exercising his spiritual funCtions as 
his predecessors had done in the early ages, down to the 
reign of Charlemagne. The following year, emboldened 
by the successes of his arms, the Emperor resolved that the 
pope should be deprived of his now nominal sovereignty— 
the mere shadow of temporal power, that still remained to 
him in his cag:ta/ and the adjacent districts. [These Pa- 
pacy held for years before Charlemagne’s gift—from a. p. 
539-] Accordingly he issued a new decree, from the palace 
of the Austrian Cesars, that Rome should be an Imperial 


~* Chair of St. Peter, PP- 4395 440. 


The Time of the End. — 57 


Free City; that its civil administration should be conducted 
by a council then nominated by the Emperor; that its 
monuments and art treasures should be taken under French 
protection; and that the pope, having ceased to reign, an 
income should be settled on his holiness.’’ 


Following this, Pius VII. issued a bull of excommunica- 
tion against Napoleon, and was taken a prisoner to France, 
where he finally signed the Concordat of Fontainebleau, 
dated Jan. 25, 1813, in which he placed in Napoleon’s 
hands the nomination of Bishops and Metropolitans, and 
virtually rescinded his own authority to veto such appoint- 
ments. Thus he in effeét gave Napoleon the authority of 
a pope, which was what Napoleon had long desired. 

Nor have Roman Catholics failed to note the importance 
of the events which introduced the present century. They 
not only admit the losses and indignities inflicted, as above 
quoted, but they claim that the Millennial reign of Papacy 
(the thousand years from the time of Charlemagne’s present 
of the before mentioned states to the Papacy—a. D. 800) 
ended with the taking away of its dominions by Napoleon ; 
from which time it has at no time had more than a skele- 
ton of power. It is Papacy’s claim that, as the Kingdom 
of Christ, it has accomplished the predicted reign over the 
nations, mentioned in Rev. 20:1-4, and that the present 
period of trouble upon that system is the ‘‘ little season’’ 
in which Satan is loosed, mentioned in the 7th and gth 
verses. Only such as see in Papacy Satan’s counterfeit of 
the true Christ, and who recognize the true Church and 
the true reign, can fully appreciate this. 

We have, perhaps, cited enough to convince the reader 
that the period of the French Revolution and Napoleon’s 
power was a very marked period in Papacy’s history; and 
Papal influence, broken then, has never been regained. 
Though at times some favors were granted, they were only 
for a short time, and were followed by renewed indignities, 


58 . Thy Kingdom Come. 


until in 1870 all temporal authority of the popes again 
ceased—-we believe never to be revived. Remember, too, 
that it was Napoleon’s soldiers who broke open the Inqui- 
sitions, and put an end to public tortures and executions 
for religious convictions. 

The effeét of the partial breaking down of priest-craft 
and superstition, while it has led to more open infidelity, 
has also, in thus overthrowing a superstitious reverence for 
men, led to more intelligent thought:on the part of the 
consecrated people of God—many of whom previously 
scarcely dared to think, or study the Scriptures for them- 
selves. Thus, this revolution was favorable to the develop- 
ment of the truth and of true Christianity, by stimulating 
Bible study. It really carried forward the good work begun 
in'the Reforination of Luther’s day, which had been checked 
by the ignorance and servility of the masses, and the love 
of power, dignity, authority and ease on the part of the 
“clergy.” 

We have thus shown that 1799 began the period called. 
the Time of the End; that in this time Papacy is to be con- 
sumed piece-meal; and that Napoleon took away not only 
Charlemagne’s gifts of territory (one thousand years after 
they were made), but also, afterward, the Papacy’s civil 
jurisdiction in the city of Rome, which was recognized zom- 
inally from the promulgation of Justinian’s decree, a. D. 533, 
' but advally from the overthrow of the Ostrogothic mon- 
archy, A. D. 539—just 1260 years before 1799. This was the 
exact limit of the time, times and a half of its power, as re- 
peatedly defined in prophecy. And though in some measure 
claimed again since, Papacy is without a vestige of tempo- 
ral or civil authority to-day, it having been wholly “ con- 
sumed.’ The Man of Sin, devoid of civil power, still poses 
and boasts; but, civilly powerless, he awaits utter destruc- 
tion in the near future, at the hands of the enraged masses 


The Time of the End. — 59 


(God’s unwitting agency), as clearly shown in Revelation. 

This Time of the End, or day of Jehovah’s preparation, 
beginning A. D. 1799 and closing a. D. 1914, though char- 
acterized by a great increase of knowledge over all past ages, 
is to culminate in the greatest time of trouble the world has 
ever known; but it is nevertheless preparing for and lead- 
ing into that blessed time so long promised, when the ¢rue 
_ Kingdom of God, under the control of the ¢rwe Christ, will - 
fully establish an order of government the very reverse of 
that of Antichrist. Since this period prepares for and leads 
to the Kingdom, it leads also to the great confli@ between 
the old and the new order of things by which the latter 
will be introduced. And though the old order of things 
must pass away, and the new must supersede it, the change 
will be violently opposed by those advantaged by the present 
order. Revolution, world-wide, will be the outcome, re- 
sulting in the final and complete destruction of the old 
order and the introduction and establishment of the new. 

All the discoveries, inventions and advantages which 
make our day the superior of every other day are but so 
many elements working together in this day of preparation 
for the incoming Millennial age, when true and _ healthful 
reform, and actual and rapid progress in every direction, 
will be the order, to all and for all. 


60 Thy Kingdom Come. 


AWAKE FROM THY SADNESS! 


“ Daughter of Zion, awake from thy sadness! 
Awake! for thy foes shall oppress thee no more. 
Bright o’er the hills dawns the day-star of gladness: 
Arise! for the night of thy sorrow is o’er. 


“ Strong were thy foes, but the arm that subdued them, 
And scattered their legions, was mightier far: 
They fled like the chaff from the scourge that pursued them; 
Vain were their steeds and their chariots of war. 


“ Daughter of Zion, the power that hath saved thee, 

‘Extolled with the harp and the timbrel should be. 
Shout! for the foe is destroyed that enslaved thee, 
Th’ oppressor is vanquished and Zion is free.’” 


CHAPTER III. 


DAYS OF WAITING FOR THE KINGDOM. 


— DANIEL XII.— 


Tue Kincpom Work Epttromizep.— Tue Waritinc Prxion to se MARKED RY 
Great Increase or KNOWLEDGE AND OF Travet.—Sir Isaac Newton’s 
Forrvigw OF RAILROADING.—THE 1260 Davs.—THe FLoop rRoM THE MouTH 
oF THE DraGon.—THE 1290 Days MARK THE SPREAD OF AN UNDERSTANDING 
OF THE Vision, PARTIALLY CorrgcT.— THe DisAppoInTMENT, TRIAL AND 
ConseQuencss.—THE 1335 Days.—THe Briassinc THEN UPON THE FAITHFUL 
““Waitinc’’ Ongs.—Tue Lorp’s Rererence TO THese Waiting Days, 1N 
Tue Parasce op THR Ten Vircins. 


HE ‘Time of the End’’ having been pointed out in 
chapter eleven, chapter twelve points to the Kingdom, 

and tells of waiting, etc., which would precede its establish- 
ment, during the ‘‘ Time of the End.’”’ The first three verses 
express in few words the grand outcome of God’s plan. 

“And at [in] that time shall Michal stand up, the great, 
prince which standeth for the children of thy people: and 
there shall be a time of trouble, such as never was since 
there was a nation, even to that same time: and at that 
time thy people shall be delivered, every one that shall be 
found written in the book. And many of them that sleep 
in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to lasting life, 
and some to shame and lasting contempt. And they that 
. be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament [the 
Sun—Matt. 13:43]; and they that turn many to righteous- 
ness as the stars, for ever and ever.’’ 

OL 


62 ‘Thy Kingdom Come. 


If, in the eleventh chapter, the summary of 2,300 years 
of the world’s history was brief and pointed, yet clear, this 
summary of Messiah’s Millennial reign, in three verses, is 
still more so. And yet it is all three. Michel (which 
signifies ‘Who as God,’’ or one representing God) is the 
name here applied to our great: Redeemer, who is indeed 
the great Prince ordained of God to stand forth and deliver | 
Daniel’s people, God’s people—all who love God in truth 
and sincerity—Israelites indeed. (Rom. 9:6, 25, 26; Gal. 
6:16.) He will deliver them from sin, ignorance, pain and 
death, and from all the persecutions and besetments of 
Satan’s blindéd servants, which have in the past almost 
overwhelmed them. All found written in the Lamb’s Book 
of ‘life will be delivered forever, from all enemies: those 
written as worthy during the Jewish and Patriarchal ages, 
as well as these written during the Gospel age, and those 
who will be written during the Millennial age. Though 
all God’s people (all who, when brought to a knowledge 
of him, love and obey him) will be delivered, yet the de- 
grees of honor to be granted to some—the overcomers— 
are carefully noted; also the fact that some of the great 
ones of the past—Alexander, Nero, Napoleon, the Cesars, 
the popes, etc.—whose talents, misused, crushed while they 
‘dazzled the world, will be seen in their true chara¢ters, and 
be ashamed and dishonored during that Millennial age. 
Nor does this brief synopsis of Christ’s reign omit mention 
of the great time of trouble by which it will be inaugurated 
—a time of trouble in comparison with which no past rev- 
olution will compare, a trouble with which even the French 
Revolution will be small, a time of trouble such as was not 
since there was a nation, no, nor ever shall be; for this 
great Prince, Michel, will not only conquer the whole 
world, but his dominion is to be an everlasting dominion. 
Justice is the foundation of his throne, and when mankind 


Days of Waiting. 63 


has once tasted of its benefits, the great majority will never 
consent to another, for his Kingdom will be ‘the desire 
of all nations.’’ 

Here the thread of this prophecy, having run its full 
length, stops, and the remaining verses of the chapter are 
for the purpose of furnishing (not to Daniel and his fellow- 
servants in his day, but to God’s children, Daniel’s fellow- 
servants living in the Time of the End) certain periods of 
1260, 1290 and 1335 symbolic days, respectively, by which, 
in the due time, we may be convinced, concerning the time 
in which we are living, that it is indeed the Harvest time 
or ‘End ’”’ of the Gospel age. 

Daniel, who had heard the long account of the strifes be- 
tween the kingdoms of this world, and now finally of the 
triumph of God’s Kingdom in the hands of Michel, the 
great Prince, was anxious to know when it would deliver 
the Lord’s people. But he is told (verse 4): ‘‘ But thou, 
O Daniel, shut up the words, and seal the book, even to 
the Time of the End: [then] many shall run to and fro, 
and knowledge shall be increased.”’ 

Not only does the general increase of knowledge experi- 
enced confirm the teaching of Daniel xi., that the Time of 
the End began in 1799, but the prediéted running to and 
fro—much and rapid traveling—also confirms it. These all 
belong to the Time of the End. The first steam-boat was 
operated in 1807; the first steam-car in 1831; the first tel- 
egraph in 1844; yet to-day thousands of mammoth cars 
and steamships are carrying multitudes hither and thither, 
“to and fro.”’ 

Sir Isaac Newton, the celebrated astronomer of the seven- 
teenth century, was greatly interested in this statement by 
the Prophet Daniel, and declared his belief that in fulfil- 
ment of it human knowledge would so increase that men 
would possibly travel at the rate of fifty miles an hour. 


64 Thy Kingdom Come. 


Voltaire, the noted French infidel, got hold of this state- 
ment and scornfully remarked :— 

“‘ Now look at the mighty mind of Newton, the great 
philosopher who discovered the law of gravitation: when he 
became an old man and got into his dotage, he began to 
study the book called the Bible, and in order to credit its 
fabulous nonsense he would have us believe that the knowl- 
_ edge of mankind will yet be so increased that we shall by- 
and-by be able to travel fifty miles an hour! Poor dotard.”’ 

Both of these men died long before the Time of the End 
_ had brought its wonderful increase of knowledge, which 
more than fulfils the prediction of the Christian philoso- 
pher, based upon the divine revelation. 

Not for Daniel, but for God’s children living during the 
Time of the End, was the conversation, etc., related in 
verses 5-7: ‘And I, Daniel, looked, and behold there 
were two others standing, one on this side of the bank of 
the flood [ Young’ s translation], and the other on that side 
of the bank of the flood. And one said to the man who 
was above the waters of the stream, ‘ How long shall it be 
to the end of these wonders?’ Then heard I the man clothed 
in linen, who was above the waters of the flood; and he 
lifted up his right hand and his left unto the heavens and 
swore by the Everliving One that [the end should be] after 
a time, times and half a time.”’ 

The matter of special inquiry was the ‘‘ abomination of 
desolation,’’ of chapter 11: 31-33, which Daniel rightly as- 
sociated with the terrible character seen in his previous 
visions, recorded in chapters 7:8-11, 21, 24-26 and 8:10~ 
12, 24-26. , 

The time, times and half a time, or three and a half 
times or vears (360 x 314 = 1260 days, symbolic time— 
1260 literal years), here mentioned, are elsewhere shown to 
be the period of Papacy’s power. Compare Dan. 7:25; 
12:7 and Rev. 12:14 with Rev. 12:6; 13:5. The ‘‘flood”’ 


Days of Waiting. 65 


in or during which these 1260 years of Papal power termi- 
nated—as shown by the angel standing ufox the flood, de- 
claring the limit of the times—symbolized a condition of 
things during the French revolution already referred to. 
This is the same “ flood’’ mentioned in Rev. 12:15, 16, 
where it is shown more fully, as coming out of the mouth 
of the serpent or dragon, and where its real object, from 
Satan’s standpoint, is explained to be to overwhelm the 
‘woman ’’ (the protesting Church of God), as her three 
and a half times (1260 years) of wilderness-hiding were 
about closing, and she was coming forward into prominence 
‘‘ leaning on [the arm of ] her beloved,’’ The Word of God. 
—Songs of Solomon 8:5. 

In symbol, water generally represents ¢ruth ; and the sym- 
bol preserves its meaning even though it be said to issue 
from the mouth of the dragon or serpent. The thought 
conveyed by this symbol is, that ¢ruth would issue forth 
through evil agencies, and with an evil intent. And just 
this we find: the strength of the French revolution lay in 
the fact that it was instigated by many stern frushs, regard- 
ing priest-craft and king-craft, and regarding the individual 
rights and liberties of all. ‘‘THEe Ricuts or MAN ”’ was in- 
deed the watchword of that revolt against civil and eccle- 
siastical oppression. Truths regarding human rights were 
seen and expressed there which cause us surprise when we 
consider the ignorance, superstition and servility of that 
day, under which the masses had so long rested. Many of 
the ¢ruths which then swept as a ‘flood’’ over France, 
deluging it with blood, are now very generally accepted 
among all civilized peoples ; but they were too strong, and 
too suddenly put, for that time. 

Indeed, the prophecy clearly shows that the serpent, 
Satan, did not intend what under God’s providence has re- 
sulted, but the reverse,. In this he overreached himself, as 

3° 


66 Thy Kingdom Come. 


he has done on other occasions. Satan will never send forth 
the waters of truth to bless and refresh and release from 
bondage: on the contrary his effort has all along been to 
blind and securely bind mankind under ignorance and su- 
perstition ; and this sudden flood of waters (truth) was de- 
signed to act as an emetic, to lead to the casting out of the 
food of liberty already being received by the people from 
the Bible, as the result of the Reformation, and thus to force 
rulers and teachers to oppose the truth through fear of 
anarchy. 

Satan’s design in instigating the French revolution was 
to create an alarm throughout Europe, especially among 
the influential class, unfavorable to liberty, and to illustrate 
in France the theory that, were the superstitions of Rome 
to be overthrown and liberty to be given full sway, all law 
and order would speedily end. This was a master-stroke 
of policy, worthy of its author, and designed, as the prophet 
shows, to overwhelm the ‘‘ woman ’’ (the reformed Church), 
and to drive all conservatives and peace-lovers—rulers and 
ruled—back to union and harmony with Papacy. The 
failure of the scheme was not due to lack of craftiness in its 
designer, but to the overruling power of God, whereby he 
is able to cause all things to work together for good. 

In this case God’s plan, for the protection of the “ wo- 
man’’ (Church) from Satan’s wiles and for causing the in- 
tended ill to work out good, may be clearly traced, in ex- 
act fulfilment of the prediétion made seventeen hundred 
years before, viz: ‘‘ And the earth helped the woman, and 
the earth opened her mouth and swallowed up the flood 
which the dragon cast out of his mouth.’’ The “ earth,’’ 
in symbol, as already explained, represents society—order- 
loving people ; and it is a fact of history that the flood of 
truth which spread over France—arraigning Papacy and its 
priest-craft, and monarchy and its parasitic aristocracy, as 


Days of Waiting. 67 


the responsible causes of much of the ignorance, poverty 
and superstition of the people—was swallowed up, or ab- 
sorbed by the people of Europe generally (the Roman 
“earth’’). ‘To such an extent was this the case, that, though 
Papacy and royal aristocracy were thoroughly alarmed, they 
were also thoroughly separated, by the fall of Papal influ- 
ence as well as by Napoleon’s armies. And when the ‘‘man 
of destiny’’ was finally crushed, and the rulers of Europe 
formed what was called ‘‘’The Holy Alliance,’”’ for the sup- 
pression of the liberties of the people and the perpetuation 
of their own thrones, it was too late to fetter the people ; 
fot, having drunk up the flood of waters, they would not 
submit. It was also too late to think of re-establishing Pa- 
pacy, which had been so terribly humiliated and whose an- 
athemas against liberty and the French had so reacted 
against itself; so the pope was nof even tnmited to join the 
‘« Holy Alliance,’’ of which before he would have been the 
recognized head. Thus the ‘‘ woman,’’the reformed and 
progressing Church of God, was helped, spared from being 
overwhelmed, and liberty and truth stepped out to promi- 
nence before men; and from that time forward the spirit 
of liberty and God’s Word have led all who were willing to 
follow, into more and more light and truth. 
Here, then, was the ‘‘flood ’’ which marked both the end 
of Papal power and the beginning of the Lord’s ‘‘ Day of 
Preparation’’ or ‘‘ Time of the End.’’ It was on this flood 
that the Lord’s messenger was prophetically seen ‘to stand, 
to announce the close of the time, times and half a time. 
And this announcement was made: in reply to the query, 
‘« How long to the end of these strange things?’? The 
“« strange things’’ or ‘‘ wonders’’ referred to were not the 
things of chapter r2:1-3, relating to the Kingdom of God. 
Those were not strange, but expected. The ‘strange 
things’’ were the intervening troubles, persecutions and 


68 Thy Kingdom Come. 


trials of God’s holy people, especta//y during, and as a re- 
sult of, the supremacy of the peculiar power or ‘“‘horn,”’ 
Papacy ; concerning which Daniel had before specially 
inquired. (Dan. 7:19-22.) The query was, How long will 
God permit these wonderful perversions of the truth, this 
wonderful deception of his children and the nations? The 
answer given measures the Papal power, giving definitely 
the time of its close, and adds, ‘‘When the crushing of the 
power of the holy people is [thus] ended, all these [strange] 
things shall be finished.”’ 

In verse 5, Daniel is shown a person on each side the 
* flood,’’ asking jointly when the strange things would énd. 
This seems to indicate that even when Papal power had 
ended, people would be in doubt as before, as to whether 
or not its persecuting and crushing power was really at an 
end. And no wonder, when we remember that even after 
its power was broken, after its ‘‘ dominion was taken away,”’ 
and even while it was being consumed, this ‘‘ horn,’’ as re- 
cently as 1870, uttered great words concerning its infallibil- 
ity. Daniel, representing the saints, says (Dan. 7:11), ‘1 
watched it then [after its dominion was gone and it was pow- 
erless longer to crush the truth, the powerof the holy people], 
because of the voice of the great words which that horn 
spoke, and I saw that [it got no power over the holy saints 
and the truth, but it did have another effect] the beast was 
slain, the body thereof destroyed and given to the burning 
flame’’—general anarchy. The destruction of the remnant 
of governments in the old Roman empire, caused by the 
misleading influence of Papacy’s continued bombastic utter- 
ances, even after its dominion is gone, is thus shown. 

Since the close of the times of Papal power are not only 
thus clearly fixed, as occuring during the French revolu- 
tion, but also by the events of chapter 11:40-44, which 
mark the very year 1799, we can readily measure back- 


Days of Waiting. 69 


ward 1260 years to note whether Papal power had its be- 
ginning there. If we find that it had, we have our evidence 
as clear and strong as faith could ask. Let us thus verify. 

Measuring back 1260 years from 1799 would bring us to 
A. D. 539, where we shall show the Papal power began. 
But the Papal system has been such a mixture of state-craft 

. and priest-craft, and had such a small and gradual beginning, 
as well as gradual ending, that a variety of opinions as to 
its commencement and close would be reasonable as well 
as possible, until we obtain. God’s fixed dates for its rise 
and fall, and see how very correét they are. Papacy claimed 
supremacy in church and state affairs, and mixed in politics, 
before it was recognized by opponents; even as it has also 
attempted to exercise civil authority, and has declared its 
head infallible, since the period at which prophecy shows 
its power was broken and its consumption began. But Pa- 
pacy has not been recognized by the Italian people of the 
province of Romagna since the spell of ignorance and su- 
perstitious reverence was broken during the French revo- 
lution. Though at times, between revolutions, the pope has 
sat as nominal ruler of the Papal states, it has been merely 
as a foreign invader, the representative of Austria or France, 
whose troops by turns protected him in office. 

Now, knowing that the 1260 years began at A. D. 539, 
we are enabled to find what would not before have been 
recognized. Papists themselves are more inclined to date 
their beginning of power either at the conversion of Con- 
stantine and the nominal Christianizing of the Roman em- 
pire ‘in 4. D. 328, or from the presentation of the Papal 
states to the church by Charlemagne in a. D. 800. The 
fact stands, however, that Constantine in no wise recognized 
civil power as a right or possession of the church. On the 
contrary, though he favored Christianity, it was rather the 
church that made the emperor at least its associate head, 


90 Thy Kingdom Come. 


so that the emperor called church councils and meddled 
in church affairs, though the church was not permitted to 
meddle in civil matters. The date a. D. 539, shown by the 
prophetic measuring rod of 4260 years, is nearly mid-way 
between this union of church and empire, in a. p. 328, and 
its full, complete recognition by Charlemagne, as the head 
of .all authority—the dispenser of civil as well as religious . 
authority—a. D. 800. 

From the time of Constantine, the bishops of Rome had 
held a most prominent position before the world, and they 
began ere long to claim an authority over all others—in 
the church as well as in the world—demanding that some 
one person should be recognized as an authority or head in 
the church, and that the bishop of Rome should be that one. 
They claimed that Peter as well as Paul had lived in Rome, 
and that Rome was thus constituted the seat of apostolic au- 
thority, and also that, by reason of its long having been 
the seat of the Cesars and the seat of civil government, it 
held a place of authority in the minds of the people. 

These pleas for supremacy were not readily conceded, 
however. The spirit of rivalry was abroad, and other 
«bishops in other large cities claimed supremacy also, some 
upon one and some upon another ground. It was not until 
A. D. §33 that the bishop of Rome was thus recognized by 
the emperor, Justinian J. This was in connection with a 
warm religious discussion in which the emperor took sides 
with the bishop of Rome, recognizing the Virgin Mary’s 
worthiness of adoration, and disputing with the Eutychians 
and Nestorians regarding distinctions and blendings of 
natures in our Lord Jesus. The emperor feared that the 
discussion might divide the church, and thus divide the 
empire which he was desirous of more firmly uniting ; for 
even at that early day the nominal church and the empire 
were one and the same—‘‘ Christendom.’’ And desiring to 


Days of Waiting. at 


have some authority as a standard to settle the dispute, and 
to tell the people what to believe and what to disbelieve, 
and finding the bishop of Rome already the most popular 
of the claimants to primacy (popedom or headship), as well 
as the one most ‘‘ orthodox ’’—the one most nearly in har- 
mony with the emperor’s views on the questions—Justinian, 
by documents, not only condemned the doctrines of the 
Eutychians and Nestorians, but, addressing the bishop of 
Rome as the Head of all the holy churches, and of all the 
holy priests of God, thus acknowledged him, and desired to 
. assist the Pope in putting down the heresy and in establish- 
ing the unity of the church. 
In conjunction with this edict, the emperor thus addressed 
Pope John, patriarch of Rome*:— 


‘<The victorious Justinian, the devout, the fortunate, the 
renowned, the triumphant, the ever august, to John, the 
most holy archbishop of the fostering city of Rome, and 
patriarch.—Rendering honor to the Apostolic See and to 
your Holiness (as always was and is our desire), and rever- 
encing your Blessedness, as befits a father, we have hastened 
to bring to the notice of your Holiness everything which 
concerns the condition of the churches, since it has always 


. 

*«Vidtor Justinianus, pius, felix, inclytus,triumphator,semper Augustus, 
Joanni sanctissimo Archiepiscopo almze Urbis Rome et Patriarchie. 

“‘ Reddentes honorem apostolicze sedi, et vestrae sanctitati (quod semper 
nobis in voto et fuit et est), et ut decet patrem honorantes vestram beat- 
itudinem, omnia que ad ecclesiarum statum pertinent festinavimus ad 
Notitiam deferre vestrz sunctitatis; quoniam semper. nobis fuit magnum 
studium, unitatem vestre apostolicz sedis, et statum sanctarum Dei ec- 
clesiarum custodire, qui hactenus obtinet, et in commote permanet, nulla 
intercedente contrarietate. Ideoque omnes sacerdotes universi Orientalis 
tractus et subjicere et unire sedi vestre sanctitatis properavimus. In 
presenti ergo quze commota sunt (quamvis manifesta et indubitata sint 
et secundum apostolicae vestree sedis do¢trinam ab omnibus semper sac- 
ertotibus firme custodita et praedicata) necessarium duximus, ut ad noti- 
tiam vestrz sanctitatis perveniant. Nec enim patimur quicquam, quod 
ad ecclesiarum statum pertinet, quamvis manifestum et indubitatum sit, 
quod movetur, ut non etiam vestre innotescal sanctitati que caput est 
omnium sanctarum ecclesiarum. Per omnia enim (ut distum est) pro- 
peramus honorem et auctoritatem crescere vestree sedis.” 


72 Thy Kingdom Come. 


been our great desire to guard the unity of your Apostolic 
See, and the standing of the holy churches of God, which 
still maintains itself and endures unshaken, with nothing to 
prevail against it. And so we have hastened to make sub- 
ject to the See of your Holiness, and to unite with it, all the 
priests of the whole Eastern distri€t. At present, then, we 
have held it necessary that there come to the notice of your 
Holiness the matters which are in commotion, however 
plain and certain they are, and however firmly they have 
always been guarded and declared by all the priests accord- 
ing to the doctrine of your Apostolic See. For we do not 
permit that any question be raised as to anything which 
concerns the state of the churches, however plain and cer- 
tain it be, that be not also made known to your Holiness, who 
is the Head of all the holy churches. For in all points (as 
has been said) we are eager to add to the henor and au- 
thority of your See.’’ 


The epistle next refers to certain views, styled heretical, 
which were causing the commotion, and gives the emperor’s 
faith as in harmony with that of the Church of Rome. It 
concludes as follows* :— 


*« Suscipimus autem sancta quatuor concilia: id est, trecentorum de- 
cem et octo sanctorum patrum qui in Niczna urbe congregati sunt: et 
centum quinquaginta sanctorum patrum qui in hac regia urbe convene- 
runt: et sanctorum patrum qui in Epheso primo congregati sunt: et 
sanctorum patrum qui in Chalcedone convenerunt: sicut vestra apostol- 
ica sedis docet atque preedicat. Omnes ergo sacerdotes sequentes doc- 
trinam apostolicz sedis vestre ita credunt et praedicant. 

“Unde properavimus hoc ad notitiam deferre vestre sanctitatis per 
Hypatium et Demetrium, beatissimos episcopos, ut nec vestram sanctita- 
tem lateat, quze et a quibusdam paucis monachis male et Judaice secun- 
dum Nestorii perfidiam denegata sunt. Petimus ergo vestrum paternum 
afectum; ut vestris ad nos destinatis literis, et ad sanctissimum episco- 
pum hujus almz urbis, et patriarcham vestrum fratrem (quoniam et ipse 
per eosdem scripsit ad vestram sanctitatem, festinans in omnibus sedem 
sequi apostolicam beatitudinis vestree), manifestum nobis faciatis, quod 
omnes qui predicta recte confitentur, suscipit vestra sanctitas, et eorum 
qui Judaice aussi sint rectam denegare fidem, condemnat perfidiam. Plus 
enim ita circa vos omnium amor, et vestre sedis crescet auctoritas; et 
que ad vos est unitas sanctarum ecclesiarum inturbata servabitur, quando 
per vos didicerint omnes beatissimi episcopi eorum, que ad vos relata 
sunt, sinceram vestre sanctitatis doctrinam. Petimus autem vestram 
beatitudinem orare pro nobis, et Dei nobis adquirere providentiam.” 


Days of Waiting. ; "3 


“« Now we admit [the validity of] four sacred councils: 
that is, of the 318 holy fathers who gathered in the city of 
Nice [Council of Nice], and of the 140 holy fathers who 
assembled in this royal city [Council of Constantinople], 
and of the holy fathers who first gathered in Ephesus [Coun- 
cil of Ephesus], and of the holy fathers who assembled in 
Chalcedon [Council of Chalcedon], as your Apostolic See 
teaches and affirms. All priests, therefore, who follow the 
doétrine of your Apostolic See, so believe, and confess, and 
affirm. Hence we have hastened to bring to the notice of 
your Holiness, through Hypatius and Demetrius, most 
blessed bishops, that it may not lie hidden from your Holi- 
ness what [doctrines] have been wickedly denied by some 
few monks, after the Jewish manner, according to the her- 
esy of Nestorius. We therefore seek your paternal regard, 
[praying] that by a letter addressed to us and to the most 

oly bishops of this fair city, and to the patriarch, your 
brother (since he himself, too, has written by the same to 
your Holiness, hastening in all points to follow the Apos- 
tolic See of your Blessedness), you make manifest to us that 
your Holiness accepts all who duly confess what is ordained, 
and condemns the heresy of these who have dared, after the 
Jewish manner, to deny the true faith. For thus the love 
of all for you and the authority of your See will grow the 
greater ; and the unity of the holy churches, which has been 
disturbed, will be preserved to you, since through you all 
the most blessed bishops will have learned the genuine doc- 
trine of your Holiness, as to those points which have been 
referred to you. Now we entreat your Blessedness to pray 
for us, and to obtain for us the protection of heaven.’’ 


Pope John replied to the above, under date of March 
24th, a. D. 534.* 


*We quote as follows from his reply:— .- 


“ Gloriosissimo et clementissimo filio Justiniano Augusto, 
« Johannes Episcopus Urbis Rome. 

“ Inter claras saptentize ac mansuetudinis vestre laudes, Christianissime 
principum, puriore luce tanquam aliquod sydus irradiat, quod amore 
fidei, quod charitatis studio edocti ecclesiasticis disiplinis, Romanz sedis 
reverentiam conservatis, et ei cuncta subjicitis, et ad ejus deducitis uni- 
tatem, ad cujus auctorem, hoc est apostolorum primum, Domino loquente 
preeceptum est, Pasce oves meas: Quam esse omnium vere ecclesiarum 


74 : Thy Kingdom Come. 


Upon the same occasion the emperor wrote to the patri- 
arch of Constantinople. The first paragraph of his letter we 
quote, as follows* :— 


‘* Epiphanius, the most holy and most blessed Archbishop 
of this royal city, and Ecumenical Patriarch :—Wishing 
your Holiness to know all matters which relate to the con- 
dition of the church, we have held it necessary to make use 
of these ecclesiastical compends, and through these to make 
manifest what movements are already started, although we 
are persuaded that you also know of these. And since we 
had ascertained that certain ones, aliens from the Holy 
Catholic and Apostolic Church, had followed the heresy 
of the impious Nestorius and Eutyches, we promulgated an 
ecclesiastical edict (as your Holiness also knows) in which 
_we censured the madness of the heretics. In no manner 
whatever have we changed, or shall we change, or have we 
(as your Holiness also knows) passed beyond that position 


caput, et patrum regulz et principum statuta declarant, et pietatis vestree 
reverendissimi testantur affatus. * * * Proinde serenitatis vestre apices, 
per Hypatium atque Demetrium, sanctissimos viros, fratres et coepisco- 
pos meos, reverentia consueta sescepimus: quorum etiam relatione com- 
perimus, quod fidelibus populis proposuistis edictum amore fidei pro 
submovenda heereticorum intentione, secundum apostolicam doctrinam, 
fratrum et coepiscoporum nostrorum interveniente consensu. Quod, quia 
apostolicee doctrinze convenit, nostra auctoritate confirmamus.”’ 


*« Epiphanio sanctissimo et beatissimo Archiepiscopo Regie hujus 
Urbis et CEcumenico Patriarche. 

“ Cognoscere volentes tuam sanctitatem ea omnia que ad ecclesias- 
ticum spectant statum: necessarium duximus, hisce ad eam uti divinis 
compendiis, ac per ea manifesta eidem facere, quze jam moveri coepta 
sunt, quamquam et illa eandem cognoscere sumus persuasi. Cum itaque 
comperissemus quosdam alienos a sancta, catholica, et apostolica ecclesia, 
impiorum Nestorii et Eutychetis sequutos deceptionem, divinum antehac 
promulgavimus edictum (quod et tua novit sanctitas) per quod heretico- 
rum furores reprehendimus, ita ut nullo quovis omnino modo immutave- 
rimus, immutemus aut preetergressi simus eum, qui nunc usque, coadju- 
vante Deo, servatus est, ecclesiasticum statum (quemadmodum et tua 
novit sanctitas) sed in omnibus servato statu unitatis sanctissimarum ec- 
clesiarum cum ipso S. S. Papa veteris Rome, ad quem similia hisce per- 
scripsimus. Nec enim patimur ut quicquam eorum, quz ad ecclesiasti- 
cum spectant statum, non etiam ac ejusdem referatur beatitudinem : 
quum ea sit caput omnium sanctissimorum Dei sacertotum; vel eo max- 
ime quod, quoties in eis locis heretici pullularunt, et sententia et recto 
judicio illius venerabilis sedis coerciti sunt.” 


Days of Watting. 75 


of the church which, by the favor of God, has as yet been 
preserved ; but in all respects the unity of the most holy 
churches with his SUPREME HOLINESS, THE POPE OF ANCIENT 
RoME (to whom we have written in like manner), has been 
maintained. For we do not suffer that any of those matters 
which relate to the state of the church be not also referred 
to HIS BLESSEDNESS, since he ts the head of all the most holy 
churches of God; even especially for this reason, that as 
often as heretics have sprung up in those parts, they have 
been repressed [literally, pruned off, as the sprouts of a tree] 
by the wisdom and righteous decisions of that venerable 
See.’’ 

The letters from which we have given the foregoing ex- 


tracts may be found complete, together with the Edict of 
Justinian * referred to, in the Volume of the Civil Law.— 
Codicis lib. 1. tit. i. 

This, the first official recognition of Papacy’s claims, was 


afterward confessed more and more pointedly by Phocus 
and succeeding emperors. 


But even after being recognized as a ruler, a sacerdotal 
emperor, for the time it was of no special advantage to Pa- 
pacy, beyond the empty name; for Justinian was far from 


* An extract from this edict reads as follows :— 

“Imp. Justinian. A. Constantinopolitis. 

“Cum Salvatorem et Dominum omnium Jesum Christum verum De- 
um nostrum colamus per omnia, studemus etiam (quatenus datum est 
humanz menti assequi) imitari ejus condescensionem seu demissionem. 
Eteniin cum quosdam invenerimus morbo atque insania detentos impiorum 
Nestorii et Eutychetis, Dei et sanctze catholicee et apostolicce ecclesiz hos- 
tium, nempe qui detrectabant sanctam gloriosam semper virginem Marian 
‘Theotocon sive Deiparam appellare proprie et secundum veritatem: illos 
festinavimus quze sit reéta Christianorum fides edocere. Nam hi incura- 
biles cum sint, celantes errorem suum passim circumeunt (sicut didici- 
mus) et simpliciorum animos exturbant et scandalizant, ea astruentes que 
sunt sancte catholicz ecclesize contraria. Necessarium igitur esse puta- 
vimus, tam hzreticorum vaniloquia et mendacia dissipare, quam omni- 
bus insinuare, quomodo aut sentiat sancta Dei et catholica et apostolica 
ecclesia, aut przedicent sanctissimi ejus sacertodes ; quos et nos sequuti, 
manifesta constituimus ea quz fidei nostra sunt; non quidem innovantes 
fidem (quod absit) sed coarguantes eorum insaniam qui eadem cum im- 
ptis heereticis sentiunt. Quod quidem et nos in nostri imperii primordiis 
pridem satagentes cunctis fecimus manifestum.” 


76 Thy Kingdom Come. 


Rome, with his capital at Constantinople. Rome, and Italy 
in general, was under the sway of another kingdom—the 
Ostrogoths—who did not recognize the bishop of Rome 
as supreme pontiff; for they were mainly Arians in faith. 
Papacy, therefore, was exalted and advantaged in name only, 
by the emperor’s recognition, until the fall of the Ostro- . 
gothic Monarchy, when its exaltation became an actual 
fact. Indeed, as if by a preconcerted arrangement, the 
emperor at once ( A. D. 534) sent Belisarius and an army 
into Italy, and in six years after the pope’s recognition by 
the emperor, the Ostrogothic power was vanquished, and 
their king Vitiges and the flower of his army were taken with 
other trophies to Justinian’s feet. This was in a. D. 539, 
which is therefore the point of time from which we should 
reckon the ‘‘ Desolating Abomination se¢ up.’’ Papacy 
there had its small beginning. There the little, peculiar 
“¢horn,’’ noted in Daniel’s prophecy (Dan. 7:8, 11, 20-22, 
25), just began to push itself up, upon the Roman beast. 
It began to form or take root two centuries before, and in 
two centuries after its smal] appearance its ‘‘ look was more 
stout than. its fellows’’—the other horns, authorities or pow- 
ers, in the territory of the old empire—and its eyes, and 
its mouth speaking great swelling words, began to develop; 
and it lorded it over the other horns, claiming divine right 
to do so. 

The Prophet had said that three horns would be plucked 
up, or rooted out, to make room or prepare the way for this 
peculiar power or ‘‘horn.’’ And so we find it: Constan- 
tine built Constantinople, and removed his capital thither; 
this, though favorable to Papacy’s development in the seat 
of the Czsars, was unfavorable to the empire; and soon it 
was found expedient to divide the empire, and Italy was’ 
thenceforth known as the Western Empire, whose seat or 
capital was at Ravenna. This was one of the ‘‘ horns :’’ it 


Days of Waiting. 7 


fell, A. D. 476, at the hands of the Heruli, another of the 
horns, which established itself on its ruins. Next came the 
Ostrogothic kingdom, another “‘ horn,’’ overthrowing the 
Heruli and establishing itself as ruler of Italy, a. D. 489. 
And, as we have just seen, it was during the power of this 
“horn’’ (the third to be rooted out to maké way for the 
papal horn) that Justinian acknowledged the papal suprem- 
acy; and it was by his orders, and by his general and his 
army, that it was plucked up. And, as we have seen, its 
plucking up was necessary to the advancement of Papacy to 
power, as a peculiar blending of political and religious’ 
power—a peculiar ‘‘ horn,’’ differing from its fellows. In- 
deed, it seems not improbable that the Papacy was secretly 
favorable to the fall of each of these ‘‘ horns’’ or powers, 
hoping thus to open the way to its own exaltation, just as 
it finally resulted. 

With the overthrow of the Ostrogoths, the Roman em- 
peror was recognized for some time as the ruler of Italy, 
and was represented by Exarchs ; but since these had their 
capital at Ravenna, and not at Rome, and since they had 
come to recognize the Papacy in the manner shown, it fol- 
lows that from a. D. 539 Papacy was recognized as the chief 
authority in the city of Rome; and that from that date 
(when it was ‘‘set up’’) it began to grow and thrive as a 
‘horn’ or power among the other ‘‘horns’’ or powers, 
representing the formerly united power of Rome. The 
fact of the greatly disturbed condition of Italy, and especi- 
ally of Rome, about this period, subjeét to the pillage of 
invaders from the North, as well as to heavy taxes by which- 
ever master was nearest at the time, helped to break up 
political loyalty to the imperial power at Constantinople ; 
so that the church-rulers, always with them, speaking the 
same language, and sharing their advantages and losses, 
were readily accepted by the people as the advisers, pro- 


78 Thy Kingdom Come. 


tectors and rulers of the city of Rome and its environs. 

No doubt, indeed, the object of Justinian in acknowl- 
edging the claims of the bishop of Rome to superiority over 
others was also in part to gain his co-operation in the war 
he was about to wage against the Ostrogoths, to regain Italy 
as a part of the Eastern Roman Empire ; for the influence 
of the pope and the church was by no means inconsiderable 
even then; and to have them on his side in the war was 
half the conquest won, at the very outstart. 

Though the Goths rebelled against the empire, and sacked 
the city Rome, they did not re-establish their rule, and its 
only government was that of the church. And though the 
Lombard kingdom soon came in and established its rule _ 
over most of Italy, even overthrowing the rule of the East- 
ern empire established by Justinian in the hands of the 
Exarchs, yet be it carefully noted that the Lombards rec- 
ognized the authority of the Papacy in Rome. It was not 
until near the end of that kingdom, in the eighth century, 
that any serious attempts were made against the Papal au- 
thority, the narrative of which only serves to establish the fact 
that the popes in turn were Rome’s real rulers, the claimed 
“«successors of the Ceesars’’—‘‘the spiritual Caesars ’’— 
though they claimed the protection of the government at 
Constantinople as long as it advantaged them to do so. 
When the Lombards finally sought to take possession of 
Rome, the pope appealed to the French king to protect the 
church (Papacy), and to maintain them in their long unin- 
terrupted control of what they called ‘‘ The Patrimony of 
St. Peter,’’ which they claimed* had been bestowed upon 
the church by Constantine. 


* That those claims were false, and based upon forgeries—* The 
Forged Decretals’’—is now freely acknowledged, even by Roman Cath- 
olics. Constantine made no such gift: Papacy grew into its power and 
control of Rome, as we have here described. 


Days of Waiting. 79 


The French kings, Pepin and Charlemagne, each in turn 
brought his army for the protection of Papacy’s dominion, 
and vanquished the Lombards. It was the latter of these 
who in a. D. 800 formally presented to Papacy several states 
known as the ‘‘Pa_al States,’’ already referred to—additional 
to the city and suburbs of Rome, actually held by Papacy 
froma. D. 539. So,then, the Lombard Kingdom or ‘‘horn”’ 
did not hinder, nor occupy the place of, the papal horn, as 
some have surmised, even though it did sometimes crowd it. 

Of this attack by the Lombards upon Rome, Gibbon 
says :— 

%e A memorable example of repentance and piety was ex- 
hibited by Lutiprand, king of the Lombards. In arms, at 
the gate of the Vatican, the conqueror listened to the voice 
of Gregory I., withdrew his troops, resigned his conquest, 
respectfully visited the church of St. Peter, and, after per- 
forming his devotions, offered his sword and dagger, his 
cuirass and mantle, his silver cross and crown of gold, on 
the tomb of the apostle.’’ But ‘‘ His successor, Astolphus, 
declared himself the equal enemy of the emperor and the 
pope: . . . Rome was summoned to acknowledge the vic- 
torious Lombard as her lawful sovereign. . . . The Ro- 
mans hesitated; they entreated; they complained; and 
the threatening barbarians were checked by arms and nego- 
tiations until the popes had engaged the friendship of an 
ally and avenger beyond the Alps.’’ 

The pope (Stephen III.) visited France, and succeeded in 
getting the needed assistance; and, says Gibbon, returned 
as a conquerer at the head of a French army which was 
led by the king [Pepin] in person. The Lombards, after a 
weak resistance, obtained an ignominious peace, and swore 
to restore the possessions, and to respect the sanctity, of the 
Roman Church. 

As an illustration of the claims of the popes and of the 
kind of power by which they claimed and held dominion, 
we quote again from Gibbon a letter of Pope Stephen III., 
sent at this time to the king of France. The Lombards 


80 Thy Kingdom Come. 


had again assaulted Rome, shortly after the French army 
had retired, and the pope desired fresh assistance. He 
wrote in the name of the Apostle Peter, saying :— 

‘‘The Apostle assures his adopted sons, the king, the 
clergy and the nobles of France, that, dead in the flesh, he 
is still alive in the spirit; that they now hear, and must 
obey, the voice of the founder and guardian of the Roman 
church ; that the Virgin, the angels, the saints, the martyrs, 
and all the host. of heaven unanimously urge the request, 
and will confess the oA/igation ; that riches, victory and 
paradise will crown their pious enterprise, and that eternal 
damnation will be the penalty of their neglect, if they suf- 
fer his tomb, his temple and his people to fall into the 
hands of the perfidions Lombards.’’ And Gibbon adds, 
‘¢ The second expedition of Pepin was not less rapid and 
fortunate than the first: St. Peter was satisfied ; Rome was 
again saved.”’ 

As this beginning of Papacy’s dominion was obscure, and 
yet important to be recognized clearly, it has seemed to us 
to require careful marking as above. And in concluding 
the proof, that a. D. 539 was the date prophetically pointed 
out, we quote corroborative testimony from Roman Cath- 
olic writings, as follows :— 

“After the downfall of the Western Roman empire the 
political influence of the popes in Italy became of still more 
importance, from the fact that the popes had to take under 
their protection the unfortunate country, but particularly 
Rome and its environs, which were so often changing mas- 
ters and continually exposed to the invasions of coarse and 
brutal conquerors. While the successors of St. Peter were 
so energetically interesting themselves in the welfare of the 
inhabitants of Italy, the latter were totally neglected by the 
Eastern Roman emperors who still /a#d claim to rule the 
land. Even after Justinian I. had reconquered a part of 
Italv [A. D. 5 39} and converted it into a Grecian province, 
the lot of the inhabitants was no better ; for the Byzantine 
emperors could only exhaust by taxation the subjects of the 
Exarchate of Ravenna, but in ng way could they afford her 
the necessary protection, 


Days of Waiting. 81 


“* Under these circumstances it happened that the. . . 
emperors . . . lost all ad?va/ power, and remained only rn 
name mastersof the government, while the popes, in virtue 
of the needs of the moment, came practically in possession of 
that supremacy over the Roman domain. . . . This spon- 
taneous result of generous exertion was in after times ac- 
knowledged as a dawful acquisition [by Pepin and Charle- 
magne]. . . . Pepin, as contemporary writers express it, 
‘restored’ the conquered territory to the Apostolic See. 
This donation or restitution of Pepin was confirmed and 
enlarged by his son Charlemagne, who in a. D. 774 put an 
end to the Lombard rule in Italy. /# this legitimate way, 
the TEMPORAL POWER AND SOVEREIGNTY OF THE POPES was, 
by divine providence, gradually established.’’ ; 

The above quotations are from ‘‘The History of the 
Catholic Church,’’ by H. Brueck, D. D., Vol. I., pp. 250, 
251. As this is a standard work among Roman Catholics, 

.wsed in their colleges and seminaries, and approved by papal 

“dignitaries, its testimony is of value, touching the gradual 
rise of the temporal power of Papacy, and the Ame when 
its beginning was favored by circumstances. It proves that 
the fall of the Ostrogothic kingdom in A. D. 539 was, as 
clearly indicated by the prophetic measure (1260 years), 
the exact point of time when this desolating and, in the 
sight of God, abominable system was ‘‘ sef up.”’ 


In harmony with the same line of thought, and in the 
endeavor clearly to establish the fact that Papal authority 
began defore the day of Charlemagne, another Catholic 
work, Zhe Chair of St. Peter, in a chapter on ‘‘ The growth 
of the temporal power’’ (page 173), says:—-‘‘ Rome was 
ruled nominally only by a Patrician appointed by the em- 
peror, but 7” rea/ity, through the force of circumstances, the 
popes became the supreme lords of the city.”’ In proof of 
this authority and rulership, the writer proceeds to cite 
_ historic proofs of the power of the popes, and of the pow- 
erlessness of the nominal rulers. He refers to Pope Greg- 


82 Thy Kingdom Come. 


ory the Great (a. D. 5g0—only fifty years after Papacy was 
“set up’’) as an tl/ustration of powcr already possessed Dy 
the popes, saying :— 

‘‘We find him dispatching Leontius as governor to Nepi 
in Etruria, enjoining on the inhabitants that they should 
obey him as they would himself. Again he appoints Con- 
stantius to the important post of governor of Naples. Next 
he writes to the bishops about the defence and provisioning 
of their respective:cities ; issues orders fo the military com- 
maniers. . . . In aword, he becomes the ad7ual ruler and 
protector of Italy; so that he is fully justified in saying, 
“Whoever fills my place as pastor is gravely occupied with 
external cares, so that it frequently becomes uncertain 
whether he discharges the funétions of a pastor or of a 
temporal prince.’ ”’ / 


So great as this was the growth of tempora: power in the 
short space of fifty years from its small beginning, a. D.5 39. 

We may therefore feel assured that the 1260 years, or thre ia, 
and a half times, of papal dominion, are well:and clearly “* 
marked at both ends. 

Daniel, who had heard the limit placed upon the power’ 
of the abomination to desolate the Church and to crush the 
truth, the power of the Lord’s people, saw that this would not 
still usher in the kingdom of Michael (Christ), and the exal- 
tation of the saints to power, but that it would merely grant 
them release from their oppressor. This, therefore, was 
still not the understanding which he desired: ‘*I heard, 
but I [still] understood not. Then said I, O my lord, what 
shall be \ater than [or after] these things? And he said, 
Go thy way, Daniel [it is useless for you to try to compre- 
hend the matter], for the words are closed up and sealed 
till the Time of the End. From the time that the continual 
sacrifice shall be taken away and the desolating abomination 
sel up [A. D. §39] shall be a thousand two hundred and 
ninety days [years. Then] many shall purify [separate] 
themselves, yea, make themselves white, yea, be tried as by 


Xu 


Days of Waiting. 83 


fire; but the wicked shall do wickedly, and none of the 
wicked shall understand; but the wise shall understand 
[then]. Oh! the blessedness of him who is waiting ear- 
nestly when the thousand three hundred and five and thirty 
[1335] days touch. And thou, go [thy way] till the end: 
and thou shalt rest, and rise again for thy lot [portion, re- 
ward] after the end of the days.’’* 

The careful student will note that these 1290 and 1335 
prophetic days, literal years, have the same starting point 
as the 1260 years of papal power to crush, viz., from the 
time the desolating abomination was ‘‘sef up’’—aA. D. 539. 
Where two events occuring at different times are mentioned, 
as in this case—the taking away of the “ daily’’ (or, more 
correctly, the continual sacrifice), and the setting up of the 
abomination—we must always reckon from the time that 
both were true. The taking away of the ‘‘ continual sacri- 
fice,’” we will show in the next chapter, occurred some 
years before the se¢ting up of the abomination in 539; and 
it was the important item which caused it to be named 
‘‘the abomination.’’ We should and do, therefore, reckon 
the ‘setting up’’ of the abomination from the last of these 
two events. 

And note, further, that both of these measures are give in 
answer to Daniel’s question as to what would occur to God’s 
holy ones after their power (the truth) would be released 
from Papal crushing, (that is, after 1799), and before the set- 
ting up of the kingdom of Messiah—Michael. The reply in 
substance is that Daniel need not hope to understand further, 
but that in /Azrty years after the beginning of the Time of the 
End (1260+ 30= 1290), a purifying, cleansing, refining 
work would begin among the holy people, in connection 
with which an understanding of the prophecy would be 
granted to the wise among this tried, cleansed, separated 

* Concerning this translation see remarks in preface. 


84 Thy Kingdom Come. 


class; yet the knowledge would be so communicated that 
the ungodly and unpurified would not receive or believe it. 
It was shown, further, that this right understanding of the 
vision would be far from complete or full; in fact it would 
be deficient in some of its chief elements until 45 years later 
(1290 + 45 = 1335), Or 75 years after the beginning of the 
Time of the End, a. D. 1799 (1260 + 75 = 1335). This is 
clearly indicated by the Hebrew text, which represents the 
matter as though the watchers, who already have seen some- 
thing, and are waiting patiently, would suddenly (when 
“©1335 days’’ had passed) get a full, clear view, far beyond 
their expectations. —“‘ Oh! the blessedness of him !”’ 

Reckoning from A. D. 539, the 1290 symbolic days ended 
in 1829, and the 1335 days in the close of 1874. Let the 
reader judge carefully how accurately these dates mark the 
understanding of the vision, and all the prophecies con- 
nected with the Time of the End, and the separating, 
cleansing, and refining as by fire, to bring God’s children 

-to the childlike, humble, trustful condition of mind and 
heart needful, that they might be ready to receive and ap- 
preciate God’s work in God’s way and time. 

A religious movement culminated in 1844, the partici- 
pants in which were then, and since, generally known as 
‘« Second Adventists’’ and ‘‘ Millerites,’’ because they ex- 
pected the second advent of the Lord to occur at that date, 
and because a Mr. William Miller was the leader and prime 
mover. The movement, which began about 1829, had be- 
fore 1844 (when they expected the Lord’s return) attraéted 
the attention of all classes of Christian people, especially 
in the Eastern and Middle States, where it amcunted 
to anexcitement. About the same time, too, Prof. Bengel, 
in Tubingen, Germany, began to call attention to the pro- 
phecies and the coming kingdom of Messiah, while the cel- 
ebrated missionary Wolff did the same in Asia. The center 


Days of Warting. 85 


of the work, however, was America, where social, political 
and religious conditions have favored, more than elsewhere, 
independence in Bible study as well as in other matters ; 
just as the first advent movement was confined to Judea, 
though all the devout Israelites, everywhere, heard more or 
less of it—Adts 2: 5. 

All know something of the failure of Brother Miller’s ex- 
pectations. The Lord did not come in 1844, and the world 
was not burned up with fire, as he had expected and taught 
others to expect; and this was a great disappointment to 
those ‘‘holy people’? who had so confidently looked for 
Christ (‘‘ Michael ’’) then to appear and to exalt them with 
him in power and glory. But, notwithstanding the disap- 
pointment, the movement had its designed effe¢ts—of awak- 
ening an interest in the subject of the Lord’s coming, and 
of casting reproach upon the subject by reason of mistaken 
expectations. We say designed effects because without a 
doubt the hand of the Lord was init. It not only did a work 
corresponding to that of the first advent movement, when our 
Lord was born, when the wise men came from the East and 
when ‘‘all men were in expectation of him’’. (Matt. 2:1, 2; 
Luke 3:15), but it corresponded with it in time also, being 
’ just thirty years before the anointing of our Lord, at thirty 
years of age, at the beginning of his work as Messiah. That 
“Miller movement,”’ as it is slightingly called, brought also 
an individual blessing to the ‘‘ holy people’’ who partici- 
pated in it: it led to a careful searching of the Scriptures, 
and to confidence in God’s Word above the traditions of 
men; and it warmed and fed and united the hearts of God’s 
children in unsectarian fellowship; for those interested 
were of all denominations, though principally Baptists. It 
is since that movement ended, that some of these have or- 
ganized and bound themselves as new sects, thus blinding 
themselves to some of the blessings due in the ‘“ harvest.’’ 


86 Thy Kingdom Come. 


While, as the reader will have observed, we disagree with 
Mr. Miller’s interpretations and deductions, on almost every 
point,—viewing the odjec7, as well as the manner and the 
time, of our Lord’s coming, in a very different light,—yet 
we recognize that movement as being in God’s order, and 
as doing a very important work in the separating, purifyiug, 
refining, and thus making ready, of a waiting people pre- 
pared for the Lord. And not only did it do a purifying and 
testing work in its own day, but, by casting reproach upon 
the study of prophecy and upon the do¢trine of the Lord’s 
second advent, it has ever since served to test and prove the 
consecrated, regardless of any association with Mr. Miller’s 
views and expectations. ‘The very mention of the subjeét 
of prophecy, the Lord’s coming and the Millennial King- 
dom, now excites the contempt of the worldly-wise, espe- 
cially in the nominal church. This was undoubtedly of the 
Lord’s providence, and for a purpose very similar to the 
sending of the infant Jesus for a time to Nazareth, ‘that 
he might be called a Nazarene,’’ though really born in the 
honorable city of Bethlehem. That evidently was in order 
that the truth might separate the “ Israelites indeed ’’ from 
the chaff of God’s chosen nation. The chaff was driven off 
by the statement that our Lord was a Nazarene; for they’ 
reasoned, ‘‘Can any good thing come out of Nazareth ?’’ 
Just so some now contemptuously inquire, ‘‘Can any good 
thing come out of Adventism?’’ and dismiss unconsidered 
the testimony of the Lord and the apostles and prophets. 
But the humble, holy ones, wise in God’s sight though fool- 
ish in the world’s estimation, take no such attitude. 

But the “* Miller movement ’’ was more than this: it was 
the beginning of the */g/¢ understanding of Daniel’s visions, 
and at the right time to fit the prophecy. Mr. Miller’s ap- 
plication of the three and a half times (1260 years) was prac- 
tically the same as, that we have just given, but he made the 


Days of Waiting. 87 


‘mistake of not starting the 1290 and 1335 periods at the 
same point. Had he done so he would have been right. On 
the contrary, he started them thirty years sooner—about 
509 instead of 539, which ended the 1335 days in 1844, 
instead of 1874.* It was, nevertheless, the deginuing of the 
right understanding of the prophecy ; for, after all, the 1260 
period, which he saw correctly, was the key ; and the preach- 
ing of this truth (even though in combination with errors, 
and misapplications, and false inferences) had the effect of 
separating and purifying ‘‘ many,’’ and at the very time the 
Lord had foretold. 

Not understanding the manner nor the obje¢t of the 
Lord’s return, but expecting a sudden appearance, and the 
end of all things in one day, he supposed all the time proph- 
ecies must end there ; and it was his aim and effort to force 
them all to this common terminus: hence his failure—be- 
yond which God did not then enlighten any, further en- 
lightenment not being then due. 

Mr. Miller was an earnest and esteemed member of the 
Baptist Church ; and, being a careful student of the Script- 
ures, the prophecies began to open before him. After be- 
coming thoroughly convinced himself, as to the correctness 
of his applications, he began to disseminate his views among 
ministers, chiefly Baptists at first, but afterward among all 
classes and all denominations. As the work spread, he, with 
many co-laborers, traveled and preached extensively. ‘The 
beginning of this work among the Baptist ministers was, as 
nearly as can be learned from his memoirs, in 1829, Elder 
Fuller of the Baptist Church at Poultney, Vt., being the 
first convert to preach his views in public. In a letter written 
about three years after, Mr. Miller says: 


* We have been unable to secure Mr. Miller's writings to compare his 
interpretations. We have merely learned the dates at which he applied 
the prophetic numbers. 


88 Thy Kingdom Come. 


‘‘The Lord is scattering the seed. I can now reckon 
eight ministers who preach this doctrine, more or less, be- 
sides myself. I know of more than one hundred private 
brethren who say that they have adopted my views. Be 
this as it may, ‘ The truth is mighty and will prevail.’ ”’ 

Thus it will be seen that the separating work of the “ Mil- 
ler movement’’ had its beginning at the time foretold,— 
at the end of the 1290 days, 1829. 

Now, how about the watting earnest/y until the 1335 days 
had been touched ? Who have thus waited ? 

Some of God’s children, the ‘‘ holy people,’’ the writer 
among the number, though not associated with the “ Miller 
movement,’’ nor with the denomination subsequently or- 
ganized, which calls itself the ‘‘ Second Advent Church,’’ 
have been looking and ‘earnestly waiting ’’ for Michzel’s 
Kingdom ; and gladly we bear testimony to the ‘‘ blessed- 
ness’? of the wonderfully clear unfoldings of our Father’s 
plan, at and since the fall of 1874—the end of the 1335 days. 

Words fail us to express this blessedness! Only those 
who have been refreshed in spirit with this new wine of the 
Kingdom could appreciate it, if we could describe it. It is 
therefore something to be felt, rather than told. It was at 
and since the ending of those 1335 prophetic, symbolic days 
that the precious views of the Lord’s presence, and the fact 
that we are even now living in the time of the ‘‘ harvest ’’ 
of this Gospel age, and in the time of the setting wp of 
Michel’s (Christ’s) Kingdom, came to be known. 

Oh, the blessedness of this favored time! Oh, the har- 
mony, the beauty, the grandeur of the divine plan as it be- 
gan to unfold when the 1335 days were ‘‘touched!’’ It is 
to express, as far as lies within our power, this ‘‘ blessed- 
ness’’ and fuller unfolding of the divine plan, now due to 
be understood by all the ‘holy people’’ now living, that 
this MILLENNIAL Dawn series is being published. None but 


Days of Wasting. 89 


the ‘‘holy people’’ will understand it. It is granted as a 
favor. ** None of the wicked shall understand ;’’ and those 
of the ‘ holy people’ who have fellowship with the worldly, 
who wawise/y stand in the assemblies of the wicked, and sit 
in the seat of the scorner, shall not understand, and shall not 
be able to experience this blessedness, now due only to 
those “holy ’’ ones, truly ‘ wise,’? who delight in the Law 
of the Lord and meditate [study] therein day and night.— 
Psa. 1:1, 2. 

This message concerning Michel’s Kingdom, gradually 
opening from 1829 onward, is symbolically represented in 
the book of Revelation (chap. 10:2,8-10) asa ‘little book,’’ 
which the ‘“wise’’ of the ‘holy people,’’ represented by 
John, are instructed to eat. And John’s experience, as 
expressed in verse 10, is the experience of all who receive 
these truths. They bring wondrous sweetness: Oh, the 
blessedness! But the after effects are always more or less a 
blending of the bitterness of persecution with the sweet- 
ness. And the effeét upon those who patiently endure to 
the end is to purge, purify and refine, and thus to make 
the bride of Christ ready for the marriage and exaltation, 
due toward the close of the Day of Preparation. 

Concerning this disappointment, which we have shown 
was nevertheless a blessing and a beginning of the correét 
interpretation of the vision, the Prophet Habakkuk is caused 
to write a word of encouragement, saying (chap. 2:2), 
“Write the vision, make it plain upon tables [charts], that 
he [desiring] may read it readily . . . Though it tarry, 
wait for tt [** Oh, the blessedness of him that warteth unto 
the 1335 days!’’], for it will surely come ; it will not tarry.’”’ 

_ Its seeming tarrying or delay was not so, but a partial mis- 
take on the part of Mr. Miller, foreknown and permitted 
by the Lord for the testing of his «holy people.’’ 

As an evidence of the consecration, Bible-study and faith 


go Thy Kingdom Come. 


engendered by this movement, we quote from a letter writ- 
ten by Mr. Miller, after the disappointment of 1844, to those 
who had been disappointed with him, as follows :— 


“*We thank God always on your behalf, when we hear, 
as we have already have, that your and our late disappoint- 
ment has produced in you, and we hope in us also, a deep 
humiliation, and a careful inspection of our hearts. And 
though we are humbled, and in a measure pained, by the 
jeers of a wicked and perverse generation, we are not terri- 
fied nor cast down. You can, all of you, when inquired of 
for the reasons of your hope, open your Bibles, and with 
meekness and fear show the inquirer why you hope in the 
glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior, Jesus 
Christ. You need not in a single instance refer the in- 
quirer to your minister, for the reason of your faith. Your 
creed is the Scriptures; . . . your philosophy is the wisdom 
which cometh down from God; your bond of union is the 
love and fellowship of the saints ; your teacher is the Holy 
Spirit ; and your professor is the Lord Jesus Christ. . . . 
We exhort you, by all the love and fellowship of the saints, 
to hold fast to this hope. It is warranted by every promise 
in the Word of God. It is secured to you by the two im- 
mutable things,—the council and oath of God, in which it 
is impossible for him to lie. It is ratified and sealed by the 
death, blood, and resurrection, and life of Jesus Christ. 
» . . Never fear, brethren ; God has told you what to say. © 
Do as he bids you, and he will take care of the consequences. 
God says, Say unto them, ‘ Zhe days are at hand, and the 
effec? of every viston.’ [See Ezek. 12:22, 23.] . . . It is to 
me almost a demonstration that God’s hand is in this thing. 
Many thousands have been made to study the Scriptures by 
the preaching of the time. . . . God’s wisdom has in a 
great measure marked ovt our path, which he has devised 
for such good as he will accomplish in his own time and 


manner.” 


«« One of our Lord’s parables was given expressly to illus- 
trate this period of waiting, from the disappointment of 
1844 to the realizations at the end of the ‘1335 days.’’ 
We refer to— 


Days of Watting. gt 


THE PARABLE OF THE TEN VIRGINS. 
——MATT. 25 5 1-12.— 

This parable begins with ‘‘then,’’ thus indicating that 
it was not applicable at once, in the Lord’s day, but some- 
time in the future. ‘‘ Zhen shall the Kingdom of heaven 
[in its embryo condition—represented by some or all of the 
holy people, probationers for heirship in that Kingdom] be 
likened unto ten virgins, who took their lamps and went — 
forth to meet the Bridegroom. And five of them were wise 
and five were foolish.’’ 

The numbers are not significant ; neither are the propor- 
tions. The parable teaches a movement among the heirs 
of the Kingdom, in expectation of meeting the Bridegroom 
—a movement in which two classes would be manifested, 
here styled ‘‘ wise’’ and ‘foolish.’’ The word ‘ virgin’ 
signifies pure; so these represented in the parable, both the 
wise and the foolish, represent ‘‘ holy people.’’ In fact, no 
lovers of the Bridegroom, longing to meet him, can be 
lovers of sin, even though many of them are ‘‘ foolish.’’ 

The movement noted by our Lord in this parable corre- 
sponds exactly to one which began with the ‘‘ Miller move- 
ment,’’ and which is still in progress. That, though begun 
by a Baptist, was an undenominational movement, joined 
in by the most devout and faithful of all denominations. 
Accounts of those times, of their fervency of zeal, etc., fill 
our hearts with admiration for men and women who had the 
honesty to act out their convictions, even though we can- 
not coincide with those convictions. Money was poured 
out like water, in printing tracts and papers in various 
languages, and in sending the message the world over. It 
is said that in the churches of all denominations a revival 
spirit spread, and that in some congregations, where all 
were under the influence of this teaching, those who had 
money to spare piled it upon a table in front of the pulpit, 


62 Thy Kingdom Come. 


where it was free to all needing it; and the sincerity and 
zeal of believers at that time were such that, it is said, the 
money thus consecrated to the Lord needed no guarding, 
as those who did not need it would not touch it. 

The virgins of the parable are shown as all having lamps 
trimmed and giving them light. These lamps represent the 
Scriptures (‘‘ Thy word is a lamp to my feet’’); and such 
a general trimming of lamps—searching the Scriptures—by . 
all classes of Christians probably never before took place. 
The oil represents the spirit of the truth. It was manifest, 
then; in the lamps of all; but all had not the spirit of the 
truth in themselves—the ‘¢ vessels.’’ 

The disappointment of 1844 is briefly recorded in the 
parable, by the statement that ‘‘ the Bridegroom tarried ’’— 
t. ¢., he seemed to the expectant ones to tarry. And the 
confusion and darkness experienced by all, and the many 
false and visionary views entered into by some who were 
there disappointed, are shown in the parable by the state- 
ment: ‘While the Bridegroom tarried, they all sdumbered 
and slept.’’ Yea, and in their darkness and slumber many 
of them dreamed strange, unreasonable things. 

But the parable shows a second movement, similar, and 
yet different, among the same virgins. The same general 
class is referred to, but not necessarily the same individuals. 
As the first movement was the result of light upon the 
prophecy, regarding the time for Messiah’s second advent as 
the Bridegroom of the Church, so was the second movement. 
But there are several differences. In the first, the lamps of 
all the virgins burned alike, and the company expecting the 
Bridegroom was mixed ; whereas in the second movement, 
while all will be aroused, only those will be led out who 
have the spirit of the truth in their hearts, as well as a 
knowledge of the Bible—a trimmed lamp. Disappointment 
was predicted for the first movement, and waiting for the 


Days of Waiting. 93. 


1335 days was- necessary ; but the second was not a disap- 
pointment, and a waiting was no longer necessary ; for ful- 
filment came exactly at the close of the 1335 prophetic days 
~-in October 1874. It was just following the close of the 
1335 years, the period of ‘‘ waiting,’’ that the fact of our 
Lord’s presence, as taught by the foregoing prophecies, be- 
gan to be recognized. It was very early in the morning 
of the new age, but it was the ‘‘ midnight ’’ hour, so far as. 
the deep slumbering of the virgins was concerned, when the 
cry (which is still ringing) went forth, ‘‘ Behold the Bride- 
groom !’’—not Behold the Bridegroom cometh,* but Behold 
he has come, and we are now living ‘in the [parousia] 
presence of the Son of man.’’ And such has been the 
character of the present movement, since that date: a proc- 
lamation of the Lord’s presence and of the kingdom work 
now in progress. The writer, and co-laborers, proclaimed 
the fact of the Lord’s presence, demonstrating it from pro- 
phecy, and on charts or tables, such as are used in this 
book, until the fall of 1878, when arrangements were made 
for starting our present publication, Zion’s WATCH TowER, 
and Herald of Christ’s Presence."’ By the Lord’s blessing, 
inillions of copies of this publication have carried abroad 
the tidings that the time is fulfilled, and that the Kingdom 
of Christ is even now being se? uf, while the kingdoms and 
systems of men are crumbling to their utter destruction. 
‘The parable forewarns us that, though all the virgin class 
trim their lamps, all cannot see. Only those who have the 
oil in their vessels (in themselves—the fully consecrated) 
can get-the light from their lamps, and appreciate the facts. 
The others (all the pure, the virgins) will get the oil and 
the light some time, and be greatly blessed by it ; but only 


* The oldest Greek manuscripts (Sinaitic and Vatican) omit. cometh, 
and read, “‘ Behold the Bridegroom !’’ 


94 Thy Kingdom Come. 


those //ed with the oil, the spirit of the truth, will have 
the light in season and get the great blessing. Only these 
go in with the Bridegroom to the marriage. The oil, or 
spirit of consecration, and its attendant light cannot be 
communicated from one virgin to another. Each for him- 
self must be filled with the spirit ; each must get his own 
supply of this oil (the Truth, and its spirit of consecration 
and holiness) ; and the cost is considerable in the way of self- 
denial and misrepresentation and fiery trial. Experience 
in the great time of trouble will be the market in which the 
foolish virgins will purchase their oil. But it will then be 
too late to go into the marriage, as members of the Bride, 
the Lamb’s wife. The Scriptures point out, however, that, 
as vessels unto ‘‘ less honor,’’ these, repentant of their folly, 
will not be destroyed ; but, being thus fitted for the Mas- 
ter’s use, they shall yet serve him in his temple. 

Recurring to the angel ’s words to Daniel—verse 13 reads : 
‘* But go thou thy way till the end; for thou shalt rest, and 
arise again for thy lot [portion, reward] at [after] the end 
of the [1335] days’’—during the harvest then beginning. 

In the expression, ‘‘Go thou thy way till the end,’’ the 
‘end’ should be noticed as of very different significance 
from the ‘‘ Time of the End.’’ “ The harvest is the end 
of the age ;’’ and the harvest, as already shown, is the period 
of 40 years from the fall of a. p. 1874, the termination of the 
‘©1335 days,’’ to the fall of a.p. 1914. And Daniel is to 
receive his portion, reward or lot in the Kingdom of Michel 
(Christ), together with all the holy prophets, as well as the 
saints of the Gospel age, in this ‘‘ Ead’’ or ‘harvest ”’ 
period ;—the saints being first in order, as well as in honor, 
in that Kingdom. (Heb. 11:40.) See MILLENNIAL Dawn, 
VoL. 1., page 288. 


CHAPTER IV. 
THE CLEANSING OF TIIE SANCTUARY. 
2300 DAYS.— DAN. 8:10-26. 


Tue True SANcTUARY.—THR DeritemMent.—TH8 Basg or Founpation.—How 
**Cast Down.’’— Evipgncgs oF Tuts Cirep From RoMAN Catnotric Writ- 
INGS.—THE CLEANSING WILL NOT BE ACCOMPLISHED UNTIL 2300 YEARS AFTER 
THE Vision.—How anpD WHERE BgGun, AND WHEN Dvs To Bx ComPpLeTep.— 
“‘ Go-pen Vessgis,” TrutHs, Must 8& REPLACED. 


ia preceding chapters we saw the identity of the presump- 

tuous, peculiar ‘‘ little horn’’ of Dan. 7:8, 11, 20-26, 
with the ‘‘ Man of Sin”’ of 2 Thes. 2:3, and with the ‘“Abom- 
ination of Desolation ’’ foretold by our Lord in Matt.24:15 ; 
and also that the same papal power is referred to in Dan. 
8:9, 10, 23-25. We have examined, sufficiently for our 
present purposes and limited space, its rise, its character 
the breaking of its crushing power, and its final complete 
destruction, which is yet future. 

We wish now to examine another prophecy which points 
out distinétly the one special false doctrine, or fundamental 
error, which led to the full rejection of that system by our 
Lord, and made it in his sight the desolating abomination. 
The prophecy now to be considered shows, further, the 
time at which the true Church, the consecrated class—the 
San¢tuary—will be cleansed of the abominable defilements 
introduced by Papacy. 

While the preceding chapter pointed out to us certain 
days of waiting, and a purifying of this holy or Sanctuary 

95 


96 - — Cleansing the Sandluary. 


class, this prophecy points out a date at which a nucleus of 
holy believers would get entirely free from papal defile- 
ments, errors, etc., and at which the misappropriated 
“*golden vessels,’’ or precious truths, would begin to be 
restored to this holy or Sanctuary class. 

We quote Dan. 8:10—26, as follows:— 

«And it became great even unto [controlling] the host of 
heaven [the entire Church]. and it caused some of the host 
and of the shining lights to fall to the earth, and trod them 
under foot. Yea, it magnified itself even up to the Prince 
of the host. [It assumed to itself honors and dignities, 
and applied to itself prophecies and titles, which belong 
to Christ Jesus, the true Chief or Prince or Head of the 
Church.] And it took away from him [Christ] the con- 
TINUAL SACRIFICE, and the BASE OF HIS SANCTUARY was 
overthrown. And the host [people] was given over to it 
against the continual sacrifice, through transgression; and 
it cast down truth to the ground, and its doings prospered. 

«‘Then did I hear a certain holy one speaking, and a holy 
one said unto another, I know not to whom he was speak- 
ing: ‘For how long shall be the vision, concerning the 
continual sacrifice and the transgression that maketh deso- 
late, to give both the sanctuary and the host to be trodden 
under foot?’ And he answered, ‘ Until two thousand 
three hundred evenings and mornings [days], then shall 
the sanctuary be cleansed.’ 

«And it came to pass when I, even I, Daniel, had seen 
the vision, that I sought to understand it ; and behold there 
stood before me as the appearance of aman. And I heard 
a man’s voice between the banks of the [river] Ulai, which 
called and said, ‘ Gabriel, make this man to understand the | 
vision.’ So he came and stood near where I stood ; and 
when he was come, I fell upon my face, trembling, and he 
said unto me, ‘Mark well, O son of man! because for the 


Cleansing the Sandluary. . 97 


Time of the End is the vision.’ Now as he was speaking 
unto me, I fell down in amazement on my face to the 
ground ; but he touched me and set me upright, where I 
had been standing. And he said, ‘ Behold, I will make 
known to thee what is to come to pass to the end of these 
evil predictions ; for it pertaineth to the appointed ‘Time 
of the End. 

‘©The ram which thou hast seen, him with the two horns, 
(signifieth) the kings of Media and Persia. And the shaggy 
he-goat is the king of Greece; and the great horn that is 
between his eyes is the first king. But that it was broken, 
and that four sprung up in its stead, (signifieth that) four 
kingdoms will spring up out of the nation, but not with 
his power. And in the latter time of their kingdom, when 
the transgressors have filled their measure of guilt [Compare 
Gen. 15:16], there will arise a king [Papacy] of an im- 
pudent [or shameless] face, and understanding deep schemes. 
And his power shall be strengthened [made mighty], but 
not with his own force. [Papacy strengthened itself by 
using the force of the various nations of Europe.] And he 
will destroy wonderfully, and do more than can be believed; 
and he shall destroy [or corrupt] the mighty ones and the 
holy [saintly] people. And by his cunning skill he shall 
cause deceit to prosper (him) in his power; and in his 
heart he shall magnify himself, and by prosperity shall he 
corrupt [destroy] many: he shall also stand up [as Anti- 
christ] against the Prince of princes ; and he shall be broken 
without hand. And [that part of] the vision concerning 
the evenings and mornings which hath been told [that 
there would be 2300, till the cleansing] is correét ; but shut 
thou up the vision, for it will be fulfilled after many days.”’ 

We do not enter into a detailed explanation of the ram, 
goat, horns, etc., mentioned in these and the preceding 
verses, believing that they have already been made clear. 


98 Thy Kingdom Come. 


(See page 27.) We have already seen that Rome, which 
is treated as a separate beast with its own horns, in chap- 
ter vii., and as the legs and feet of the image, in chapter 
ii., is here (chapter viii.) treated as one of the horns of 
the Grecian ‘‘goat,’’ which, after becoming great toward 
the South and toward the East, as civil or imperial Rome, 
underwent a change, and, becoming papal Rome, ‘‘ became 
great even unto the host of heaven; #. ¢., it became an 
ecclesiastical power or empire, over the host or people. 
And this same method of treating the Roman empire as a 
branch or development out of one of the divisions of the 
Grecian empire, is followed in the historical prophecy of 
chapter xi. : ; 
The continual sacrifice here mentioned is generally 
supposed to refer to the daily or continual burnt-offerings 
of the Jews at Jerusalem. And this taking away of the 
continual sacrifice has been laid to the charge of Antiochus 
Epiphanes, as already narrated. The prophecy, however, 
passes by the typical temple or San@tuary, and the typical 
burnt-offerings, and deals with the anti-typical San¢tuary 
or Temple of God, the Christian Church (2 Cor. 6:16), 
and with the antitypical burnt-offering, Christ’s merito- 
rious sacrifice once for all and forever—a continual, ever- 
efficacious sacrifice, for the sins of the whole world. 
Christ’s continual sacrifice was not aCtually canceled or 
abolished by Papacy, but it was set aside by a false doc- 
trine advanced by that system,—which gradually, but in 
the end fully and completely, set aside the merit of Christ’s 
sacrifice as a continual and ever-efficacious one. This false 
doctrine is known as the Mass, or Sacrifice of the Mass. 
Protestants in general totally misunderstand this so- 
called sacrament. They suppose it to be merely a different 
form of celebrating the Lord’s Last Supper, adopted by 
Roman Catholics. Others get the idea that it is a sort of 


Cleansing the Sanéluary. 99 


special prayer. But these ideas are quite erroneous. The 
Roman Catholic doctrine of the Mass is this: The death 
of Christ, they claim, canceled. Adamic or original sin, 
but is not applicable for our daily shortcomings, weak- 
nesses, sins and omissions; it is not a continual sacrifice, 
ever meritorious for all our sins, ever sufficient and effica- 
cious to cover as a robe every sinner and every sin, so as to 
.permit the contrite one to come back into union and fellow- | 
ship with God. For such sins the Sacrifice of the Mass 
was instituted: it is esteemed by Papists as a further de- 
velopment of the Calvary sacrifice. Each time the Mass is 
offered in sacrifice it is, they claim, a fresh sacrifice of 
Christ, for the particular persons and sins to which the 
priest offering it mentally applies it. 

The Christ to be thus sacrificed afresh is first ‘‘ created ’’ 
from wheat-bread and wine by the officiating priest. They 
are ordinary bread and wine until laid upon the altar, 
when certain words of consecration, it is claimed, change 
the bread and wine into the aéd@ual flesh and blood of 
Christ. Then they are bread and wine no longer, though 
they still have such an appearance. This change is called 
' transubstantiation—change of substance. The five magical 
Latin words which, it is claimed, effect this change of 
bread and wine into a@éfua/ flesh and blood, are, ‘‘Hoc 
est autem corpus meum.’’ It is claimed that any priest can 
thus create Christ in the flesh, afresh, to be sacrificed afresh. 
And having thus created Christ, a bell is sounded, and 
priests and people fall down and worship and adore the 
bread and wine, which now they recognize as the very 
Christ. This done, the bread (the real flesh of Christ, 
vailed from the senses, they say) is broken. Christ is thus 
slain or sacrificed afresh, repeatedly, for the special sins 
sought by this means to be canceled. 

Carrying out this absurd theory, and endeavoring to 


100 Thy Kingdom Come. 


have it consistent with itself, Roman Catholic councils 
have issued numerous and long decrees and explanations, 
and wise (?) theologians have written thousands of books. 
In these it is taught that if a drop of the ‘‘blood’’ (wine) 
be spilled, it must be carefully preserved and burned, and 
the ashes buried in holy ground; and likewise the bread 
(‘the flesh of Christ ’’): not a crumb of it must be lost. 
Provision is carefully made lest a fly should get into the 
“‘blood’’ (wine), or lest a mouse or dog should get a crumb 
of the broken ‘‘flesh’’ (bread). And Dr. Dens, one of their 
leading theologians, explains that, ‘‘A mouse or a dog eat- 
ing the sacramental species, does not eat them sacrament- 
ally; yet this proves that shen the body of Christ does not 
cease to exist under the species.’’* The Roman Catholic 
(American) Catechism states the doctrine thus: 

‘‘Ques. What is the holy eucharist ? 

Ans. It is a sacrament which contains the Bopy and 
BLOOD, the sout and Divinity, of Jesus Christ, under the 
forms and appearances of bread and wine. 

Q. Is it not bread and wine which is first put upon the 
altar for the celebration of the Mass? 

A. Yes, it is always bread and wine till the priest 
pronounces the words of consecration during the Mass. 

What happens by these words? 

A. The bread is changed into the sopy of Jesus Christ, 
and the wine into his BLOOD. 

Q. What is this change called ? 

A. It is called sransubstantiation, that is to say, a 
change of one substance into another. 

What is the Mass? 

A. The Mass is the perpetual [‘‘ daily ’’ or ‘‘ continual’’] 
sacrifice of the new law, in which Christ our Lord offers 
himself by the hands of the priest, in an unbloody manner, 
under the appearances of bread and wine, to his Heavenly 
Father, as he once offered himself on the cross in a bloody 
manner. 


* Dens, Tract. de Euchar., No. 20, p. 314. 


Cleansing the San€luary. Io 


Q. What is the difference between the sacrifice of the 
Mass and the sacrifice of the Cross? : 

A. The sacrifice of the Mass is essentially the same 
{kind or sort of] sacrifice as that of the Cross; the only 
difference is in the manner of offering. 

Q. What effeéts has the Mass as a sacrifice of propi- 
tiation [satisfaction]? 

A. By it we obtain from the divine mercy, first, Graces 
of contrition and repentance for the forgiveness of sins; 
and second, Remission of temporal punishments deserved 
for sins. 

Q. To whomarethe fruits [benefits] of the Mass 
applied ? 

A. The general fruits are applied to the whole Church, 
both the living and the dead; the sfec#a/ fruits are applied, 
first, Chiefly to the priest who celebrates the Mass; next, 
To those for whom in particular he offers it up; and, 
thirdly, To those who assist at it with devotion [¢. ¢., those 
who attend Mass as or 

The same authority says: ‘‘ He who sacrifices is a priest ; 
the sensible thing which is sacrificed is called the wd? ; 
the place where it is sacrificed is called the a/far. These 
four—priest, viciim, altar and sacrifice—are inseparable: 
each one of them calls for the others.’’ 

Again, explaining the ceremony, it savs of the priest: 

‘‘Then he pronounces the mysterious words of Consecra- 
tion, adores, making a genuflection, and elevates the 
Sacred Body and the Sacred Blood above his head. At 
the ringing of the bell the people adore on their knees, and 
strike their breasts in token of repentance for their sins. 
The priests degs of God graciously to ACCEPT THE SACRIFICE.”’ 

We close the testimony on this subject by a brief quota- 


_ tion from the Canons of the Council of Trent * as follows :— 


Canon 3. ‘‘If any one shall say that the Mass is only 
a service of praise and thanksgiving, or a bare commemora- 
tion of the sacrifice made on the Cross, and not [7 s¢se/f] 
a propitiatory offering [#. ¢., a sacrifice which itself makes 
satisfaction for sins]; or that it only benefits him who 
receives it, and ought not to be offered for the living and 


* Concil. Trid., Sess. 22. De Sacrificio Misse. 


to2 Thy Ki ingdom Come. 


the dead, for sins,’ punishments, satisfactions, and other 
necessities: let him [who so denies the power of this 
sacrifice] be accursed.’ 

Thus we see clearly that Papacy has substituted a false 
or sham sacrifice, in the place of the one everlasting, com- 
plete and never-to-be-repeated sacrifice of Calvary, made 
once for all time. Thus it was that Papacy took away from 
Christ’s work the merit of being rightly esteemed the Con- 
tinual Sacrifice, by substituting 7% sts stead a fraud, made 
by its own priests. It is needless here to detail the reason 
why Papacy denies and sets aside the true Continual Sacri- 
fice, and substitutes the ‘‘abomination,’’ the Mass, in its 
stead; for most of our readers know that this dorine, 
that the priest makes in the Mass a sacrifice for sins, with- 
out which they cannot be canceled, or their penalties es- 
_caped, is at the very foundation of all the various schemes 
of the Church of Rome for wringing money from the 
people, for all her extravagancies and luxuries. ‘* Absolu- 
tions,’’ ‘‘indulgences,’’ and all the various presumed bene- 
fits, favors, privileges and immunities, for either the present 
or the future life, for either the living or the dead, are 
based upon this blasphemous doctrine of the Mass, the 
fundamental doctrine of the apostasy. It is by virtue of 
the power and authority which the sacrifice of the Mass 
imposes upon the grtests, that their other blasphemous 
claims, to have and exercise the various prerogatives which 
belong to Christ only, are countenanced by the people. 


4s an evidence of the fundamental character of this error, 
let it be noted that, though the Reformation in Germany 
and Switzerland began with opposition to indulgences, it 
soon became a question concerning sransubstantiation— 
the sacrifice of the Mass. The corner stone of the Reform- 
ation was, that the forgiveness of sins was effected by 
Christ alone, as a consequence of his sacrifice at Calvary, 


Cleansing the Sandluary. 103 


and not by indulgences, confessionals and Masses. In fact, 
this question of the Mass lay at the bottom of nearly all of 
Rome’s persecutions. Bishop Tilotson remarks, ‘This 
[transubstantiation—the Mass] has been in the Church of 
Rome the great durning article; and, absurd and unreason- 
able as it is, more Christians have been murdered for the 
denial of it, than perhaps for all the other articles of their 
religion.” ; 

Of course, Romanists claim that the Mass was instituted 
by Christ and the apostles; but the earliest mention of it 
we have been able to find was at the Council of Constan- 
tinople, a. D. 381. However, the date of the introduc- 
tion of this defiling error is not particularly referred to in 
the prophecy, except that by reason of this fun... nental 
error Papacy became the ‘‘Abomination of Desolation,”’ 
before it was, as such, ‘‘set up’’ in power, which, we have 
seen, was in A. D. 539. 

The prophecy declares, ‘It took away from him [Christ] 
the continual sacrifice,’’ and then adds, ‘‘and the dase of 
his Sanctuary was overthrown.’’ The base, or foundation- 
truth, upon which the truly consecrated or Sanctuary class 
is built, is that our Lord Jesus, by the sacrifice, of himself, 
has redeemed all, and will save to the uttermost all who 
come unto God by him, without any other mediator, with- 
out priest, or bishop, or pope, and without any other sacri- 
fice; any other being an abomination in God’s sight, as 
teaching by implication the insufficiency of Christ’s great 
ransom-sacrifice.—Heb. 7:25; 10:14. 

_ This doétrine of the ransom is the base of the San¢tuary 
or holy temple—the consecrated Church. And when this 
*‘continual’’ was displaced, made void or overturned by 
the Mass, then followed the evils predicted by the prophet. 
The host (nominal Christians) was given over to the error, 
easily led by the false system which exalted itself (in the 


104 Thy Kingdom Come. 


person of its head, the pope) even to be the Prince or 
ruler over the host. <‘‘And it cast down the ¢rwth to the 
ground,’’ together with such of the host, and of the shin- 
ing lights, or teachers, as held fast to the truth, and would 
not unite with it in its course of transgression. And, as 
we have seen in preceding chapters, it prospered marvel- 
ously, in its doings. 

The very foundation of the true Christian faith being 
thus cast aside, is it any wonder that the great apostasy fell 
into such depths of iniquity as it did? One error led to 
another, until only outward forms of truth and godliness 
remained; and the desolating abomination seated itself in 
the temple of God, defiling both the Sanétuary and the 
host, - ... exalting its head as Christ’s vicar or representative. 

In the midst of these scenes of the success of the Abomina- 
tion of Desolation, Daniel hears the saints, holy ones, ask, 
‘For how long shall be the vision, concerning the Contin- 
ual Sacrifice and the transgression which maketh desolate, 
to give both the Sanctuary and the host to be trodden un- 
der foot?’’ All along since the abomination was set up, 
there have been saints who more or less distin@tly recognized 
its character and its defilements, and anxiously have such 
sought to know, crying to God, How long, O Lord! 
shall the truth be trodden in the mire, and error, blasphemy 
and abominations be allowed to prosper ?—How long shall 
Antichrist, ‘intoxicated with the blood of the saints and 
martyrs of Jesus,’’ and with its phenomenal success, con- 
tinue to intoxicate and deceive the nations? (Rev. 17:2, 6; 
14:8; 18:3.) And, anticipating their inquiry, and Dan- 
iel’s and ours, God gave the answer in advance, through 
his messenger. And though the terms could not even be- 
gin to be understood before the Time of the End, yet the 
fixing or limiting of the time gave to others as well as to 
Daniel the assurance that God has full control of the 


Cleansing the Sandluary. 105 


situation, so that naught can happen which he cannot and 
will not control, and ultimately overrule for good. This 
answer marks, not the beginning of the cleansing work, 
but a period when it would be in a measure finished. It 
reads as follows: — 

‘fUNTIL TWO THOUSAND THREE HUNDRED DAYS, THEN 

SHALL THE SANCTUARY BE CLEANSED.”’ 

In the examination of this period of time the student 
is at once struck with the fact that literal days cannot be 
meant ; because 2300 literal days would be less than eight 
years, and yet the prophecy evidently covers all the long 
period of the defiling of the Sanétuary and the treading 
down of the truth. Again, we note that it is foretold that 
these 2300 days will terminate sometime i” the period 
called the ‘‘Time of the End;’’ for Gabriel said, ‘‘ Mark 
well, O son of man! because for the Time of the End is 
the vision ;’” and again, ‘‘ Behold, I will make known unto 
thee what is to come to pass to the end of these evil pre- 
dictions; for it [the fulfilment] pertaineth to the appointed 
Time of the End.”’ 

In his explanation, Gabriel traverses the entire vision, 
explaining in part the various symbols, and finishes with 
the assurance that the 2300 days is the correct measure 


of it all. 
Daniel, who was thinking specially of Israel, and of the 


fulfilment of God’s promises to the fathers, perceived that 
all that he had heard could not occur in 2300 literal days, 
especially when Gabriel said to him, ‘‘ But shut thou up the 
vision, for it will be fulfilled after wany days.’’ And though 
he knew not how long each symbolic day would be, he was 
made sick at heart by the thought of so many evils as were 
coming upon God’s people—though he saw not the change 
of that name from fleshly to spiritual Israel. We read, 
“And I, Daniel, languished and was sick for some days;’’ 


106 Thy Kingdom Come. 


and ‘‘I was astonished at the vision, but none could inter- 
pret it.’’. And well it was for Daniel, and for all God’s 
children from then to the Time of the End, that the dread 
significance of that vision of papal power and persecution, 
and of saintly suffering, was not more clearly revealed in 
advance. Our merciful Heavenly Father, while willing to 
prove his people in the furnace of affliction and persecu- 
tion, in order to prepare a people for the exceeding and 
eternal weight of glory promised, deals with us upon the 
principle—‘‘ Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.’’ 

Daniel, who was more interested in Israel than in the 
Persian ‘‘ram,’’ or the Grecian ‘‘goat,’’ knew from Jere- 
miah’s prophecy that the seventy vears of captivity in 
Babylon was a punishment upon Israel for sins, and so now 
he judged from the vision of coming persecutions (instead 
of exaltation and glory as he had expected) that it beto- 
kened Israel’s sin and God’s wrath; hence he prayed earn- 
estly for forgiveness of Israel’s sins, and for the fulfilment 
of the promises made to the fathers. This is told in few 
words in Dan. 9: 2-19. Daniel saw not the scope of the 
divine plan as we may now behold it; nevertheless, his 
earnestness and faith in the promises were pleasing to God, 
who therefore revealed to him something more concerning 
this vision—an increase or further elaboration of.it, in those 
features which specially pertained to fleshly Israel. Daniel 
supposed that the end of the seventy years desolation of the 
land of Israel, while its people were in Babylon, was to be 
thus prolonged, or continued, for many (2300) days. God 
corrects this error by sending Gabriel to inform him that 
the captivity would end when the seventy years were com- 
plete, and that the city of Jerusalem and the temple would 
be rebuilt, though in a troublous period, etc. 

It was while Daniel was praying over this vision of the 
2300 days, which he misunderstood to mean a prolonging 


Cleansing the Sanéluary.  . 107 


of the 70 years captivity in Babylon, that Gabriel was sent 
to further explain that misunderstood vision, thus (Dan. 9: 
21-27) :— 

ened he talked with me and instruéted me, and said, 
© Daniel, I am now come forth to teach thee, that thou 
mayest understand. From the beginning of thy prayers 
the [further] declaration [of God’s plan, now to be com- 
municated] went forth, and I am come to tell it; for thou 
art greatly beloved: therefore understand this [further] 
matter, and have understanding of the vision [of the 2300 
days].—Seventy weeks [70 x 7==490 days] are cut off [or 
set apart, fixed, or determined] upon thy people [Israel] 
and upon thy: holy city [Jerusalem],”’ etc.* 

The point to be here noticed specially is, that the 490 
days are a part of the 2300 days—a part marked off as of 
special interest to Daniel, in answer to his prayer about the 
restoration of Israel from Babylon. (See verses 12, 16-18.) 
As these seventy weeks, or 490 days, were the forepart 
of the 2300, their fulfilment not only serves to show us 
when the 2300 began, but also to show what manner 
of time (literal or symbolic) was signified. (See 1 Pet. 
1:11.) And, more than this, the fulfilment of this prophe- 
cy of ‘‘seventy weeks’’ would serve to set a sea/ upon 
Daniel as a true prophet, and upon all his prophecies; and 
especially would it sea/ this ‘‘vision’’ of the 2300 days. 
And thus it was foretold that the seventy weeks should 
among other things serve to ‘‘sea/ the vision and prophet.”’ 

So then, recognizing the symbolic seventy weeks, or 490 
days, as fulfilled in years, to be the fore-part of the 2300 
days, and God’s seal or mark of approval to that full vision, 
we begin there to measure, to see where the whole period 
will be fulfilled. Deducting from the 2300 the 490 fulfil- 
led at the first advent, we have a remainder of 1810. Then, 


* For an examination of this prophecy see VOL. I1., chapter iii., page 63. 


108 Thy Kingdom Come. 


1810 years (prophetic, symbolic days) must be the measure 
from the close of the seventy weeks to the time when the 
Sanétuary class will be cleansed from the various defilements 
of Papacy—the desolating abomination which has for so 
many centuries defiled the temple of God. 

The death of Messiah, as shown, was in the spring of 
A. D. 33;* and this was the midst or middle of the last 
week of the seventy, the full end of which was therefore a 
-half week, or three and a half years later—in the autumn 
of A. D. 36. Therefore, 1810 years from the autumn of a. 
D. 36, viz., the autumn of 1846, marks the end of the vision 
of the 2300 days, and the date when the San@uary was 
due to be cleansed. 

This prophecy being fulfilled, we should expect, in this 
as in other cases of fulfilled prophecy, to find the facts 
proving its fulfilment clearly set forth on the pages of his- 
tory; for, though historians are often unbelievers in the 
Bible and the God of the Bible, yet, unknown to them, God 
has overruled their work, so that wherever a prophecy has 
been fulfilled, the faéts have unmistakably passed into 
history, and always on good and reliable authority. And 
so it has been in this case of the cleansing of the Sanctuary. 

We find, on the authority of all modern historians, that 
what they all term a Great Reformation had its beginning 
in the sixteenth century,—except Roman Catholic writers, 
who call it the great sedition. And with this reformation 
the cleansing of the Sanétuary may be dated as commenc- 
ing. Let us bear in mind that the Sanctuary was defiled 
_ by the bringing in of various errors with their correspond- 
ing evil tendencies, that the climax of these was reached 
in the introduction of the Mass, and that following in the 
wake of this error came the deepest degradation of the host 
(the masses of the church nominal), culminating in the 


*See VOL. IL, page 68. 


Cleansing the San@uary. 109 


shameless sale of ‘‘indulgences,’’ which measurably provok- 
ed the reform movement. Though the Seadfuary class, 
too, was in a measure defiled, 7. ¢., deceived into this error, 
the dreadful results opened their eyes to it. And, accord- 
ingly, we find that the key-note of the Great Reformation 
was, Justification by faith in the ‘‘ continual sacrifice’ of 
Christ that needs no repetition—as opposed to forgiveness 
assumed to be secured by penances and Masses, at the pol- 
luted altars of Antichrist. 

This was the right place for reformation to begin: at the 
foundation — justification [cleansing] dy fatth in ‘‘the con- 
tinual.’’ Yet, notice, the prophecy does not indicate a 
cleansing of the hos? at this time, but of the Send?uary class 
only. Nor was the host cleansed. They still retained the 
error, and do to this day; but the consecrated class, the 
Sanétuary, renounced the error and suffered for the truth’s 
sake, many of them even unto death. 

But this was only the beginning of the cleansing process ; 
for this class, now awakened, soon discovered that the defil- 
ing errors had been multiplied while Papacy had pra¢ticed 
and prospered. Luther, the leading spirit of the reforma- 
tion, did not stop with one error, but attempted to throw 
out many others, and nailed upon the church door at Wit- 
tenberg, Oct. 31st, 1517, ninety-five theses, all of which 
were objections to the doctrines of Papacy, the twenty- 
seventh being a denial of the claimed inherent immortality 
of man. These propositions having been denounced as 
heresy by Pope Leo X., Luther in his response (A. D. 1520) 
denounced in unmeasured terms the doctrines of transub-_ 
stantiation, human immortality, and the claim of the pope 
to be ‘‘Emperor of the world, king of heaven, and God 
upon earth,’’ and referred to them as ‘‘ MONSTROUS OPINIONS 
10 BE FOUND IN THE ROMAN DUNGHILL OF DECRETALS.”’ 

But, alas! the ‘‘cleansing’’ work so nobly and courage- 


Ito Thy Kingdom Come. 


ously commenced was too radical to be popular, and the 
friends and admirers of Luther and his associates conquered 
in a measure, overpowering them with fo/rcy, prudence, 
“flatteries,’? and promises of help and success, provided 
their course were shaped according to the di¢tates of the 
wisdom of this world. (See Dan. 11:34, 35.) Several of 
the German princes became ardent admirers of the bold 
reformers, who had both the understanding and the courage 
to attack the system before which kings had for centuries 
trembled. These princes aided the reformers, and their 
aid seemed to them to be indispensable to the success of 
the movement. And in return for the aid they received 
from the reformers recognition of their kingly rights (?). 

We should remember also that the reform movement was 
a revolt not only against religious tyranny, but against 
political tyranny as well. And the two classes of reform- 
ers were brought into more or less sympathy and co-opera- 
tion. Concerning this era of the reformation, Professor 
Fisher * says :— 

Of Switzerland—‘‘ Zwingli’s exertions as a church re- 
former were mingled with the patriotic zeal for the moral 
and political regeneration of Switzerland.’’ 


Of John Calvin’s time and the Genevan government— . 
“The civil was followed by an ecclesiastical revolution. 
Protestantism was legally established (1535). Calvin be- 
came the virtual law-giver of the city. It was an ecclesi- 
astical state.’’ 

Of Scandinavia—‘‘In Scandinavian countries monarch- 
ical power was built up by means of the reformation.”’ 

Of Denmark—‘‘ The new [Protestant] doctrine had come 
into the land and was spreading. The nobles who coveted 
the possessions of the church [Roman Catholic] espoused it.’’ 


* Fisher's Universal History, } pp. 402=412, 


Cleansing the Sanctuary. 111 


Of Sweden—‘‘A great political revolution occurred, 
which involved also a religious revolution.’’ 

Of Germany—‘‘ The threats against the Protestant princes 
induced them to form the League of Smalcald, for mutual 
defense. It was found impracticable to carry out the meas- 
ures of repression against the Lutherans.’’ ‘‘At the Diet 
of Augsburg in 1555, the Religious Peace was concluded. 
Every prince was to be allowed to choose between the 
Catholic religion and the Augsburg Confession [of the 
Reformers]; and the religion of the prince was to be that 
of the land over which he reigned: that is, each govern- 
ment was to choose the creed for its subjects.’’ 

In fact, the political circumstances of the time, combined 
with the fact that even the leaders of the reform were only 
beginning to get awake to some of the moral and a few of 
the doétrinal errors of Papacy, lead us to wonder at the 
rapid strides taken toward the right, rather than to 
harshly condemn them for not making the cleansing more 
thorough. But when the Protestant churches united with 
the state, progress and reform came to a standstill. Soon 
creeds were formed which were almost as unyielding and 
opposed to growth in knowledge .as the decrees of Rome, 
though nearer to the truth than Rome’s,— bondages of 
greater latitude. 

Thus, the same kind of union between church and state 
which had worked such injury to the truth before, in Pa- 
pacy, was the snare by which the adversary impeded and 
obstructed the ‘‘ cleansing of the sanétuary,’’ so nobly be- 
gun. Reformation and cleansing for a time ceased, and, 
instead of progressing with the cleansing, the reformers 
gave attention to organizing themselves, and to revamping 
and repolishing many of the old papal dogmas, at first so 
loudly condemned. Thus did Satan decoy the reformers 
into the very ‘‘ harlotry’’ (union of church and state) which 


112 Thy Kingdom Come. 


they had denounced in the Church of Rome. And thus 
the deadly wound which Papacy had received was for a 
time healed.—Rev. 13:3. 

But the ‘‘cleansing,’’ thus begun and thus interrupted, 
must start afresh and go on; for by the end of the 2300 
years the Sanctuary must be cleansed. And so it has been. 
The recurrence to the Bible as the only authority for faith, 
by which the reformation was begun, planted deeply seeds 
which have since sprouted time and again, and brought 
forth one and another reform, in spite of the fact that the 
leading reformers speedily attempted to hinder the spread 
of reform beyond their own measure, by establishing creeds 
and bulwarks of faith beyond which, regardless of the 
teachings of the Bible, none were permitted to go, without 
drawing down upon themselves the anathema of “heretic.” 

Glancing along the pathway of the Church, from 
Luther’s day until now, we can see that, step by step, reform 
or cleansing has progressed ; and yet the same tendency is 
marked at every step; for each set of reformers, as soon as 
they accomplished their own little item of cleansing, stop- 
ped and joined the others, in opposition to all further re- 
form or cleansing. ‘ 

Thus the Church in England, casting aside some of the 
grosser doctrines and practices of the Church of Rome, 
claimed, and still claims, that it is the only true Church, 
and that its bishops have apostolic succession, and hence 
supreme control of God’s heritage. This ‘‘daughter’’ of 
Rome, leaving the ‘‘mother,’’ took the proffered arm of 
England, and made the sovereign of the empire the head 
of that church. Yet, as with the Lutheran daughter, even 
this was a reform, and in the right direction—a partial 
cleansing. Calvin, Knox and others discovered that God’s 
foreknowledge of transpiring events had been largely lost 
sight of under the papal rubbish ; and, casting out the idea 


Cleansing the Sandluary. 113 


that the success of God’s plans where made wholly depend- 
ent on the efforts of fallible men, their do€trines helped to 
show that the Church was not dependent on the arm of 
the state to win success for it by carnal weapons. These 
men did a great and valuable work which has since borne 
more good fruit than many seem to see. Nevertheless, 
blinded by other defiling errors not recognized as such, 
they were led to advocate the error that all not elected to 
the heavenly state were reprobated to eternal torture. 
Soon their doétrines became crystalized under the name 
Presbyterianism; and, beyond the first enunciation of the 
immutability of the divine decrees, little has been done by 
them to aid reformation or cleansing. And, like its sister 
sects, Presbyterianism has also done much to obstruct and 
hinder the cleansing work. 

The Wesleys and their co-laborers, oppressed by the 
prevalent coldness and formality of their day, endeavored to 
cast out some of the cold formalism naturally resulting from 
the union of church and state, and to show the necessity 

. of individual holiness through personal faith in and union 
with Christ,—teaching that the fat of being born under a 
so-called Christian government, and reckoned from birth a 
member of such state-church organization, is not Christian- 
ity. This was excellent so far, and a necessary part of the 
‘cleansing’? work; but, instead of going on toward per- 
fection in the simplicity of the early church, Wesley, too, 

. soon concluded that the cleansing and reforming work was 
completed, and proceeded with others to organize Method- 
ism, and so to hedge it about with the creed, formulas and 
standards of Methodism as to effeCtually hinder further 
progress and cleansing. Unitarianism and Universalism, 
though likewise embodying errors, have also been attempts 
to cast out defiling errors, which perhaps have been pro- 
portionately as successful and as unsuccessful as others. 


114 Thy Kingdom Come. 


Those called Baptists represent another effort at cleans- 
ing the Sanctuary, by casting out another error introduced 
by Papacy with reference to baptism, and denying that the 
sprinkling of an unbelieving infant is the baptism of a 
believer, or that sprinkling in any manner even symbolizes 
any dottrine of Christ. Yet, beyond the teaching of a 
correct outward form or symbol, Baptists have made little 
progress, and now are often found standing with others as 
objectors to, and hinderers of, any further cleansing. 

A later reform is known by the name of ‘ The Christian 
Church”’ or ‘‘ The Disciples.’’ This seét was organized in 
1827 by Alexander Campbell. The reforms they specially 
advocated at their organization were, Apostolic simplicity 
in church government; the Bible only for a creed; the 
equality of all members of Christ under Him as the head of 
all; and, consequently, the abrogation of gcclesiastical titles, 
such as Reverend, Doctor of Divinity, etc., as Romish, and 
contrary to the spirit of Christ and pure Christianity, which 
says: ‘‘All ye are brethren, and one is your master, even 
Christ.’? The design, and the cleansing so far as it went, - 
were good, and have borne fruit in the minds and liberties 
of some in all denominations. But this denomination, like 
the others, has ceased to attempt further reform, and the 
spirit of its reform is already dead; for, while claiming the 
Bible as the only creed, it has stopped in the rut, and there 
it revolves without making progress in the truth. Claiming 
liberty from the creeds and shackles of human tradition, it 
fails to use the liberty, hence is really bound in spirit, and 
consequently fails to grow in grace and knowledge. Though 
bound by no written creed, yet by its respect for the tradi- 
tions and the honor of men, as well as by self-complacency, 
it soon became fixed, and asleep to the work of the further 
. cleansing of the Sanétuary, and is even retrograding from 
its former position, 


Cleansing the Sanctuary. 115 


While we have mentioned but a few of the reformers and 
reform movements, we must not be understood as rejecting 
_or ignoring others. Far from it: the reform has been gen- 
eral, and all true, earnest Christians have had some share 
in the work of cleansing. The great difficulty lies in the 
fact that, prejudiced by early training and awed by the loud 
and boastful claims of error, few can see the great amount 
of error, and the consequent necessity for going forward 
with the cleansing. And these, his advantages, our great 
adversary, Satan, has not been slow to use in binding the 
saints and hindering the cleansing work. : 
Another reform, and in some respects the most thorough 
of all, had its start shortly after the last mentioned, as re- 
ferred to briefly in the preceding chapter. Mr. William 
Miller, of Massachusetts, connected with the Baptist denom- 
ination, who was tRe instrument used to start this reform, 
brought to the attention of the Church the fact that the 
Bible reveals something of the time, as well as the order, 
of God’s plan. He saw periods recorded by the prophets, 
accompanied by the statement that at the due time the truly 
wise should understand them, and he sought to be of the 
class described. He searched, and found some things of 
greatinterest, long lost sight of under the traditions of Rome, 
among others that the second coming of our Lord was for 
the bestowment of God’s blessing of 4/e, to believers, as the 
first coming was for the purchase of the world; in fact, that 
ransom and recovery are two parts of the one redemptive plan. 
For an honest, earnest heart to realize such good news 
could mean no less than to proclaim it; and this he did. 
The uncovering of this truth led to the rejection of certain 
errors, and hence he did a cleansing work in all who came 
under its influence. For instance, since our Lord’s second 
coming is to ‘set up’’ his Kingdom and to exalt his Church, 
jt is evident that the claims of churches associated with 


116 Thy Kingdom Come. 


earthly kingdoms (which severally claim to be the kingdoms 
of God, and that they therefore are now authorized to reign 
and rule over the world) must be mere assumptions; for, if 
the Kingdom of Christ has not yet been ‘‘set up,’’ these 
now ‘‘set up’’ must have been so exalted ‘‘by the prince 
of this world ’’ (Satan), and must be working largely in his 
interest, however ignorant of the fact their rulers may be. 
Another error, to the removal of which Mr. Miller’s 
preaching /ez, was the natural immortality of man. The 
idea had long obtained that man is inherently an immortal 
being; that is, that once created he can never die, and 
and that death is merely a deceptive illusion ; that man on- 
ly appears to die, and does not really do so, but merely 
changes form and takes another step in ‘‘evolution.”” Mr. 
Miller believed like others on this subject ; yet the truths 
to which he called attention, particularly the doctrines of 
the Lord’s coming and the resurredtion of the dead, first 
pointedly exposed this baneful error—which denies the 
resurrection by teaching that none are dead, and hence 
that the Lord’s second coming and a resurrection of the 
dead are not necessary. But the critical examination of 
this subject we leave for a future volume of this work, in 
which it will be shown that immortality and everlasting life 
are favors, obtainable only through Christ, and neither 
promised nor to be granted to the wicked. Based upon and 
growing out of the idea of human immortality, is the Rom- 
ish dodtrine of purgatory, and the still more awful Protestant 
doétrine of e/erna/ misery in a place of unending tortures ; 
for they reason, If man mus# live forever (and if smmortal, 
even God could not destroy him), he must live in either 
everlasting happiness or everlasting misery. And since, say 
they, he is at death remanded to his everlasting condition, 
the vast majority must then begin an eternity of torture, - 
because in the few years of the present life they either failed 


Cleansing the Sandluary. — 117 


to get a knowledge of the right way, or, obtaining the 
knowledge, they were, through inherited weaknesses, etc., 
unable to walk in it. 

This great root of many blasting errors began to be torn 
up and cast out by the preaching of the second coming of 
Christ and the resurrection declared to be then due. In-. 
telligent and thinking people began to wonder why the 
Lord would resurreét the dead, if they were in either heaven 
or hell, and their portion forever unalterably fixed. Then 
they began to wonder why the dead were called dead, if 
really alive. Then they wondered why our Lord and the 
apostles said nothing about the dead being still alive, but 
on the contrary always pointed to a resurrection as the only 
hope; even declaring that if there be no resurredtion all 
have ‘‘perished.”’ (1 Cor. 15:13-18.) Then our Lord’s 
words, promising an awakening to ‘‘all that are in their 
graves,’’ began to have a meaning; and it gradually came 
to be seen that the dead are not alive, but that death signifies 
the opposite of life. And those who sought found that the 
Scriptures are in perfect harmony with themselves on this 
subject, but in direct opposition to the common traditions 
of to-day, received from Papacy. 

The root of error being thus removed, the various branches 
soon began to wither ; and soon it was seen that instead of 
everlasting life (in misery) being the punishment of the 
wicked, the reverse is the Bible statement of God’s plan ;— 
that everlasting life is the reward for righteousness, and that 
death, a cutting off from life, is the punishment for wilful 
sinners. a 

Then came to be seen what was meant by the curse of 
death which came upon all the race through Adam’s disobe- 
dience—that the whole race was condemned to extinction. 
Then, too, the vail began to lift, showing the object and 
value of our Redeemer’s death, as the payment of the pen- 


118 Thy Kingdom Come. 


alty upon the race, in order that there might be a resurrec- 
tion, a restoring to life and its rights. Ah! then the mean- 
ing of ransom began to be appreciated, as it was seen that 
he who knew no sin was treated as the accursed ; that, being 
willingly substituted in our stead, he was made a curse for 
us, treated as a sinner for us, and ded, the just for the unjust. 

Thus, finally, the great system and network of defiling 
error, which began with the taking away of the continual 
sacrifice, was removed ; and, the Sanctuary being relieved 
or cleansed of it, the value of the ‘‘continual sacrifice’ of 
Jesus was seen in renewed freshness and beauty and power. 

When we say that the Sanétuary was cleansed of this de- 
filement, we must remember that in Scripture a part of the 
Church not infrequently stands for the whole. A company, 
a few, had been relieved from the defiling error; and to 
these few, God has been adding daily of those who are fully 
under his leading and taught of him. 

In his calculation of what would occur, Mr. Miller was 
far from correét—supposing that the cleansing of the Sanct- 
uary meant a cleansing of the earth from evil, by literal 
fire in which the earth would be burned up. The failure 
of his predictions, which ensued, was a sore trial to those 
who under his teachings had learned to expect the Lord 
from heaven and the fulfilment of the prayer, ‘‘ Thy king- 
dom come.’’ But, though disappointed by the Bridegroom’s 
tarrying, they were greatly blest. Their experience in 
searching the Scripture was valuable, and they had learned 
to place the Word of God above the traditions of men. 
They had measurably gotten free from servility to the honor 
and respect of men in the various denominations from 
- which they had been cut loose, for they had been separated 
from their company by reason of obedience to their con- 
victions relative to the subject of the Lord’s coming. Hon- 
esty to conviction always brings some blessing: even as 


Cleansing the Sandluary. 11g 


Paul going to Damascus, we meet the Lord in the way. 

Consequently, we find that among these were some who 
took a more advanced stand in the cleansing or reformation 
work than any who preceded them. Thus A. D. 1846, the 
‘end of the 2300 days, as above shown, found an unorgan- 
ized nucleus of Christians who not only agreed with the 
‘Disciples’? regarding simplicity of church government, 
the discarding of all creeds but the Bible, and the abolition 
of all titles by its ministers, but with the ‘“ Baptists ’’ rela- 
tive to the outward form of baptism, and with Luther in 
regarding the Papal aystem as the Man of Sin, and the de- 
generate church the mother of harlots and abominations. 
These, standing aloof from any compromise or affinity with 
the world, taught vital piety, simple trust in the omni- 
potent God, and faith in his unchangeable decrees; and, in 
addition, while recognizing Christ as Lord of all, and now 
partaker of the divine nature, they were able to refute and 
disprove the senseless doctrine of the trinity as being with- 
out Scriptural support.* And in addition to all these reforms 
was the rejection of the doctrine of human immortality. 

And, as though God-would arrange that thereafter there 
should always be a class representing his Sanctuary cleansed, 
kept separate from the various sects, this very year 1846 
witnessed the organization of Protestant sects into one great 
system, called Zhe Evangelical Alliance. This organization, 
mindful of the new views (of the cleansed Sanctuary), clearly 
defined its faith in human immortality, adding it as the 
Ninth Article of its creed. Thus it separated, and has since 
kept separate, from other Christians, a company of God’s 
children—the Lord’s cleansed Sanctuary—a sanctuary of 

* The only seeming Scriptural authority for the doctrine of a divine 
trinity is a part of 1 John 5:7, 8, which is an interpolation, and now 
so acknowledged by all scholurs. The Revised Version omits the 
spurious portion. 


120 Thy Kingdom Come. 


truth. And to this cleansed Sanétuary class other meek 
and faithful children of God have been added daily ever 
since; while from it have been eliminated such as lose the 
spirit of meekness and love of the truth. To maintain 
their standing as the cleansed Sanctuary, against organized 
opposition and great numbers, becomes a sevefe test of 
courage and faith, which only @ few seem able to endure: 
the majority follow the course of their predecessors, and 
endeavor to make themselves respectable in the eyes of the 
world. Becoming somewhat numerous, and seeking less 
odium, some of these organized another system, formulated 
a creed, and adopted another sectarian name, calling them- 
selves Second Adventists. And, settling down to the belief 
that what they had learned was all that cauld be learned, 
they have not made progress since; and, in common with 
others who failed to follow on in the path that shineth 
more and more unto the perfect day, many of them have 
fallen into foolish errors. 

But though many of those who at first represented the 
cleansed Sanctuary thus became again entangled with the 
yoke of bondage, those who still kept free and followed on 
to know the Lord still represented his cleansed Sanctuary, 
and have since been owned and greatly blessed by his leading. 

Tf the rubbish and defiling abominations were entirely 
removed in 1846, the time since should be a season for the 
setting in order of the things which remain, and for the un- 
folding and developing of God’s glorious plan—which truths 
should re-occupy the places vacated by the errors removed. 

This work of opening up the truth, and examining and 
appreciating its beauty, is properly due now, and is being ac- 
complished. We thank God for the privilege of being en- 
gaged with others in this blessed work of bringing the 
golden vessels of the Lord’s house (precious truths) back 
from the captivity of (symbolic) Babylon the Great (Ezra 
1:7-11; 5:14; 6:5), and replacing them in the San@tuary. 
And in this great work we offer fraternal greetings to all 
co-laborers and members of the Anointed Body. Blessed 
those servants whom their Lord, when he Aas come, shall 
find giving meat in due season to the household. 


CHAPTER V. 
THE TIME OF HARVEST. 


Tue Curonococicat Location or THE Harvest.— Irs Osyect AND GREAT 
IMPORTANCE.— THE Focus oF Time PropHecizs.— PREPARATIONS FOR THE 
Harvest.— SIGNIFICANCE OF THE CONVERGENCE OF PRopHETIC TESTIMONY. 
Tue Lorp’s Presence.— REASONABLE OnjECTIONS ANSWERED.— ENTERING 
THE Joys or Our Lorn. 


“The Harvest is the end of the age.’’—-Matt. 13 : 39. 

HE careful student will have observed that the period 
designated ‘‘ The Time of the End’”’ is very appropri- 
ately named, since not only does the Gospel age close in it, 
but in it, also, all prophecies relating to the close of this age 
terminate, reaching their fulfilments. The same class of 
readers will have noticed, too, the special importance of 
the last 4o of those 115 years (1874-1914), called ‘‘ The 


End”? or ‘‘ Harvest.’’ 
This brief period is the most momentuous and eventful 


period of the entire age; for in it all the fruitage of the 
age must be gathered and disposed of, and the field, which 
is the world (Matt. 13:38), must be cleared, plowed and 
prepared for another. sowing and reaping time—the Millen- 
nial age. The importance of the events of this harvest 
period can scarcely be overestimated; and yet the world 
will not be aware of it, until its potent though unrecog- 
nized agencies have accomplished their appointed work. 
Indeed, it is well to remember that this is not a harvesting 


of the whole world, but of the Christian Church ; and it 
121 


122 Thy Kingdom Come. 


affects not Mohammedans, Brahmins, Buddhists, etc., but 
only the true Church of Christ, and such as are more or 
less associated with it—‘‘ Christendom.”’ 

But while the world during the entire period will be in 
total ignorance of its character, yet in dread and fear of 
the outcome of its strange events (Isa. 28:21), the Lord’s 
little flock of consecrated followers, now living, enjoy 
greater enlightenment than was ever the privilege of any of 
their forerunners ; for in this period all the rays of prophetic 
testimony reach a grand focus, illuminating to the eye of 
faith the plan of God, including its developments, past 
present and future. , 

Since the beginning (1799) of the Time of the End, 
God has been preparing his consecrated ‘holy people,”’ 
his ‘‘Sanctuary,’’ for the great blessings he intended to pour 
upon them during these forty years of harvest: which bless- 
ings are also intended as special preparation for their enter- 
ing with Christ into full joy and joint-heirship with him, as 
his bride. At the exact ‘‘ time appointed,’’ 1799, the end 
of the 1260 days, the power of the Man of Sin, the great 
oppressor of the Church, was broken, and his dominion 
taken away. With one stroke of his mighty hand, God there 
struck off Zion’s fetters, and bade the oppressed go free. 
And forth came, and are coming, the ‘‘ Sanctuary ’’ class, the 
‘“tholy people,’’ weak, and halt, and lame, and almost naked, 
and blind, from the dungeon darkness and filth and misery 
of papal bondage. Poor souls! they had been trying to 
serve God faithfully in the very midst of the lurid flames of 
persecution, clinging to the cross of Christ when almost 
every other truth had been swept away, and courageously 
endeavoring to emancipate God’s ‘‘ Two Witnesses ’’ (the 
Old and New Testaments), which had so long been bound, 
and which had prophesied only under the sackcloth of dead 
languages. —Rev. 11:3. 


The Time of Harvest. 123 


In his wisdom, God did not overpower them with the 
great flood of light now granted to the saints. Gently he led 
them on, step by step,cleansing them first from the papal pol- 
lutions which still clung to them. And as God thus drew 
them, the Sanctuary class followed on, recognizing the voice 
of the Good Shepherd in the accents of truth which exposed 
the old errors, until 1846, which prophecy marks as the date 
when a nucleus of the ‘‘holy people,’’ the ‘‘Sanétuary,”’ 
would become free from the errors of Papacy, cleansed of 

_defilements, and ready to replace the unclean theories of men 
with the clean and beautiful principles of truth, on which 
the Lord and the apostles had founded the Church. Grad- 
ually they were led to expect the great culmination of bless- 
ing when the Lord himself should come, in the harvest of 
the age. Their diligent study of God’s Word, and com- 
mendable desire to know what even the angels desired to 
look into (1 Pet. 1:12), were greatly blessed, though their 
desires were not fully granted. 

A faithful few were thus instructed in the Word of truth, 
filled with its spirit, purified and more fully separated from 
the world, purged of pride and, through the discipline of the 
disappointment of 1844, brought to more humble reliance. 
upon God; and the foretold tarrying of thirty years de- 
veloped in the holy ones patience, humility and loving sub- 
mission, until the watchers at the end of the ‘* 1335 days ”’ 
(1874, harvest time) received, and weresent forth toannounce 
to all the San¢tuary class, the glad ‘message, ‘‘ Behold the 
Bridegroom!’’ And all of this class who hear, when they rec- 
ognize its import, lift up their voices also, saying, ‘‘ Behold 
the Bridegroom !’’ And this harvest message to the saints 
continues to go forth, and will do so, until it has reached 
all the consecrated and faithful. This intelligence is not for 
the world now, but only for the prospective bride of Christ. 
Our Lord is not the Bridegroom to any other class. The 


124 , ; Thy Kingdom Come. 


knowledge of his presence will come to the world in another 
way, and at a later time. None are now prepared to receive 
this truth, except the consecrated, the Sanétuary class. To 
the ‘host ’? of nominal Christians, as well as to the world, 
it is foolishness ; nor will they be disposed to test the proofs 
set forth in the volumes of this series. 

Not only thus has the Lord prepared the hearts of his 
people and led them by ways which they knew not, but for 
this special time of need he has furnished wonderful helps 
to Bible study, such as concordances, and varied and valu- 
able translations of the Scriptures, as well as wonderful fa- 
cilities for printing, publishing and mailing the truth ; and 
the advantages of general education, so that all can read 
and study for themselves, and prove to.their own satisfac- 
tion all the doctrines advanced ; and these under conditions 
of peace, so that none can molest them-or make them afraid 
to exercise full liberty of conscience in so doing. 

After a careful perusal of the foregoing chapters of this 
and the preceding volume, the thoughtful reader will ob- 
serve that while each of the time prophecies accomplishes 
a separate and distinct purpose, the central object of their 
united and harmonious testimony has been to mark, with. 
definiteness and precision, by either direét or indire¢t evi- 
dence, or corroborative testimony, the date of our Lord’s 
second advent, and of the establishment of his Kingdom in 
the earth; and also to mark the various stages and means 
of its establishment, daring the harvest period. 

In order that we may realize the force of these various 
lines of prophecy in their bearing on these central truths, 
let us draw them to a focus, and note how these rays of 
testimony unitedly and harmoniously blend, clearly reveal- 
ing the blessed fact, not that the Lord is coming, nor that 
he will soon come, but that he has come; that he is now 
present, a spiritual king, establishing a spiritual empire, in 


The Time of Harvest. 125 


the harvest or end of the Gospel age, which laps upon 

the now dawning Millennial age. We have seen that there 

are to come ‘‘ Times of Restitution of all things ’’—**Times 

of Refreshing ’’ (Acts 3:19); we have seen also that the 

Lord Jehovah ‘‘hath appointed a day [the Millennial age] in 

the which he will judge the world in righteousness by that 

man whom he hath ordained, whereof he hath given assus- 

ance unto all men, in that he hath raised him from the dead’”’ 

(Acts 17:31); we have seen that the Gospel age has been 
the trial time or judgment day of the Church, and that it 

ends with a harvesting, and the glorification of those who are 
te live and reign with Christ a thousand years—during the 
world’s judgment day, the Times of Restitution ; and we 
have'also seen that the kingdoms of this world, under the 
prince of this world, Satan, must give place to the King- 
dom of God, under the King of glory. All of these great 
events must tarry until the second advent of our Lord, the 
King, Bridegroom and Reaper, whose presence and work 
are to accomplish them, as foretold. 

The typical Jubilee cycles pointed out a. D. 1874 as the , 
date of our Lord’s return ; and yet the date was therein so 
ingeniously hidden, as to make its discovery impossible un- 
til the «Time of the End.’’ And this testimony was made 
doubly strong by proofs from two standpoints—the Law 
and the Prophets—the two being entirely independent of 
each other, and yet equally clear and convincing 

The wonderful parallelism of the Jewish and Gospel dis- 
pensations taught us the same truth with additional features. 
The second advent of our Lord in the end or harvest of the 
Gospel age, occurring in the fall of 1874, proves to be at a 
point of time exactly parallel to the time of his first advent, 
in the end of the Jewish age. (See Table of Correspond- 
encies, VOL. 11., pages 246 and 247.) As every prominent 
feature of the Gospel dispensation is marked by a corre- 


126 Thy Kingdom Come. 


sponding parallel in that typical dispensation, so we find 
that this most noteworthy event taught by the jubilee has 
its corresponding parallel. Our Lord’s presence as Bride- 
groom, Reaper and King is shown in both dispensations. 
Even the movement on the part of the virgins going forth 
to meet him, their disappointment and the tarrying time 
of thirty years find their parallel both in time and cir- 
cumstances. And the parallelism continues to the full end 
of the harvest of this dispensation—until the overthrow of 
the professedly Christian kingdoms, really ‘‘kingdoms of 
this world,’’ and the full establishment of the Kingdom of 
God in the earth at a. D. 1914, the terminus of the Times 
of the Gentiles. (See Vol. 11., chap. iv.) This coming 
trouble and overthrow, we have seen, had its parallel in the 
destruction of Jerusalem and the complete overthrow of the 
Jewish polity, a. D. 7o—another parallel, corresponding in 
both time.and circumstances. 

Again, we have found the second adveni of our Lord in- 
dicated by the prophet Daniel (12:1), yet in such a man- 
ner as to be under cover until the events foretold to pre- 
cede it had transpired aud passed into history, when we were 
led to see that the one vailed under the name Michael is 
indeed that which the name indicates— God's representative 
—‘*The Great Prince.’’ Yes, we recognize him: ‘‘ The 
Prince of the Covenant,’’ the ‘‘ Mighty God [ruler],’’ the 
‘« Everlasting Father [life-giver]’’ (Dan. 11:22; Isa. 9:6), 
who is to ‘‘ stand up’’ with power and authority, to accom- 
plish the great restitution of all things, and to offer ever- 
lasting life to the dead and dying millions of mankind, re- 
deemed by his own precious blood. And, having traced 
the 1335 days of Dan. xii., down to their ending at this 
same date, we can now understand why the angel who thus 
pointed out the date referred to it in such exultant terms— 
‘* Oh, the blessedness of him that waiteth [who is in a wait- 


The Time of Harvest. 127 


ing or watching attitude] and cometh to the thousand, three 
hundred, five and thirty days! ’’—a. D. 1874.* And in 
our reckoning of the symbolic times here given, let it not 
be overlooked that we used the key furnished us by the 
manner in which the first advent was indicated—a symbolic 
day representing a literal year. Thus we found the time of 
our Lord’s second advent clearly proven to be 1874—in 
Oétober of that year, as shown in Vol. 11., chap. vi. 

But this is not all. Certain reasonable obstacles to faith 
in Christ’s presence might yet appear to the minds of even 
careful students, and we wish to see these all removed. For 
instance, it might reasonably be inquired, How is it that 
the exact Bible Chronology points to October 1872 as the 
beginning of the seventh thousand years, or Millennium, 
while the Jubilee Cycles show October 1874 to be the date 
of our Lord’s return and the beginning of restitution times? 

This apparent inharmony of the date of the second ad- 
vent with the beginning of the seventh thousand years 
seemed at first sight to indicate ‘‘a screw loose ’’’ somewhere 
in the chronological reckoning, and led to careful re-exam- 
ination of the subject, but always with the same result. 
Closer thought, however, proves that God is an exact time- 
keeper, and that this point is no exception to his mathe- 
matical precision. It will be remembered that the reckon- 
ing of chronology began with the creation of Adam, and 
that some time was spent by Adam and Eve before sin en- 
tered. Just how long we are not informed, but two years 
would not be an improbable estimate. Before the creation 
of Eve, Adam was permitted to live long enough to realize 
his lack of a companion (Gen. 2:20); he had become ac- 
quainted with and had named all the animals; he had be- 
come acquainted with the various trees and plants of Eden. 


* The year as reckoned by the Jews begins | in , Oober ; hence Oéto- 
ber 1874 was really the beginning of 1875. 


128 Thy Kingdom Come. 


Then followed the creation of Eve; and some time must 
have elapsed in the enjoyment of their delightful surround- 
ings, before the blight of sin entered. 

Recalling all these circumstances, we can scarcely im- 
agine that a shorter time than two years elapsed in that 
sinless condition ; and the interval between the close of the 
six thousand years and the beginning of the times of Res- 
titution leads to the inferer.ce that the interval between the 
creation of Adam and the entrance of sin, during which 
God’s Kingdom was in the world, represented in Adam, is 
not counted as part of the six days of evil. Thesix taonsand 
years in which God has permitted evil to dominate the 
world, prior to the beginning of the great seventh or sab- 
batic thousand, or ‘Times of Restitution, dates-from the en- 
trance of sin into the world. And since the Times of Res- 
titution began with O€tober 1874, that -must be the end of | 
the six thousand years reign of Sin ; and the difference be- 
tween that and the date shown in the chronology from 
Adam’s creation represents the period of sinlessness in Eden, 
which really belongs to the reign of righteousness. 

Again, what might at first thought have appeared a dis- 
crepancy—that the Lord would be present in the close of 
1874, and yet that Gentile Times would not end until 1914— 
is found, on the contrary, to be in fullest harmony with the 
unfoldings of God’s plan for the campaign of the Battle of 
the Great Day, and exaétly as foretold by Danicl (2:44), 
who declared, ‘‘ Jn fhe days of these kings, shall the God 
of heaven set np a Kingdom, and ?f shall break in pieces and 
consume all these.’’ It must, therefore, be just as we have 
found it: our Lord must be present, must test the living 
members of his Church, must exalt them, glorify them and 
associate them with himself in the power and authority to 
be exercised during the Millennium (Rev. 5:10; 2:6), 
and must put in motion those instrumentalities and agencies 


The Time of Harvest. 129 


which (though unconscious of it themselves) will carry out 
his orders—thus doing their share in the ‘‘ battle of the 
great day of God Almighty’’—undermining and finally 
overthrowing all the present ‘‘ Christian Nations,’’ so- 
_ called. The ‘‘ kingdoms of this world,’’ even while being 
crushed by the Kingdom of God, will be quite ignorant of 
the reat cause of their downfall,—until, in the close of this 
‘¢ day of wrath,’’ the eyes of their understanding shall open, 
so that they will. see that a new dispensation has dawned, 
and learn that Immanuel has /aken to himself his great 
power, and has begun his glorious and righteous reign. 
While the time-prophecies thus point to and harmonize 
with 1874 as the date of our Lord’s second presence, assur- 
ing us of the faét with mathematical precision, we find our- 
selves overwhelmed with evidence of another character ; for 
certain peculiar signs, foretold by the Lord and the apos- 
tles and prophets, which were to precede his coming, are 
now clearly recognized as actually fulfilled. We see that 
the promised Elias has indeed come; that his teachings 
have been rejected, just as predicted ; and that therefore. 
the great time of trouble must follow. The predi¢ted Man 
of Sin, the Antichrist, has also made his appearance, and 
accomplished his long and terrible reign ; and at the exact 
‘time appointed’’ (1799) his dominion was taken away. 
The cleansing of the sanctuary was also accomplished as pre- 
dicted, and at a time sufficiently in advance of 1874 to make 
ready ‘‘ a people prepared for the Lord’’—a people in de- 
vout expectancy of his coming—just as a similar work prior 
to the first advent made ready a people to receive him then. 
We find that the date 1874 is also in harmony with the 
prophecy of Daniel (12:1), which fixes the advent of 
‘«Michael’’ in the ‘ Time of the End’’—that is, some- 
where between 1799 and 1914—and as the cause and pre- 
cursor of the great time of trouble. When seventy-five 
ge 


130 Thy Kingdom Come. 


years of this ‘‘ Day of Preparation’’ had developed the 
proper conditions for the beginning of his great work, then 
the Master stepped upon the scene—quietly, ‘‘ without out- 
ward show ’’—‘‘in like manner’’ as he went away. And the 
remaining forty years of this ‘‘ Day of Preparation,’’ sixteen 
of which are already in the past, will accomplish the setting 
up or establishment of his Kingdom in power and great glory. 

The focus of time-prophecy upon the harvest and matters 
connected with the Lord’s presence and the establishment of 
the Kingdom, will be impressed upon the mind by a careful 
study of the accompanying diagrams, one of which shows 
the parallels or correspondencies between the Gospel age 
and its type, the Jewish age, and how the various promi- 
nent features in this harvest are marked by the great pro- 
phecies, while the other concisely shows the history of the 
world as related to that of God’s typical and real churches 
(Jewish and Gospel), and points out the prophetic measures 
relating to them. 

‘Thus all the rays of prophecy converge upon this. ‘‘ Time 
of the End,’’ the focal point of which is the ‘‘Harvest ’?— 
the time of our Lord’s presence and the establishment of 
his long promised Kingdom. And when we consider the 
great importance of these events, the stupendous dispensa- 
tional changes which they introduce, and the amount and 
character of the prophetic testimony which marks them ; 
and when we see how carefully we have been instructed as 
to the manner of his manifestation, so that no stumbling- 
block to our faith should stand in the way of our recogni- 
tion of his presence, our hearts rejoice with joy unspeaka- 
ble. Fully tenfold greater testimony is now given to the 
fat of his second presence than was granted to the early 
disciples at the first advent, though that was quite sufficient 
then for tbe ‘Israelite indeed,’’ who waited for the con- 
solation of Israel, 


/ 
BABYLON. 
LION, 
. \) 
SN SY 
ISRAEL'S 


. 
\ 
‘ 
‘ 
‘ 


TYPICAL KINGDOM ENDS. 
~ BAUR. 315 25-27. 


ISRAEL'S LAST 
TYPICAL JUBILEE. 


EZ LL 


Deedes 


mein troran LEWD) 
VANE, mona), eV 
NX 


BABYLON: 
GREAT PAPACY. 


FLESHLY ISRAEL 


NX DOWN OF THE GENTILES 
70 WEEKS.—DAN. 9:24. 


2300 DAYS.—DAN. 8: 14. 


2499 YEARS TO ANTITYPICAL JUBILEE, 1874 


6000 YEARS FROM CREATION, ENDED 1873 A. D. 


THE SCROLL OF CHURCH HISTORY 
aS RELATED TO 
NATIONAL HISTORY AND PROPHECY. 


MOTHER AND DAUGHTERS = 


SO-CALLED 
CHRISTIAN KINODOMS., 


ONE CHURCH 


OR 


aH SANCTUARY. 


MILLENNIAL 
KINGDOM 


BOTH THE HOUSES OF ISRAEL.” 


CHRISTIAN FAVOR, WAITING FOR THE KINGDOM CHRISTIAN HARVEST ~ 


DURING JEWISH “‘ DOUBLE ’’—1845 + 334 YEARS. ae \ 334 +334 + 33-40 YEARS. 


; 2 
PERIOD OF CHRISTIAN FAVOR AND HIGH CALLING i ao. 8 3 b Es 
TO BELIEVERS, DATING FROM MESSIAH’S zg % fe | 3 s[faZ 4 g 
8 mo =| 2 
DEATH TO THE REJECTION AND a 3 § A°oels|a a Z z= a 
FALL OF BABYLON. Ro z i a *2 28 < 
| A 5 
4 = : 
Lal a “ 
3 g <3 
i A 
m 7 9 
x bg <2 
Z ae 
| ‘a0OVE HOUVIYLYd FHL 4 Bod th Z 
Sy a vb NO 8 9° 
40 HLVAd FHL NOWd ONILVG 5 7 elS,. 3] BRaZE 
< AS] a 
“TaVUSI GUNVNUNS ‘AOOVE dO NAY TINO 2 g}Aa° 3 elas z & 
< 
AHL dO FONALSIXE IVNOILYN AHL dO Golaad e2 & Saas & 


4ESM HLL 


“SuUVAA HE + Shgr ‘SUVEA OF me EE + HE + KE 


WOGONIN FHL YOd ONLLIVM ‘AOAVE HSIMGL  - ISHAMVH HSI 


The Time of Harvest. 133 


For nearly two thousand years, the suffering, persecuted, 
self-sacrificing, consecrated ones have anxiously waited for 
the Master’s coming. Faithful Pauls, ardent Peters, loving 
Johns, devoted Stephens, gentle Marys and tender and 
generous Marthas, a long line of brave confessors of the truth 
at the risk of torture and death, and suffering martyrs, and 
some of the faithful fathers and mothers and brothers and 
sisters in Israel who humbly walked with God in less stormy. 
times, neither ashamed nor afraid to confess Christ and to 
bear his reproach, nor to be the companions of those who 
were reproached for his truth’s sake (Heb. 10:33)—these, 
after fighting the good fight of faith, laid down their armor 
to await their promised reward at the Master’s appearing. — 
2 Tim. 4:8. 

And now he has come! The Lord is indeed present ! 
And the time is at hand for the setting up of his Kingdom, 
and the exaltation and glorification of his faithful bride. 
The days of waiting for his presence are now in the past, 
and the blessedness of the waiting ones, long foretold, is 
ours. To the eye of faith he is now revealed by the pro- 
phetic lamp (2 Pet.1:19) ; and, ere the harvest is fully ended, 
faith, and the present joys of faith, will give place to the 
rapturous jovs of the full fruition of our hopes, when thase 
counted worthy will all have been made like him, and will 
see him as He ts, face to face. 

Asshown in the parable illustrating it (Matt. 25:1 4-30), the 
Jirst thing done by the Lord on his return is to call his serv- 
ants and reckon with them. In reckoning with the servants 
who had made faithful use of their talents, seeking to know 
and to do his will, the parable shows that each one, as soon 
as examined, tested, is caused to ‘‘ enter into the joys of his 
Lord,”’ before he receives the dominion promised. Now 
we see that parable fulfilling, and that before our share in 
the reign begins. Even before the enemies are conquered, 


134 Thy Kingdom Come. 


each faithful one is permitted to get a clear view of the 
coming Kingdom and glory and of the great work of the 
dawning Millennial day; and this view of the great resti- 
tution shortly to be accomplished for all mankind, through 
the instrumentality of Christ and his glorified Church, is the 
joy of the Lord in which they are permitted to participate. 
While we thusstand, asit were on Pisgah’s heights,and view 
the grand prospect just before us, our hearts rejoice in the 
Lord’s great plan, with an unspeakable joy ; and though we 
realize that the Church is still in the wilderness of her humil- 
jation, and that the hour of her actual triumph has not yet 
fully come, yet, seeing the indications of its rapid approach, 
and by faith already discerning the Bridegroom’s presence, 
we lift up our heads and rejoice, knowing that our redemp- 
tion draweth nigh. Oh, what fulness of blessing and cause 
for joy and thanksgiving this truth contains! Truly, the 
Lord hath put a new song into our mouths. It is the grand 
anthem, the first note of which was sung by the angelic 
choir, at the birth of the infant Jesus—‘ Behold, I bring 
you good tidings, of GREAT Joy, which shall be unto @// peo- 
ple.’ Thank God, its harmonious strains will ere long fill 
heaven and earth with eternal melody, as the blessed work 
of salvation—restitution—which he comes to accomplish 

progresses toward its glorious culmination. 

“ Joy to the world! the Lord is come! 
Let earth receive her King! 


Let every heart prepare him room, 
And heaven and nature sing. 


“ He'll rule the world with truth and grace, 
And make the nations prove 
The strictness of his righteousness, 
And wonders of his love.”” 


CHAPTER. VI. 


THE WORK OF HARVEST. 


CHARACTER OF THE Harvest Work.—GATHERING THE WHEAT.—BUNDLING AND 
BINDING AND BuxNiInG THE TARES.—THEIR ORIGIN AND PROLIFIC GROWTH.— 
Consumep Like THE CHAFF OF THE JEWISH HarRvest.— TIME CORRESPONDEN- 
criss Notep.—THe Castine orr, GRADUAL Fact AND Fina DgstRUucTION OF 
BABYLON.—THE SEALING OF THE SERVANTS OF Gop BRFORE THE PLAGUES 
Comg upon BaByYLon.—JUDGMENT OR TRIAL, BotH as SYSTEMS AND INDIvID- 
UALLY.—THE Test oF THR JewisH System TypicaL.— THE TESTING AND 
SrrTiInG oF THE WHEAT.—THE Wisk, SEPARATED FROM THE FOooLisH VIRGINS, 
Gorn TO THE Feast.—‘Anp THE Door was SHut.’’—A FurTHER INSPECTION, 
AND THE CASTING Out oF Somer.—Wuy? anp How?—THE CLOSE OF THE 
“HicH Canuinc.””—THe Time 1s SHort.—‘ Let no Man Taxes Tuy 
Crown "—EveventH Hour SERVANTS AND OVERCOMERS. 


“TTARVEST ” is a term which gives a general idea as 
to what work should be expected to transpire between 
the dates 1874 and 1914. It is a time of reaping rather 
than of sowing, a time of testing, of reckoning, of settle- 
ment and of rewarding. The harvest of the Jewish age be- 
ing a type of the harvest of this age, observation and _com- 
parison of the various features of that harvest afford very 
clear ideas concerning the work to be accomplished in the 
present harvest. .In that harvest, our Lord’s special teach- 
ings were such as to gather the wheat, who were such already, 
and to separate the chaff of the Jewish nation from the 
wheat. And his doctrines became also the seeds for the 
new dispensation, which opened (shortly after the nation of 
Israel was cast off) at Pentecost. 
Our Lord’s words to his disciples as he sent them forth, 
135 


136 Thy Kingdom Come. 


during his ministry to that church-nation, should be care- 
- fully remembered, as giving proof that their special work 
then was reaping, and not sowing. He said to them, “Lift 
up your eyes and look on the fields; for they are white 
already to harvest: and he that reapeth receiveth wages, 
and gathereth fruit unto life eternal.’’. (John 4:35, 36.) As 
the chief reaper in that harvest (as he also is in this one), 
the Lord said to the under-reapers, ‘‘I sent you to reap 
that whereon ye bestowed no labor: other men [the patri- 
archs and prophets and other holy men of old] labored, and 
ye are entered. into their labors’’—to reap the fruits of those 
centuries of effort, and to test that people by the message, 
‘‘The Kingdom of heaven is at hand,’’ and the King is 
present—‘‘ Behold, thy King cometh unto thee.’’ —Matt. 
10:7; John 12:15; Zech. 9:9. 

In the Jewish harvest, the Lord, rather than to make goats 
into sheep, sought the blinded and scattered sheep of Israel, 
calling for all who already were his sheep, that they might 
hear his voice and follow him. These observations of the 
type furnish an intimation of the character of the work due 
in the present harvest or reaping time. Another and a 
larger sowing, under the more favorable conditions of the 
Millennial age and Kingdom, will soon be commenced: in- 
deed, the seeds of truth concerning restitution, etc., which 
will produce that coming crop, are even now being dropped 
here and there into longing, truth-hungry hearts. But this 
is only an incidental work now; for, like-its Jewish type, 
the present harvest is a time for reaping the professed 
church (so-called Christendom), that the true saints gathered 
out of it may be exalted and associated with their Lord, 
not only to preach the truth, but also to put into operation 
the great work of restitution for the world. 

In this harvest, wheat and tares are to be separated ; yet 
both of these classes, previous to the separation, compose 


The Work of Harvest. 137 


the nominal church. ‘lhe wheat are the true children of 
the Kingdom, the truly consecrated, the heirs, while the 
tares are nominally, but not really, Christ’s Church or pros- 
pective bride. The tares are the class mentioned by our 
Lord, who call him Lord, but who do not obey him. (Luke 
6:46.) In outward appearance, the two classes are often so 
much alike as to require close scrutiny to distinguish be- 
tween them. ‘The field is the world,’”’ in the parable, and 
the wheat and tares together (the tares more numerous) 
constitute what is sometimes called ‘‘ The Christian World,”’ 
and ‘‘ Christendom.’’ By attending religious services occa- 
sionally or regularly, by calling themselves Christians, by 
following certain rites and ceremonies, and by being iden- 
tified more or less directly with some religious system, the 
tares look like, and sometimes pass for, God’s heart-con- 
secrated children. In so-called ‘‘ Christian lands,’’ all ex- 
cept professed Infidels and Jews are thus counted Christians ; 
and their numbers (including the few fully consecrated ones 
—the saints) are estimated at about one hundred and eighty 
millions of Greek and Roman Catholics, and about one 
hundred and twenty millions of Protestants. : 
During the Gospel age, our Lord’s instructions have been 
not to attempt a separation of the true from the imitation 
children of the Kingdom; because to accomplish a complete 
separation would occasion the general turning of the world 
(the field) upside down—a general unsettlement of the 
wheat, as well as of the tares. He therefore said, ‘‘ Let both 
grow together until the harvest.’’ But he added, ‘ In the 
time of harvest I will say unto the reapers [angels, messen- 
gers], Gather ye together first the tares and bind them in 
bundles to burn them, but gather the wheat into my barn.”’ 
(Matt. 13:30.) Hence, in the time of harvest we must ex- 
pect a general separating work, hitherto prohibited. While 
those syrabolized by the wheat are ever encouraged to stand 


138 Thy Kingdom Come. 


fast in the liberty wherewith Christ made them free, and to 
avoid entangling alliances with open transgressors and with 
wolves in sheep’s clothing, yet they were not to attempt to 
draw the line between the fud/y consecrated class (the wheat, 
the saints), and the tares who frofess Christ’s name and doc- 
trines, and who to some extent allow these do¢trines to in- 
fluence their outward conduct, but whose heart desires are 
far from the Lord and his service. This judging of hearts, 
motives, etc., which is beyond our power, and which the 
Lord commanded us to entirely avoid, is the very thing 
which the various sects have all along endeavored to accom- 
plish ;—-attemipting to separate, to test the wheat, and to 
keep out as tares or heretics, by rigorous creeds of human 
manufa¢ture, all professors of Christianity whose faith did 
not exactly fit their various false measurements. Yet how 
unsuccessful all these sects have been! They have set up’ 
false, unscriptural standards and do¢trines, which have re- 

ally developed many tares and choked and separated the — 
wheat ; for instance, the doctrine of the everlasting torment 
of atl not members of the Church. Though now becoming 
greatly modified, under the increasing light of our day, what 
a multitude of tares this error has produced, and how it has 
choked and blindedsand hindered the wheat from a proper 
recognition of God's character and plan. To-day we see 
what a mistake the various sects have made in not follow- 
ing the Lord’s counsel, to let wheat and tares, saints and 
professors, grow together, without attempting a separation. 
Honest men in every sect will admit that in their sets are 
many tares, professors not saints, and that outside their 
sectarian bars are many saints. Thus, no se¢t to-day either 
can or does claim to be a// wheat, and free from tares. 
Much less would any earthly organization (except Christa- 
delphians and Mormons) be bold enough to claim that it 
contained a// of the wheat. Hence, they are without any 


The Work of Harvest. 139 


excuse for tneir organizations, theological fences, etc. ‘They 
do not separate wheat from tares, nor can anything com- 
pletely and thoroughly accomplish this separation of hearts 
except the method which the Lord has ordained shall be 
put into execution in the time of harvest. ‘This shows the 
necessity for knowing when the time is at hand and the 
harvest work of separating is due to begin. And our Lord, 
true to his promise, has not left us in darkness, but is giving 
the information now due, to ail whose hearts are ready for 
it. ‘‘Ye, brethren, are not in darkness [nor asleep] that that 
day should overtake you as a thief.’’— 1 Thes. 5:4. 

The truth now due is the sickle in this harvest, just as a 
similar sickle was used in the Jewish harvest. The reapers, 
the angels* or messengers, now, are the Lord’s followers, 
just as a similar class were the reapers:in the Jewish harvest. 
And though others, throughout the age, were told not to 
attempt the separation of the wheat from the tares, yet those 
now ready, worthy and obedient will be shown the Lord’s 
plan and arrangement so clearly that they will recognize 
his voice in the time of harvest, saying, ‘Thrust in the 
sickle’’ of present truth, and ‘‘ gather my saints together 
unto me, those that have made a covenant with me by sac- 
rifice.’’ ‘* Zhey shall be mine, saith the Lord of hosts, in 
that day when I make up my jewels.’’—Psa. 50:5 ; Mal. 3:17. 

Not only is this the time for the gathering of the saints 
by the truth (into oneness with their Lord and each other, 

-and out of fellowship with mere professors, tares), but it is 
also a time for cleaning up the field by consuming the tares, 
stubble, weeds, etc., preparatory to the new sowing. In 
one sense the ‘‘ wheat’’ is, gathered out from among the 
tares—because of the greater abundance of tares—as when 
the Lord says, ‘‘ Come out of her, my people.’’ Yet, in 
another sense, the separation is properly represented by the 

* The word “ angel” signifies messenger. 


140 Thy. Kingdom Come. 


tares being gathered from the wheat. Really, the wheat 
has the place by right; it is a wheat-field, not a tare-field 
(the world of mankind being counted the ground out of 
which the wheat and also the tares grow or develop) ; so it 
is the tares that are out of place and need to be removed. 
The Lord started the wheat-field, and the wheat represents 
the children of the Kingdom. (Matt. 13:38.) And since 
the field or world is to be given to these, and already be- 
longs to them by promise, the parable shows that really it 
is the tares that are gathered out and burned, leaving the 
field, and all in it, to the wheat. The tares are returned to 
the ground (world) whence they came, and the first-frnits 
of the wheat are to be gathered into the garner, so that the 
earth may bring forth another crop. 

The wheat was not to be bundled: the grains were orig- 
inally planted separate and independent, to associate only 
as one kind, under similar conditions. But the parable de- 
_ Clares that one of the effects of the harvest will be to gather 
and bind the tares in bundles before the ‘burning ’’ or 
‘*time of trouble.’? And this work is in progress all around 
us. Never was there a time like it for Labor Unions, Cap- 
italistic Trusts and protective associations of every sort. 

The civilized world is the ‘‘ field’’ of the parable. In it, 
during the Reformation, the winds of doctrinal strife, from 
one quarter and another, threw wheat and tares together in- 
to great batches (denominations), inclining some in one 
direction (dodtrinally), andsome in another. This huddled 
wheat and tares closely together, and took away much of 
the individuality of all. The doctrinal storms are long past, 
but the d#v'stons continue from force of habit, and only here 
and there has a head of wheat attempted to lift itself to up- 
rightness from the weight of the mass. 

But with the harvest time comes the release of the wheat 
from the weight and hindrance of the tares. The sickle of 


The Work of Harvest. 141 


truth prepares this class for the freedom wherewith Christ 
‘originally made all free, though the same sickle has an 
opposite influence upon the tares. ‘The spirit of the tares 
is toward sectarian greatness and show, rather than toward 
individual obedience and allegiance to God. Hence, pres- 
ent truths, the tendency of which they at once discover to 
be to condemn all sectarianism, and to test each individual, 
they reject and strongly oppose. And, though disposed to 
unite with each other, all the sects unite in opposing the 
disintegrating tendencies of present truth, to such an extent 
as to draw the cords slowly, cautiously, yet tightly upon all 
individual thought and study on religious subjects, lest their 
organizations should fall to pieces and, all the wheat escap- 
ing, leave nothing but tares. 

Each of the tare class seems aware that, if examined in- 
dividually, he would have no claim to the Kingdom promised 
to the close followers of the Lamb. The tares would pre- 
fer to have the various sects judged as so many corporations, 
and in comparison one with another, hoping thus to glide 
into the Kingdom glory on the merits of the wheat with 
whom they are associated. But this they cannot do: the 
test of worthiness for the Kingdom honors will be an indi- 
vidual one,—of individual fidelity to God and his truth,— 
and not a trial of sects, to see which of them is the true one. 
And each sect seems to realize, in the greater light of to-day, 
which is scattering the mists of bigotry and superstition, 
that other seéts have as good (and as little) right as itself to 
claim to be the one and only true church. Forced to admit 
this, they seek to bind all by the impression that it is essen- 
tial to salvation to be joined to some one of their sects—it 
matters little to which one. Thus they combine the idea 
of individual responsibility with sectarian bondage. 

As an illustration of a popular cord recently drawn tightly 
by sectarianism upon its yotaries, we cite the seemingly 


142 Thy Kingdom Come. 


harmless, and, to many, seemingly advantageous, Interna- 
tional Sunday School Lessons.. These lend the impression 
of unsectarian co-operation in Bible study, among all 
Christians. They thus appear to be taking a grand step 
away from, and in advance of, the old methods of studying 
with sectarian catechisms. These uniform lessons have the 
appearance of being an abandonment of sectarianism and a 
coming together of all Christians to study the Bible in its 
own light ;—a thing which all recognize to be the only 
proper course, but which all sectarians refuse to do actually ; 
for, be it noticed, these International S..S. Lessons only a- 
pear to be unsectarian: they only afpear to grant liberty 
in Bible study. Really, each denomination prepares its 
own comments on the Scriptures contained in the lessons. 
And the committee which selects these lessons, aiming for 
the outward appearance of harmony and union, sele¢ts such 
passages of Scripture as there is little difference of opinion 
upon. The passages and doctrines upon which they disa- 
gree, the very ones which need most to be discussed, in order 
that the truths and errors of each sect may be manifested, 
that a real union might be arrived at upon the basis of ‘‘ one 
Lord, one faith and one baptism,’’—— these are ignored in 
the lessons, but still firmly held as before by each se¢t. 
The effect of these and other similar ‘‘ union’’ methods is 
to make Protestantism more imposing in appearance, and to 
say to the people in fact, if not in words: You must join 
one of these sects, or you are not a child of God at all. 
Really, it is not a union as one church, -but a combination 
of separate and distinct organizations, each as anxious as 
ever to retain its own organization as a sect or bundle, but 
each willing to combine with others to make a larger and 
more imposing appearance before the world. It is like the 
piling of sheaves together in ashock. Each sheaf retains 
its own bondage or organization, and hecomes bound yet 


The Work of Harvest. 143 


more tightly by being wedged and fastened in with other 
bundles, in a large and imposing stack. 

The International Lesson system, in connection with 
modern methods of ‘‘running’’ Sunday Schools, greatly 
aids sectarianism, and hinders real growth in the knowledge 
of the truth, in yet another way. So general a lesson is 
presented in connection with the ‘‘ exercises ’’ of the school, 
that there is scarcely time to consider the guarded, printed 
questions, with prepared answers ; and no time is left for 
the truth-hungry Bible student, or the occasional earnest 
teacher, to bring out other questions of greater importance, 
containing food for thought and profitable discussion. For- 
merly, Bible classes met to study such portions of the Bible 
as they chose, and were hindered from obtaining truth by 
the bondage of their own prejudice and superstition only, 
and the earnest, truth-hungry ones were always able to 
make some progress. But now, when increasing light is 
illuminating every subject and dispelling the fogs of super- 
stition and prejudice, it is hindered from shining upon the 
Bible class student by the very International Lessons which 
claim to aid him. His time for Bible study is skilfully di- 
rected, so that he may get no new ideas, but be so contin- 
ually occupied in the use of the ‘milk of the word”’ 
' (greatly diluted with the traditions of men), as to take 
away all appetite for the ‘‘ strong meat’’ of more advanced 
truth. (Heb. 5:14.) In such classes, all time and opportu- 
nity for tasting and learning to appreciate ‘‘ meat’’ is sac- 
rificed, in obedience to the words, ‘‘ We must stick to our 
lesson ; for the hour will soon expire.’’ Well has the prophet, 
as well as the apostle, declared that, to appreciate the great 
do¢trines of God, so essential to our growth in grace and 
in the knowledge and love of God, we must leave the first 
principles and go on unto perfection—‘‘ weaned from the 
milk, and drawn from the breasts,’’==Heb. 6:1; Isa. 28:9. 


144 Thy Kingdom Come. 


As a result of present Sunday School methods (including 
the use of the International Lessons with stereotyped ques- 
tions, which discourage individual study and the exercise 
of individual brains), the adult Bible class for seeking grace 
through knowledge of the Scriptures is generally a thing of 
the past. Maturer minds are either harnessed and bridled 
as teachers, to drag along the International System, or stay 
at home to read the newspapers. Young men and young 
women, on the contrary, find the brief session, the stereo- 
typed questions, and the ‘‘ exercises,’’ more agreeable than 
Bible study. ‘They are led to feel that they have performed 
a duty ; and the sacrifice of the few moments is repaid by 
the social gossip and interchange which it affords. The 
little ones, too, like the ‘‘ exercises,’’ the singing, story- 
books, picnics, treats and general entertainment, best ; and 
they and their mothers feel well repaid for the labor of 
dressing, by the opportunity thus afforded for showing their 
fine clothing. And the parental responsibility of religious 
home-training is very largely resigned in favor of the sham 
and machinery of the Sunday School. The Sunday School 
has been well nained the nursery of the church, and the 
little ones thus brought up in the nurture and admonition 
of the worldly spirit are the young shoots of that abundant 
crop of tares with which great Babylon is completely overrun. 

Wherever, here and there, an adult Bible class does exist, 
and the teacher is candid and independent enough to leave 
the prescribed lesson, and follow up more important topics, 
giving liberty for the truth to be brought forward, whether 
favorable or unfavorable to the creed of the sect, he is 
marked by the worldly-wise pastor or superintendent as an 
unsafe teacher. Such teachers are indeed dangerous to 
sectarianism, and are very soon without classes. Such 
teachers, and the truths they would admit to candid inves- 
tigation, would soon cyt the cords and scatter the sectarian 


The Work, of Harvest. 145 


bundles, and hence are not long wanted. Others are there- 
fore preferred, who can hold the thoughts of their classes, 
divert them from ‘‘ strong meat,’’ and keep them unweaned 
babes, too weak to stand alone, and bound to the systems 
which they learn to love, and believe they would die with- 
out. The true teacher’s place, and the true Bible student’s 
place, is outside of all human bondage, free to examine and 
feed upon all portions of the good Word of God, and un- 
trammeled to follow the Lamb whithersoever he leads.— 
John 8:36; Gal. 5:1. 

While individual liberty mst outwardly be recognized as 
never before, we see that really there never was a time when 
the bands were so thoroughly drawn, to bind all wheat and 
tares into the many bundles. There never was a time when 
arrangements were so close, and so restraining of all per- 
sonal liberties, as now. Every spare hour of a zealous sec- 
tarian is filled by some of the many meetings or projects, 
so that no time for untrammeled thought and Bible’ study 
can be had. The principal design of these meetings, enter- 
tainments, etc., is sectarian growth and strength ; and the 
effect is the bondage mentioned, so detrimental to the real 
development of the consecrated children of God, the wheat. 
These bands are being made stronger, as the prophet inti- 
mates. (Isa. 28:22.) Some wheat and many tares consti- 
tute these bundles, from which it daily becomes more diffi- 
cult to get free. 

From what we have seen of the small quantity of truly 
consecrated wheat, and the great mass of ‘‘ baptized pro- 
fession’’ (as a Methodist bishop has forcibly described the 
tare class), it is evident that the burning of the tares will 
be a momentous event. It is a mistake, however, which 
many. make, to suppose that the burning of the tares in a 
furnace of fire, where there shall be wailing and gnashing 


of teeth (Matt. 13:42), refers either to a literal fire, or to’ 
1oc 


146 Thy Kingdom Come. 


trouble beyond the present life. The entire parable belongs 
to the present age. Not only is this fire a symbol, as well 
as the wheat and the tares, but it symbolizes the destrucTion 
of the tares, in the great time of trouble with which this 
age is to close, and from which the wheat class is promised 
an escape. (Mal. 3:17; Luke 21:36.) The great furnace 
of fire symbolizes the ‘‘ great time of trouble’’ coming, in 
the close of this harvest, upon the unworthy tare class of 
“ Christendom.”’ 

Nor does the destruction of the tares imply the destruc- 
tion, either present or future, of all the zadfviduals com- 
posing the tare class. It signifies rather a destruction of the 
false pretentions of this class. Their claim or profession is 
that they are Christians, whereas they are still children of 
this world. When burned or destroyed as tares, they will 
be recognized in their true character,—as members of the 
world, and will no longer imitate Christians, as nominal 
members of Christ’s Church. 

Our Lord explains that he sowed the good seed of the 
Kingdom, the truth, from which springs all the true wheat 
class, begotten by the spirit of truth. Afterward, during 
the night, the dark ages, Satan sowed tares. Doubtless the 
tares were sown in the same manner as the wheat. They 
are the offspring of errors. We have seen how grievously the 
sanctuary and the host were defiled by the great adversary 
and his blinded servants, and how the precious vessels (doc- 
trines) were profaned and misapplied by Papacy; and this 
is but another showing of the same thing. False doctrines 
begat false aims and ambitions in the Lord’s wheat-field, 
and led many to Satan’s service, to sow errors of doétrine 
and practice which have brought forth tares abundantly. 

The field looks beautiful and flourishing to many, as they 
count by the hundreds of millions. But really the propor- 
tion of wheat is very small, and it had been far better for 


The Work of Harvest. 147 


the wheat, which has been choked and greatly hindered from 
development by the tares, if the worldly-spirited tares had 
not been in the Church, but in their own place in the world, 
leaving the consecrated <‘ little flock,’’ the only representa- 
tives of Christ’s spirit and dodtrine, in the field. Then the 
difference between the Church and the world would be very 
marked, and her growth, though apparently less rapid, would 
have been healthy. ‘Ihe great seeming success manifested 
by numbers and wealth and social standing, in which many 
glory so much, is really a great injury, and in no sense a 
blessing, either to the Church or to the world. 

As we examine this subject, we find that many of these 
tares are little to blame for their false position as imitation 
wheat. Nor do many of them know that the tares are not 
the real Church ; for they regard the little flock of conse- 
crated wheat as extremists and fanatics. And, when com- 
pared with the tare multitude, the Lord and the apostles 
and all the wheat certainly do appear to be extremists and 
fanatics, if the majority, the tares, be in the right. 

The tares have been so thoroughly and so often assured 
that they are Christjans—that all are Christians except Jews, 
infidels and heathens—that they could scarcely be expected 
to know to the contrary. False doctrines assure them that 
there are but two classes, and that all who escape everlast- 
ing torment are to be joint-heirs with Christ. Every funeral 
discourse, except in the case of the miserably degraded and 
the openly wicked and immoral, assures the friends of the 
peace and joy and heavenly glory of the deceased ; and, to 
prove it, passages of Scripture are quoted, which, from the 
context, should be seen to apply only to the fully conse- 
crated, the saints. 

Naturally inclined to reprove themselves, to conscientious- 
ly deny that they are saints, and to disclaim the rich prom- 
ises of the Scriptures to such, they are persuaded to claim 


148 Thy Kingdom Come. 


them, by their no better informed fellow-tares, both in pulpits 
and pews. They conscientiously feel—indeed they are cer- 
tain—that they have done nothing which would justly merit 
everlasting torture ; and their faith in the false doctrines of 
“‘Christendom’’ leads them to hope, and to claim, that 
they and all moral people are members of the Church to 
which all the rich promises belong. Thus they are tares 
by force of false doctrines, and not only occupy a false po- 
sition themselves, but misrepresent the truly high standard 
of saintship. Under the delusion of the error, they feel a 
sense of security and satisfaction ; for, measuring themselves 
and their lives with those of the majority in the nominal 
church, and with their deceased friends to whose funeral 
eulogies they have listened, they find themselves at least 
average—and even more consistent than many of loud pro- 
fession. Yet they are conscious that they have never made 
any real consecration of heart and life, time and means, 
talents and opportunities, to God and his service. 

But as the ‘‘chaff’’ class of the Jewish nation was con- 
sumed in the close of that harvest (Luke 3:17), so this 
‘¢ tare’’ class will be consumed in this harvest. As the chaff 
ceased from all pretention to divine favor as the triumphing 
Kingdom of God, before that harvest closed in the great fire 
of religious and political contention, which consumed that 
system, so it shall be with the tare class of so-called ‘‘ Chris- 
tendom.’’ They will be consumed ; they will cease /o be 
tares; they will cease to deceive either themselves or others ; 
they will cease to apply to themselves the exceeding great 
and precious promises which belong only to the overcom- 
ing saints; and, when their various so-called Christian king- 
doms, and their various religious organizations, rent by 
discords induced by the increasing light of truth, will be 
consumed in the fire already kindled, ‘‘ the fire of God’s 
zeal’’ (the great time of trouble with which this age will 


The Work of Harvest. 149 


end.—Zeph. 3:8), they will cease te claim for their worldly 
systems the name ‘‘ Christendom.’ 

After telling of the burning of the tares, the parable further 
declares, ‘‘ Then shall the righteous [ the wheat] shine forth 
as the sun in the Kingdom of their Father.’’ [What better 
testimony than this could we have, that the true Church is 
not yet set up in power, as God’s Kingdom, and that it will 
not be thus exalted until this harvest is ended?] Then 
shall this sun of righteousness (of which Christ Jesus will 
always be the central glory) arise with healing in his beams, 
to bless, restore, purify and disinfeét from sin and error 
the whole world of mankind ;—the incorrigible being de- 
stroyed in the second death. 

Let the faét be remembered that, in the typical. Jewish 
harvest, Israelites indeed, as well as imitation Israelites, con- 
stituted the Jewish or Fleshly House of Israel; that only 
the ¢rve Israelites were selected and gathered into the gos- 
pel garner, and honored with the truths belonging to the 
Gospel age; and that all-others of that nation (‘‘ chaff’’) 
were not physically destroyed (though of course many lives 
were lost in their trouble), but were cut off from all King- 
dom favors in: which previously they trusted and boasted. 
Then trace the parallel and counterpart of this, in the treat- 
ment of the ‘‘ tares’’ in the present burning time. 

Not only has the Lord shown us what to expeét in this 
‘harvest,’’ and our share in it, both in being separated 
ourselves and, as ‘‘ reapers,’’ in using the sickle of truth to 
assist others to liberty in Christ and separation from false 
human systems and bondages, but in order to render us 
doubly syre that we are right, and that the separating time 
of the harvest has arrived, he provided us proofs of the very 
year the harvest work began, its length, and when it will 
close. These, already examined, show that the close of 
1874 marked the beginning, as the close of 1914 will mark 


150 Thy Kingdom Come. 


the end, of this 4o years of harvest ; while all the minutiz of 
the order and work of this harvest were portrayed in that 
of the Jewish age, its type. Some of the marked time-features 
of that typical harvest we will now examine, and note the 
lessons which they teach, which are applicable now, and. 
which our Lord evidently designed for this purpose, so that 
we might not be in either doubt or uncertainty, but might 
know ofhis plan, and beable to act accordingly, with strength, 
as co-operators with him in carrying out his revealed will. 

All the time-features connected with the Jewish harvest 
(though they sometimes indirectly related to the faithful), 
had their direct bearing upon the great nominal mass, and 
marked periods of its trial, rejeCtion, overthrow and- de- 
. struction as a system or church-nation. Thus the Lord, as 
the Bridegroom and reaper, came (A. D. 29) not to the /rve 
Israelites only, but to the entire mass. (John 1:11.) The 
progress of the harvest work there disclosed the faét that 
the grains of ripe wheat fit for the garner (the Gospel dis- 
pensation) were few, and that the great mass was wheat 
merely in appearance—in reality only ‘ chaff,’’ devoid of 
‘the real wheat principle within. When, three and a half 
years later (A. D. 33), our Lord assumed the office of King, 
and permitted (what before he had refused—John 6:15) 
that the people should mount him upon an ass and hail him 
King, it marked a point in this antitypical, Gospel harvest 


more important far than that gf the type. The parallel to_ 


The doings of our Lord, while there for a few hours typi- 
cally acting as King of Israel, are deeply significant to us, 


The Work of Harvest. 151 


as unquestionably indicating, and shadowing forth, what 
must be expected here. What men saw him do at that 
time, such as riding on an ass into Jerusalem as king, and 
scourging the money-changers out of the temple, we recog- 
nize as typical—as done 4ere on a larger scale, though the 
King, and the scourge of cords, and the proclamation of 
kingly authority, are now manifested in a very different way, 
and to the eye of faith only. But the Jewish type serves 
to call attention to this fulfilment, which otherwise we would 
not be able to appreciate. The first work of the typical 
King was to reject the entire church-nation of Israel as un- 
worthy to be his Kingdom, or longer to be treated as his 
special heritage. This was expressed thus: ‘‘O Jerusalem, 
Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, and stonest them 
which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered 
thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens 
under her wings, and ye would not. Behold, your house is 
left unto you desolate /’’ —Matt. 23 :37-39- 

This, when applied to the present harvest, teaches that 
as in A. D. 33 typical Israel, after being recognized as God’s 
people for 1845 years by favors, chastisements, etc., was 
cast off, rejected by the King, because found unworthy, after 
a trial and inspection of three and a half years, so in the 
present harvest, after a similar three and a half years of in- 
spection, and at the close of a similar period of 1845 years 
of favor and chastisement, nominal Christendom would be 
rejected by the King as unworthy longer to receive any 
favors from him, or to be recognized in any manner by him. 

But, as the rejection of nominal Fleshly Israel did not 
imply the rejection, individually, of any ‘< Israelite indeed,”’ 
in whom was no guile, but rather a still greater favor to 
such (who were set free from the ‘‘ blind guides,’’ and taught 
more directly and perfectly through new spiritual channels 
—the apostles), so here we must expect the same. The 


152 Thy Kingdom Come. 


spiritual favors, formerly bestowed upon the nominal mass, 
belong henceforth only to the faithful and obedient. Hence- 
forth the light, as it becomes due, and ‘‘the meat in due 
season for the houselfold of faith,’’ must be expected, not 
through former channels, in any degree, but through faith- 
ful individuals outside of the fallen, rejected systems. 

During his ministry, and up to the time when, as King, 
he cast off the Jewish system, our Lord recognized the 
scribes and Pharisees as the legitimate instructors of the 
people, even though he often upbraided them as hypocrites 
who deceived the people. This is evident from the Lord’s 
words (Matt. 23:2)—‘‘ The scribes and the Pharisees sit in 
Moses’ seat; whatsoever therefore they bid you do, that 
observe and do.’’ So, likewise, for a time the great religi- 
ous rulers of nominal Christendom in Synods, Conferences, 
“Councils, etc., measurably sat in Christ’s seat as instructors 
of the people, as the Jewish Sanhedrim once occupied Moses’ 
seat. But as, after A. D, 33, the scribes and Pharisees were 
no longer recognized by the Lord in any sense, and the 
true Israelites were no longer instruéted by these, but by 
God himself, through other, humbler, untitled and more 
worthy instruments, who were raised up among the people 
and specially taught of God, so we must expect and do find 
it here, in this parallel harvest. 

- The taking of the kingly office by our Lord in a. D. 33, 
and his first official aét in rejecting the national church of 
fleshly Israel, taken in connection with all the striking par- 
allels of the two ages, indicate very clearly that at the par- 
allel point of time in the present harvest, 7. ¢., 1878, mystic 
Babylon, otherwise called Christendom, the antitype of Ju- 
daism, was cut off; and there went forth the message, 
“« Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the 
habitation of devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, and 
a cage of every unclean and hateful bird.’’—Rev. 18:2. 


The Work of Harvest. | 153 


The fall, plagues, destruction, etc., foretold to come up- 
on mystic Babylon, were foreshadowed in the great trouble 
and national destruétion which came upon fleshly Israel, and 
which ended with the complete overthrow of that nation 
in A.D. 70. And the period of falling also corresponds ; for 
from the time our Lord said, ‘ Your house is left unto you 
desolate,’’ a. D. 33, to A. D. 70 was 36% years ; and so from 
A. D. 1878 to the end of a. D. 1914 is 36% years. And, 
with the end of a. p. 1914, what God calls Babylon, and 
what men call Christendom, will Have passed away, as already 
shown from prophecy. 

Judaism was a divinely appointed type of the Millennial 
Kingdom of Christ which will control and regulate all mat- 
ters; hence Judaism was properly a union of church and 
state—of religious and civil government. But, as we have 
already shown, the Gospel Church was in no sense to be 
associated in, or to have anything to do with, the govern- 
ment of the world, until her Lord, the King of kings, comes, 
assumes control, and exalts her as his bride to share in that 
reign of righteousness. Neglecting the Lord’s words, and 
following human wisdom, theories and plans, the great sys- 
tem called Christendom, embracing all governments and 
creeds professing to be Christ’s (but a miserable counter- 
feit of the true Kingdom of Christ), was organized before 
the time, without the Lord, and of wholly unfit elements. 
The fall of Babylon as an unfit church-state system, and 
the’ gathering out of the worthy wheat, therefore, can be 
and is well illustrated by the fall of Judaism. 

The name Babylon originally signified God’s gate-way ; 
but afterward, in derision, it came to mean méxfure or con- 
Jusion. In the book of Revelation this name is applied 
specifically to the church nominal, which, from being the 
gate-way to glory, became a gate-way to error and con- 
fusion, a miserable mixture composed chiefly of tares, hypo- 


154 ~ Ay Kingdom Come. 


crites,—: confused mass of worldly profession in which the 

Lord’s jewels are buried, and their true beauty and luster 

hidden. In symbolic prophecy, the term Babylon is applied 

at times only to the Church of Rome, called ‘‘ Babylon the 

Great, the Mother of Harlots.’? The name could apply 
only to her for centuries, so long as she was the only mixed 

system and would tolerate no others ; but other ecclesiasti- 

cal systems, not so great as the ‘‘mother,’’ nor yet so wicked, 

nor so radically wrong, sprang up out of her, through vari- 

ous attempted though imperfect reforms. Errors, tares and 

worldliness in these also largely predominating, the name 

Babylon is used as a general or family name for all the nom- 

inal Christian systems, and now includes not only the Church 

of Rome, but all Protestant sects as well ; for, since Papacy: 
is designated the mother system, we must regard the various 

Protestant systems which descended from her as the daugh- 

ters—a fact very generally admitted by Protestants, and 

sometimes with pride. 

Previous to the harvest time, many of God’s people in 
Great Babylon discovered her real predominant character 
to be grossly antichristian (notably the Waldenses, the Hu- 
guenots and the reformers of the sixteenth century) ; and, 
calling attention to the fact, they separated from the mother 
system and led others with them, many of whom were tares, 
as the prophet had predicted, saying, ‘‘ Many shall cleave 
to them with flatteries.’’ (Dan. 11:34.) Here were the 
separatings of the politico-doctrinal storms before the har- 
vest time. Among these the tares, still predominating, 
formed other, though less objectionable, Baby lonish systems. 

Thus the wheat, though from time to time endeavoring 
to free themselves from the incubus of the tares (and espe- 
cially from the grosser errors which fostered and produced 
the tares), and though blessed by these efforts, were still un- 
der their influence, still mixed with a large predominance of 


The Work of Harvest. 155 


the tare element. But for the wheat’s sake God's favor ex- 
tended even to these mixed bunches or Babylonish systems ; 
and not until God’s time for effecting a complete and final 
separation—in the time of harvest, 1878—were those sys- 
tems completely and forever cast off from all favor, and 
sentenced to swift destruction, and all of God’s people ex- 
plicitly and imperatively called out of them. In the very 
beginning of the age, God’s people were warned against 
the deceptions of Antichrist, and taught to keep separate 
from it; and yet, for their trial and testing, they were per- 
mitted to be in a measure deceived by it and more or less 
mixed up with it. Every awakening to a realization of un- 
christian principles, doctrines and doings, which led to re- 
form measures, tested and proved the wheat class, and 
helped to purify them more and more from the poilutions 
of Antichrist. But this last testing and positive call, coupled 
" with the utter rejection of those systems, no longer to re- 
ceive divine favor (as they had formerly received it, for the 
sake of the wheat in them), is to effect the final separation 
of the wheat class from all anti-christian systems and prin- 
ciples. What truths those systems formerly held are now 
fast being swept away from them, being displaced by theo- 
ries of men, subversive of every element of divine truth ; 
and vital godliness and piety are being rapidly displaced 
by the love of pleasure and the spirit of the world. 

With the declaration that Babylon is fallen comes also 
the command to all of God’s people still in her, to come 
out—‘‘ And [ heard another voice from heaven, saying, 
Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her 
sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.’’ (Rev. 18:4.) 
The expression, ‘‘ Babylon is fallen: Come out of her, my 
people,’”’ clearly marks two thoughts which should be dis- 
tinctly remembered. It indicates that at one time Baby- 
lon was not fallen from divine favor; that for a time she 


156 Thy Kingdom Come. 


retained a measure of favor, notwithstanding her mixed 
character ; that, however large the proportion of error which 
she held, and however littlé of the spirit of Christ which 
she manifested, she was not entirely cast off from God’s 
favor until the harvest time of separation. It indicates that 
at some time a sudden and utter rejection is to come upon. 
Babylon, when all favor will forever cease, and when judg- 
ments will follow—just such a rejection as we have shown 
was due in 1878. It indicates, also, that at the time of 
Babylon’s rejection many of God’s people would be in and 
associated with Babylon ; for it is after Babylon’s rejection, 
or fall from favor, that these are called to,—‘‘ Come out of 
her, my people.’’ : 

The contrast between the many gradual reform move- 
ments of the past four hundred years and this final com- 
plete separation should be clearly discerned: they were 
permitted attempts to reform Babylon, while this recognizes 
her as beyond all hope of reform—‘‘ Babylon hath been a 
golden cup in the Lord’s hand, that made all the earth 
drunken ; the nations have drunken of her wine; therefore 
the nations are mad [intoxicated with her errors]. Baby- 
lon is suddenly fallen and broken: wail for her; take balm 
for her wound, if so be she may be healed. We would have 
healed Babylon, \ut she is not healed: forsake her, and let 
us go every one unto his own country [to the true Church, 
or to the world, as the case may be, according as each is 
thus proved to be of the wheat or the tares]: for her pun- 
ishment reacheth unto heaven.’’—Jer. 51:7~9. Compare 
Rev. 17:4; 14:8; 18:2, 3, 5, 19. 

Unhealed Babylon is now sentenced to destruction: the 
whole system—a system of systems—is rejected, and all of 
God’s people not in sympathy with her false do¢trines and 
practices are now called to separate themselves from her. 
The prophet gives the reason for this sentence of rejection, 


The Work of Harvest. 157 


and the failure of some to comprehend it, saying :— 

“« The stork in the heavens knoweth her appointed times ; 
and the turtle and the crane and the swallow observe the time 
of their coming home ; but my people know not the arrange- 
ment of the Lord. [They do not recognize that a harvest 
time of full and complete separation of wheat, from chaff 
and tares, must come. In this they show less discernment 
than the migratory fowls.] How can ye say, We are wise, 
and the Law of the Lord is with us [when you cannot discern 
the harvest time and the change of dispensations then due]? 
Truly, behold in vain wrought the pen, in vain the writers 
[because the word of the Lord by his prophets and apostles 
is made void, and set aside without attention, and creeds 
formed in the past ‘‘ dark ages’’ are the lightless lanterns 
of them that walk in darkness]. The wise (?) [learned] men 
are ashamed ; they are disheartened [by the failure of their 
cherished human schemes] and caught: lo, the word of the 
Lord have they rejected, and what wisdom have they [now]? 
[Compare Isaiah 29:10.] Therefore will I give their wives 
[churches] unto others, and their fields [of labor] to the 
conquerors ; for, from the least even to the greatest, every 
one [of them] is seeking his own personal advantage—from 
the prophet [orator] even unto the priest [minister], every 
one practiseth falsehood. [Compare Isa. 56: ro-12; 28: 
14-20.] And they heal the sore of the daughter of my peo- 
ple [nominal Zion—Babylon] very lightly, saying, Peace, 
peace: when there is no peace [when her whole system is 
diseased, and needs thorough cleansing with the medicine 
of God’s word—the truth]. They should have been ashamed 
of their abominable work ; but they neither felt the least 
shame, nor did they know how to blush: therefore shall 
they [the teachers] fall among them that fall; in the time 
of their visitation [or inspection—in the ‘harvest ’’] they 
shall stumble, saith the Lord. Iwill surely make an end of 


158 Thy Kingdom Come. 


them, saith the Lord; there shall be left no grapes on the 
vine, and no figs on the fig-tree, and the leaf shall wither ; 
and the things that I have given them [all divine favors and 
privileges] shall pass away from them.’’—Jer. 8: 7-13. 
The succeeding verse shows that many of the rejected 
will realize the troubles coming, yet will still be blind to 
their real cause. ‘They will say, Let us unite ourselves and 
entrench ourselves in the strong cities [governments], and 
keep silence. They somehow realize that neither reason nor 
Scripture supports their false doctrines, and that the wisest 
method is to keep silent, in the shadow of old superstitions 
and under the protection of so-called Christian govern- 
ments. They are here represented as saying very truly: 
“« The Lord hath put us to silence, and given us bitter poison- 
water to drink.’’ The only refreshment they may have is 
the cup which they have mixed (the poison of bitter error, 
_ the “ doétrine of devils,’’ mingled with the pure water of 
life, the truth of God’s Word). Shall not such as are of and 
who love Babylon, and who are therefore unready to obey 
the command, ‘‘ Come out of her,’’ be forced to drink the 
cup of their own mixing ? Shall not such be forced to admit 
the falsity of their doctrines? They surely shall; and they 
will all be thoroughly nauseated by it. The next verse tells 
of the disappointment of their expectations, which were 
that their bitter (poison-water) doctrines would have con- 
verted the world and brought about the Millennium. They 
- say, ‘© We looked for peace, but no good came; and for a 
time of health, and behold trouble !’’--The disease of nom- 
inal Zion will grow rapidly worse from the time of her vis- 
itation and rejection, when the ‘ Israelites indeed,’’ obey- 
ing the divine call, begin to come out of the nominal systems. 
Some wonder why the Lord does not institute a still 
greater reform than any of the past, which have proved so 
futile and short-lived. They ask, Why does he not pour 


The Work of Harvest. . 159 


out a blessing upon all the great seéts and amalgamate them 
all into one, or else upon some one and purify it of dross, 
and draw all others into it. But, we ask, Why not also amal- 
gamate all the kingdoms of earth into one, and purify it? 

It should be sufficient for all of God’s children to know 
that such is not what he reveals as his plan. And a little 
further reflection, from the standpoint of God’s Word, 
shows us the unreasonableness of such a suggestion. Con- 
sider the number of the professed church (four hundred 
milliong) and ask yourself, How many of these would them- 
selves claim to be fud/y consecrated, mind and body, to the 
Lord and the service of és plan. Your own observation must 
lead you to the conclusion that to separate the ‘‘ wheat ”’ 
‘from the ‘‘ tares,’’ by removing the ‘tares,’’ would in al- 
most every instance leave but a small handful, even in the 
largest church buildings or cathedrals. 

The reason for not attempting to purify the nominal sys- 
tems is that no amount of cleansing would make the uncon- 
secrated mass of ‘‘ Christendom ’’ and their organizations, 
civil and ecclesiastical, suitable to the Lord’s work, now to 
be commenced in the earth. During the past eighteen 
centuries he has been selecting the truly consecrated, the 
worthy ones, and now all that remains to be done is to se- 
lect from among the living those of the same class—and 
they are but few—as only a few are lacking to complete the 
fore-ordained number of members in the body of Christ. 

The reason for discarding all human organizations, and 
not reforming the least objectionable one and calling out 
of all others into it, now, is shown by our Lord’s treatment 
of the various Jewish seéts in the harvest or close of their 
dispensation ; for then, as now, all were rejected, and the 
“Israelites indeed ’’ were called out of all, into freedom, 
and taught the will and plan of God by various chosen ves- 
sels of God’s own selection. 


160 Thy Kingdom Come. 


Illustrating this subject to the Jews, the Lord in two par- 
ables explained the wisdom of his course: first, that a patch 
of new cloth upon a very old garment would only make the 
weakness of the garment more noticeable, and from the in- 
equality of strength the rent would be made greater ; sec- 
ond, that new wine put into old wine-skins, out of which 
all the stretch and elasticity had gone, would be sure to 
damage, rather than benefit, for the result would be not 
only to speedily burst and destroy the old wine-skins, but 
also to lose the valuable new wine. 

Our Lord’s new doétrines were the new wine, while the 
Jewish sects were the old. wine-skins. Suppose that our 
Lord had joined one of those sects and had begun a reform 
in it: what would have been the result? There can be no 
doubt that the new truths, if received, would have broken 
up that sect completely. The power of its organization, 
built largely upon sectarian pride, and cemented by errors, 
superstitions and human traditions, would forthwith have 
been destroyed, and the new doctrines would have been 
left stranded—hampered, too, by all the old errors and tra- 
Gitions of that sect, and held responsible for its past record 
by the world in general. 

For the same reasons, the Lord here, in the present har- 
vest, in introducing the fuller light of truth, at the dawn of 
the Millennial age, does not put it as a patch upon any of 
the old systems, nor as new wine into old skins. First, 
because none of them are in a fit condition to be 
patched, or to receive the new doctrines. Second, because 
the new truths, if received, would soon begin to work, and 
would develop a power which would burst any sect, no 
matter how thoroughly organized and bound. If tried, one 
after another, the result would be the same, and, in the end, 
the new wine (doctrines) would have none to contain and 
preserve it. 


The Work of Harvest. 161 


The proper and best course was the one followed by our 
Lord at the first advent. He made an entirely new garment 
out of the new stuff, and put the new wine into new wine- 
skins ; #.¢., he called out the Israelites indeed (non-sectarian), 
and committed to them the truths then due. And so now: 
he is calling out the truth-hungry from nominal spiritual 
Israel ; and it becomes them to accept the truth in the Lord’s 
own way, and to co-operate with him heartily in his plan, 
no matter which, or how many, of the old wine-skins are 
passed by and rejected as unfit to contain it. Rejoice, 
rather, that you are counted worthy to have this new wine 
of present truth testified to you, and, as fast as proved, re- 
ceive it and act upon it gladly. 

Those whg at the first advent waited to Jearn the opinion 
and follow the lead of prominent se¢tarians, and who in- 
quired, ‘‘ Have any of the scribes or Pharisees believed on 
him ?’’ did not receive the truth, because they were follow- 
ers of men rather than of God; for prominent sectarians 
then did not accept of Christ’s teaching, and the same class - 
always have been, and still are, the blindest leaders of the 
blind. Instead of accepting the truth and being blessed, 
they ‘‘ fall’’ in the time of trial. The old garment and the 
old wine skins are so out of condition as to be totally unfit 
for further use. 

Since it is the Lord who calls his people out of Babylon, 
we cannot doubt that, whatever may be his agencies for 
giving the call, all truly his -people will hear it; and not 
only will their obedience be tested by the call, but also their 
love of Babylon and affinity for her errors will be tested. 
If they approve her doctrines, methods, etc., so as to be 
loth to leave her, they will prove themselves unworthy of 
present truth, and deserving of her coming plagues. But 
the words of the call indicate that God’s true people in 


Babylon are not to be considered as implicated in her sins 
1KC 


162 Thy Kingdom Come. 


of worldiness and ignoring of divine truth, “p /o the time 
they.shall learn that Babylon is fallen—cast off. Then, if 
they continue zz her, they are esteemed as being of her, in 
the sense of approving her wrong deeds and doctrines, past 
and present, and shall be counted as partakers of her sins, 
and therefore meriting a share of their punishment, the 
plagues coming upon her.—See Rev. 18:4. 

How strong the expression, ‘‘ She is become the habita- 
tion of demons, and the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage 
of every unclean and hateful bird.’’ How true it is, that 
the most execrable of society seek and wear the garb of 
Christian profession and ceremonialism, in some of the va- 
rious quarters (sects) of Babylon. Every impure principle 
and do¢trine, somehow and somewhere, finds representa- 
tion in her. And she is a ‘‘cage’’ which holds-securely not 
only the Lord’s meek and gentle doves, but also many un- 
clean and hateful birds. Of all the defaulters, and deceiv- 
ers of men and of women, how many are professedly mem- 
’ bers of Christ’s Church! and how many even use their pro- 
fession as a cloak under which to forward -evil schemes! 
It is well known that a majority of even the most brutal 
criminals executed die in the Roman Catholic communion. 

Babylon has contained both the best and the worst, both 
the cream and the dregs, of the population of the civilized 
world. The cream is the small class of truly consecrated 
ones, sadly mixed up with the great mass of mere professors 
and the filthy, criminal dregs; but under favorable condi- 
tions the cream class will be separated in the present harvest, 
preparatory to being glorified. 

As an illustration of the proportion of the unclean aud 
hateful birds, in and out of Babylon, note the following 
official report of the condition of society in a quarter of the 
wheatfield where ‘‘ Orthodoxy ’’ has for centuries boasted 
of the fine quality and purity of its wheat and the fewness 


The Work of Harvest. 163 


of its tares, and where “* Ze Church,”’ so called, has been 
associated with the government in making the laws and in 
ruling the people :— 
THE STATUS OF SOCIETY IN ENGLAND AND WALES. 
PARLIAMENTARY REPORT MADE IN 1873. 


POPULATION BY RELIGIOUS PROFESSIONS. 


Roman Catholics ; ‘ . : 4 1,500,0C0 
Church of England ty aa ; . 6,933,935 
Dissenters [Protestants other than Biieapalisne) 72345158 
Infidels. ‘ ; “ , 5 : 7,000,000 
Jews. ‘ : A 2 ‘ : . 57,000 


TOTAL NUMBER OF CRIMINALS IN JAILS. 


Roman Catholics : . . : : 373300 
Church of England ; j : 2 . 96,600" 
Dissenters. . : - é . ‘ 10,800 
Infidels. : . wm eS : : i 350 
Jews . ‘ , : ‘ . ; : ° 

145,250 


CRIMINALS TO EVERY 100,000 POPULATION. 


Roman Catholics. : ‘4 : . : 2,500 
Church of England —. ‘ ; : : . 1,400 
Dissenters . : : : : : . 150 
Infidels , 5 
Jews 2 . - 0 


PROPORTION OF CRIMINALS. 


Roman Catholics : , R ‘ ‘i 1 in 40 
Church of England . 3 . : : - rin 72 
Dissenters. : ; ‘ : ie # T in 666 


Infidels. ‘ : ‘ 7 : + Tin 20,000 


164 Thy Kingdom Come. 


The cause of this mixed condition is stated: ‘‘ Babylon 
made all the peoples drunk with the wine [spirit, influence] 
of her fornication ’’—worldly affiliation. (Rev. 18:3.) False 
teachings concerning the character and mission of the 
Church, and the claim that the time for her exaltation and 
reign had come (and particularly after the great boom of 
success which her worldly ambition received in the time of 
Constantine, when she claimed to be the Kingdom of God 
set up to reign in power and great glory), led many into 
Babylon, who would never have united with her had she 
continued in the narrow way of sacrifice. Pride and ambi- 
tion led to the grasping of worldly power by the early 
Church. ‘To obtain the power, numbers and worldly influ- 
ence were necessary. And to obtain the numbers, which, 
under present conditions, the truth never would have drawn, 
false doétrines were broached, and finally obtained the as- 
cendancy over all others ; and even truths which were still 
retained were disfigured and distorted. The numbers came, 
even to hundreds of millions, and the true Church, the 
wheat, still but a ‘little flock,’’ was hidden among the 
millions of tares. Here, as sheep in the midst of devouring 
wolves, the true embryo Kingdom of God suffered violence, 
and the violent took it by force; and, like their Lord, in 
whose footprints they followed, they were despised and re- 
jected of men, men of sorrows and acquainted with grief. 

But now, as the Millennial morning dawns, and the doc- 
trinal errors of the dark night past are discovered, and the . 
real gems of truth are lighted up, the effect must be, as de- 
signed, to separate completely the wheat from the tares. 
And, as false doctrines produced the improper development, 
so the unfolding of truth in the light of harvest will pro- 
duce the separation. All of the tares and some of the 
wheat are fearful, however. To them it seems that the dis- 
solution of Babylon would be the overthrow of God’s work, 


The Work of Harvest. 165 


and the failure of his cause. But not so: the tares never . 
were wheat, and God never proposed to recognize them as 

such. He merely permitted, ‘‘let,’’ them both grow to- 

gether until the harvest. It is from Babylon’s ‘‘ cage’’ of 

unclean birds that God’s people are called out, that they 

may both enjoy the liberty and share the harvest light and 

work, and prove themselves out of harmony with her errors 

of doétrine and practice, and thus escape them and their 

reward,—the plagues coming upon all remaining in her. 

These plagues or troubles, foreshadowed in the troubles 
upon the rejected Jewish house, are pictured in such lurid 
symbols in the book of Revelation that many students have 
very exaggerated and wild ideas on this subject, and are 
therefore unprepared for the realities now closely impend- 
ing. They often interpret the symbols literally, and hence 
are unprepared to see them fulfilled as they will be,—by re- 
ligious, social and political disturbances, controversies, up- 
heavals, reactions, revolutions, etc. 

But note another item here. Between tne time when 
Babylon is cast off, falls from favor (1878), and the time 
when the plagues or troubles come upon her, is a brief in- 
terval, during which: the faithful of the Lord’s people 
are all to be informed on this subject, and gathered out 
of Babylon. This is clearly shown in the same verse ; for 
with the message, ‘‘ Babylon is fallen,’’ is coupled the call, 
“¢Come out of her, my people, that ye . . . receive not of 
her [coming] plagues.’’? This same interval of time, and the 
same work to be accomplished in it, are also referred to in 
symbol, in Rev. 7:3. To the messenger of wrath the com- 
mand is given, ‘‘ Hurt not the earth, neither the sea, nor 
the trees, until we have SEALED the servants of our God in 
their foreheads.’’ The forehead sealing indicates that a 
mental comprehension of the truth will be the mark or seal 
which will separate and distinguish the servants of God from 


166 Thy Kingdom Come. 


the servants and votaries of Babylon. And this agrees with 
Danicl’s testimony: ‘‘ The wise [of thy people] shall un-, 
derstand ; but none of the wicked [unfaithful to their cov- 
enant] shall understand.’’ (Dan. 12:10.) Thus the classes 
are to be marked and separated before the plagues come 
upon rejected, cast off Babylon. 

And that this kvowledge is to be both a sealing and a 
separating agent is clearly implied in the verse before con- 
sidered ; for the declaration is first made, that ‘‘ Babylon 
is fallen,’’ and that certain plagues or punishments are com- 
ing upon her, before the Lord’s people are expected to obey 
the command, ‘‘ Come out,”’ dased upon that knowledge. 
Indeed, we know that all must be well ‘ sealed in their fore- 
heads ’’— intelligently informed—concerning God’s plan, 
before they can rightly appreciate or obey this command. 

And is it not apparent that this very work of sealing the 
servants of God is now progressing? Are we not. being 
sealed in our foreheads? and that, too, at the very proper 
time ? Are we not being led, step by step, as by the Lord’s 
own hand—by his Word—to an appreciation of truth and 
affairs in general from his standpoint,—reversing our former 
opinions derived from other sources, on many subjects? Is 
it not true that the various divisions or sects of Babylon 
have not been the channels through which this sealing has 
come to us, but rather that they have been hindrances which 
prevented its speedier accomplishment ? And do we not see 
the propriety of it, as well as of the Lord’s declaration, that. 
a separation of wheat and tares must occur in the harvest ? 
And do we not see it to be his plan, to reveal the facts to 
his faithful, and then to expect them to, show their hearty 
sympathy with that plan by prompt obedience? What if to 
obey and come out obliges us to leave behind the praise of 
men, or a comfortable salary, or a parsonage home, or finan- 
cial aids in business, or domestic peace, or what not ?—yet 


The Work of Harvest. 167 


let us not fear. He who says to us ‘‘ Come!’’ is the same 
. who said ‘* Come!’’ to Peter, when he walked on the sea. 
Peter, in obeying, would have sunk, had not the Lord’s out- 
stretched arm upheld him ; and the same arm supports them 
well who now, at his command, come out of Babylon. 
Look not at the boisterous sea of difficulties between, but, 
looking directly to the Lord, be of good courage. 

The command is Come, not Go; because in coming out 
of bondage to human traditions, and creeds, and systems, 
and errors, we are coming directly to our Lord, to be taught 
and fed by him, to be strengthened and perfected to do all 
his pleasure, and to stand, and not to fa// with Babylon. 

God’s Word reveals the fact that the nominal church, 
after its fall from his favor and from being his mouth-piece 
(Rev. 3:16), will gradually settle into a condition of unbe-_ 
lief, in which the Bible will eventually be entirely ignored 
in fact, though retained in name, and in which philosophic 
speculations of various shades will be the real creeds. From 
this fall the faithful sealed ones will escape; for they will 
be ‘‘ accounted worthy to escape all these things that shall 
come to pass, and to stand’’—not fall, in the time of the 
Lord’s presence. (Luke 21:36.) In faét, many are already 
thus settling,—retaining the forms of worship, and faith in 
a Creator and in a future life; but viewing these chiefly 
through their own or other men’s philosophies and theories, 
and ignoring the Bible as an infallible teacher of the divine 
purposes. These, while retaining the Bible, disbelieve its 
narratives, especially that of Eden and the fall. Retaining 
the name of Jesus, and calling him the Christ and the Savior, 
they regard him merely as an excellent though not infalli- 
ble exemplar, and reject entirely his ransom-sacrifice—his 
cross. Claiming the Fatherhood of God to extend to sinners, 
they repudiate both the curse and the Mediator. 

It has not been generally observed that at the first advent 


168 Thy ‘Kingdom Come. 


our Lord’s ministry of three and a half years, up to the 
casting off of the Jewish nation (their church and nation 
being one), was a trial or testing of that polity or system as 
a whole, rather than of its t2d%vtdua/ members. Its clerical 
class—Priests, Scribes and Pharisees—represented that sys- 
temas awhole. They themselves claimed thus to represent 
Judaism (John 7:48, 49), and the people so regarded them ; 
hence the force of the inquiry, Have any of the rulers or 
Pharisees believed on him? And’our Lord so recognized 
them: he rarely rebuked she people for failure to receive 
him, but repeatedly held responsible the ‘‘ blind leaders,’’ 
who would neither enter into the Kingdom themselves, nor 
permit the people, who otherwise would have received Jesus 
as Messiah and King, to do so. 

_ Our Lord’s constant effort was to avoid publicity,—to 
prevent his miracles and teachings from inciting she people, 
lest they should take -him by force, and make him king 
(John 6:15); and yet he constantly brought these testi- 
monies or evidences of his authority and Messiahship to the 
notice of the Jewish clergy, up to the time when, their trial 
as a church-nation being ended, their house or system was 
cast off, <‘ left desolate.’’ Then, by his direction and under 
the apostles’ teachings, all efforts were directed to the peo- 
ple individually ; and the cast off church-organization and 
its officers, as such, were wholly ignored. 

In evidence that during his ministry, and until their sys- 
tem was rejected, the teachers and priests represented it, 
note the Lord’s course with the cleansed leper, as recorded 
in Matt. 8:4. Jesus said to him, ‘‘ See thou tell no man; 
but go thy way, show thyself o the priest and offer the gift 
that Moses commanded, for a testimony unto THEM."’ The 
evidence or testimony was to be hidden from the people for 
a time, but to be promptly given to ¢heir ‘‘ rulers,’ who 
represented the Jewish church in the trial then in progress. 


The Work of Harvest. ; 169 


We should notice particularly the object and results of 
the trial of the Jewish church as a system, because of their 
typical bearing upon the present trial of the Gospel Church, 
as well as their relationship toward the entire plan of God, 
They professed, in harmony with God’s promises, to be the 
people ready for the coming Messiah, the people whom he 
would organize, empower, direct and use as his ‘‘ ow peo- 
ple,’’ in blessing all the other nations of the earth, by bring- 
ing all to a full knowledge of God and to opportunities of . 
harmony with his righteous laws. God, though by his fore- 
knowledge aware that Fleshly Israel would be unfit for the 
chief place in this great work, nevertheless gave them every 
opportunity and advantage the same as though he were ig- 
norant of the results. Meanwhile he disclosed his fore- 
knowledge in prophetic statements which they could not 
comprehend, lest we should suppose that he had experi- 
mented, and failed, in his dealings with the Jewish people. 

So long as Israel as a church-nation claimed to be ready. 
waiting and anxious to carry out their part of the program, 
it was but just that they should be ¢ested, before God’s further 
plan should go into effect. That further plan was, that when 
the natural seed of Abraham should, by their testing, be 
proved unfit for the chief honor promised and sought, then 
an election, or selection should be made, during the Gospel 
age, of individuals worthy of the high honor of being the 
promised seed of Abraham, and joint-heirs with Messiah in 
the promised Kingdom, which would lift up and bless all 
the families of the earth.—Gal. 3:16, 27-29, 14. , 

The ‘‘ seventy-weeks ’’ (490 years) of divine favor prom- 
ised to the Jewish people could not fail of fulfilment; and 
hence in no sense could Gentiles, or even Samaritans, be 
invited to become disciples, or in any sense to be associated 
with the Kingdom which Christ and the apostles preached. 
(Acts 3:26.) “Jf was necessary that the word of God [the - 


176 _ Dhy Kingdom Come. 


invitation to share the Kingdom] should first have been 
preached ¢o you,’’ said Paul, addressing Jews. (Acts 13:46.) 
‘Go not into the way of. the Gentiles, and into any city 
of the Samaritans enter ye not; but go rather to the lost 
sheep of the house of Israel ;’’ and again: ‘‘I am not sent, 
except to the lost sheep of the house of Israel,’’ said the 
Master, sending forth his disciples.—Matt. 10:5; 15:24. 

The entire ‘‘ seventieth week,’’ in the midst of which 
Christ died,—the seven years from the beginning of our 
Lord’s ministry to the sending of Peter to preach to Cor- 
nelius, the first Gentile convert—was set apart by God’s 
arrangement for the Jewish trial. But instead of testing 
them as a whole (as a church-nation) all of those seven years, 
that testing was ‘‘ cut short in righteousness ’’—that is, not 
to their disadvantage, but to their advantage. Because it 
was evident, not only to God but to men also, that the 
Pharisees, priests and scribes not only rejected, but toward 
the last hated, the Lord Jesus and sought to kill him ; there- 
fore, when the time had come for hi: to offer himself pub- 
licly as King, riding to them on the ass, when not received 
by the representatives of the church-nation, the King 
promptly disowned that system, though the common people 
received him gladly and insisted on his recognition as king. 
(Mark 12:37.) Thus our Lord cut short the further use- 
less trial, in order that the remainder of that “ seventieth 
week ’’ might be spent specially and exclusively upon the 
people, the individuals of that cast-off system ;—before the 
efforts of the ministers of the new dispensation should be 
distributed broadcast to all nations. And it was so; for 
our Lord, after his resurrection, when telling his disciples 
that their efforts need no longer be confined to Jews only, 
but might be extended to ‘all nations,’’ was particular to 
add—‘‘ beginning at Jerusalem. (Luke 24:47.) And he 
knew well that their Jewish ideas would hinder them from 


The Work of Harvest. 171 


going beyond the Jews until he should in due time open the 
way,—as he did at the end of their favor, by sending Peter 
to Cornelius. Since that time, individual Jews and Gentiles 
have shared the privileges of God’s favor equally, both be- 
ing alike acceptable, in and through Christ; for in the 
present call ‘‘ there is no difference ’’ so far as God is con- 
cerned—the difference unfavorable to the Jew being his own 
prejudice against accepting, as a gift through Christ, the 
blessings once offered him upon condition of his aétual 
compliance. with the full letter and spirit of God’s law, 
which none in the fallen state could fulfil. 

That ‘‘seventieth week,’’ with.all the particulars of the 
testing of Fleshly Israel, not only accomplished the purpose 
of testing that system, but it also and specially furnished a 
typical representation of.a similar testing of the nominal 
Gospel Church or Spiritual Israel, called ‘* Christendom ”’ 
and ‘‘ Babylon,’’ during seven corresponding years, which 
began the harvest of the Gospel age,—the period from Oc- 
tober 1874 to October 1881. ‘ Christendom,’’ “‘ Babylon,”’ 
professes to see the failure of its prototype, Fleshly Israel, 
and claims to be the true spirttua/ seed of Abraham, and to 
be ready, waiting and anxious to convert the heathen world, 
and to righteously rule and teach and bless all nations, just 
as the Jewish system professed. The present is like the typ- 
ical age, also, in the fact that the leaders then had gener- 
ally come to regard the promises of a coming Messiah as 
figurative expressions ; and only the commoner class of the 
people expected a personal Messiah. ‘The learned among 
the Jews, then, ignored an individual Messiah, and expected 
that their church-nation would triumph over others by reason 
of its superior laws, and thus fulfil all that the common peo- 
ple supposed would require a personal Messiah to accom- 
plish. (And this is the view that is still held by ‘‘ learned ’’ 
Jewish teachers, or Rabbis, who interpret the Messianic 


172 Thy Kingdom Come. 


prophecies as applicable to their church-nation, and not to 
an individual Savior of the world. Even the prophecies 
which refer to the sufferings of Christ ‘they apply to their 
. sufferings as a people.) Carrying out their theory, they 
were sending missionaries throughout the world, to convert 
the world to the Law of Moses, expecting thus to reach 
and ‘bless all the families of the earth,’’ aside from a per- 
sonal Messiah. To such an extent was this the case, that 
our Lord remarked it, saying, ‘‘ Ye compass sea and land 
to make one proselyte.’’ : 

How similar to this is the theory of nominal ‘‘ Christen- 
dom’’ to-day. The common people, when their attention 
- js drawn to the fact that the Lord promised to come again, 
and that the apostles and prophets predicted that the Mil- 
lennium, or Times of Restitution, would result from the 
second coming of the Lord (Aéts 3:19-21), are inclined to 
accept the truth and to rejoice in it, just as a similar class 
did at the first advent. But to-day, as eighteen hundred 
years ago, the chief priests and rulers of the people have a 
more advanced (?) idea. They claim that the promises of 
Millennial blessedness, of peace on earth and good will 
among men, can and must be brought about by their efforts, 
missions, etc., without the personal coming of the Lord 
Jesus ; and thus they make void the promises of the second 
advent and the coming Kingdom. 

The present chief priests and rulers, the ‘clergy ” of 
-“€ Christendom,’ deceiving themselves as well as the people, 
claim, and seemingly believe, that their missionary efforts 
are just about to succeed, and that, without the Lord, they 
are now upon the eve of introducing to the world all the 
Millennial blessings portrayed in the Scriptures. 

The foundation of this delusion lies partly in the fact 
that the increase of knowledge and of running to and fro 
in the earth, incident to this ‘‘ Day of His Preparation,’’ 


The Work of Harvest. 173 


have been specially favorable to the spread of the commerce 
of civilized nations, and the consequent increase of worldly 
prosperity. The credit of all this Babylon coolly appropri- 
ates to herself, pointing out all these advantages as the re- 
sults of her Christianizing and energizing influences. She 
proudly points to the ‘‘ Christian nation ’’ of Great Britain, 
and to her wealth and prosperity, as results of her Christian 
principles. But what are the facts? Every step of progress 
which that nation or any other nation has made has been 
only to the extent of the effort exercised to cast off the yoke 
of Babylon’s oppression. In proportion as Great Britain 
threw off the fetters of papal oppression, she has prospered ; 
and in proportion as she continued to hold and to be in- 
fluenced by the papal doctrines of church and state union, 
of divinely appointed kingly and priestly authority and op- 
pression, and to submit to the tyranny of greed and selfish- 
ness, to that extent is she degraded still. 

Greed for gold and ambition for power were the energies 
by which the ports of heathen lands were reluctantly opened 
up to the commerce of so-called Christian nations, to English 
’ and German rum and opium, and to American whiskey and 
tobacco. The love of God and the blessing of the heathen 
nations had no place in these efforts. Here is an apparently 
small item of current history that ought to startle the con- 
sciences of so-called Christian nations, if they have any. 
The Mohammedan Emir of Nupe, West Africa, recently 
sent the following message to Bishop Crowther, of the 
Niger mission :— 

‘Tt is not a long matter; it is about barasa [rum]. Bar- 
asa, barasa, barasa! It has ruined our country; it has ruined 
our people very much ; it has made our people mad. I beg 
you, Malam Kip, don’t forget this writing ; because we all 
beg that he lo should ask the great priests [the 
committee of the Anglican Church Mission Society] that 
they should beg the English Queen [Head of the Church 


174 Thy Kingdom Come. 


of England] to prevent bringing barasa into this land. 


‘For God and the Prophet’s sake! For God and the 
Prophet, his messenger’s sake,.he must help us in this 
matter—that of barasa. Tell him, may God bless him in 
his work. This is the mouth word from Malike, the Emir 
of Nupe.’’ 


Commenting on this a Baptist journal remarks :—‘‘ This 
humble negro ruler reveals in this letter a concern for his 
people which Christian monarchs and governments have 
not yet reached ; for no European Christian ruler, and no 
President of the United States, has ever yet so appealed in 
behalf of his people. In all the addresses opening Parlia- 
ments, in all the Presidential messages, no such passage has 
ever been found. All shame to our Christian rulers! Gain, 
the accursed hunger for gold, is the law with merchants ; 
and these are the darlings and lords of governments.’’ 

Then, in the name of truth, we ask, Why call these 
Christian governments? And the government of the United 
States is no exception, though so many persist in denomi- 
nating it a Christian government, while properly it does not 
recognize the undeserved title, though urged to do so by 
zealous sectarians. From Boston, vast cargoes of rum are _ 
continually sent to Africa, unchecked by the government, 
and with its full permission, while it grants licenses to tens 
of thousands to manufacture and deal out to its own citi- 
zens the terrible ‘‘ fire-water,’’ made doubly injurious and 
seductive by what is called rectifying, that is, by the legal- 
ized mixture of the rankest poisons. All this, and much 
more, is justified and defended by ‘ Christian ’’ statesmen 
and rulers of so-called Christian nations, for revenue—as 
the easiest way of collecting from the people a share of the 
necessary expenses of the government. Surely this is pros- 
titution of the lowest and worst type. Every thinking man 
must see how out of place is the name Christian, when ap- 
plied to even the very best of present governments. The 
attempt to fit the name Christian to the characters of “the 


The Work of Harvest. 175 


kingdoms of this world,’’ ruled by the ‘prince of this 
world ’’—Satan—and imbued with the ‘spirit of the world,”’ 
has perplexed all truly Christian hearts, deluded by this 
error of supposing the present governments of the world to 
be in any sense Christ’s Kingdom. 

‘Says Cannon Farrar in the Contemporary Review :— 


‘«The old rapacity of the slave-trade has been followed 
by the greedier and more ruinous rapacity of the drink-seller. 
Our fathers tore from the neck of Africa a yoke or whips: 
we have subjected the native races to a yoke of scorpions. 
We have opened the rivers of Africa to commerce, only to 
pour down them the raging phlegethor of alcohol, than 
which no river of the Inferno is more blood-red or accursed. 
Is the conscience of the nation dead?’”’ 


We answer, No! The nation never was Christian, and 
consequently never had a Christian conscience or a Chris- 
tian spirit. The mos¢ that can be said of it is, that the light 
from God’s truly consecrated children has enlightened, re- 
fined and shamed into a measure of moral reform the public 
sentiment of those nations in which they ‘shine as lights.”’ 

In like manner a similarly horrid traffic was forced upon 
China and Japan, against their earnest protest, by the same 
Christian (?) governments. In 1840 Great Britain began 
a war with China, called the “ Opium War,”’ to compel the 
Chinese government, which wished to protect its people 
from that terrible curse, to admit that article. The war 
resulted favorably to the devil’s side of the question. British 
war-ships destroyed thousands of lives and ‘homes, and 
forced the heathen Chinese ruler to open the empire to the 
slower death of opium,—the intoxicant of China. The net 
revenue of the British government from this drug, after 
paying large expenses for collecting the revenue, amounted, 
according to official reports published in 1872, to over 
$37,000,000 for the preceding year. This, $37,000,000 per 
year, was the inspiring cause of that war, the very reverse 


176 Thy Kingdom Come. 


of love for either the present or future welfare of the Chinese. 
The clause in the treaty providing protection to Christian 
missionaries was merely a morsel cunningly thrown in to 
appease the consciences of justice-loving people—to make 
a great crime appear to be asmercy, in kindness done. In 
the treaty at the end of the war, certain ports were made 
free to British trade, and similar treaties with other nations 
followed, and some good results were thereby secured. One 
of these was the opening of China to civilizing influences. 
But the fact that a few Christian men and women stepped 
to the front to teach the people some of the principles of 
righteousness is not to be reflected to the credit of ‘the 
British nation, whose object was trade, and which, for greed 
of gold, and not for the good of the Chinese, or the glory 
of God, waged an unholy and unjust war upon a people 
not so skilled in the devilish art. 

Along with other vices, ‘‘ Christendom ”’ has taught the 
nations the worst forms of idolatry, the idolatry of self and 
wealth and power, for which professedly Ghristian men and 
nations are willing to defraud, to injure and even to kill one 
another. It has also taught them blasphemy and sacrilege 
in every language ; for every ship’s crew, from. every pro- 
fessedly Christian nation, blasphemes the name of Christ. 
But, while such has been the influence of the so-called 
Christian nations, from their midst have also gone some 
noble missionaries of the cross, some real servants of God, 
and also some less noble, the servants of men—in all, how- 
ever, but a mere handful—to tell the heathen about Christ 
and real civilization. 

It is not the earnest missionaries, but the sanguine home 
officers of missionary societies, who have little idea of, and 
often little actual interest in, the rea] situation in foreign 
lands, and whose views are based mainly upon the large sum 
annually collected and expended, whe think the heathen 


The Work of Harvest. 177 


world almost converted, and their efforts about to eventu- 
ate in the promised Millennial blessings, without the Lord’s 
second coming. Missionaries who have been to the front 
confess, generally, to great discouragement, except when 
they can stimulate their hope out of all proportion to actual 
experience and sound judgment. Thus, one such—Rev. 
J. C. R. Ewing, D. D.—who had spent nine years in mis- 
sion work in India, in delivering a discourse recently before 
the Young Men’s Christian Association of Pittsburgh, Pa., 
admitted that the presen? effect of civilization and mission- 
ary effort is not only to break down the heathen religions, 
but to abolish all religious faith and to make the people 
infidels. But his strong hope is that the next step will 
be from Infidelity to Christianity—an unreasonable hope, 
surely, as all experience here, in civilized lands, most 
certainly proves. We extract from the public press reports 
of his discourse, as follows :— 


‘India owes more to the direct and indirect influences 
of Christianity than to any other one thing. It has done 
much to break down the old idea of material gods, and in 
its*stead to set up the idea of a single supreme God, that 
the people of the West [Europe and America] entertain. 
{A more explicit statement would be that they are receiving 
the idea, common to Atheism, that Nature is the supreme 
and only God.] 


“Among the 263,000,000 of people in that country there 
are 10,000,000 young men who speak the English language 
and are instructed in the Western ideas that we are taught. 
The higher caste are thoroughly learned in the literature, 
the religion and the sciences that are the basis of the edu- 
cation of the people of this country. The old idea of a 
vengeful God, who must be propitiated by numerous gifts 
and many prayers, has given way to the modern spirit of 
Infidelity. ‘Che educated men of the East no longer be- 
lieve in the gods of their fathers. They have abandoned 
them forever, and replaced them with the teachings of Col- 
onel Robert G. Ingersoll, of Paine, of Voltaire, of Brad- 

12¢ 


178 _ LDhy Kingdom Come. 


laugh and of every other atheistical and pantheistical teacher. 
This skeptical age will soon pass away, and the West, just 
as it has given India her ideas, will give her the religion of 
the Christian God. 

‘*The young men of India are well educated, acute ob- 
servers, intelligent, well posted in all the affairs of other 
nations besides their own, and, though it may seem strange, 
well acquainted with our Bible. Indeed, they know it so 
well that none but a man thoroughly conversant with its 
teachings, and the Christian theology, could hope to be 
able to successfully answer all the objections they bring for- 
ward against it. The popular idea, that a missionary sits 
in the shade of a tree and teaches naked savages who gather 
around him, is an exploded one. In India the missionary 
meets intelligent and educated men, and he must be well 
equipped to influence them. They are, besides being in- 
telligent, a fine looking people, amiable, courteous, gentle- 
manly, and treat all foreigners with the greatest considera- 
tion and respect.””__ 

The obstinate facts he cites certainly do not warrant the 
gentleman’s unreasonable hopes. Experience has surely 
proved that the bungling arguments of sectarianism, whose 
errors distort and vitiate what truth they possess, seldom 
make converts of either honest or scoffing skeptics. Surely, 
all but the blind can see that if the ten hundred millions of 
heathendom were converted to the condition of the four 
hundred millions*® of so-called Christendom, the question 
would be an open one, as it was in the Jewish age (Matt. 
23:15), whether they would not be two-fold more fit for 
destruction than they were in their original heathen super- 
stitions. Surely no sane mind could claim that conversion 
to such a condition as that of so-called Christendom would 
fulfil the description of the Millennial peace and good will, 
foretold by the prophets, and briefly summed up in our 
Lord’s prayer, in the words, ‘‘ Thy kingdom come; Thy 


* Of these 400,000,000, Roman and Greek Catholics together claim 
280,000,000, while Protestants claim 120,000,000, 


The Work of Harvest. 179 


will be done on earth, as it is done in heaven.’’—Luke 11:2. 

Is it at all surprising that this mass of four hundred mit- 
Hions, professedly constituting the Church of Christ, and 
calling itself his Kingdom—“ Christendom ’’—is disowned 
by the Lord, and by him given the more appropriate name, 
Babylon (mixture, confusion)? And is it any wonder that 
with their ideas of the Kingdom of Christ, and of the man- 
ner and results of its spread throughout the world, these 
should be unprepared for the real Kingdom, and unwilling 
to receive the new King, as, for similar reasons, the rulers 
of the typical house were unprepared at the first advent? 
Nor can it be doubted that those emperors, kings and princes 
who now use influence ane] power chiefly for self-aggran- 
dizement, and who equip zad maintain millions of armed 
men to protect and to continue them in their imperial ex- 
travagances and lordly positions, would rather see millions 
slaughtered, and other millions made widows and orphans, 
as in the past, than that they should part with their present 
advantages. Is it any wonder that these should neither de- 
sire, nor expect, nor believe in the kind of Kingdom prom- 
ised in the Scriptures ?—a kingdom in which the high and 
lofty and proud shall be brought low, and the lowly lifted 
up to the general, proper and designed level? Is it any 
wonder that all in sympathy with any kind of oppression, 
extortion, or grinding monopoly, by which they obtain, or 
hope to obtain, unjust advantage over their fellow-creatures, 
would be slow to believe in the Kingdom of righteousness. 
in which no injustice and overreaching will be permitted ? 
Especially, can we wonder that such are slow to believe this 
Kingdom nigh, even at the doors? 

Nor can we wonder that the great ones, the chief priests 
and rulers of ‘¢ Christendom,’’ looking each to gain from 
his own quarter or sect (Isa. 56:11), fail to recognize, and 
therefore reject, the spiritual King now present, as the 


180 Thy Kingdom Come. 


teachers of the fleshly house rejected him when present in 
the flesh. And as the Lord rejected, cut off and cast away 
from favor, into a fire of trouble, many of the ‘“ natural 
branches ’’ of the olive tree, preserving only the Israelites 
indeed as branches, do we not see that, in the harvest of 
this age, the same wisdom tests the ‘‘ wild branches’’ also 

_ (Rom. 11:21, 22), and cuts off from the favor and fatness 
.of the root [the Abrahamic promise] this great mass of pro- 
fessed branches, whose character and aims and dispositions 
are foreign and wild indeed—very different from the promise 
and plan of God represented in the root ? 

It is not strange that the present harvest witnesses the 
separation of true Christians from mere professors, as in the 
Jewish harvest a separation of Israelites indeed from mere 
professors was accomplished. It is only what we might 
reasonably have expected, even had there been no revela- 
tion made to us in God’s Word, showing the fact of the re- 
*jeGion of the mass, as Babylon.—Compare Rom. 11:20- 
22 with Rev. 3:16; 18:4. 

The rejection of Babylon (‘‘ Christendom’’), in 1878, 
was the rejection of the mass of professors—the ‘‘ host,’’ as 
it is termed by Daniel, to distinguish it from the sanctuary 
or temple class. The sanctuary class will not be given up, 
nor left desolate. No, thank God, the san¢tuary is to be 
glorified ; the glory of the Lord is to fill his temple, when 
its last living stone is polished and approved and set in place. 
(1 Pet. 2:5, 6.) We have seen how such a sanctuary class 
has existed throughout the age, how it was defiled, and its 
precious vessels (doctrines) profaned, and how its cleansing 
from error has been gradually effected? This class had all 
along been the real Church, even while the nominal systems 
were still in a measure recognized and to some extent used. 
After the rejection of the nominal systems, however, now as 
in the Jewish harvest, the real Church or Sanctuary class 


The Work of Harvest. 181 


alone is recognized and used as God’s mouthpiece. Caiaphas, 
a chief-priest of Fleshly Israe], was used as the agent of 
God to deliver a great lesson and prophecy only a few days 
before that system was, cast off. (See John 11:50, 51,55; 
18:14.) But we have no intimation in the Scriptures, nor 
any reason for supposing, that God ever used or recognized 
that church-nation, its rulers and representatives, after it 
was cast off. And this same lesson should be recognized, 
here, in connection with Babylon. She is ‘‘ spewed out ’’ 
of the Lord’s mouth; and neither the voice of the Bride- 
groom nor of the bride shall be heard # her any more for- 
ever.—Rev. 18:23. 

It is in vain that some attempt to make a plea for their 
quarter of Babylon, and, while admitting the general cor- 
rectness of the prophetic portrait, to claim that their sect, 
or their particular congregation, is an exception to the gen- 
eral character of Babylon, and that, therefore, the Lord 
cannot be calling upon them to withdraw from it formally 
and publicly, as they once joined it. 

Let such consider that we are now in the harvest time of 
separation, and remember our Lord’s expressed reason for 
calling us out of Babylon, namely,—‘‘ that ye be not par- 
takers of her sins.’’ Consider, again, why Babylon is so 
named. Evidently, because of her many errors of doctrine, 
which, mixed with a few elements of divine truth, make 
great confusion, and because of the mixed company brought 
together by the mixed truths and errors. And since they 
will hold the errors at a sacrifice of truth, the latter is made 
void; and often worse than meaningless. This sin, of hold- 
ing and teaching error at the sacrifice of truth is one of 
which every sect of the Church nominal is guilty, without 
exception. Where is the sect which will assist you in dil- 
igently searching the Scriptures, to grow thereby in grace 
and in the knowledge of the truth ? Where is the sect which 


182 Thy Kingdom Come. 


will not hinder your growth, both by its doctrines and its 
usages? Where is the sect in-which you can obey the Mas- 
ter’s words and let your light shine? We know of none. 
If any of God’s children in these organizations do not 
realize their bondage, it is because they do not attempt to 
use their liberty, because they are asleep at their posts of 
duty, when they should be active stewards and faithful 
watchmen. (1 Thes. 5:5, 6.) Let them wake up and at- 
tempt to use the liberty they think they possess; let them 
show to their fellow-worshipers wherein ‘their creeds fall 
short of the divine plan, wherein they diverge from it and 
run in direct opposition to it; let them show how Jesus 
’ Christ by the favor of God tasted death for every man ; how 
this fact, and the blessings flowing from it, shall ‘‘in due 
time’’ be testified to every man; how in ‘the times of re- 
freshing ’’ the blessings of restitution shall flow to the whole 
human race. Let them show further the high calling of 
the Gospel Church, the rigid conditions of membership in 
that body, and the special mission of the Gospel age to take 
out this peculiar ‘‘ people for his name,’’ which in due time 
is to be exalted and to reign with Christ. Those who will 
thus attempt to use their liberty to preach the good tidings 
in the synagogues of to-day will succeed either in convert- 
ing whole congregations, or else in awakening a storm of 
opposition. They will surely cast you out of their syna- 
gogues, and separate yon from their company, and say all 
manner of evil against you, falsely, for Christ’s sake. And, 
in so doing, doubtless, many will feel that they are doing 
God service. But, if thus faithful, you will be more than 
comforted in the precious promises of Isa. 66:5 and Luke 
6:22,—‘* Hear the word of the Lord, ye that tremble at 
his word: Your brethren that hated you, that cast you out 
for my name’s sake, said, Let the Lord be glorified [we do 
this for the Lord’s glory]: but he shall appear to your joy, 


The Work of Harvest. 183 


and they shall be ashamed.’’ ‘‘ Blessed are ye when men 
shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from their 
company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name 
as evil, for the Son of man’s sake. Rejoice ye in that day, 
and leap for joy; for, behold, your reward is great in heaven 
for in like manner did their fathers unto the prophets.’’ 
But, ‘Woe unto you when all men shall speak well of you; 
for so did their fathers to the fa/se prophets.”’ 

If all with whom you worship as a congregation are saints 
-—if all are wheat, with no tares among them—you have 
met a most remarkable people, who will receive the harvest 
truths gladly. But if not, you must expect present truth to 
separate the tares from the wheat. And more, you must 
do .your share in presenting these very truths which will ac- 
complish the separation. 

If you would be one of the overcoming saints, you must 
now be one of the ‘‘reapers’’ to thrust in the sickle of 
truth. If faithful to the Lord, worthy of the truth and 
worthy of joint-heirship with him in glory, you will rejoice 
to share with the Chief Reaper in the present harvest work, — 
no matter how disposed you may be, naturally, to glide 
smoothly through the world. 

If there are tares among the wheat in the congregation 
of which you are a member, as is always the case, much 
will depend upon which is in the majority. If the wheat 
‘preponderates, the truth, wisely and lovingly presented, 
will affeét them favorably ; and the tares will not long care 
to stay. But if the majority are tares—as nine-tenths or 
more generally are—the effect of the most: careful and 
kind presentation of the harvest truth will be to awaken 
bitterness and strong opposition ; and, if you persist in de- 
claring the good tidings, and in exposing the long estab- 
lished errors, you will soon be ‘‘ cast out’’ for the good of 
the sectarian cause, or have your liberties so restrained that 


184 Thy Kingdom Come. 


you cannot let your light shine in that congregation. Your 
duty then is plain: Deliver your loving testimony to the 
goodness and wisdom of the Lord’s great plan of the ages, 
and, wisely and meekly gtving your reasons, publicly with- 
draw from them. 

There are various degrees of bondage among the different 
sects of Babylon—‘ Christendom.’’ Some who would in- 
dignantly resent the utter and absolute slavery of individual 
conscience and judgment, required by Romanism, are quite 
willing to be bound themselves, and anxious to get others 
bound, by the creeds and dogmas of one or another of the 
Protestant sects. True, their chains are lighter and longer 
than those of Rome and the dark ages. So far as it goes, 
this surely is good,—reformation truly,—a step in the right 
direction,—/owurd full liberty,—toward the condition of 
the Church in the apostolic times. But why wear human _ 
shackles at all? Why bind and limit our consciences at all? 
Why not stand fast in the full liberty wherewith Christ hath 
made us free? Why not reject all the efforts of fallible fel- 
low men to fetter conscience and hinder investigation >— 
not only the efforts of the remote past, of the dark ages, 
but the efforts of the various reformers of the. more recent 
past ? Why not conclude to be as was the apostolic Church? 
—free to grow in knowledge as well as in grace and love, 
as the Lord’s ‘‘ due time’’ reveals his gracious plan more 
and more fully? a 

Surely all know that whenever they join any of these hu- 
man organizations, accepting its Confession of Faith as theirs, 
they bind themselves to believe neither more nor less than 
that creed expresses on the subject. If, in spite of the 
bondage thus voluntarily yielded to, they should think for 
themselves, and receive light from other sources, in advance 
of the light enjoyed by the sect they have joined, they 
must either prove untrue to the se¢t and to their covenant 


The Work of Harvest. 185 


with it, to believe nothing contrary to its Confession, or else 
they must honestly cast aside and repudiate the Confession 
which they have outgrown, and come out of sucha sect. 
To do this requires grace and costs some effort, disrupting, 
as it often does, pleasant associations, and exposing the 
honest truth-seeker to the silly charges of being a ‘‘ traitor’”’ 
to his sect, a ‘‘turncoat,’’ one ‘‘not established,’’ etc. 
When one joins a sect, his mind is supposed to be given up 
. entirely to that sect, and henceforth not his own. The sect 
undertakes to decide for him what is truth and what is error; 
and he, to be a true, staunch, faithful member, must accept 
the decisions of his sect, future as well as past, on all religi- 
‘ous matters, ignoring his own individual thought, and 
avoiding personal investigation, lest he grow in knowledge, 
aud be lost as a member of suchse&t. This slavery of con- 
science to a sect and creed is often stated in so many words, 
“when such a one declares that he ‘* de/ongs’’ to such a sect. 
These shackles of seCtarianism, so far from being rightly 
, esteemed as shackles and bonds, are esteemed and worn as 
ornaments, as badges of respect and marks of character. 
So far has the delusion gone, that many of God’s children 
would be ashamed to be known to be without some such 
chains—light or heavy in weight, long or short in the per- 
sonal liberty granted. ‘They are ashamed to say that they 
are not in bondage to any sect or creed, but ‘‘ de/ong’’ to 
Christ only. 

Hence it is that we sometimes see an honest, truth-hungry 
child of God gradually progressing from one denomination 
to another, as a child passes from class to class in a school. 
If he be in the Church of Rome, when his eyes are opened, 
he gets out of it, probably falling into some branch of the 
Methodist or Presbyterian systems. If here his desire for 
truth be not entirely quenched and his spiritual senses stu- 
pefied with the spirit of the world, you may a few years 


186 Thy Kingdom Come. 


after find him in some of the branches of the Baptist sys- 
tem ; and, if he still continue to grow in grace and knowl- 
edge and love of truth, and into an appreciation of the lib- 
erty wherewith Christ makes free, you may by and by find 
him outside of all human organizations, joined merely to the 
Lord and to his saints, bound only by the tender but strong 
ties of Inve and truth, like the early Church.—1 Cor. 6: 
15,173 Eph. 4:15, 16. 

The feeling of uneasiness and insecurity, if not bound by 
the chains of some sect, is general. It is begotten of the 
false idea, first promulgated by Papacy, that membership in 
an earthly organization is essential, pleasing to the Lord 
and necessary to everlasting life. These earthly, humanly 
organized systems, so different from the simple, unfettered 
associations of the days of the apostles, are viewed involun- 
tarily and almost unconsciously by Christian people as so 
many Heaven Insurance Companies, to some one of which’ 
money, time, respect, etc., must be paid regularly, to secure 
heavenly rest and peace after death. Acting on this false 
idea, people are almost as nervously anxious to be bound 
by another sect, if they step out of one, as they are if their 
policy of insurance has expired, to have it renewed in some 
respectable company. 

But no earthly organization can grant a passport to 
heavenly glory. The most bigoted sectarian (aside from 
the Romanist) will not claim, even, that membership in his 
sect will secure heavenly glory. Ail are forced to admit 
that the true Church is the one whose record is kept in 
heaven, and not on earth. They deceive the people by 
claiming that it is needful to come to Christ through them, 
—needful to become members of some sectarian body in or- 
der to become members of ‘‘ the body of Christ,’’ the true 
Church. On the contrary, the Lord, while he has not re- 
fused any who came to him through se¢tarianism, and has 


The Work of Harvest. 187 


turned no true seeker away empty, tells us that we need no 
such hindrances, but could much better have come to hm 
direct. He cries, ‘* Come unto me ;’’ ‘take my yoke upon 
you, and learn of me;’’ ‘‘my yoke is easy and my burden 
is light, and ye shall find rest to your souls.’? Would that 
we had given heed to his voice sooner. We would’ have 
avoided many of the heavy burdens of sectism, many of its 
bogs of despair, many of its doubting castles, its vanity 
fairs, its lions of worldly-mindedness, etc. 

‘Many, however, born in the various sects, or transplanted 
in infancy or childhood, without questioning the systems, 
have grown free in heart, and unconsciously beyond the 
limits and bounds of the creeds they acknowledge by their 
profession and support with their means and influence. 
Few of these have recognized the advantages of full liberty, 
or the drawbacks of se¢tarian bondage. Nor was the full, 
complete separation enjoined until now, in the harvest time. 
Now the Lord’s words are heard, Come out from among 
them: be ye clean (free, both from wrong praétices and 
from false do¢ctrines), ye who bear the vessels (truths—doc- 
trines) of the Lord.—Isa. 52:11. 

Now the ax is laid to the root of the nominal Christian 
system—Babylon, ‘‘ Christendom ’’ —as it was to the nom- 
inal Jewish system at the first advent ; and the great system 
in which the ‘‘ fowl of heaven ’’ delight to roost, and which 
they have grievously befouled (Luke 13:18, 19), and which 
has in fa¢ét become ‘‘a cage of every unclean and hateful 
bird’? (Rev. 18:2), is to be hewn down, and shall deceive 
the world no longer. Instead, the true olive tree, whose roots 
are the true promises of God, and whose branches are the 
truly and fully consecrated and faithful ones of this Gospel 
age, whose names are ‘“‘wrtften in heaven,’’ will be seen t¢ 
be the true and only joint-heir and Bride of the Lamb. 
—Rev. 17:14. 


188 Thy Kingdom Come. 


THE TESTING AND SIFTING OF THE SANCTUARY CLASS. 


Though coming out of Babylon is one step, and a long 
one, in the direction of complete overcoming, it is by no 
means the last one ; and we should be careful to guard against 
a disposition to rest after every advance step of the way. 

“ Ne’er think the victory won, ~ 
‘ Nor once at ease sit down: 
Thine arduous work will not be done 
Till thou hast gained thy crown. 


“A cloud of witnesses around 
Hold thee in full survey. 
Forget the steps already trod, 

And onward urge thy way.” 

The step out of Babylon has generally been preceded by 
other steps of obedience, which in turn have exercised and 
strengthened ‘the character for subsequent conflicts and vic- 
tories. And it will be followed by various other tests and 
opportunities for avercoming, in view of which Paul (Gal. 
5:1) wrote, ‘Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ 
hath made us free, and be not entangled again with a yoke 
of bondage.’’ Every one who comes to realize the liberty 
of the sons of God and full freedom from Babylon’s bond- 
age should expect to meet other attempts of the great ad- 
versary to bring him into other bondages, or to stumble 
him. The Lord permits these severe testings, that the class 
now sought may be manifested, and prepared for his service - 
in the Kingdom of glory. 

An illustration of this t@sting and sifting took place in 
the Jewish harvest, foreshadowing what we may expect 
here. The temple or sanctuary class at the first advent 
was represented by the Lord’s disciples, of whom he said, 
“Ye are clean, but not all [of you]’’; and following the 
casting off of nominal Israel (A. D. 33) came a severe testing 


The Work of Harwest. 189 


to those representing God’s temple, the clean and the un- 
clean, to separate them. Peter was sifted, and almost failed 
(Luke 22:31; Matt. 26:74, 75; John 21:15-17); but, be- 
ing ‘‘clean,’’ true at heart, he was enabled to come off vic- 
torious. Judas also was tested, and he proved to be unclean, 
willing to sell the truth for earthly advantage, to deny the 
‘Lord for money, even while kissing him in profession of love. 

Just so there is here, in this harvest, a cleansed sanctuary, 
and, closely associated with it,some who are not clean. And 
since the casting off of Babylon in 1878, and the call there 
made, to come out of her, a testing and sifting work has 
been going on amongst those who have come out. Doubt- 
less Peter and Judas were illustrations of similar classes here, 
among those who have come out of Babylon, and who have 
been cleansed from many of her do¢trinal pollutions,—a class 
which remains faithful to the Lord and the truth, and another 
class which proves unfaithful, which does not follow on to 
know the Lord, but which turns aside to evil and false doc- 
trines, often worse than those from which they had escaped. 

This testing and sifting of the temple class, in this har- 
vest since 1878, were foreshadowed by our Lord’s typical 
act of cleansing the typical temple after assuming the office 
of King and pronouncing judgment against the nominal 
Jewish church. After declaring their house left unto them 
desolate, he proceeded to the temple in Jerusalem, typical 
of the true temple or sanctuary, and, making a scourge of 
small cords, he used it in driving out the money changers ; 
and he overturned the tables of them that sold doves. 

The scourge of small cords used in that typical aét rep- 
resented the various truths, used in the present harvest: 
among the temple class, to correct and prove, and to sepa- 
rate the unclean. ‘he truths now made manifest reveal so 
clearly the perfect will of God, the import of full consecra- 
tion to his service, and the narrowness of the way which 


190 Thy Kingdom Come. 


must be traveled by those who walk in the Master’s footprints, 
-that those who have joined themselves to this class from any 
unclean motives are continually scourged by the truth, until 
constrained to separate themselves from the sanctuary class. 

Though several of our Lord’s parables show the general 
separation of the ‘‘ sanctuary ’’ class from the ‘ host,’’ or 
general mass of professing Christendom, there are two which 
go still further and show the testing and sifting, afterward, 
of the sanCtuary class,—the separation of the overcomers, 
who shall inherit the Kingdom (Rev. 3:21), from others of 
the honestly consecrated, who, overcome by the spirit of 
the world, neglect to sacrifice present advantages and hon- 
ors of men, for the higher honors of God. 

‘The parable of the Ten Virgins, while it shows the entire 
virgin or consecrated class being separated from Babylon, 
marks distin¢tly a testing and separation to take place in 
this class also—a separation of wise virgins, full of faith and 
fervent love and the spirit of prompt obedience, from foo/- 
tsh virgins, who allow their first love and fervency of spirit 
tocool, and their faith and promptness of obedience con- 
sequently to abate. The wise, living in full harmony with 
their covenant of entire consecration to God, and earnestly 
watching for the Lord’s promised return, are prepared to 
appreciate the glad harvest message, to recognize the 
foretold indications of the Master’s presence, and to stand 
whatever tests he may see fit to apply, to prove their loy- 
alty and faithfulness. These, awake and watching, hear 
the Master’s knock, through the words of the prophets, an- 
nouncing his presence; and to them present losses and 
crosses, meekly borne for the truth’s sake, are welcomed as 
the harbingers of a more lasting peace and joy and glory 
aid blessing to follow. 

When the knock of prophecy was neard announcing the 
Lord’s presence in the autumn of 1874, almost immediately 


The Work of Harvest. 191 


it began to be recognized: and quickly the cry was raised, 
‘« Behold the Bridegroom! go ye out to meet him.’’ And 
. this cry still goes forth, and will continue until all of the 
consecrated virgin class have heard, and have had their faith 
and loyalty tested by it. The wise, with lamps (the Word of 
God) trimmed and burning, and with oil (the holy spirit) 
in their vessels (their hearts), will All recognize the Lord’s 
presence; and, by ordering their conduct and affairs in har- 
mony with their faith, they will go “‘ forth’’to meet the beloved 
Bridegroom, and sit down with him at the marriage feast. 

The marriage custom of the Jews formed a beautiful illus- 
tration of the Church’s betrothal and marriage with Christ, 
her Lord. The espousal or betrothal was a formal agree- 
ment made with solemn covenants of fidelity on each, side. 
The woman continued in her father’s house until she was 
taken to the home of her husband, usually about a year after 
betrothal or marriage. The consummation of the union con- 
sisted in the receiving of the wife to the home prepared for 
htr by the husband, and was celebrated with a great feast 
lasting several days—called the Nuptial Feast. At a fixed 
hour the bridegroom set out for his bride, who was waiting 
in readiness to receive him and to accompany him to their 
future home and to the feast which he had provided, fol- 
lowed by her virgin companions with lamps and all the 
necessary preparations. 

In the parable no mention is made of the bride, but all 
of the ‘‘wise virgins’’ are mentioned as those for whom 
the Bridegroom comes, and who accompany him and enter 
to the feast of joys prepared. And this is both proper and 
necessary ; because the Bride of Christ is composed of 
many members or persons, most beautifully represented in 
the wise virgins. The foolish virgins who obtain the light 
and experience later, but who will fail to obtain the high 


exaltation of the “ wise,’’ faithful Bride class, will no doubt 
e 


192 Thy Kingdom Come. 


be the class mentioned (Psa. 45:14, 15) as ‘‘the virgins her 
companions which /o//ow her,’’ who in due time will be 
favored, but not so highly, by the King. 

The attitude of the wise virgins, ready, waiting and anx- 
ious for the Bridegroom’s coming, fitly represents the only 
proper a/titude of the Lord’s betrothed, the truly conse- 
crated Church. For a bride to neglect or to be unprepared 
for this, the most eventful moment of life, would prove her 
unfitness for the honor; and so it is with the Church: 
‘“sHe that hath this hope in him purifieth himself,’’ seeks 
to be in an attitude of heart and life’ pleasing to the Bride- 
groom, and is longing and waiting for the blessed union 
and feast promised by him who said, I go to prepare a place 
for you, and will come again and receive you unto myself. 

Two things are evident from this parable: first, that this 
special feature of truth (the knowledge of the Bridegroom’s 
presence) is not intended for the world in general, nor for 
the nominal church in general, but only for the virgin or 
consecrated class; second, it is evident that this message , 
of the Bridegroom’s presence will cause the separation 
which will test and prove each individual of the virgin class, 
and clearly manifest the wise, faithful, worthy ones from 

_ the unfaithful, unwise virgins. 

Oh, what riches of grace are contained in this glorious 
message, ‘‘ Behold the Bridegroom!’’ As yet it is a great 
secret known only among the saints; for the world cannot 
receive it. It is foolishness unto them, and will be, until 
the virgins have all heard, and the wise among them have 
fully entered in ; until ‘‘ the door is shut,’’ and the “ flam- 
ing fire’’ of the great time of trouble then to ensue will 
cause every eye to see (recognize) the Lord’s presence and 
reign begun. 

With what kingly grace the message of Jehovah comes 
to his humble servants and handmaidens—“ Hearken, O 


The Work of Harvesi. 193 


daughter, and consider, and incline thine ear; forget also 
thine own people and thy father’s [Adam’s] house [the 
human relationships, hopes, aims and ambitions]; so shall 
the King [the Lord Jesus] greatly desire thy beauty: for 
he is thy Lord ; and worship thou him.’’ (Psa. 45:10, 11.) 
And who are these who will receive such favor? They are 
the ‘called, and accepted, and faithful.’ ‘The King’s 
daughter [Jehovah’s daughter; for as such the Bride of 
Christ is owned] is all glorious wz/hin.’’ Her beauty is the 
beauty of holiness.  Outwardly, before the world, she is not 
glorious ; and, like her Lord in his humiliation, she is de- 
spised and rejected of men. But she will not always’be so: 
having followed him in his humiliation, she shall also share 
in his glory. As a new creature, she will in due time be 
clothed with his divine nature—‘‘ Her clothing [when glori- 
fied] is of wrought gold ’’ —gold being a symbol of the di- 
vine nature. ‘‘ She shall be brought unto the king in rai- 
ment of needle work’’—-in the simple white robe of her 
Lord’s own furnishing, the robe of his righteousness, upon 
which she will have wrought, with much carefulness, the 
beautiful adornments of the Christian graces. And great 
will be the rejoicing in heaven and in earth at her abundant 
entrance into the King’s palace (2 Pet. 1:5-8, 11): many 
will say, ‘‘ Let us be glad and rejoice and give honor to 
him; for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife 
hath made herself ready.’’ (Rev. 19:7.) ‘‘ And the daughter 
of ‘Tyre [the strong ones of earth] shall be there with a gift ; 
even the rich among the people shall entreat thy favor. 

- I will make thy name to be remembered in all gene- 
rations: therefore shall the people praise thee forever and 
ever.”’—Psa, 45:12-17. 

Truly ‘ wise’’ will those of the consecrated prove to be 
who, neglecting worldly enchantments, and earthly hopes 
and prizes, and with hearts yearning and waiting for the 

13¢ 


194 Thy Kingdom Come. 


Beloved, are found ready and proved worthy of the great 
exaltation promised, as the Bride, the Lamb’s wife. 
“ Bride of the Lamb, thy charms, 
Oh, may we share.” 

Since taking their lamps and following the Bridegroom 
represents leaving all else to follow Christ in this time of 
his presence, it is equivalent to leaving Babylon, where the 
virgins have mainly been ; because the truth manifested in 
the light of harvest clearly indicates this separation of wheat 
from tares. Careful trimming reveals this fact to the wise 
virgins possessing the holy spirit of consecration and. obe- 
dience. Such as have this ‘‘ oil’’ will have the light also ; 
and such, appreciating the privilege, will gladly and promptly 
‘¢ follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth.’’ 

The foolish virgins, on the contrary, lacking sufficiency 
of oil, fail to get clear light on the subject of the Bride- 
groom’s presence; and, being overcharged with the cares, 
plans, etc., of the present life, they fail to investigate the 
subject fully, and consequently are halting and undecided 
about leaving Babylon, and are measurably indifferent to, 
and incredulous of, the whole subject. And even if, urged 
by others, they reluctantly take their departure, like Lot’s 
wife, they are constantly inclined to look back. For such the 
Lord left the injunction, ‘‘ Remember Lot’s wife.”’ (Luke 
17:32.) And again he said, ‘‘ No man having put his hand 
to the plow, and looking back, is // for the Kingdom of God. 

There is nothing in the parable to indicate that the fool- 
ish virgins will be aware of their foolishness, until the op- 
portunity of going in to the feast has passed by. Then they 
will realize how foolish they were in expecting to be owned 
of the Lord as his Bride and joint-heirs, when they were at 
most but lukewarm and distant followers. Many now 
‘highly esteemed among men,’’ and noted for their ‘‘ won- 
derful works,’’ will be among the disappointed. 


The Work of Harvest. 195 


AND THE DOOR WAS SHUT. 


The proclamation of the Bridegroom’s presence, the go- 
ing forth to meet him, and the entering in with him to the 
marriage, s##// continue, and will continue, until all the wise 
virgins are ‘‘sealed in their foreheads’’ with a knowledge 
of harvest truth sufficient to separate them from Babylon, 
and to enable them to enter in with the Bridegroom to the 
feast prepared. Then, when all the virgins have been tested 
by this présent truth, the door of opportunity will be shut, 
and no more will be permitted to enter to the feast ; for, 
said the Master, I am ‘‘he that openeth, and no man shut- 
teth, and shutteth and no man openeth.’’ (Rev. 3:7.) And 
when the foolish virgins come knocking and seeking’ admit- 
tance, after the door is shut, saying, ‘‘ Master, Master, open it 
for us,’’ he will answer them, saying, ‘‘ Indeed, I say to y 9u, I 
recognize you not.’’ Those who are ashamed of him and of 
his words now, and therefore indifferent to them, of such 
will he then be ashamed, when he is about to appear in 
glory and power with all his holy, faithful messengers—the 
wise virgins exalted and glorified with him. 

The shut door, it will be perceived, has nothing what- 
ever to do with the worldly. It is the door to the marriage 
feast ; and it never was open to any except the consecrated, 
the virgin class. No other class was ever invited to enter 
it; and it closes when the harvest truths have sifted and 
separated all the warm, earnest covenant-keepers from the 
cold, lukewarm and overcharged, who negle¢t to fulfil their 
covenant. Thank God, it is not the door of mercy that 
here closes, nor even the door of all favor; but it is the 
door to that one chref favor of joint-heirship with Christ as 
his Bride. But when it closes against the foolish virgins, 
and will never again open to their knock, though it leave 
them standing without, exposed to the great tribulation of 


196 Thy Kingdom Come. 


the ** evil day,’’ where there will be weeping and wailing 
and gnashing of teeth, it still leaves them in the arms of 
God’s love and mercy, and even under his favor and special 
care; for the great tribulations through which they shall 
pass are designed to purify and purge those then repentant 
virgins, and thereby to fit them as vessels of honor for the 
Master’s use, though not for the chief honor to which they 
were originally called, but of which they proved themselves 
unworthy. Partaking to some extent of the spirit of Baby- 
- lon, giving to her the weight of their influence, however small, 
they are reckoned of God as partakers of her sins and there- 
fore as unworthy to escape the plagues coming upon her. 
These plagues are necessary, not only for Babylon’s destruc- 
ion, but also for the purification and separation of the hither- 
to unripe wheat remaining in her ;—the foolish virgins, meas- 
ur: bly intoxicated and overcome with the wine of Babylon. 

The going in with the Lord to the marriage was beauti- 
fully illustrated by the happy bridal procession which es- 
corted the Jewish bride to her husband’s home, with music 
and lighted lamps and every demonstration of joy. Thus 
she entered in to the joy of her Lord and to the feast which 
he had provided. Thus the wise virgins are now entering 
in. The joy begins when they first hear of the Bridegroom’s 
presence. Gladly they leave all clse for his company and 
the prepared feast. Already by faith they are enjoying the 
coming feast, as the present Bridegroom makes known to 
them the exceeding great and precious things in reservation 
for his ele€t Bride, and reveals to them his great work of 
blessing and restoring the world, in which it will be the 
privilege of the Bride to share. Surely, as we enter the re- 
ception room and see evidences of the coming feast of King- 
dom favor, we are already entering into the joys of our Lord. 
Already we have a foretaste of the good things to come. 
Already we are feasting, mentally, upon the richest bounties 


The Work of Harvest. 197 


of his grace. By faith we are already seated at the Master’s 
table, and he himself, according to promise (Luke 12:37), 
has come forth and is serving us. 

This feasting by faith on the precious truths disclosed 
during this harvest time began in 1875, at the close of the 
1335 days (Dan. 12:12), in the beginning of the harvest, 
and is the blessedness foretold by the prophet, saying, ‘¢ Oh, 
the blessedness of him that waiteth earnestly, and cometh 
unto the thousand three hundred five and thirty days !”’ 


THE WEDDING GARMENT TEST. 


Another of our Lord’s parables (Matt. 22:1-14) shows a 
still further testing of the san¢tuary class—a testing and 
separation even among those who have heard and recog- 
nized the harvest message. The ‘‘ wise virgins’’ of the 
one parable, who enter with the Bridegroom to the wedding, 
and the ‘‘ guests ’’ of this parable, are the same class of con- 
secrated ones, who thus far have shown themselves faithful 
and obedient. In fact, this class is represented by many 
different figures, each of which has, as an illustration, its own 
peculiar force. ‘hey are represented as wise virgins, as 
servants waiting for their Lord’s return from a wedding, as 
guests at a wedding, and as a bride. They are the body 
of Christ, the prospective bride of Christ, soldiers under 
Christ their Captain, branches in Christ the vine, olive 
branches in Christ, living stones in a temple of which Christ 
is the chief corner stone; pupils under Christ as their teacher, 
sheep over whom he is Shepherd, etc., etc. In consider- 
ing these figures, we must remember that they are distinct 
and separate illustrations, entirely independent of each 

_other, and seek to gather from each the lesson which it 
was designed to impart. If we endeavor to blend the illus- 
trations, and wonder how a stone in a temple can be a 
branch in a vine, how sheep can be soldiers, or how the 


198 Thy Kingdom Come. 


guests at a wedding can be the servants, or the bride, we fail 
entirely to comprehend them. A¢7ua//y we are not called 
to be guests at the marriage supper of the Lamb, nor servants 
waiting for his return from the wedding, but we are called 
to be the bride, though in some respects we must be ke ser- 
vants and /ike these guests—like faithful servants in our vig- 
ilance and watchfulness, and like guests in another respect. 

This parable serves to show what could not be illustrated 
under the figure of the bride, which represents the elect 
church collectively as Christ’s joint-heir. This shows both 
the character of the readiness required, and also the inspec- 
tion of each individual which shall rejeét some and accept 
others. Those thus inspected are represented as already in 
the guest chamber. They are the wheat reaped or gathered 
out from amongst the tares, the wise virgins separated from 
the foolish. They have heard and received the harvest 
truths, and are rejoicing by faith in anticipation of the glory 
and blessing to follow their full union with the Lord. 
Hitherto they all have run well; but until he reach the end 
of his course, ‘‘let him that thinketh he standeth, take 
heed lest he fall.’’ 

The condition of acceptableness and readiness for the 
marriage is symbolized in this parable under the figure of 
the wedding garment. It was a custom at Jewish weddings 
for the host: to provide dresses of ceremony—white linen 
robes—for all the guests; and for any guest to discard the 
wedding robe presented by the host on such an occasion, 
and to appear in his own clothing, would have been con- 
sidered a shameful impropriety, significant of pride and of 
disrespect for his entertainer. 

As a symbol, the wedding garment clearly illustrates the 
righteousness of Christ, provided by our host, Jehovah 
(Rom.8 ; 30-34), imputed to every one believing and trusting 
in him, without which no one is acceptable at the marriage 


The Work of Harvest. 199 


of the Lamb, and without which no guest is admitted. The 

invitation and the wedding robe are both necessary, and 

the parable shows that only those so attired are admitted 

even to the ante-chamber of special preparation—into the 

light of present truth, where the bride makes herself finally — 
ready. (Rev. 19:7.) The robe and the invitation received 

and accepted, these guests spend the short time just prior 

.to the marriage feast (the harvest time) in adjusting their 

robes and giving to themselves and to each other the finish- 

ing touches of preparation. And, while thus engaged, they 

are together feasting already, by faith, on the prospect be- 

fore them. ‘The Bridegroom, the grand future work, the glori- 

ous inheritance and the present work of preparation are the - 
constant themes of their thoughts and conversation. 

In this antechamber (this favored time and condition), 
brilliantly lighted with the clear unfolding of divine truth 
now due, both the facilities for, and the inspiration to, the 
final adornment and complete readiness for the marriage 
feast are granted. But, nevertheless, the parable shows that 
even under these specially favorable conditions, some, here 
represented by ‘‘one,’’ will insult the host, the King, by 
despising and taking off the wedding garment. 

The unmistakable teaching of this parable then is, that _ 
the final general test of those ‘‘ wise virgins,’’ who have 
thus far been found ready and worthy, and who have there- 
fore been ushered into much of the harvest light, will be a 
test of their appreciation of the faét, often testified to in 
the Scriptures, that they are accepted to the feast, not in 
' their own merit, solely, but primarily because their naked- 
ness and many imperfections are covered by the merit of 
him who gave his life as their ransom price, and whose im- 
puted righteousness, as a robe, alone makes them presenta- 
ble and acceptable before the King. All must wear the robe. 
Each may embroider his own with good works. 


206 Thy Kingdom Come. 


How remarkable and significant that ¢#7s should be the 
great, general, closing test. Our Heavenly Father is evi- 
dently determined that none shall be of the bride company 
except such as realize clearly their own nothingness, and 
that the great Bridegroom is their Redeemer, as well as their 
Lord and Teacher. , 

It seems strange, too, that any who had run well so far 
along the course should fall when so near the fruition of 
their hope; yet, when warned of such a possibility, it be- 
hooves all the consecrated to watch and pray, lest they 
enter into temptation ;- for in these last days come the peril- 
ous times foretold by the Apostle. (1 Tim. 4:1; 2 Tim. 
3:13 4:3-5.) And yet the times are not so perilous that 
divine grace is unable to sustain those who lean confidently 
upon the Omnipotent Arm. Indeed, those who Awmbly 
keep the narrow way of sacrifice were never before so well 
sustained, or so fully equipped with the whole armor of God. 
But, strange as it may seem, the very abundance of God’s 
favors, the very clearness of the unfoldings of the Lord’s 
gracious plans (for using the Church during the Millennium 
to bless all the families of the earth), instead of leading to 
humility and a greater appreciation of the wonderful ransom 
price, through which release from condemnation is accom- 
plished, and our call to the divine nature and joint-heirship 
with Christ is secured, seems to have the opposite effe@ upon 
some. Such seem to lose sight of their personal unworth- 
iness, as well as of the Lord’s unblemished perfection ; and, 
instead of realizing themselves to be at best ‘‘ unprofitable 
servants,’’ they seem to see, in their own little self-denials 
for the truth’s sake, something wonderful—the equivalent 
of what our Lord Jesus did—and feel that they as much as 
he are ‘ndispensable to the execution of the great plan of 
the ages which the Scriptures reveal. Such are guilty of 
“not holding the Head,’’ and his great work of redemp- 


The Work of Harvest. 01 


tion, in proper respect. (Col. 2:19.) These stand con- 
demned of ‘ counting the blood of the covenant wherewith 
they were sanctified’’ (and accepted) a common or ordi- 
nary thing. (Heb. 10:29.) These do despite to the very 
spirit of God’s favor, when they reject the ‘way ’’—the 
only way—and the only name given under heaven and 
among inen, whereby we must be saved from Adamic con- 
demnation and fully zeconciled to God. 

These are represented in the parable by the one ‘“ bound,”’ 
hindered from making further progress toward the feast, or 
even toward a further appreciation of its blessings and joys ; 
and these will finally be cast out of the light entirely, 
into the ‘‘ outer darkness’’ of the world, to share in the 
anguish and vexations of the great time of trouble. ‘To 
these, therefore, the very truths now unfolding, designed 
for our good and development, become an occasion of 
stumbling, because they are not rightly exercised by them. 
And as Israel, so long specially favored of God, became 
proud, and began to think themselves actually worthy of 
those favors, and indispensable to the divine plan, so that 
God cast them off from all favor, so now it will be with 
those who, though they have hitherto run well, fail to keep 
humble,.and begin to think themselves worthy to stand be- 
fore God in ¢heir own righteousness, and who assume a 
right to partake of the feast without the wedding robe of 
‘Christ’s imputed righteousness. 

Peculiarly sad though it be, this feature of prophecy, 
shown in the parable under consideration, is also fulfilling 
before our eyes, forming another link in the great chain of 
evidence that we are in the ‘“‘ harvest.’’ Some of those en- 
joying present spiritual favors have thus disdained and cast 
aside the wedding robe; and, though still speaking of Christ 
as Lord, they despise and deny the importance and efficacy 
of the very transaction by which he became Lord, and on 


202 Thy Kingdom Come. 


account of which they were counted worthy of an invitation 
to the marriage. (Rom. 14:9; 5:2.) They boldly claim to 
need no Redeemer ; and with subtle sophistries and’ mis- 
applications of Scripture they convince themselves and others 
that they get into the sheep-fold by another way without 
being ransomed,—in their own righteousness, which the 
Apostle terms “filthy rags ; ’’ and some claim that they need 
no Mediator or Ransom, but were  unalterably elected by 
God to heavenly glory. 

This taking off of the wedding garment, by a rejection 
of the value of Christ’s ransom-sacrifice, first made its ap- 
pearance amongst those in the light of present truth in the 
summer of 1878; and since that time it has been testing 
all who entered into the light of the guest-chamber, the 
harvest light. In the very presence of the Bridegroom the 
error has gained a footing ; and some are casting aside the 
indispensable wedding robes. And what a commotion it 
has caused among the guests! what division! what sifting ! 
Those who discard the robe seem anxious to have others do 
the same; and these strive while the faithful remonstrate ; 
and the work of division goes on, even in the very guest- 
chamber ; and doubtless it will continue up to the very last 
hour prior to the marriage. 

Meanwhile, the invisible but present Bridegroom-King 
marks the faithful worthy ones who shall taste of his supper ; 
and he permits, and in the parable foretold, this final test. 
Of those who have discarded the robe he inquires, ‘‘ Friend 
[comrade], how camest thou in hither, not having a wedding 
garment ?’’—a gentle but very forcible reminder that the 
wearing of the robe was the very condition of his admis- 
sion to the favors enjoyed, and that he had been provided 
one gratis. And we challenge any who now deny the value 
of Christ’s death as their ransom-price, to say that they 

. came into the present light—the knowledge of the Lord’s 


The Work of Harvest. 203 


presence and the other deep things of God, now so clearly 
seen—without, at the time of entrance, being clothed in 
this garment. No one ever entered in without the robe: 
others cannot see the deep things of God. (1 Cor. 2:7-14.) 
Just as in the parable, so now, when this question is put 
to those who have rejected the robe, they are ‘‘ speechless.’’ 
They cannot deny that it was while wearing the robe they 
were admitted ; and they do not like to acknowledge it. 

“‘Then said the King unto his servants, Bind him hand 
and foot, and cast him into outer darkness.’’ The ‘‘ outer 
darkness’ is the darkness that envelops the worldly-wise, 
the darkness of human reasoning undireCted by God’s Word 
and unsquared by his revealed plan of ransom and restitu- 
tion. The binding or restraining makes an example of 
such before the company of the consecrated, and helps all 
the truly loyal ones to see most clearly the necessity and 
value of the robe in the King’s estimation. The servants 
who are directed to do the binding are those who have the 
truth on the subject, and who can diad the influence of such 
with Scriptural testimonies on the value and necessity of 
the precious blood and the robe of righteousness which it 
purchased for us. In struggling against these arguments of 
Scripture, the disrobed ones are forced, by their own argu- 
ments and efforts to justify themselves, out of the light into 
the ‘‘ outer darkness.’’ To them, as to the.world, the cross 
of Christ is now a stumbling-block and foolishness ; but to 
the faithful, consecrated ones it is still ‘‘ the power of God 
and the wisdom of God.”’ 

But let it not be overlooked that those of the parable 
who are ‘‘ bound ”’ and ‘‘ cast into outer darkness ’’ must 
first have been in the light of harvest truth; and con- 
sequently their responsibility and penalty are greater than 
the responsibility and penalty of those who never enjoyed 
such favor. ‘Fhousands in the nominal Church will doubt- 


304 Thy Kingdom Come. 


less follow the teaching of prominent leaders among them, 
in discarding faith in the efficacy of the precious blood of 
Christ as the sinner’s ransom-price, who will not be ac- 
countable for the step to the fullest extent; because they 
have not been sufficiently enlightened with reference to it. 

‘Thousands of professed Christians have never believed in 
Christ as their ransom or substitute, and have never worn 
the robe of his imputed righteousness. These, of course, 
are not noticed in the parable. ‘The parable refers only 
to a very limited class, all of whom have once clearly ap- 
preciated the ransom, and while so appreciating it had, 
under the favor which it secured, entered into the special 
light of the harvest time—the time of the King’s presence, 
just before the feast. With what care should those who 
have been once enlightened, and who have tasted of the 
good word of God and the powers of the age to come, 
guard against the merest suggestion to a step so disloyal, 
unjust and disastrous. —Heb. 10: 26-31 ; 6:4-8. 

In considering these parables, we must not make the 
mistake of presuming that all the wise virgins have already 
gone into the marriage—to the guest-chamber of special 
and final preparation—and that the door is shut before the 
inspection referred to in this parable begins. The door of 
opportunity still stands open to all the consecrated, robed 
by faith in the wedding garment of Christ’s righteousness ; 
the message, ‘‘ Behold, the Bridegroom !’’ is still going 
forth ; the wise virgins are still going out to meet him, and 
entering in with him to the marriage; and the foolish 
have not yet returned with oil in their vessels. But, since 
‘‘ the King came in’’ (since 1878, the parallel in time to our 
Lord’s typical assumption of the office of King of the Jews 
—Matt. 21:1-13), the inspection of the guests and the test- 
ing of their appreciation of the wedding robe have been 
in progress. And while more of the wise virgins are still 


The Work of Harvest. 205 


learning of the Bridegroom’s presence and joyfully coming 
in to the feast, some of those already in are proving them- 
selves unworthy to stay in, and have been, and are being, 
bound hand and toot; and their appreciation and apprehen- 
sion of present truth—of the Lord’s presence and the pres- 
ent and future work—begin to grow more and more dim, 
as, borne along by false reasonings upon false premises, they 
gradually or rapidly, according to temperament, gravitate 
- toward worldly views of things—the ‘‘ outer darkness"’ of 
the world, when contrasted with the inner light, now acces- 
sible to the properly robed saints. And, doubtless, all the 
virgins who come in must be tested upon this subject. 
Happy and fearless, in this testing, will be all who from the 
heart can say :— 
“ My hope is built on nothing less 

Than Jesus’ blood and righteousness. 

I dare not trust the sweetest frame, 

But wholly Jean on Jesus’ name. 

On Christ, the solid Rock, I stand; 
All other ground is sinking sand.” 
And such can exultantly sing :— 


“ The Prince of my peace is now present, 
The light from his face is on me. 
O listen! beloved, he speaketh : 
‘ My peace I now give unto thee.’ 
‘The cross well covers my sins ; 
‘The past is under the blood; 
I’m trusting in Jesus for all; 
My will is the will of my God.” 


THE END OF THE HIGH CALLING IS NOT 
THE CLOSING OF THE DOOR. 
The Scriptures do not give the exaét date at which the 
door to the marriage feast will close, though they show 
plainly that it will not be closed until a// the “ virgins’? 


206 - Thy Kingdom Come. 


shall have had an opportunity to enter, and after all the 
“¢wise’’ or ready ones have done so. 

An open ‘‘ door’’ symbolizes an opportunity of entrance 
to certain conditions and privileges; a shuf door repre- 
sents the termination of such privilege or opportunity. 
The privilege, invitation or opportunity of the Gospel age, 
granting, under restrictive conditions, to believers in Christ, 
entrance into joint-heirship with him in the heavenly King- 
dom and to the divine nature, is the ‘‘ door’’ by which we 
‘have access into this grace [favor] wherein we stand; ’’ 
namely, into the hope of sharing the glory of God. (Rom. 
5:2.) This door, which has stood open throughout the 
entire age, is sometime to be closed; and the door in the 
parable of the virgins marks this close ;—the termination 
of all such opportunities and privileges. This parable of 
the virgins merely portrays the events in the close of this 
age among those of the true Church living at that time. 
The ‘‘door’’ of this parable represents that certain- special 
privileges, the consummation and goal of all the favors of 
the Gospel age, will be open to the ‘‘ wise virgins’’ in 
the time of harvest ; and the closing of the door when all 
of this class shall have availed themselves of such priv- 
ileges represents the close of a@// the favor and privileges 
of the Gospel age; because the feast represents in full 
the Gospel advantages and privileges, being a representa- 
tion of the grand consummation to which all other favors 
lead—the promised Kingdom glories. 

Consider this ‘‘ door’’ of opportunity and privilege, soon _ 
to close. Our Lord called it a gate, and said that during 
the Gospel age it would be difficult both to find and to 
enter it, and advised us to make great effort to enter, if 
we would share the immortality and Kingdom honors, to 
which it and no other door leads. He said, therefore, 
“* Strive to enter in at the strait gate; for many, I say unto 


The Work of Harvest. 207 


you, shall seek to enter in and shall not be able, when once 
the Master of the house hath risen up and shut to the door.”’ 
(Luke 13:25.) This narrow way, as we have already seen,* 
is the way of self-sacrifice in the interest of the Lord’s plan 
and work. ‘The way is made narrow by the circumstances 
of the present time, by the opposition of the worldly spirit 
against truth and righteousness, so that whoever walks in 
the footprints of our Leader and Forerunner will find the 
way narrow or difficult and must suffer persecution. To 
walk in this way, as our Lord set us an example that we 
should follow in his steps, implies not only a passive con- 
formity to his disposition-or spirit, but also an active, ener- 
getic zeal in the promulgation of his truth at all hazards. 
And all who walk in this narrow way, faithful as he was 
faithful, unto death, have fellowship in his sufferings, and 
will also in due time have fellowship in his glory, at the 
marriage feast,—in the glory to be revealed at his appear- 
ing and Kingdom.—Phil. 3:10: 1 Pet. 4:13. 

In view of its glorious termination, the opportunity to 
walk in this narrow way of self-sacrifice for the truth’s sake 
is the grandest privilege that was ever offered to any crea- 
ture. ‘The privilege of suffering with Christ and in his 
cause, after first recognizing him as our Redeemer, is there- 
fore the door, and the only door of opportunity, by which 
the glory to follow, as the bride and joint-heir of Christ, 
can be reached. 

There are three ways in which the closing of this door 
might be indicated: first, by a definite Bible statement of 
the exact date; second, by such a reversal of public sen- 
timent with reference to the truth, that fidelity and zeal in 
its service would no longer meet with opposition, and 
when suffering with Christ for the truth’s sake (Rom. 8:17) 
would be no longer possible ; or third, by such a condition 


*¥ VOL. 1, page 203. 


208 Thy Kingdom Come. 


of affairs obtaining in the world that all opportunity for 
such service would be effectually obstruéted, thus leaving 
no opportunities for candidates to enter into the work and 
to develop and prove their love and faithfulness by their 
activity and endurance. 
‘Though we are definitely informed that the door will be 
shut sometime within this harvest period or end of the age, 
the Bible does not give the exa¢t date; and, although after 
the great time of trouble there will be a grand reversal of 
public sentiment in favor of truth and justice, we have no 
intimation whatever that such a condition of affairs will 
obtain until after the harvest period is fully ended. But we 
have aclear intimation that she door will be shut in the 
manner last named; for, before the Millennial day breaks, 
we are forewarned of a dark night wherein no man can 
labor—‘‘ The morning cometh, and also the night.'’—Isa. 
21:12. See also Vou. 11., chap. viii. 

The narrow way opened to us is the privilege and oppor- 
tunity of co-operating with our Lord now, when to mani- 
fest his spirit of meekness and zeal and loyalty to God and 
his truth will be at the cost of earthly disadvantage ; when 
to champion his cause and the truths which he advanced 
will make us, to say the least, very unpopular; and when 
our endeavors to honor his name and bless our fellow-men 
‘with the truth, by letting our light shine, bring upon us re- 
proach, misrepresentation and persecution in some form. 
And if, as we have'seen, the narrow gate-way opened means 
the privilege of thus sacrificing, faithfully, unto death, at 
whatever cost, it follows that the closing of all such opportunity 
for such fellowship of service and suffering would be she 
closing of the door, the barring of the narrow way to the 
future glory and joint-heirship ; our reign with Christ being 
conditioned on our faithfulness in his service, which now 
means suffering with him.—Rom, 8:17; 6:8. 


The Work of Harvest. 209 


And suffering with Christ, we have seen, is not the ordi- 
nary suffering, common to all in the fallen state, but only 
such sufferings as are the results, more or less directly, of 
the following of Christ’s example, in advocating unpopular 
truths and in exposing popular errors. Such were the causes 
of the sufferings of Christ; and such will be the causes of 
persecution, suffering and loss to all who follow in his foot- 
steps. ‘They will have fellowship in his sufferings now, and 
in the end will be accounted worthy to share in the reward 
of such faithfulness to principle. This, throughout the Gos- 
pel age, has meant self-sacrificing labor and endurance of 
reproach in the sowing and watering of the seed of Christ’s 
doétrines ; and now, in the close of the age, it means a 
similar fidelity and endurance in the harvest work now in 
progress—even to the laying down of life, whether it be 
required by the gradual process of working it out in the 
Master’s service, a dying daily, or by being brought more 
abruptly to a martyr’s sudden death. 

The worthiness of the espoused virgin Church to be the 
bride, the Lamb’s wife, consists not merely in sinlessness, 
though she will be holy and ‘‘ without blemish ’’—<< with- 
out spot or wrinkle or any such thing ’’ (Eph. 5:27), nade 
‘(whiter than snow’’ in the great fountain of redeeming 
love, her Redeeiner’s merit. This much is necessary to a// 
who will ever be accounted worthy of lasting life on any 
plane. But to be the bride of the Lamb, she must not only 
be a virgin in purity, and in addition be free from sinftl 
alliance and‘coquetry with the world, but she must be more, 
much more than this. She must so closely resemble her 
Lord, and so closely follow his footsteps and his counsel, 

_that she will on this account be a sufferer, a martyr, as he 
was, and for the sake of the same principles of truth and 
righteousness. She must prove that she possesses a conswm- 


tug love for the Bridegroom, and an untiring devotion to 
14 


210 Thy Kingdom Come. 


his name and principles, so as to be willing to be despised 
and rejected of the worldly, as he was, for the sake of obe- 
dience to his doctrines. 

To develop and demonstrate this character, she must be 
tried and tested. Her confidence, her endurance, her fidel- 
ity to her Lord, through evil as well as good, must be de- 
veloped and proved. And only sueh as are thus developed 
and tested, and by the test proved faithful, will ever be 
owned and recognized as the bride and joint-heir-of the 
Lord, the heir of all things. As it is written, ‘* Blessed the 
man that exdurefh under temptation: because, having be- 
come [thus] approved, he will receive the crown of life 
which the Lord hath promised to them that love him ’’— 
thus intensely. Thus, rightly understood, every trial of our 
fidelity should be joyfully met as a fresh opportunity to 
show the Bridegroom the depth and strength of our love, 
and another proof of worthiness of his love and confidence 
and of the promised exaltation. Those who will share with 
the Lord the coming glory must not only be caed and ac- 
cepted, ut also faithful, even unto death.—Rev. 17:14. 

Thus the door of opportunity to engage, with Christ our 
Lord, in the work of the Gospel age, will be closed when 
“the night cometh wherein no man can work.’? And all 
who have not previously, by faithful service, developed the 
necessary charaéter and proved their sympathy, devotion, 
love and zeal for the Lord and his truth (Matt. 10:37; 
Mark 8:38), will then be too late todo so. As represented 
in the parable, they will thus be proved to be ‘‘ foolish vir- 
gins,”’ for letting slip the great and glorious opportunity to 
suffer with and on behalf of him with whom they would gladly 
reign. By that time, the full number predestinated by God 
to constitute and complete the Church will have been called, 
chosen, and by trial proved faithful—*‘ copies of the like- 
ness of his Son.’’ (Rom. 8:29.) ‘he harvest will be past, 


The Work of Harvest. 211 


the summer time of favor ended, and only the burning of 
the tares will remain, to clear the field (the world of man- 
kind) and to prepare it fully for the much more extensive 
sowing of the Millennial age. 

The closing in of this night will evidently put a stop to 
any further labor to disseminate the truth, which, misunder- 
stood by the public generally, will probably be accused of 
being the cause of much of the anarchy and confusion then 
prevailing, instead of being seen in its true light as a fore- 
shadowing of the divine mind and revelation concerning 
coming troubles of the world and their true causes. Nor 
should we expect that the coming of-night and the closing 
of the door will be sudden, but rather that it will bea grad- 
ual obstructing and closing down of the harvest work. 

The present is the time for the sealing of the servants of 
God in their foreheads, before the storm of trouble bursts 
(Rev. 7:2, 3); and every wise virgin should appreciate 
this privilege of the present, both for his own intellectual 
sealing with the present truth, and also for engaging in the 
harvest work of sealing others of the wheat class and gath- 
ering them into the barn of security, before the night 
cometh and the door of opportunity to labor is shut. 

That the present, most favorable opportunity is but a brief 
one, is manitest from the fact that only twenty-four years 
of the harvest period remain, the close of which will witness 
the end of the reign of evil and the ushering in of the glori- 
ous Millennial Day ; and within this period the dark. night 
of ‘the world’s greatest tribulation must find place. The great 
darkness which must precede the glorious day is drawing 
on; ‘the morning cometh, and also the night ’’—‘ a time 
of trouble such as was not since there was a nation.’’ 

Observe that, when this night cometh, when the reap- 
ers must cease their labors, it will prove that this final work 
of the Gospel age is accomplished ; that the eleét number 


212 Thy Kingdom Come. 


of the Bride of Christ have all been ‘‘sealed,’’ and ‘‘ gath- 
ered ’’ into.a condition of separateness from the worldly— 
into the barn condition (Matt. 13:30); for God will not 
permit anything to put an end to his work until it is finished. 
Then, all the true and faithful servants of God will have 
been sealed in their foreheads ; and, the work of the Gospel 
age being finished, no more cam enter into that work or 
reap its rich reward, foretold in the ‘‘ exceeding great and 
precious promises ’’ as the reward of the faithful who enter 
while the ‘‘ door’’ is open.—z Pet. 1:4. 

But we are not to gather from this that all, as quickly as 
proved faithful, will at once enter into their reward. Possi- 
bly some such may live on, far into that dark night of 
trouble,—though our expectation is to the contrary. ‘‘ Here 
is the patience of the saints; here are they that keep the 
commandments of God and the faith of Jesus.’’ Having 
put on the whole armor of God, and boldly withstood error 
by clear and fearless presentation and defence of the truth, 
during this evil day, when giant errors so boldly and defi- 
antly stalk abroad, the saints are exhorted, ‘* Having done 
all, to stand,”’ clad in full armor, with the sword of the spirit 
ever ready for defence, and with watchtulness and persever- 
ance and prayer for all saints. All will have need of patience, 
that after having done the will of God they may receive 
the promise.—Rev. 14:12; Eph. 6:13; Heb. 10:36. 

The ending of the high calling to joint-heirship with our 
Lord Jesus in the Kingdom of God, it should be distinctly 
understood, is not the shutting of the door in the parable 
of the virgins. Though the general ‘‘call’’ to this favor 
ceased in 1881, the ‘‘door’’ is yet open. he call is the 
general invitation of God, to all justified believers in the 
Redeemer, to follow in his footsteps of self-sacrifice, even 
unto death, and thereby prove their worthiness to reign 
with him in glory. ‘This favor had a definite time for be- 


? 


The Work of Harvest. 213 


ginning: the waiting disciples were accepted to it on the 
day of Pentecost, a. D. 33. And it has had, as already shown, 
a definite time of ending ; viz., October 1881.* 

On the other hand, the closing of the ‘‘door,’’ in the 
parable of Matt. xxv., marks the full end of all opportunity 
for any, even of the ‘‘ called ’’ ones, thereafter to attain the 
prize of the high calling. It marks the end of all opportu- 
nity to prove worthy of the prize by faithfulness in the ser- 
vice: all opportunity for service will there terminate, in 
the ‘“‘night’’ wherein no man can work. (John 9:4.) It 
is manifest, therefore, that the door, or opportunity, thus to 
make our calling and election sure, does not. necessarily 
close when the call, or general invitation to all believers to 
enter, ceases to go forth. And, while the door stands open, 
it indicates that any believer who is anxious to enter and 
ready to comply with the conditions may yet do so, even 
though the general ‘‘call’’ or invitation to enter is no 
longer sent out. As a matter of fact, the door or oppor- 
tunity to labor and sacrifice has not yet closed, though the 
general call ceased in 1881. 

‘Phe Gospel age has been the calling time—first, for call 
ing sinners to repentance and to faith in Christ the Re- 
deemer ; and, second, for calling these justified ones to the 
high privilege of joint-heirship with Christ in his Kingdom, 
on the condition of following now in his footprints of self- 
sacrifice, even unto death—as the condition of acceptance 
to the Kingdom work and honors of the coming Millennial 
age. When, therefore, the Lord tells us that the closing 
period of the age will be a harvest time, it indicates clearly 
a radical change—from sowing to reaping, from calling to 
testing the called and closing the work begun by the call. 

As an illustration of the change in the character of the 
work at the close of the Gospel age, our Lord gave the 

*See VoL. 11, Chapter vii. 


. 


214 Thy Ki ingdom Come. 


parable of the drag-net. (Matt. 13:47-50.) ‘* The King- 
dom of heaven is like unto a net that was cast into the sea 
and gathered fish of every kind ; which, when it was full, 
they [the fishermen] drew to shore, and sat down, and ‘gath- 
-ered the good into vessels and cast the bad away. So shall 
it be at the end of the age [the harvest, Matt. 13:39]: the 
angels [messengers, servants of God] shall come forth and 
separate the wicked from among the just, and shall cast 
them into the furnace of fire [the great .time of trouble]: 
there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.’”’ 

This parable represents the nominal Christian Church as 
the nominal prospective Kingdom of God—¢he net cast in- 
to the sea (the world), which gathered fish (men—Matt. 
4:19) of every Rind (real Christians, half deceived and de- 
luded Christians, and multitudes of hypocrites) ; which, when 
it is full (in the fulness of God’s time), is drawn to shore. 
It shows that the ‘every sort’’ gathered into the nominal 
Church are not fit for the Kingdom, whatever else they 
may be fit for; that at the close of the age—in the harvest 
time—the call or invitation to a place in the Kingdom 
would cease by God’s arrangement, as represented by the 
dragging of the net to shore ; and that then a different work 
would be commenced by the fishermen,—namely, a sepa- 
rating, a dividing work, which will accomplish the gather- 
ing of the desired sort and the rejection of others who are 
unworthy of the favor to which they had been called ; for 
“‘ many are called, but few chosen.’’—Matt. 22:14. 

The separating work of this parable is the same as that 
shown in the parable of the wheat and the tares, which teaches 
us to expect a discontinuance of ‘the sowing (the calling), 
and a change from that work to the work of reaping. The 
Lord’s-servants, who, under his direction, will thus change 
the work, are in both parables called angels—special mes- 
sengers of God. They are his faithful disciples who, walk- 


The Work of Harvest. 215 


ing very humbly, and near to the Lord, and very earnestly 
seeking to know his plan and to co-operate in his work, are 
not left in darkness concerning his times and seasons. 
(Matt. 13:11; 1 Thes. 5:4; Jer. 8:7-t2.) Of course, this 
reaping and gathering relates only to those living in the 
harvest time, and not to those who died previously ; each 
of whom, as he finished his course, was noted, and separated 
to await his proper position in or out of the glorified little 
flock, the Kingdom proper.—2 Tim. 4:8. . 
The net was not intended to catch all the fish of the sea. 
Our Lord, the great Chief Fisherman, designed to catch a 
particular number of fish of a particular kind, no matter 
how many of other varieties went into the net with them ; 
and when the full number of the desired, peculiar kind, 
have entered the net it is ordered ashore for the purpose of 
sorting and separating. When-the net is thus ordered ashore, 
the commission given at the beginning of the age, to cast 
the net into the sea (Matt. 28:19 ; 24:14), should be under- 
stood as at an end; and all who would continue to be co- 
workers with the Lord must give heed to his directions, and 
no longer give their time to general fishing, but to the present 
work of selecting and gathering. And as the truth then due 
was the agency for calling, so truth, ‘‘ present truth,’’ harvest 
truth, is now the Lord’s agency for testing and dividing. 
When, therefore, the Lord’s servants hear his voice, 
through his Word, declaring that the time has come to stop 
sowing and to begin reaping, to stop catching and go to 
sorting the fish, to stop calling and to preach the harvest 
message now due to those already called, they will, if faith- 
ful, gladly and promptly obey. Such, therefore, instructed 
of the Master concerning his plan of the ages, and not in 
darkness as to the times and seasons in which we are living, 
should no longer be going forth seeking to sow the good 
seed of the Kingdom in the field or world of mankind, but 


216 Thy Kingdom Come. 


should be “ giving meat in due season to the household of 
faith—’’ scattering among the Lord’s professed children the 
good tidings of the Kingdom at hand, and of the great joy 
and blessing it will soon bring to all people. 

And, strange to say, it is this message of God’s loving 
provision, in the ransom, for the restitution of all things, 
by and through Christ Jesus and his glorified body, the 
Church, God’s Kingdom (this message, which should re- 

-joice, refresh and unite all loving Christian hearts), that is 
to develop and draw into heart-union the true class only, 
to test them and to separate them from the nominal mass. 

Shortly the harvest will be ended, and then both he that 
sowed and he that reaped will rejoice together. Now, the 
reapers must hasten the work, and should feel so concerned 
about its full accomplishment as to pray the Lord of the 
harvest, the Chief Reaper, to send forth more laborers in- 
to his harvest. It will not be long before the plowman of the 
next dispensation (the great trouble foretold, which will 
prepare the world for the Millennial seed-sowing) shall over- 
take the reaper of this dispensation.—Amios 9:13. 


ISRAEL’S SEVENTIETH WEEK A FIGURE OF 
THE CLOSE OF GOSPEL FAVOR. 


Tt will be remembered that Israel’s ‘‘ seventieth week ’’— 
the last seven years of their favor—was very exactly marked . 
at its beginning, middle and close; and we believe for the 
very purpose of giving us clearly defined dates in the close 
of the Gospel age of favor to Spiritual Israel. We have seen 
that the beginning of that week was to Fleshly Israel the 
date of the beginning of their harvest testing, in A. D. 29. 
It was marked by our Lord’s baptism and recognition as 
Messiah at Jordan, when the reaping work began—the par- 
allel to which, here, is the recognition of the presence of 
the Lord, in A. D. 1874, at the beginning of this harvest. 


Lhe Work .of Harvest. 217 


The middle of that covenant week, a. D. 33, was the date 
of the rejection of Israel as a system or church-nation, and 
was marked by our Lord’s death on the cross, and by his 
words just before his death, ‘‘ Your house is left unto you 
desolate.’? And the parallel to that, here, is the rejection 
from favor and the fall of the sectarian systems, called 
Christendom or ‘‘ Babylon,’’ in 1878. 

The last half of Israel’s covenant week (375 years, from 
A. D. 33 to 36) was not a period of national or sectarian 
favor, but of individual favor, granting the Israelites (not 
as formerly through the channels of the nominal Church, 
but ¢adividually, if they would receive it) all the favors and 
special privileges of the Abrahamic covenant, down to the 
end of those seventy symbolic weeks, the limit of their favor, 
marked by the sending of favor to Cornelius and Gentiles 
in general.‘ So in the parallel, here: the 3% years from 
April, 1878, where so-called Christendom, or ‘‘ Babylon,”’ 
was rejected from favor, to October, 1881, was the closing 
period of the favor of the Azvh-ca/iing to individual believers. 
Thus, the genera/ ‘call’? (the favor of this Gospel age) 
ceased with October, A. D. 1881, just as the corresponding 
date, October a. b. 36, witnessed the end of Jewish fayor. 

The Jesh favor consisted in the (exclusive) offer to 
Israel of the Kingdom—the ca// of the natural children of 
Abraham to avail themselves of the privileges and oppor- 
tunities granted them under their Law Covenant. ‘This ca//, 
favor or privilege ceased totally and forever with the end 
of their covenant week. ‘he Gosfe/ favor consisted in the 
offer of the Kingdom (exclusively) to believers in Christ— 
the ‘‘high-calling’’ of all reconciled to God under the New 
Covenant, who might avail themselves of the opportunities 
thus granted (and: become members of theAbrahamic “‘ seed”’ 
which is to bless. the world) by joining with Christ Jesus, 
their Redeemer, in his covenant of self-sacrifice ;—the test 


218 . Thy Kingdom Come. 


which must-demonstrate their worthiness to share in Christ’s 
coming work and glory. And it is this favor, this ‘call ’’ 
or invitation, which we have seen ceased, totally and for- 
ever, in October 1881, the parallel point of time to the end 
of the Jewish call or favor. 

Be it noted, that the stopping of the Jewish favor or call 
was followed by another general call, which, ignoring them 
and their past favor, nevertheless included any of them who 
afterward, by becoming defevers, became worthy of that 
worldwide call to the honor of the Kingdom. The stopping 

_of their past favor was just as actual as though they had not 
been invited to anything after their favor ceased ; just as 
actual as though they had afterward been invited to a lower 
favor; but it is not as noticeable, because the general 
Gospel call, which did not exclude them, was the same call 
broadened and deepened ;—made applicable to a// believers 
in Christ, of every nation. 

‘Thestopping of the favor or‘‘call’’here,in 1881, is followed,. 
or rather lapped upon, by the general call of the whole world 
tothe Millennial blessings and favors upon conditions of faith 
and willing obedience (not however a sacrifice unto death). 
This however, is a lower call, a less favor than that which 
ceased ;—a call to enjoy blessings under the Kingdom, but not 
to be parts of the anointed, Kingdom class. And this change— 
this stopping of the higher favor and beginning of a lesser 
favor—will be little noticed in the present time, by reason 
of the fact that the great prize of the Kingdom and joint- 
heirship with Christ as partakers of the divine nature, has 
been generally lost sight of in the Church. The highest 
conception of reward generally held by Christians for cen- 
turies past is, that in their resurrection they will be given 
perfect bodies ; and, freed from sickness, pain and sorrow, 
will enjoy God’s favor and have everlasting life. And this 
conception, though far short of the real privileges under the © 


The Work of Harvest. 219 


‘high calling ’’ of the Gospel age, is really a fair conception 
of the blessed privileges to be granted during the Millennial 
age to the world in general—to as many of them as will 
then yield obedience and come into harmony with God. 

As a matter of fact, then, the only ones who see clearly 
the peculiarly high and grand features of the call of the 
Gospel age—the only ones, therefore, who could announce 
or explain ¢/zs calling—are the very ones who are also 
shown from God’s Word that the time limit of this call was 
reached in O¢tober, 1881. Others, while quoting the Apos- 
tle’s words concerning a “high calling of God in Christ,”’ 
really explain the lower call which belongs to the Millennial 
age. Hence the general Gospel call, the true one, is ended. 
None can extend it. Some cannot because they do not 
understand it and could not give it, and some because they 
know it to be at an end. : 

But though the general ‘‘call’’ has ceased, the ‘‘ door’”’ 
is not yet shut. ‘The end of the ‘‘call’’ and the shutting 
of the ‘*door’’-are distinét and separate. The ‘‘door’’ 
stands open for some to enter the race, for the great prize 
of joint-heirship in the Kingdom, after the gemerad ‘ call”’ 
has ceased. God had predetermined a fixed number to 
constitute the Church, ‘‘the body of Christ ;’’ and there 
can be neither one member superfluous nor one lacking. 
(See this typically taught in Lev. 21:17-23.) It follows that 
he ‘could not ca// or invite to that honor more than would 
complete the number he had determined. And, in October 
1881, his Word shows, this full number had been secured. 

’ But, since some of those who responded under the general 
call and made the covenant with him will fail to keep their 
covenant, fail so to run as to obtain the prize, the ‘‘ door’’ 
stands open after the general call has ceased, to permit the 
entrance to the race, to self-sacrifice in the service of the 
truth, of some Zo take the places of such as may, during the 


220 Thy Kingdom Come. 


inspection, cast aside the wedding garment of Christ's 
righteousness ; and also of such others as, having made the 
covenant of self-sacrifice in the service, love the present 
world, become overcharged with its cares or pleasures, and 
fail to perform the requirements of their covenant. 

And, again, it should be noted that the ending of the 
call in 1881 in no way interfered with the privileges of the 
thousands who had already accepted the call and become 
God’s consecrated servants: it put none out who were in. 
Nor does it imply that no more can come in: it was merely 
the stopping of God’s general invitation. 

The fact that you may only recently have come to a clear 
knowledge of the exceeding great and precious promises of 
the things which God hath in reservation for them that love 
him does not prove that you were not called and accepted 
as a runner for this great prize long before you understood 
how great and grand is the prize. The fact is, not one who 
accepts the call is able, at first, to comprehend fully either 
the roughness and narrowness of the way or the grandeur 
of the prize to be attained at its farther end. The clear- 
ness of our comprehension of the promises is to us the 
power of God working in us to strengthen us and to enable 
us to overcome present obstacles and trials. The exceed- 
ing great and precious promises are unfolded to us gradu- 
ally, as we prove faithful and go on, in order that by these 
—hy the strength and courage which they infuse—we may 
be enabled so to run as to obtain the prize. —2 Pet. 1:4. 

The class to receive the prize is not only called and 
chosen (accepted), but also faithful. And though the gen- 
eral call has ceased, it is evident that the testing of the 
faithfulness of the called ones is not yet finished. The 
faithful are being sealed, and separated from those who are 
unfaithful to their covenant of self-sacrifice ; and the wise 
virgins are being separated from the foolish, whose folly 


The Work of Haruest. 221 


consists in supposing that they can run for and win the 
world’s prizes of honor, wealth, etc., and at the same time 
run faithfully the race for the great prize of glory, honor 
and immortality,—the very conditions of which render such 
a dual course impossible. ‘*A double-minded man is un- 
stable in all his ways.’’ ‘‘ Ye cannot serve God and mam- 
mon.'’— Jas. 1:8: Matt. 6:24. 

When all the faithful ‘‘ wise virgins’’ have been proved 
so, and have entered in to the joys of the Lord, the ** goer’? 
of opportunity to become of that class will close; and no 
more can enter it. When all the wise have entered in, the 
number predestinated will be complete; and then the Mas- 
ter will rise up and shut the door. (Luke 13:24, 25 ; Matt. 
25:10.) Our Lord himself tells us that ¢#ez many will be- 
gin to see matters differently—to see what privileges and 
‘opportunities for sacrifice they once enjoyed and missed. 
But when they seek entrance, the Master will tell them, I 
do not recognize you as my bride—she is complete, and I 
have but one. But, thank God, other Scriptures show that 
the foolish virgins, though thus rejected from the high call- 
ing, for which their conduct when on trial will have proved 
them unworthy, will nevertheless be favored, and will be 
known in a humbler capacity in the Lord’s household. 

Therefore, before the door shuts, before the full number 
of the faithful is completed, let each strive to make his 
calling and selection sure; and to this end let us permit 

_ the Lord, by these precious promises and these explanatory 
parables, to work in us to w2// and to «/o his good pleasure. 

But some may yet say, I fear that I am not one of those 
called before the general call ceased in 1881, because I was 
then not only wholly ignorant of the deep things of God’s 
promises, but more: } was wholly a stranger to God, and 
even an enemy of his, far from any covenant with him to 
do him service, and far from any such desire. Only re- 


222 Thy Kingdom Come. 


cently I came to know God at all; recently I took Christ’s 
voke upon me to learn of him; and still more recently I 
learned of the privilege of suffering with Christ now, by 
self-denials in his service, and that such joint-sacrificers are 
by and by to be made joint-inheritors with him in the glori- 
ous work of the Millennium. And now, after seeing these 
glories, after admiring these precious things, and after 
setting myself to run this race for this wonderful prize, must 
{ conclude that it is not open to me, because enough to fill 
the number had already been called ? I would not think to 
change the divine arrangement, or to ask that another be 
added beyond the limit determined by divine wisdom, but 
I shall feel keenly my misfortune. 

To such we answer: Run on. Your case is not so dark 
as itseems to you. The ‘‘door’’ is not yet ‘shut.’’ Re- 


member that if 2/7 who had accepted the call when it closed . 


should prove faithful to their covenant, there would be none 
too many, but just enough. Remember, too, that your ob- 
servation, as well as the Scriptures, indicates that of the 
many who accept the call few will be chosen, because but 
few prove faithful to their covenant when on trial. As one 
after another some of the called ones prove unfaithful, their 
opportunities, their places of labor and their crowns of re- 
ward are transferred to others. One of these places of labor 
and one of these crowns of reward.may be transferred to 
“ you, and your name may be written on the scroll of life as 
a probationary member of the Bride of Christ, in the place 
of ome erased as unworthy.—See Rev. 3:5 ; Heb. 12:23. 
‘Those who can grasp these precious promises and who 
have the desire to work in the vineyard have a strong evi- 
dence that they have been begotten of the spirit ;¥* for the 
human mind, even when justified, is unable to grasp the 
deep thines intended by God for those only who have con- 
*See VOL. I., page 226. 


The Work of Harvest. 223 


secrated themselvesand been accepted. (1 Cor.2:6-16.) And 
the Lord is too loving and too just to authorize in the hearts 
of any hopes which could never be realized. ‘Io be begotten 
of the spirit, through the Word of truth, implies an ultimate 
birth to spirit conditions, unless the one as begotten prove 
hiniself unworthy—unfaithful. +‘ Cast not away, therefore, 
your confidence, which hath great recompense of reward.” 
THE ELEVENTH HOUR. 
MATT. 20: 1-16, 

This parable seems to have been given specially to teach 
a lesson for this time. ‘he laborers are those earnest, con- 
secrated children of God who throughout this Gospel age— 
the ‘‘day’’ of the parable—are faithfully spending their 
time and energy, not in the service of self, the service of 
mammon, but in the service of God. Only the faith/u/ 
therefore are represented by the laborers, all of whom get 
the same reward, the Kingdom honors represented in the 
parable by the ‘ penny.’”’ 

The generality of the call and the need of laborers are 
represented by the four calls—early in the morning, at nine 
o'clock, at noon, and at three o’clock in the afternoon. 
Yet the exact, clear understanding of wha? the wages should 
be was mentioned only at the beginning: the householder 
then ‘‘agreed’’ to give them a penny for the service. So 
the promise of the Kingdom was clearly understood by the 
early Church, but afterward was in the main lost sight of 
and not clearly enunciated. The living members of Christ's 
Church /adoring in his vineyard at any time during this 
Gospel age represent all the laborers. And the parable 
shows, as its particular feature, a class who enter this ser- 
vice of the Lord when the day’s work is about done, at the 
‘* eleventh [the last] hour.’? They are represented as some 
desirous of engaging in the Master’s service, but foo dare, the 
general call having ended. They say,—-‘* No man hath hired 


224 Thy Kingdom Come. 


’ 


us,’’ we were too late to get into the service under the call. 

The Master responds by pointing to the door of oppor- 
tunity for doing and suffering in his service not yet ‘shut ”’ 
the close of which will be indicated by the coming of “the 
night in which no man caz work.’’ But he says nothing 
about what the reward will be; though in employing the 
others under his general call, he said, ‘‘ Whatsoever is right 
I will give you’’*—a portion of the pay at first ‘agreed’ upon. 

So, during the Gospel age, our Lord has continually, 
through his mouth-pieces in the Church, irivited all Dbe- 
lievers to enter into his service. The full reward, the di- 
vine nature and Kingdom glory, was clearly stated and well 
understood at first; but although repeated throughout theage, 
it has not since been c/ear/y understood because of the great 
falling away from the truth. But now we have come to the 
close of the Gospel day of service,—to the *‘ eleventh hour.’’ 
It is past the time for calling laborers for this day, Yet, 
some are now standing by and saying, We have not been 
called into the work ; ‘‘no man hath hired us;’’ we have 
no promise of labor, nor of a reward if we should find work ; 
the call is ended, the day’s work is nearly done; there are 
enough laborers without us. But to these the Master would 
have us say, as his mouth-pieces, “Go ye also into my 
vineyard ; ’’—I promise nothing, the general call is ended, 
the time is short, the time for labor is nearly ended, ‘the 
night cometh wherein no man can work ;’’ but go in, show 
your love and zeal, and leave the rewarding to my generosity. 

And this is all we can say; the only hope we can hold 
out is that no man ever labored for our Master who will 
not receive abundantly more than he could ask or expect. 
And then we know that some of the places in the work will 
be vacated by reason of some not continuing faithful, and 


Matt. 20:7 the words, “and whatsoever ts right that shall ye receive.” 


The Work of Harvest. 225 


that the crowns of reward set apart for such will be given 
to others who, by faithfulness and self-sacrifice, prove them- 
selves worthy of the work and the reward. 

So, then, if any have but recently come to know and 
love our Lord, and desire to serve him and his truth, let 
not such be discouraged because the general call ended in 
1881. If you see the ‘‘ d@vor’’ of opportunity for sacrifice 
and service open before you, enter in. But enter quickly ; 
for the night of darkness and of intense opposition to the 
truth will ere long be upon us and will hinder you from en- 
gaging in theservice. ‘‘ The morning cometh, and also the 
night.””. “The night cometh in which no man can work.”’ 
When that is true, you may know that ‘‘ the door is shut,’’ 
that all the wise virgins have entered in, that all have been 
proved, and that all vacancies have been acceptably filled. 
All the special ‘‘servants of God’’ having by that time 
been ‘‘ sealed in their foreheads ’’ (given an intellectual ap- 
preciation of God’s plan), the four winds will be loosed 
(Rev. 7:1-3), and will produce the great ‘‘ whirlwind’ of 
trouble in the midst of which the remnant of the Elijah 
class will be ‘‘ changed,’’ and exalted to Kingdom glory. 

What a lesson is here for those who have covenanted with 
the Lord to serve him first and chiefly, and who are negle&t- 
ing his work to strive with time and thought and means for 
the transient joys and prizes which the world offers. These 
the Lord urges, saying, ‘‘ Be thou faithful unto death, and 
I will give thee a crown of life.’’ He that overcometh [who 
conquers in himself the spirit of the world], the same shall 
be clothed in white raiment; and / will not blot out his 
name out of the book of life, but I will confess his name 
before my Father and before his holy servants.’’ ‘‘ Hold 
fast that which thou hast, that no man take thy crown,’’—~ 
Rev. 2:10; 3:5, 11. 


gc yo 2 deg alt 


226 


2 
A 


Thy Kingdom Come. 
LET US GO FORTH. 


HEB. 13: 13.— 

s Silent, like men in solemn haste, 
Girded wayfarers of the waste, 
We pass out at the world’s wide gate, 
Turning our back on all its state; 


We press along the narrow road 
That leads to life, to bliss, to God.- 


* We cannot and we would not stay ; 
We dread the snares that throng the way; 


' We fling aside the weight and sin,. 


Resolved the victory to win; 
We know the peril, but our eyes 
Rest on the splendor of the prize. 


“No idling now, no wasteful sleep, 
From Christian toil our limbs to keep; 
No shrinking from the desperate fight; 
No thought of yielding or of Hight - 
No love of present gain or ease; 

No seeking man or self to please. 


“ No sorrow for the loss of fame ; 
No dread of scandal on our name; 
No terror for the world’s sharp scorn; 
No wish that taunting to return. 
No hatred can to hatred move, 
And enmity but kindles love. 


“No sigh for laughter left behind, 
Or pleasures scattered to the wind; 
No looking back on Sodom’s plains; 
No listening still to Babel’s strains ; 
No tears for Egypt’s song and smile; 
No thirsting for its flowing Nile. 


“ What though with weariness oppressed ? 
’ Tis but a little and we rest. 
This throbbing heart and burning brain 
Will soon be calm and cool again; 
Night is far spent and morn is near— 
Morn of the cloudless and the clear. 


#? Tis but a little and we come 
To our reward, our crown, our home! 
Another year, or more, or less, 
And we have crossed the wilderness ; 
Finished the toil, the rest begun, 
The battle fought, the triumph won!”—/7, Sonar, 


~ CHAPTER VII. 


THE .DELIVERANCE AND EXALTATION 
OF THE CHURCH. 


Tue Deriverance oF THe CuurcH Nerar.—It Witt Be THe HarsixcER 
or Deriverance To Att Manxinp.— Its Date APrrproxiMATED.—How ‘THE 
Saints Witt Escarz THose Tuincs Cominc on Tug Wortv.—How ann 
Wuen Gop Witt Here Her.—THe Manner AND CIRCUMSTANCES OF HER 
Finat Detiverance.— Tue Derivgrance First oF ‘THOSE WHO SLEEP IN 
Jssus.—Tue CHANGE oF THE Livinc Mempers or THE CHURCH.—WILL THEY 
Dig?—Brgssep THR Dgap wHo Dig tn THE Lorp From Hencerortu. 


“ Look up, and lift up your heads ; for your deliverance draweth nigh.”’ 
—Luke 21: 28. 


BY the lamp of prophecy we have traced the wonderful - 

events of the ‘‘ harvest ’’ down to their culmination in 
the great time of trouble; and, as we remember that with- 
in this eventful period the promised deliverance and exalt- 
ation of the Church are due, the central points of interest 
to the saints now are the time, manner and circumstances 
of their deliverance. . 

Our Lord taught us that as soon as we should begin to 
see the events of the harvest come to pass, then we should 
expect a speedy realization of our glorious hope. And, 
therefore, as we now mark the accumulating evidence of 
these signs, we do lift up our heads and rejoice in hope of 
the glory to follow ; for the morning cometh, although a 
brief, dark night must intervene. Nor is this rejoicing self- 
ish in its character; for the deliverance and exaltation of 


the Church of Christ will be the harbinger of a speedy 
227 : 


228 Thy Kingdom Come. 


deliverance to the whole race, from the tyranny and op- 
pression of the great enslaver, Sin, from the shadow and 
pains of sickness, and from the prison-house of death :‘‘ For 
we know that the whole creation groaneth and travaileth 
in pain, . . . waiting for the . . . deliverance of OUR 
Bopy ’’— the ‘‘ body of Christ’’ (Rom. 8:22, 23); because, 
according to Jehovah’s arrangement, the new order of things 
cannot be established until the great ruler, the Christ com- 
plete, Head and body, has come fully into power. 

That the deliverance of the saints must take place some 
time before 1914 is manifest, since the deliverance of flesh- 
ly Israel, as we shall see, is appointed to take place at that 
time, and the angry nations will then be authoritatively 
commanded to be still, and will be made to recognize the 
power of Jehovah’s Anointed. Just how long before 1914 
the last living members of the body of Christ will be glori- 
fied, we are not directly informed ; but it certainly will not 
be until their work in the flesh is done; nor can we reason- 
ably presume that they will long remain after that work is 
accomplished. With these two thoughts in mind, we can 
approximate the time of the deliverance. 

While there are clear indications that some of the living 
members of the body will witness the gathering of the storm 
and share in some of the troubles it will bring, there are 
also indications that none of these will pass entirely through 
it, nor even far into it. The Master’s words, ‘‘ Watch, 
that ye may be accounted worthy to escape those things 
that shall come to pass’’ (Luke 21:36), seem to indicate 
this. And yet we know that we are already passing through 
the beginning of these troubles (the troubles upon the nom- 
inal Church incident to its testing), and that we are escap- 
ing, while many on every hand are falling into error and 
infidelity. We escape, not by being taken from the scene 
of trouble, but by being supported, strengthened and kept 


Deliverance of the Church. 229 


in the very midst of it all by the the Word of the Lord, 
our shield and buckler. (Psa. 91:4.) While admitting that 
in like manner some members of the body might remain to 
the very end of the time of trouble, and pass through it all, 
and yet thus escape all the trouble coming, it is neverthe- 
less clear, we think, that all the members of the body will 
be fully delivered—exalted to the glorious condition—be- 
fore the severest features of the trouble come,—after the 
body is complete and the door shut. 

We have seen the storm gathering for years past: the 
mighty hosts have been mustering and preparing for the 
battle, and each successive year witnesses more rapid strides 
of progress toward the foretold crisis; yet, although we 
know that unparalleled disaster must soon dash all law and 
order into the abyss of anarchy and confusion, we do not 
fear ; for ‘‘ God is our refuge and strength, a very present 
help in trouble. Therefore will not we fear, though the 
earth [the present organization of society] be. removed 
[unsettled and disorganized], and though the mountains 
[kingdoms] be carried into the midst of the sea [the lawless 
and ungovernable people] ; though the waters thereof roar 
and be troubled [with the disputings of contending fac- 
tions] ; though the mountains [kingdoms] shake [tremble for 
fear and insecurity} with the swelling [the threatening and 
rising power] thereof.’’— Psa. 46: 1-3. 

“There is a river [God’s Word, a fountain of truth and 
grace], the.streams whereof shall make glad the city of God 
[the Kingdom of God, the Church—even in its present em- 
bryo condition, before its exaltation to power and glory], 
the holy place of the tabernacles of the Most High [the 
sanctuary—the Church wherein the Most High is pleased 
to dwell}. God is in the midst of her; she shall not be. 
moved; God shall help her.’’— Psa. 46:4, 5. 

At the present time we are realizing this promised help, 


230 Thy Kingdom Come. 


to the full extent of our present necessities, by being taken 
into our heavenly Father’s confidence, made acquainted 
with his plans and assured of his favor and sustaining grace, 
and even being made co-workers with him. This help we 
shall realize to the full end of our course ; and then we shall 
be helped still more by being ‘‘ changed ’’ to the higher 
sphere to which we are called, and toward which we 
diligently urge our way. 

Though we may be sure that this ‘‘ change’’ of the last 
living members of the body of Christ will not take place 
until the work committed to them in the flesh is accom- 
plished, we are informed, as shown in the preceding chapter, 
- that ere long our work will be cut short—gradually at first, 
and then completely and finally, when ‘‘ the night cometh, 
when no man can work.’’ (John 9:4.) And the gloom of 
that ‘‘ night ’’ will be dispelled only by the Millennial sun- 
rise. When our work is done, and that night closes in 
around us, we may expect not only to see the storm-clouds 
grow much darker, but also to hear and to feel the rising 
“¢winds’’ which will culminate in a wild hurricane of hu- 
man passion—a whirlwind of trouble. Then, having finished 
our appointed work, it will be our part to ‘‘stand,’’ patient- 
ly, until our ‘‘ change ’’ comes.— Eph. 6:13. 

How long the Lord may be pleased to let his saints stand 
in enforced idleness so far as his work is concerned, we do 
not know, but probably only long enough to let faith and 
patience have their perfect work. Here these virtues will 
be most fully developed, tested and manifested. This test 
of patience will be the final trial of the Church. Then 
‘*God will help her, at the dawning of [her] morning’’ 
(Psa. 46:5, Leeser’s translation)—not the morning which 
is to dawn on the world at the brightness of her rising with 
her Lord as the sun of righteousness, but at the dawning 
of her morning, in which she is to be changed to the nature 


Deliverance of the Church. 233 


and likeness of her Lord. Mer morning is to precede the 
Millennial morning. . 

That this dark night is already approaching we are made 
aware, not only from the Scriptures but as well from the 
ominous signs of the times; and the fate of the Church 
then, so far as her human career is concerned, seems out- 
lined in the closing pages of the lives of Elijah and John 
the Baptist, already referred to.* The beheading of the one, 
and the whirlwind and fiery chariot which bore away the 
other, probably indicate violence to the last members of the 
body of Christ. Yet Zion need not fear; for God is in 
the midst of her, and will help her. Her consecration is 
unto death, and her privilege is to prove her faithfulness : 
‘“«The disciple is not above his master, nor the servant 
above his lord. It is enough for the disciple that he be as 
his master, and the servant as his lord.’’— Matt. 10:24,25. 

It will probably be in an effort at self-preservation on 
the part of ‘‘Great Babylon ’’—‘ Christendom ’’— when 
she sees her power in politics, priestcraft and superstition 
waning, that the work of truth-spreading will be stopped 
as detrimental to her system. And probably at this junét- 
ure the Elijah class, persisting in declaring the truth to 
the last, will suffer violence, pass into glory and escape from. 
the severest features of the great time of trouble coming— 
just in the crisis of affairs when men begin to feel that des- 
perate measures must be resorted to, to sustain the totter- 
ing structure of Christendom. 

Although the exact time of the deliverance or ‘‘change’’ 
of the last members of the body of Christ is not stated, 
the approximate time is nevertheless clearly manifest, as 
shortly after the ‘‘door’’ is shut (Matt. 25:10); after the 
truth, which a now begins to regard « as her enemy, 


* VOL. 11, pages Sse, 


232 Thy Kingdom Come. 


become more generally known and widely circulated ; after 
‘the hail’’ has to a considerable extent swept away the 
refuge of lies ; and after the now smoldering and menacing 
hatred of the truth is thereby roused to an opposition so 
violent and so general as to effectually stop the further prog- 
ress of the great work in which the saints are engaged. And 
God will permit this as soon all the ele¢t are ‘‘sealed.’’ 
But, whatever of trouble or seeming disaster may await the 
saints while they remain in the flesh, and put a stop to the 
work which it is their meat and drink to do, let us take 
comfort in remembering that nothing can befall us without 
our Father’s notice and permission, and that in every trial 
of faith and patience his grace shall be sufficient for those 
who abide in him, and in whom his Word abides. Let us 
look beyond the vail, and keep the eye of faith fixed upon 
the prize of our high calling, which God has in reservation 
for them that love him—for the called and faithful and 
chosen according to his purpose.—Rev.17:14; Rom. 8:28. 

While we may thus reasonably and Scripturally approx- 
imate the time and circumstances of the full deliverance of 
the Church, the manner of her glorification becomes all the 
more a question of deepening interest. And again we come 
to the divine oracles to make inquiry. 

First, Paul declares, ‘‘ We must a// be changed [the liv- 
ing no less than the dead saints]: this corruptible must put 
on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality ; 
for flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, 
neither doth corruption inherit incorruption.’’ And this 
**change’’ from mortality to immortality, he assures us, 
will not be accomplished by gradual development, but it 
will be instantaneous —‘‘ in a moment, in the twinkling of 
an eye,’’ under the sounding of the ‘ last trump ’’— which 
. is already-sounding.*—1 Cor. 15:53, 50, 52. 

“*See Vor. i, Chapterv. | 


Deliverance of the Church. 233 


Furthermore, order will be observed : some will be glori- 
fied or ‘‘ changed ’”’ first, and others afterward. Precious 
in the sight of the Lord has been the death of his saints 
(Psa. 116:15): and though most of them have slept long, 
none have been forgotten. Their names are written in 
heaven as acceptable members of the Church of the First- 
born. And the Apostle declares that the living, who are 
left over to the presence of the Lord, will by no means pre- 
cede those who fell asleep. (1.Thes. 4:15.) Those who 
sleep in Jesus are not required to wait in sleep for the living 
members to finish their course, but are resurrected at once, 
as one of the first acts of the Lord when he takes his great 
power. And thus those members of the Christ who have 
slept will take precedence in entering into glory. 

The exact date of the awakening of the sleeping saints 
is not directly stated, but may be clearly inferred from our 
Lord’s parable of the young nobleman. After having re- 
ceived the kingdom and returned, the first work of the 
nobleman (who represented our Lord Jesus) was the reck- 
oning with the servants (his Church) to whom his vineyard 
had been entrusted during his absence, and the rewarding 
of the faithful. And since the Apostle tells us that the dead 
in Christ will be reckoned with first, we may reasonably 
conclude that the rewarding of these took place as soon as 
our Lord, after his return, took unto himself his great power. 

To learn the date at which our Lord began the exercise 
of his power would therefore be to discover the time when 
his sleeping saints were awakened to life and glory. And 
to do this we have but to recall the parallelism of the Jew- 
ish and Gospel dispensations. Looking back to the type, 
we see that in the spring of A. D. 33, three and a half years 
after the beginning of the Jewish harvest (A.D. 29), our 
Lord typically took unto himself his power and exercised 
kingly authority. (See Matt. 21: 5-15.) And evidently 


234 - Thy Kingdom Come. 


the only object of that ation was to mark a parallel point 
of time in this harvest, when he would in reality assume 
the kingly office, power, etc.; viz., in the spring of 1878, 
three and a half years after his second advent at the begin- 
ning of the harvest period, in the fall of 1874. The year 
1878 being thus indicated as the date when the Lord began 
to take unto himself his great power, it is reasonable to 
conclude that there the setting up of his Kingdom began, 
the first step of which would be the deliverance of his body, 
the Church, among whom the sleeping members are to take 
precedence. 

And since the resurrection of the Church must occur 
some time during this ‘‘end’’ or ‘‘ harvest ’’ period (Rev. 
11:18), we hold that it is a most reasonable inference, and 
one in perfect harmony with all the Lord’s plan, that in 
the spring of 1878 all the holy apostles and other “ over- 
comers’’ of the Gospel age who slept in Jesus were raised 
spirit beings, like unto their Lord and Master. And while 
we, therefore, conclude that their resurrection is now an 
accomplished fact, and hence that they as well as the Lord 
are present in the earth, the fact that we do not see them 
is no obstacle to faith when we remember that, like their 
Lord, they are now spirit beings, and, like him, invisible to 
men. The facts that they are invisible, that tombs were 
not found opened and empty, and that none were seen go- 
ing from the cemeteries, are not objections to such as have 
learned what to expe¢t—to such as realize that our risen 
Lord left no hole in the walls of the room which he entered 
and left while.the doors were shut; who remember that 
none saw the risen Redeemer except the few, to whom he 
specially and miraculously showed himself, that they might 
be witnesses of his resurrection ; who remember that he 
appeared in various forms of flesh to prevent these witnesses 
supposing that he still was flesh or that any of the forms 


Deliverance of the Church. 235 


they saw was his glorious, spirit body. Such as remember 
that only Saul of Tarsus saw Christ’s spirit body, and that 
by a miracle, while others around saw it not, and then at 
the expense of his sight, will readily see that their not hav- 
ing seen the risen saints with their natural eyes is no more 
of an objection to the fact of their resurrection than that 
they have not seen the Lord during this harvest, and have 
never seen angels, who, all through the Gospel age, have 
‘been ‘‘ ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for those 
who shall be heirs of salvation.’’* 

Our belief that the Kingdom began to be set up, or brought 
into power, in April, 1878,.be it observed, rests on exactly 
the same foundation as our belief that the Lord became 
present in October, 1874, and that the harvest began at 
that time. There “the mountain [kingdom] of the Lord’s 
house,’’ the Church, began to be “‘ exalted above the moun- 
tains’’ [kingdoms] of earth, and there the work of judging 
‘¢ Babylon,’’ Christendom, and all the nations of the whole 
world, began, preparatory to their final overthrow. 

Nor is it out of harmony with this thought, that the ma- 
jority of the Church are exalted, while a few of the last 
members of that royal priesthood are yet ‘‘alive and re- 
main ;’’ for, as we have seen, the Apostle foretold this very 
order. To be among those who remain is no dishonor; and 
to be the very last one of those to be ‘‘changed’’ will 
be no discredit. Several Scriptures show that there is a 
special work for the last members of the body to do on this 
side the veil, as important and as essentially a part of King- 
dom work as that of the glorified members on the other 
side the veil. While the glorified Head and those members 
of the body on the other side the veil have the complete 
supervision of the great changes now in progress and about 
to be inaugurated in the world, the fellow-members who 

*See VoL. 11, Chap. v. 


236 Thy Kingdom Come. 


remain in the flesh are the agents of the Kingdom in pub- 

lishing, by word, by pen, by books and by tra¢ts, the ‘‘ good 

tidings of great joy which shall be unto all people.’’ They 

tell the world the blessed tidings of’God’s gracious plan of 
the ages, and that the time is at hand for the glorious con- 

summation of that plan; and they point, not only to the 

great time of trouble impending, but also to the blessings 

which will follow it as the results of the setting up of God’s 

Kingdom in the world. A great and important work, then, 
is given to the remaining members: Kingdom work it is 

indeed, and accompanied also by Kingdom joys and bless- 

ings. Although yet in the flesh and pursuing their appointed 

work at the expense of self-sacrifice, and in the face of 
much opposition, these are already entering into the joys 
of their Lord,—the joys of a full appreciation of the divine 

plan and of the privilege of working out that plan, and, in 

conjunction with their Lord and Redeemer, of offering ever- 

lasting life and blessings to all the families of the earth. 

These with their message are clearly pointed out by the 
‘ prophet Isaiah (52:7) as the ‘‘ feet’’ or last members of the 
body of Christ in the flesh, when he says: ‘ How beauti- 
ful upon the mountains [kingdoms] are the feet of him that 
bringeth good tidings of good, that publisheth salvation 
[deliverance] ; that saith unto Zion, Thy God reigneth. 
[The reign of Christ, which shall bring de/iverance, first to 
Zion, and finally to all the groaning creation, is begun.] 
Thy watchmen shall lift up the voice: with the voice to- 
gether shall they sing ; for they shall see [clearly] eye to 
eye, when the Lord returneth unto Zion.”’ 

Poor, bruised ‘ feet,’’ now despised of men, none but 
yourselves fully appreciate your privileges. None others can 
appreciate the joy you have in proclaiming present truth, _ 
in saying unto Zion that the time is at hand for the setting 
up of the Kingdom, and in declaring that Immanuel’s reign — 


Deliverance of the Church. 237 


of righteousness, soon to be inaugurated, is to bless all the 
families of the earth. But, though despised of men, the 
‘‘feet’’ of Christ and their present mission are highly es- 
teemed on the other side the veil by the glorified fellow- 
members of the body and by their glorious Head, who is 
willing to confess such faithful ones before his Father and 
all his holy messengers. 

The mission of the feet, which is no insignificant part of 
the Kingdom work, will be accomplished. Though their 
message is popularly hated and discredited and they are 
despised by the world as fools (for Christ’s sake)—as all 
his faithfu/ servants have been throughout the Gospel age— 
yet, before they all are ‘‘ changed ’’ and joined to the glo- 
rified members beyond the veil, they, as agents of the 
Kingdom, will have left such records of that Kingdom and 
its present and future work as will be most valuable infor- 
mation to the world and to the undeveloped and over- 
charged children of God who, though consecrated to God, 
will have failed to so run as to obtain the prize of our high 
calling. 

And let it not be forgotten that all who are of the ‘ feet ’” 
will be thus engaged in publishing these good tidings and 
in saying to Zion, ‘* Thy God retgneth /’’—The Kingdom 
of Christ is begun ! And all who are true watchmen can at 
this time see clearly, as one man, and can together harmo- 
niously sing the new song of Moses and the Lamb—the 
song of Restitution, so clearly taught, not only in the law 
of Moses, which was ‘‘a shadow of the good things to 
come,” but also in the clearer revelations of the Lamb of 
God contained in the writings of the New Testament,— 
saying, ‘‘ Just and true are thy ways.’’ ‘All nations shall 
come and worship before thee.’’—Rev. 15:3, 4. 

One by one the ‘‘ feet ’’ class will pass from the present 
condition, in which, though often weary and wounded, 


238 Thy Kingdom Come. 


they are always rejoicing, to the other side the veil ;— 
“« changed’’ in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, from 
mortality to immortality, from weakness to power,. from 
dishonor to glory, from human to heavenly conditions, from 
animal to spirit bodies. Their wor& will not cease with 
this change; for all those who will be counted worthy of 
that change to glory will be already enlisted in the service 
of the Kingdom on this side the veil: only the weariness, 
the labor feature, will cease with the change—‘ They shall 
rest from their /ador, but their works follow with them.’’— 
Rev. 14:13. 

«‘The ‘‘change’’ to these ‘ feet’? members will bring 
them into the same fellowship and glory and power already 
entered by the members who slept: they will be ‘caught 
away’’ from earthly conditions to be united “together” 
“with the Lord in the a#r’’—in the spiritual rulership of 
the world. As already shown,* the ‘‘air’’ here mentioned 
symbolizes spiritual ule or power. Satan has long occupied 
the position of ‘ prince of the power of the air’’ (Eph. 2:2), 
and has used for his co-workers and joint-rulers in it many 
of the great ones of Babylon, who, under his blinding errors, 
verily think they are doing God service. But in due time 
the present ‘‘ prince of the air’’ shall be bound, and shall 
deceive no more ; and the present heavens, the great Anti- 
christ system, will ‘‘ pass away with a great noise,’’ while 
the new prince of the air, the true spiritual ruler, Christ 
Jesus, will take the dominion and establish the ‘new 
heavens,’’ uniting with himself in this power or ‘‘air’’ his 
bride, the ‘‘overcomers’’ of the Gospel age: Thus the 
“‘new heavens’’ will supersede the present ‘air ’’ powers. 

But must all die?—all of the ‘ feet’’ who will be alive 
and remain until the presence of the Lord? Yes; they all 
consecrated themselves—‘‘ even unto death ; ’’ and of these 
~¥ VoL 1, page 318, ee ee 


. 


Deliverance of the Church. 239 


it is distinétly written that they must all die. No Scripture 
contradicts this thought. God declares by the Prophet— 
‘«T have said, Ye are gods [mighty ones]! All of you sons 
of the Highest [God]! Yet ye shall aL. DIE Ake men, and 
fall like one of the princes.’’—Psa. 82:6. 

The word here rendered ‘‘princes’’ signifies chiefs or heads. 
Adam and our Lord Jesus are the two heads or princes re- 
ferredto. Both died, but for different reasons : Adam for his 
own sin, Christ as a willing sacrifice for the sins of the world. 
And all the Church of Christ, justified by faith in his sac- 
rifice, are reckoned freed from the sin of Adam, and also from 
the death penalty attached to that sin, in order that they 
may share with Christ as joint-sacrificers. It is as such joint- 
sacrificers with Christ that the death of the saints is esteemed 
by God. (Psa. 116:15.) The fellow-members of the body 
of Christ, when they die, are recognized as ‘‘ dead with 
Christ,’’ ‘“« made comformable unto Ass death.’’ They fall 
like one of the princes,—not like the first, but like the sec- 
ond Adam, as members of the body of Christ, filling up that 
which is behind of the afflictions of Christ. —Col. 1:24. 

That the term ‘ gods,’’ inighty ones, in this passage is 
applied to all the Sons of the Most High God, who will be 
joint-heirs with Christ Jesus, the heir of all things, is clearly 
shown by our Lord’s reference to it.—John 10: 34-36. 

“Ye shall a// de like men ;’’ but, ‘“ behold, I show you 
amystery: we shall zof a// sleep.’’ To die is one thing, to 
‘*sleep’’ or remain unconscious, dead, is quite another. 
God’s testimony, then, is that all the saints must die, but 
that they shall not all sleep. Our Lord died, and then slept 
until the third day, when the Father raised him up. Paul 
and the other apostles died, and thus * fell asleep,’’ to rest 
from labor and weariness, to ‘‘sleep in Jesus,’’ and to wait 
for the promised resurrection and a share in the Kingdom 
at the Lord’s second advent, Accordingly, when the 


240 Thy Kingdom Come. 


setting up of the Kingdom was due, their awakening from 
the sleep of death was due. Why should their waiting 
and sleep continue a/fer the Lord is present and the time 
for his Kingdom has come? There can be no reason for 
it; and we believe, therefore, that they ‘‘sleep’’ no longer, 
but are now risen, and with and like their Lord. And 
if their continuance in the sleep of death is no longer 
necessary, neither is it necessary that any of the saints 
who now die in this time of the presence of the Lord and 
the setting up of his Kingdom should ‘‘sleep”’ or wast tn 
death for a resurrection at some future time. No, thank 
God! the Life-giver is present; and, since 1878, when he 
took his great power and began the exercise of his authority, 
none of his members need to sleep. Henee, with all of ‘the 
feet’’ who die since that date, the moment of death is the 
moment of change. They die as men and like men, but 
in the same instant they are made like their Lord, glorious 
spirit beings. They are caught away from earthly condi- 
tions, to be forever with the Lord—‘‘in the air’’—in 
Kingdom power and glory. 

It was after our Lord had accomplished the sacrifice of 
his human nature and had been raised from death, changed 
to a spirit being, that he declared, ‘‘All power in heaven 
and on earth is given unto me.’’ (Matt. 28:18.) And not 
until all the members of the Christ have followed the ex- 
ample of the Head, and finished the sacrifice in death, will 
the Christ be complete and fully empowered for the great 
subsequent work of restoring all things. 

In view of these things, how full of meaning is the state- ¢ 
ment, ‘‘ Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord from 
henceforth ; yea, saith the spirit, that they may rest from 
their labors, but their works follow with them.’’ (Rev. 
14:13.) Nowhere in the Scriptures is death represented as 
in any sense a blessing, except in this one instance; and 


Deliverance of the Church. 241 


here it is particularly limited and made applicable to a cer- 
tain specific time *—‘‘ from henceforth.’’ And even then, 
notice, it is blessed only to a special class—‘‘ the dead who 
die.’ This expression must not be considered a blunder, 
but as a very pointed and forcible description of the small 
class to whom death will be a blessing. This class consti- 
tutes ‘‘the feet of Him.’’ And, as already shown, each 
member of the body of Christ must finish his sacrifice in 
actual death. 

These alone are the dead who die. They are reckoned 
of God as being already dead, and they are exhorted so also 
to reckon themselves: ‘‘ Reckon ye yourselves dead indeed 
unto sin.’’ No other dead men can be said to die but this 


class of dead ones, who mast finish their course of sacrifice 


in actual death. 

Thus will God help Zion in the dawning of her morning 
—inthe morning of the eternal day of Christ’s triumph. ‘Thus 
he is already helping her. One by one, imperceptibly to the 
world, the saints are now being changed, and are joining 
the company of the Church triumphant; and those who 
remain to the last proclaim the everlasting gospel until the 
door is shut and all opportunity to labor is at an end. Then 
they will ‘‘ stamd’’ in faith and patience and await their 
change, accepting deliverance joyfully through whatsoever 
agency God may be pleased to permit its accomplishment. 

Thus they will be saved from that great hurricane of 
trouble which will follow their departure, as well as preserved 
in the forepart of the battle in which « ¢housand will fall 
into infidelity, and be overcome by the various pestilences 
of error, to one who will stand. —Psa. gi:7. 


*Whcen, in a succeeding volume, | we examine the wonderful visions 
of the Revelator, it will be clearly seen that the time here pointed out 
by the word “ henceforth,” as marked by events, synchronizes closely 


with 1878 as indicated by the prophecies herein noted. 
16¢c 


242 *Thy Kingdom Come. 


As the time of trouble draws on, we must therefore ex- 
pect the true Church in its present condition, the Elias, the 
John class, to decrease in influence and numbers, while the 
Christ in triumph and glory, the same body on the other 
side of the veil, will increase, as John prophetically indi- 
cated.—John 3:30. 


A LITTLE WHILE, 


“A little while, our fightings wj!l be over; 
A little while, our tears be wiped away ; 
A little while, the power of Jehovah 
Will turn our darkness into heaven’s bright day. 


“ A little while, the fears that oft surround us 
Will to the memories of the past belong; 
A little while, the love that sought and found us 
Will change our weeping into heaven's glad song. 


‘A Tittle while! ’ Tis ever drawing nearer— 
The brighter dawning of that glorious day. 
Blest Savior, make our spirits’ vision clearer, 
And guide, Oh! guide us in the shining way. 


‘A little while, O blessed expectation! 
For strength to run with patience, Lord, we cry. 
Our hearts up leap in fond anticipation: 
Our union with the Bridegroom draweth nigh.” 


CHAPTER VIII. 


THE RESTORATION OF ISRAEL. 


Tue Re-ZSTABLISHMENT OF ISRARL IN PALESTINE, AN EVENT TO BE EXPECTED 
Wituin THis Harvest Pgriop.—How, AND TO WHAT EXTENT, AND WITH 
Wuat Crass, We SHoutp Expsct Tus ResToraTion.—Date oF iTs Be- 
GINNING, AND EvIDENCRS OF ITS ACTUAL ProGress S1nce.—Wuy MILLeENNIAL 
Buassincs, INTENDED FOR ALL MANKIND, WILL REACH AND Revive THE JEW 
Finst.—Tue Revivar or Jewish Hores.—Osservations oF Leapinc JRrwish 
anp GENTILE WRITERS.—THE HARMONY OF THESE WITH Propugcy.—ISRAEL’s 
Bunpngss Rasprctinc Curist ALREADV TurNING AWAY.—THE SPREAD AND 

fomentum OF THE MovemEntT.—Gop Witt Harr Tuem. Y 
“In that day will I raise up the tabernacle of David that is fallen, 
and close up the breaches thereof; and J will raise up his ruins, and I 
will build it as in the days of old. And J will bring again the captivity 
of my people of Israel, and they shall build the waste cities and inhabit 
them; and they shall plant vineyards and drink the wine thereof; they 
shall also make gardens, and eat the fruit of them. And I will plant them 
upon their land, and they shall no more be pulled up out of their land 
which I have given them, saith the Lord thy God.”,—Amos 9: 11,14, 15. 


jh MONG the relics of antiquity that have come down to 
our day, there is no other object of so great interest as 

the Jewish people. The searchers after ancient lore have 
untiringly questioned every inanimate object that could give 
_a mite of historic or scientific information. Monuments, 
altars, tombs, relics of public and private edifices, paintings, 
sculptures, hieroglyphics and dead languages have all been 
appealed to; and some have even endeavored patiently to 
discover the line of actual truth which probably inspired 
the many fanciful traditions, legends, songs, etc., that have 

243 


244 Thy Kingdom Come. 


come floating down the centuries, in order to learn all that 
it is possible to know of human origin, history and destiny. 
But the most interesting relic, and the one whose history 
can be most easily deciphered and understood, is the Jewish 
people. In them we have a monument of antiquity of in- 
estimable value, upon which are recorded, in clearly legi- 
ble characters, the origin, progress and final destiny of the 
whole human race—a living and intelligent witness of the 
gradual outworking of a wonderful purpose in human affairs, 
in exa€t conformity with the predictions of their divinely 
inspired prophets and seers. , 

As a people, they are marked as distin@t and peculiar by 
every circumstance of their history and by their common 
religious faith, as well as by every element of their national 
character, and even by their physiognomy and their man- 
ners and customs. The national characteristics of many 
centuries ago are still prominent, even to their fondness for 
the leeks and onions and garlic of Egypt, and their stiff- 
necked obstinacy. As a people, they truly had much 
advantage every way, in having committed unto them the 
oracles of God, developing among them poets, lawyers, 
statesmen and philosophers, and leading them up step by 
step from being a nation of slaves to be—as in the time of 
Solomon, the zenith of their glory—a people distinguished 
and honored among the nations, attracting the wonder and 
admiration of thé world.—Rom. 3:1, 2; 1 Kings 4:30-34; 
1o:1-29. ; 

That the re-establishment of Israel in the land of Pales- 
tine is one of the events to be expected in this Day of the 
Lord, we are fully assured by the above expression of the 
Prophet. Notice, particularly, that the prophecy cannot 
be interpreted in any symbolic sense. It is not a Canaan in 
heaven to which they are appointed, but a Canaan on earth. 
‘They are to be planted upon ‘‘ ¢heir Jand,’’ the land which 


Restoration of Israel. 245 


God says he had gimen them, the land which he promised to 
Abraham, saying, ‘‘ Lift up now thine eyes and look from 
the place where thou art, northward, and southward, and 
eastward, and westward: for a// the /and WHICH THOU SEEST, 
to thee will I give it, and to thy seed forever. And I will 
make thy seed as the dust of the earth, so that if a man can 
number the dust of the earth, then shall thy seed also be 
numbered. [An intimation of a then far distant period, 
giving ample time for such a multiplication of his seed.] 
Arise, walk through the land, in the length of it, and in the 
breadth of it; for I will give it unto thee.’’ ‘‘And I will 
give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the land wherein 
thou art a stranger—all the land of Canaan, for an EVER- 
LASTING POSSESSION.”’ (Gen. 13:14-173; 17:8.) Itisa land 
into which they were once privileged to enter, and in which 
they dwelt for centuries. But during that time they were 
many times plucked up and carried into captivity in other 
lands, while strangers wasted their cities, drank the wine 
of their vineyards, and ate the fruit of their gardens. And 
finally they were completely rooted out, their cities laid 
waste and desolate, and they were driven as wanderers and 
exiles from country to country the world over. But when 
replanted in their land according to this promise, ‘“ they 
shall zo more be pulled up out of their land,’’ which God 
gave them; and ‘they shall build the waste cities [cities 
in which they had formerly lived], and inhabit them.’’ 
A scattered, homeless, desolate and persecuted people, they 
are still a distinét and homogeneous people. United by 
the strong ties of blood relationship, by common hopes in- 
spired by a common faith in the wonderful promises of God, 
though they have but dimly comprehended those promises, | 
and still further bound together by the bond of sympathy 
growing out of their common sufferings and privations as 
exiles, they, to this day, look and long for the hope of Israel. 


246 Thy Kingdom Come. 


Asa people they still have faith in God, though in their 
blindness and pride of heart they have stumbled over the 
humility of God’s appointed messenger for the world’s sal- 
vation ; so that, instead of receiving him, they crucified 
the Savior, the Lord of glory. And yet the apostles and 
prophets show us that even this flagrant crime, to which 
their pride and self-will drove them, was not one which 
could never be forgiven them. Because of it, they have 
been punished, and that severely. When they condemned 
the Just One and said, ‘‘ His blood be upon us and upon 
our children,’’ they little expected the fearful recompense 
which followed. 

The terrible trouble and loss of life, the destruction of 
their holy city and témple, the full end of their national 
existence, and the scattering of the surviving remnant as 
exiles into all nations, completed the work of their harvest 
period. It began in factious civil strife and was completed 
by an invading Roman army. Fire, sword and famine ac- 
complished upon them a fearful recompense. 


And since that time Israel has truly been a nation scat- - 


tered and peeled. Driven as exiles from country to country, 
and from province to province, they have been deprived of 
almost every right and privilege which other men enjoyed. 
Rejecting Christianity, as well in its corrupted as in its pnre 
form, they became the objects of the contempt and re- 
lentless persecution of the Church of Rome. Says the 
historian :— 

“¢In Germany, France, England and Italy, they. were 
circumscribed in their rights by decrees and laws of the 
ecclesiastical as well as the civil powers, excluded from all 
‘ honorable occupations, driven from place to place, com- 
pelled to subsist almost entirely by mercantile occupations 
and usury, overtaxed and degraded in the cities, kept in 
narrow quarters, and marked in their dress with signs of 
contempt, plundered by lawless barons and penniless prin- 


Restoration of Israel. 247 


ces, an easy prey to all parties during the civil feuds, again 
and again robbed of their pecuniary claims, owned and sold 
as serfs by the emperors, butchered by mobs and revolted 
peasants, chased by monks, and finally burned in thousands 
by the crusaders, who also burned their brethren at Jerusa- 
lem in their synagogues, or tormented them by ridicule, abus- 
ive sermons, monstrous accusations and trials, threats and 
experiments of conversion... . They could own no land, 
belong to no guild of mechanics and engage in no form of 
art; they were shut up almost exclusively to trading, And, 
finding all mankind at war with them, their national pride 
and arrogance were by no means softened, and the breach 
consequently widened between the Jews and their Gentile 
neighbors everywhere.’’ 

Thus estranged from God and from their fellow-men of 
every nation, sad and pitiable indeed has been their miser- 
able condition. During the relentless Papal persecutions, 
they have suffered in common with the saints and martyrs 
of Jesus,—the Christian for his rejection of Antichrist, the 
Jew for his rejection of both Christ and Antichrist. While 
God has permitted these afflictions and persecutions to come 
as a penalty for their national crime of rejection of the 
gospel and crucifixion of the Redeemer, he will neverthe- 
less in due time reward the constancy of their faith in his 
promises, to which they have so long and so perseveringly 
held. -God foreknew their pride and hardness of heart, and 
foretold it as well as the evils which have come upon them; 
and no less pointedly has he foretold a departing of their 
blindness and the ultimate fulfilment to them of all the 
earthly promises declared long ago to Abraham and re- 
peated by ote after another of the holy prophets. 

As the time for the promised restoration of God’s favor 
to Israel draws on, we see a preparation being made for it. 
Within the present century a sifting and separating process 
is manifest among them, dividing them into two classes, 
the Orthodox and the Non-orthodox Jews. The former still 


248 Thy Kingdom Come. 


hold to the promises of God, and still hope that God’s set 
time to favor Zion may soon come. ‘lhe latter are losing 
faith in a personal God, as well as in the Abrahamic prom- 
ises, and are drifting toward liberalism, rationalism, infi- 
delity. The Orthodox include most of the poor, oppressed 
Jews, as well as some of the wealthy and learned, and are 
vastly more numerous than the Nen-orthodox; though the 
latter are by far the more influential and respected, often 
merchants, bankers, editors, etc. 

The following is a brief summary of the faith of the Or- 
thodox Jews :— 


“T believe with a true and perfect faith (1) that God is 
the creator, governor and maker of all creatures, and that 
he hath wrought all things; (2) that the Creator is one, 
and that he alone hath been our God, is, and forever shall 
be; (3) that the Creator is not corporeal, not to be com- 
prehended with any bodily properties, and that there is no 
bodily essence that can be likened unto him; (4) that 
nothing was before him, and that he shall abide forever ; (5) 
that he is to be worshiped and none else; (6) that all the 
words of the prophets are true; (7) that the prophecies of 
Moses were true; that he was chief of all wise men that 
lived before him or ever shall live after him ; [We may con- 
sider them somewhat excusable for this overestimate of such 
a noble and worthy character.] (8) that all the law which 
at this day is found in our hands was delivered -by God 
himself to our master, Moses; (g) that the same law is 
never to be changed, nor any other to be given us of God ; 
(10) that God understandeth all the thoughts and works of 
men, as it is written in the prophets—‘ He fashioneth their 
hearts alike, he understandeth all their works ;’ (11) that 
God will recompense good to them that keep his command- 
ments, and will punish them who transgress them; (12) 
that the Messiah is yet to come ; and, although he retard his 
coming, yet ‘I will wait for him till he come;’ (13) that 
the dead shall be restored to life when it shall seem fit unto 
God, the Creator, whose name be blessed and memory cel- 
ebrated without end. Amen.’’ 


Restoration of Israel. 249 


Since the destruction of their temple and their dispersion, 
the sacrifices have been discontinued ; but in all other re- 


. speéts the Mosaic requirements are still observed among the 


Orthodox Jews. Their worship, as of old, consists in the 
reading of the Scriptures, prayer and praise. On the second 
day of their feast of trumpets they read the account of 
Abraham’s offering of his son Isaac and God's blessing on 
him and his seed. Then they blow the trumpet and pray 


- that God would bring them to Jerusalem. 


The Non-orthodox or Reformed Jews, ‘‘ Radicals,’’ differ 
widely from the Orthodox: many of them are avowed athe- 
ists, denying a personal God. They deny that any Messiah 
is to come; and if they do not deny prophecy entirely, 
they explain that the Jewish nation is itself the Messiah and 
is reforming the world gradually, and that the sufferings 
predicted of Messiah are fulfilled in their persecutions and 
sufferings as a people. Others of them declare that civili- 
zation is the only Savior of the world they expect. 

It will be the former class, no doubt, that will be re- 
gathered and blessed when Messiah comes a second time, 
in glory and power; who will say, ‘‘ Lo, this is our God ; 
we have watted for him, and he will save us: this is the 
Lord ; we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoice 
in his salvation.’’ (Isa. 25:9.) And in the clearer light of 
Messiah’s teaching, all faith in the vain traditions which 
they still hold as valuable additions to the law of God will 
vanish away. The time is fast approaching when God will 
speak peace to Israel and comfort them and fully turn away 
their blindness. We do not by this mean to intimate that 
those who have wandered far off into infidelity will never. 
have their blindness removed. God forbid. The blind 
eyes of all, and of every nationality, will be opened ; and 
all the deaf ears will be unstopped. But no sfecta? favor 
will come to these infidel Jews at the time of the returning 


250 Thy Kingdom Come. 


favor; for ‘he is zo¢f a Jew, who is one outwardly ’’—merely 
by family relationship and facial expression. The Jews 
recognized by God’ as children of Abraham are those who 
hold to the faith of Abraham and trust in the divine promises. 


ANGLO-ISRAELITES, 


And here we must express our dissent from the views of 
those who claim that the Anglo-Saxons are the Israel of 
promise, in the Scriptures. Briefly stated, they claim that. 
the Anglo-Saxons, the people of the United States, etc., are 
the descendants of the ten tribes of Israel which separated 
from the tribes of Judah and Benjamin, after Solomon’s 
death, and which are often termed ‘the ten lost tribes; ’’ 
because, after the captivity (of the entire twelve tribes) in 
Babylon, the ten tribes never re-established themselves in 
the land of Canaan, as “Israel,’’ but became scattered as 
tribes and as individuals among the various nations, Those 
whose theory we criticise claim that they can trace their 
journey toward Great Britain, and that the greatness and 
influence of the English speaking peoples of the world are 
traceable to the fact that they belong to Israel, and are in- 
heriting the promises made to Israel. 

To this we answer: Some of the evidences offered in 
proof that they are of the ‘lost tribes’’ seem far from 
strong; but if we should admit all they claim in this, it 
would not prove their position, that the greatness and in- 
fluence of the Anglo-Saxon race are attributable to their be- 
ing Israelites by natural generation, any more than to their 
being ‘‘lost.’’ Their greatness is attributable to their free- 
dom and intelligence, which are traceable, not to their be- 
ing lost, nor to their being born Israelites according to the 
flesh, but to the doctrines of Christ—to the light which 
some of the spiritual seed of Abraham let shine among them. 

The fact that the ten tribes strayed away from the two 


Restoration of Israel. 251 


is not to their credit, but otherwise. It is an evidence that 
they were disposed to rejeét God’s promises: it is a sign 
of infidelity, of unbelief; for they well knew that God had 
predicted that the Lawgiver, the Savior, the Deliverer, the 
King, in whom and by whom the promises were to be ful- 
filled, was to come out of Judah. The tribe of Benjamin 
was the only tribe, therefore, aside from Judah, which, at 
the time of the revolt, manifested faith in God’s promises. 
But at the time of the return from the Babylonian captivity, 
though those who showed their continued faith in God and 
his promises, by returning to the land of Canaan, were 
mostly of the tribes of Judah and Benjamin, yet all who 
came back were not of these two tribes. Among them were 
some from the various tribes, who loved the Lord and sought 
him with repentance, still relying upon his promises. How- 
ever, the vast majority of the ten tribes, as well as of the 
two tribes, did not avail themselves of the opportunity to 
’ return to the'land of promise, preferring Babylon and other 
lands, many among them having fallen into idolatry and lost 
their. respect for God’s promises. 

We must remember that but a few of those who returned 
to their land under the lead of Ezra and none of those who 
returned under Nehemiah were of those who had been 
taken captive, the vast majority having died years before in 
Babylon. These were their children, in whose hearts the 
faith of their fathers still burned, who still hoped for the 
blessings and honors promised to Abraham’s seed. Thus 
the returning little band of less than fifty thousand were all 
the Israelites then remaining, of all the tribes, who by the 
aét of returning to the land of promise showed that they 
still held to the faith of Abraham. It was to the descend- 
ants of these fittest ones, sifted out of all the tribes of Israel 
—though principally of the two tribes, and all called Jews, 
after the royal and predominating tribe—that our Lord 


252 Thy Kingdom Come. 


presented himself and the Kingdom, at the first advent, as 
representing the holy nation, Israel entire. 

Our Lord referred to them as Israel, and not as a part of 
Israel, not as Judah merely. He speaks of even those who 
had clung to the promises, and to each other, as the ‘lost 
sheep of the house of Israel,’’ in that they had wandered far 
from the truth, after the traditions of false shepherds who had 
led them in their own way and not as God directed. Hesays: 
‘‘T am not sent save [except] to the lost sheep of the house 
of Israel."" To the house of Israel consequently his min- 
istry was confined, in harmony with the foregoing, show- 
ing that the Jews of his day were the only recognized rep- 
resentatives of the ‘house of Israel,’’ as the terms, ‘all 
Israel,’ ‘‘ our twelve tribes constantly serving God,’’ and 
many similar expressions of our Lord and the apostles in- 
dicate. And it will be remembered that our Lord, in con- 
nection with this statement, that his ministry was to Israel, 
forbade his disciples going to any outside the Jews of Pal- 
estine.—Matt. 10:5,63 15:24. 

Notice also how the apostles used the word ‘Israel,’ 
and not “ Judah,’’ when speaking of those who were living 
at that time in Palestine (Acts 2:22; 3:12; 5:353 13:16; 
21:28), and how they apply the words of Isaiah concern- 
ing the remnant of Israel to the comparatively few who re- 
ceived the gospel (Rom. 9:4, 27, 29, 31-33 3 10:I-43 11:1, 
7-14, 25, 26, 31), and speak of all ¢he rest as stumbling and 
being blinded. So, then, even if it could be demonstrated 
that the Anglo-Saxon peoples were part of ‘‘the ten lost 
tribes,’’ we see clearly that no favor could have come to 
them upon that score, under that covenant; for they de- 
serted the Israelitish covenant and became idolaters, unbe- 
lievers, and practically Gentiles. Besides, as already noted,* 
all recognized as the zatura/l seed of Abraham, who would 

*VoL. H., Chapter vii. Ss “y t7* 


Restoration of Israel. 253 


continue to reject Christ, were cast off from all favor from 
the time of Christ’s death to the year 1878, when, chron- 
ologically, divine favor was due to return to them, and 
their blindness to begin to be removed. Consequently, the 
prominence of the Anglo-Saxons for the past centuries could 
in no sense have been Israel’s returning favor. Those from 
whom the favor was taken for the rejection and crucifixion 
of the Lord are the ones to whom the favor is to return 
now. At that time, and ever since, Israel has been rep- 
resented by ‘‘the Jew’’ (Rom. 2:9, 10), and it is the Jew 
that will now be restored to favor as the zatural ‘‘ seed of 
Abraham.’’ These, with the spiritual ‘‘seed’’ (selected 
during the Gospel age—a remnant from Israel, Jews, and 
the remainder gathered from the Gentiles), are to be God’s 
agencies for blessing all the families of the earth. 

Nor will the coming favor to Israel be exclusive. All be- 
lievers in the covenant promises may share those returning 
favors with the natural seed, just as during the Gospel age 
any Jew who accepted Christ was eligible to all the spirit- 
ual blessings and advantages offered during the Gospel age. 
As only a small remnant believed in and accepted the gos- 
pel favors at the beginning, so, aside from the Jews, only 
a small number of mankind will be ready for the new laws 
and conditions of the Millennial age, under the righteous 
administration of the glorified Lord and his glorified Church; 
and hence, at first, few but Jews will be blessed under it. 

The Jew, long accnstomed to striving to do, and to trust- 
ing to works of obedience to the Law to secure for him the 
divine blessing, stembled over the first feature of the Gos- 
pel dispensation—the remission of sins, without works, to 
every one that believeth in Jesus’ perfect work and all-suf- 
ficient sacrifice for sin. But the Jew’s respect for the Law 
will turn to his advantage in the dawn of the Millennial 
age, and none will be more ready for the strict requirements 


254 Thy Kingdom Come. 


and laws of that age than he, after his blindness, relative 
to Christ and the value of his sacrifice for sins, shall have 
passed away ; for works are required after faith in Christ, 
though not accepted before. And the Jew, in accepting 
the love and favor of God in Christ, will not be so inclined 
to lose sight of God’s justice as are many others of to-day. 
Others, on the contrary, will be blinded for a time and un- 
ready to recognize the rules of the Kingdom, in which jus- 
tice will be laid to the line and righteousness to the plummet. 

As the Jew was blinded by a false view of the Law, which 
was made void through false teachings, so now, many Gen- 
tiles will be hindered from taking hold of the conditions of 
favor during the Millennnial age, by reason of the false pre- 
sentation of the do¢trine of grace in the forgiveness of sins, 
made by false teachers of the present time, who make void 
the gospel of the grace of God through sophistical reason- 
ings—‘‘ even denying that the Lord dought them’’ (2 Pet. 
2:1), and that there was any ransom-fprice given or neces- 
sary for man’s recovery. They claim that to err is human, 
to forgive, divine ; and hence, inferentially, that occasional 
sin is quite excusable, and that strictness of punishment, a 
ransom, etc., are not supposable, since if there were no sins 
to forgive it would take away God’s pleasure and office of 
forgiving. Losing sight of God’s justice, they fail to see 
the philosophy of his plan of reconciliation through the blood 
of the cross, granting remission of sins through a ransom- 
sacrifice, to such only as accept Christ and strive against 
sin. Blinded by their lax ideas of God’s justice and strict- 
ness, few will be so well prepared as the Jew for that strict 
obedience according to ability, which will be required of 
all in the next age. 

As an illustration of the preparation of the Jew to recog- 
nize Christ Jesus’ death as his ransoni—corresponding price 
—the legal atonement for man’s sin, we quote below, from 


Restoration of Israel. 255 


the pen of a young Hebrew converted to Christ, an account 
of the yearly commemoration of the ‘‘ Great Day of Atone- 
ment,’’ as observed at the present time by Orthodox Jews. 
The article appeared in Zhe Hebrew-Christian, as follows: 

“* Yom Kippur, or the Great Day of Atonement, was a 
remarkable day with my father; for he not only fasted, 
prayed and mortified himself on this holy day of expiation, 
but he a€tually spent the whole night at the synagogue in 
devotion. I have often seen my devout parent weep on 
this great day, when he repeated the pathetic confession 
following the enumeration of the sacrifices which were’ap- 
pointed by God to be offered up for the sins of ommission 
and commission; and many a time have J shed sympathetic 
tears as I joined him in lamenting that we have now no 
temple, no high priest, no altar and no sacrifices. The day 
before that solemn day, he, in company with the rest of 
the Jews, took a cock ; and, during the repetition of certain 
forms of prayers, he moved the living fowl round his head 
three times, repeating these words: ‘This be my substitute, 
this be my exchange, this be my atonement ; this fowl shall 
go to death, and I to a blessed life.’ Then he laid his 
hands on it, as the hands used to be laid on the sacrifices, 
and immediately after it was given to be slaughtered. This 
is the only blood that is shed in Israel now. The blood of 
bulls and goats no longer flows beside the brazen altar. 

‘«My father took the greatest pains to procure a white 
cock, and avoided a red one altogether ; and when I asked 
him his reason for doing so, he told me that a red cock is 
already covered with sin, for sin itself is red, as it is written: 
‘Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be white as snow ; 
though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool.’ 
(Isa. 1:18.) He continued: ‘ You will find that the Rab- 
bis have laid it down in the Talmud, if the cock be white, 
he is infected with no sin, and can therefore bear the sins 
of the Jews ; but if he be red, he is altogether covered with 
sins, and is ‘unfit for bearing our iniquities.’ 

‘«The reason why they use a cock rather than any ailie: 
creature is this. In Hebrew man is called gever. Now if 
gever (man) has sinned, gever must also sustain the penalty 
thereof. But since the punishment is heavier than the Jews 


256 Thy Kingdom Come. 


can bear, the Rabbis have substituted for them a cock, 
which in the Chaldee diale& is called gever, and thus the 
divine justice is assumed to be satisfied: because, as gever 
has sinned, so gever, z. ¢., a cock, is sacrificed. 

“« This vain invention may be viewed as a remarkable evi- 
dence of a most striking fact, that, while many among the - 
Jews at the present day deny the atonement altogether, the 
body of the nation still have some feeling of the absolute 
necessity of a sacrifice for sin, and that without an atone- 
ment repentance is of no avail for salvation. If, instead of 
reading Rabbinical fables, the Jews would study the Bible, 
they would find that the Lord Jesus, the true Messiah, in 
His own blessed person made that very atonement for sin 
which they in their ignorance imagine may be made by the 
sacrifice of a cock. Gever (man) has sinned, and gezer 
(man), even the man Christ Jesus, has made his soul an 
offering for sin.—Isa. 53:10.” 


TO THE JEW FIRST. 

We see, then, that God’s prediction, that Israel (except 
the faithful few) would be blinded by their Law (Rom. 
11:9), was fulfilled in a natural way; and also that his 
further prediction, that the favors and conditions of the 
Millennial age will bless many of them more quickly than 
others, is also to come about in a perfectly natural way and 
to result from reasonable causes. 

Thus the Millennial favors will be to the Jews first, even 
as by reason of the covenants, etc., the gospel favors were 
offered to them first. And so it shall be finally as Simeon 
prophesied: ‘‘ This child is set for the fall and rising again 
of many in Israel.’’ And the time for raising up that nation, 
so long fallen from favor, is at hand. 

But let us guard against a too common mistake, made by 
many who see something of these promises, of supposing 
that the statements should be taken literally, which say: 

. © After this I will return, and will build again the taber- 
nacle [house] of David, which is fallen down; and I will 


Restoration of Lsrael. 257 


build again the ruins thereof, and I will set it up.”’ “‘ And 
the Lord shall give him the throne of his father David.” 
“And David, my servant, shall be king over them.’’ (Aéts 
15:16; Luke 1:32; Ezek. 37:24.) While the literalness 
of the promised return of Israel to their own land, and the 
rebuilding of Jerusalem upon her own heaps, cannot be 
questioned, we may be equally confident that by the house 
and ¢hrone of David, not the literal stones, timbers, etc., 
are meant. ‘The re-establishment of the house of David re- 
fers to the re-establishment of royalty and dominion in the 
hands of some of David’s posterity. Christ Jesus is the 
promised scion of David’s house, and the heir of his throne; 
and when his authority begins to be established, that will 
be the beginning of the raising up (permanent establish- 
ment) of the formerly temporary house or tabernacle of 
David, which was overthrown, and which for many centu- 
ries has lain in the dust. So, likewise, the “throne of 
David,’’ upon which Messiah will sit, refers not to the - 
wood and gold and ivory bench upon which David sat, but 
to the dignity, power and authority of office which he ex- 
ercised. That authority, office or throne, which David oc- 
cupied for some years, is to be filled on a much grander 
scale by Jehovah’s Anointed, our Lord Jesus. 

But what authority did David have and exercise? We 
answer, it was Jehovah’s authority: David ‘‘sat upon the 
throne of Jehovah’’ (1 Chron. 29:23); and this is the 
very authority which will support Christ in his Millennial 
Kingdom. And when rightly seen it is evident that David 
and his throne or divine authority, established in the typi- 
cal nation of Israel, were merely typical illustrations of 
Christ and his Kingdom ; and David’s chief honor will be, 
if he be counted worthy, to be one of the ‘‘ princes”’ to 
whom Immanuel will entrust the earthly phase of his King- 
dom,—Psa. 45 :16, - 

76 


258 Thy Kingdom Come. : 


David’s name as well as his Kingdom was typical. The 
name David signifies Be/oved; and it is God’s Beloved Son 
who will be king over all the earth in that day, and not the 

‘typical beloved David of old. It is well also to distinguish 
clearly between the New Jerusalem, the heavenly or spirit- 
ual city of which the apostles are the twelve foundations, 
and the old Jerusalem which is to be rebuilt upon her old 
heaps. The old Jerusalem’s promised restoration implies 
not merely the reconstruction of the buildings, etc., but 
specially the reorganization of Israel’s government ; for a 
city in prophecy is always the symbol or representation of 
a government. Hence the promised reconstruétion of Je- 
rusalem upon her old foundations implies a national reor- 
ganization of Israel upon a basis similar to that which it 
formerly had, as a people over whom Jehovah's Anointed 
held the authority. The New Jerusalem represents the Gos- 
pel Church in glory and Kingdom power, spiritual, and in- 
visible to men, yet all-powerful. Its descent to earth (Rev. 
21:2) marks the fulfilment of that petition of our Lord’s 
prayer which says, ‘‘ Thy Kingdom come ,’”’ and its ‘‘ com- 
ing ’’ will be gradual, and not sudden. It is already ‘‘ com- 
ing down,’’ coming into control, and as a result we see the 
preliminary steps leading to the re-establishment of the old 
Jerusalem ; and ultimately the result mentioned in our Lord's 
prayer will be realized :—God’s will will be done on earth 
asin heaven. The New Jerusalem and the New Heavens are 
synonymous, signifying the new spiritual ruling power. 

Prophecies already examined point to the year 1878 as 
the date at which Israel’s ‘‘doub/e”’ time of waiting for the 
King was fulfilled, and from which their return to favor 
and the turning away of their blindness were due to date: 
the time after which it would be due to ‘‘ speak comforta- 
bly to Jerusalem, and cry unto her that her appointed time 
[of waiting—her ‘double’’] is accomplished and her ini- 


Restoration of Israel. 259 


quity pardoned ; for she hath received of the Lord’s hand 
[her] double for all her sins,’’—Isa. 40:1~2. 

From that date onward, therefore, we see, as we should 
expect, marked indications of returning favor to that people 
—a movement toward their actual planting again in their 
own land and their rebuilding as a great nation, according 
to God’s multiplied promises to that effect; for, ‘<‘ Thus 
saith the Lord, the God of Israel: Like these good figs, so 
will I acknowledge them that are carried away captive of 
Judah, whom I have sent out of this place into the land of 
the Chaldeans [Babylon—mystic Babylon, Christendom, 
as shown in verse g; for since their overthrow they have 
been dispersed among all the nations of so-called Christen- 
dom] for their good [for their discipline and punishment : 
a good thing in disguise]. ‘‘ For I will set mine eyes upon 
them for good, and I will bring them again to this land ; 
and I will build them, and not pull them down; and I will 
plant them, and not pluck them up. [This could not refer 
to the return from the captivity to literal Babylon, since . 
after that return they were again pulled down and plucked 
up.] And I will give them a heart to know me, that I am 
the Lord; and they shall be my people, and I will be their 
God ; for they shall return unto me with their whole heart.’’ 
—Jer. 24:5~7. 

““Thus saith the Lord: Behold, I will bring again the 
captivity of Jacob’s tents, and have mercy on his dwelling- 
places; and the city [Jerusalem] shall be builded upon her 
own heap, and the palace [the temple] shall remain after 
the manner thereof. Their children also shall be as afore- 
time, and their congregation shall be established before me, 
and I will punish all that oppress them. And their nobles 
shall be of themselves, and their governor shall proceed 
from the midst of them. Behold, I will bring them from 
the north country [ Russia, where nearly two-thirds of all] 


260 Thy Kingdom Come. 


the Jews now living reside], and gather them from the coasts 


of the earth. . . . A great company shall return thither. 
They shall come with weeping ; and with supplications will 
I lead them. . . . Hear the word of the Lord, O ye na- 


tions, and declare it in the isles afar off, and say, He that 
scattered Israel will gather him and keep him as a shepherd 
doth his flock ; for the Lord hath redeemed Jacob and ran- 
somed him from the hand of him that was stronger than he. 
Therefore, they shall come and sing in the height of Zion, 
and shall flow together to the goodness of the Lord, for 
wheat and for wine, and for oil, and for the young of the 
flock and of the herd; and their soul shall be as a watered 
garden ; and they shall not sorrow any more at all.’’—Jer. 
30:18, 20, 21; 31:8-12. 

Not only will the great Redeemer, once rejected by them, 
thus restore and lift up the living generations of that people, 
but the dead also are to be restored ; for ‘‘ Thus saith the 
Lord God: Behold, O my people, I will open your graves, 
and cause you to come up out of your graves, and bring 
you into the land of Israel. And ye shall know that I am 
the Lord, when I have opened your graves, . . . and shall 
put my spirit in you, and ye shall live, and I shall place you 
tn your own land: then shall ye know that I the Lord have 
spoken it,and performed it, saith the Lord.’’ Ezek. 37:12-14. 

These wonderful promises will not be fulfilled in a twenty- 
four-hour day, but during the Millennial day. They had a 
marked beginning with the year 1878, as the result of the 
Berlin Congress of Nations. The Jews now enjoy greater 
privileges in the land of their fathers than had been ac- 
corded them for centuries. They are no longer merely 
« dogs’’ to the insolent Turks. 

It is not generally known, we think, that England has 
already assumed a protectorate over Palestine, and, indeed, 
over all of Turkey’s Asiatic provinces, of which it is one, 


Restoration of Israel. 261 


England has for a long time felt a necessity for protecting 
Turkey for three reasons: first, her wealthy classes are large 
holders of Turkish bonds ; second, if ‘Turkey should go to 
any one of her neighboring nations, or-were divided among 
them, England would get little or none of the spoil; and 
the other rival nations would thus be lifted more than Eng- 
land into prominence and power in the control of the 
affairs of Europe; third, and mainly, England realizes that 
with the Turkish government out of the way, Russian in- 
fluence in southern Asia would be greatly increased, and — 
would ere long absorb the Indian Empire, of which Eng- 
land’s Queen is Empress, and from which England draws 
rich revenues in commerce, etc. Hence we find the Royal 
or Tory party in England strenuously supporting the Turks; 
and when, in 1878, Russia was about to enter Constanti- 
nople, England interposed and sent a fleet of gunboats in- 
to the harbor. The result was the Berlin Conference of 
June 13, 1878, in which the chief figure was a Hebrew, 
Lord Beaconsfield, Prime Minister of England; and Turk- 
key’s affairs were then settled so as to preserve her national 
existence for the present, and yet so to arrange her provinces 
that in the event of final dismemberment the great powers 
would know which portion each would be expected to seize. 
It was at this time that all the provinces of Turkey were 
granted greater religious freedom, and England by secret 
treaty with Turkey became protector of the Asiatic provin- 
ces. In the language of the historian, Justin McCarthy, 


‘The English government undertook to guarantee to 
Turkey her Asiatic possessions against all invasion, . . . 
formally pledged herself to defend and secure Turkey against 
all in vasion and aggression, and occupied Cyprus in order 
to have a more effectual vantage-ground from which to car- 
ry on this project.”’ 

It will be seen, then, that Palestine, as one of those 
Asiatic provinces, is already under England’s care ; and this 


262 Thy Kingdom Come. 


accounts for the greater laxity on the part of the Turkish 
government in the enforcement of its laws unfavorable to 
Jewish interests. And this providential opening of Pales- 
tine to the Jews was followed by renewed persecutions in 
the ‘north country ’’—Russia and Roumania—certain to 
induce emigration from those countries to their own land. 
As a result of this combination of circumstances, Palestine, 
and especially Jerusalem, is rapidly increasing in Jewish 
population of the ‘‘ orthodox’’ type. Already the Jews in 
Jerusalem outnumber all other nationalities combined, 
whereas for centuries they have been a small minority. 

The Mew York Herald, commenting some time ago upon 
the acquirement by England of the island of Crete, her 
occupancy of Egypt and the condition of Turkey and her 
provinces generally, said :— 

‘We live in a fast age, and even history is manufactured 
at a greater speed. Wars used to last decades of years; 
civilization advanced slowly ; communications between na- 
tions and consequent mutual benefit proceeded correspond- 
ingly tardily. Now what is invented in one country is 
known forthwith thousands of miles away, and the whole 
world can profit simultaneously by the invention. Notably 
in politics is the spirit of haste evident. Statesmen’s 
schemes once required generations for completion; now 
the boldest plans are carried out by the plannners, and the 
map of a continent is changed in a week. How quickly 
events march and history is created is evident with special 
clearness in the magnetic Eastern question. . . . In the 
very midst of the scene of conflicting interests lies Palestine 
—dear to Jew, Christian and Mohammedan. The states- 
man says it is the key to the position ; and looking to his 
countrymen’s advantage he declares that in view of its won- 
derful fertility, which of old supported millions; in view of 
its grand possibilities for commerce, which in former days 
made its sea-ports scenes of activity and wealth, and which 
have rendered Tyre and Sidon proverbial to this day; in 
view of its being at the jun¢tion of Europe and Asia, and 


in location, therefore, most admirable, the possession of: 


Restoration of Israel. 263 


Palestine is to his patriotic heart most desirable. The his- 
‘torian says, The first international episode on record was 
the invasion of Palestine ; from that day to this it has been 
a center of interest ; therefore, he on his part is concerned 
for Palestine’s future. The religionist cannot find words 
to express the interest which he from his point of view 
takes in what he calls the Holy Land: for him every stone 
is an epic, every tree a poem. The shrewd commercial 
man notes that when the Asian railway system is built up, 
as built up it will be as soon as stable government is estab- 
lished, the geographical position of Palestine will make it 
the State to which the great railway lines will converge to 
carry the productions of Asia to European and American 
markets and vice versa; for, as the commerce of three con- 
tinents met in its borders in the days of Solomon, so will 
the future commerce of the same continents flow again to 
that favored spot. Nor will he abate his hopes in the least 
degree because their realization seems distant. Remember- 
ing the swift growth of a Chicago or a San Francisco, the 
rapid turning of wastes into populous States, he simply re- 
marks, ‘ Events follow quickly nowadays,’ and waits. 

‘‘While, however, the great Christian Powers stand with 
mail-clad hands to grasp the coveted and tempting bit when 
the moribund Turk lets go his hold, a historic figure steps 
forward and declares, ‘ The land is mine!’ And when the 
powers turn to look at the speaker, they recognize the Jew 
—the child of the patriarch who lived in Palestine when it 
was first invaded, and who would himself fain be present 
to recetve tt as his own when its possession is disputed thirty- 
six centuries after ! 

‘«What a wonderful coincidence! ‘Not so,’ says the 
Jew; ‘it is not a coincidence, it is my destiny.’ Let us 
now briefly glance at the position of the Jew in this ques- 
tion of the future of Palestine. Nations are born from 
ideas. From the idea of German unity grew the German 
empire into actual fact, proclaimed to the world from Ver- 
sailles, with French cannon to answer amen to German 
prayer for its welfare. From the cry of ‘ Italia irridenta’ 
was born the new Italy of to-day, whose thunder will again 
wake the Mediterranean shores. From the tradition of 
ancient Greece the modern Greece was created. So Chris- 


264 Thy Kingdom Come.- 


tians understand how the long cherished aspirations of the 
Jew may yet be realized ; and while they fully concede that 
to the Jew, above all, belongs Palestine, while he above all 
is specially qualified to develop the future of that teeming 
country, while his possession of it would solve the fears of 
the jealous,Powers, the establishment of the Jew in it would 
be an act of justice, and a worthy atonement for the fear- 
ful wrongs perpetrated upon him—the martyr of history. 

‘* As for the Jews themselves, to say how they long for 
restoration is hardly necessary. On the gth of their month 
Ab, they fast for the destruction of their temples and the 
national calamities attending those events. There is not a 
morning or an evening but what they pray, ‘Gather us to- 
gether from the four corners of earth ;’ ‘ Restore our peo- 
ples as of old;’ ‘ Dwell thou in the midst of Jerusalem ;’ 
and these words are uttered in every city where the Jew is 
found—that means throughout the world. Such constancy 
is almost beyond all bounds, and to this day the Spanish 
Jews in all lands (even in this distant country) put some of 
the dust of Palestine or ‘tierra santa,’ as they call it, on 
the eyes of their dead—a poetic and pathetic evidence of 
their love for the sacred soil. 

«««When the railway reaches Jerusalem, Messiah comes,’ 
alludes to Isaiah 66: 20, where the prophet in his vision 
sees the exiles returning by all manner of conveyances, 
among them what he calls ‘kirkaroth.’ The English ver- 
sion translates it ‘swift beasts,’ which is, of course, too in- 
definite, or ‘dromedaries,’ which is certainly incorrect. 
Philologists are not wanting who derive the word from sar, 
‘a furnace,’ and karkar ‘to sway’—asserting that the 
prophet sought thus to coin a word for what was shown him 
in his vision, a train in rapid motion. ‘When Nicholas 
reigns redemption comes,’ is.an allusion to Isaiah 63:4, 
from which verse Hebraists evolve, by what they term 
‘Rashe Teboth,’ the sentence, ‘ All Judah shall hear and 
behold the fall of Nicholas, Emperor of Muscovy, on account 
of the oppression of the children of Judah, and after happen- 
ing our fall, will happen our real redemption, and near at 
hand for the children of Judah will be the good tidings of 
the Tishbite prophet [Elijah].’ These, and such as these, are 
important, insomuch as they indicate Jewish thought.’’ 


Restoration of Israel. 265 


We are forcibly reminded of how near worldly men some- 
times come to the truth, without knowing it, by the above 
expression that the patriarch Abraham ‘‘ wou/d himself fain 
be present to receive’’ the land of promise as his own and 
that of his posterity, thirty-six centuries after his death. 
This, which some might consider a flight of poesy, the Script- 
ures declare shall be an actual faét. For, as we have already 
seen,* Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, with Daniel and all the 
holy prophets, will be ‘‘made perfect ’’—awakened from 
death to perfeét manhood, after the Gospel Church has 
been glorified (Heb. 11:40); and they will constitute the 
‘princes in all the earth’’ (Psa. 45:16), the earthly and 
visible representatives of the Christ, the spiritual, invisible 
ruler. To Abraham as well as to his seed the dand of 
promise was given for an everlasting possession ; and he 
must receive it in the future, for as yet he has never possessed 
a foot of it.—Aéts 7:5. 

A letter publishéd in a Chicago journal bears remarkable 
testimony to the gradual progress of restitution in Palestine, 
and the preparations for God’s promised future blessing 


upon it and its people, as follows :— 
Jerusalem, Nov. 23, 1887. 
‘‘T am very glad to tell you of the glorious things that 
we have been witnesses of during the six years we have 
lived here. When we arrived here, six years ago, we num- 
bered fourteen adults and five children. As we drove up 
from Jaffa we were deeply impressed with the desolation of 
the land. Not aspear of green could be seen anywhere ; 
the olive trees and vines were so covered with the gray dust 
of a hot, dry summer, that you never could imagine there 
could be any green underneath; and the whole earth seemed 
dried to its foundations. But we have never seen it look 
like that since that time. Every year it looks greener, and 
now many of those barren hill-sides are covered with vine- 
yards and olive yards, quite changing their appearance. 


* VoL. 1., Chapter xiv. 


266 Thy Kingdom Come. 


“You will ask, What is the cause of this great change? 
God has promised that, like as he brought all this evil upon 
this land, so he will bring great blessings unto it, and these 
have evidently begun by the sending of more rain than for 
many centuries past. He sends beautiful showers and heavy 
dews, where there used not to be any; and he sends clouds 
in summer, which were never known even twenty years ago. 
This tempers the heat, so that it does not dry up the ground 
so. Five years ago hesent, in July and August (months in 
which it never used to rain), three hours of rain in Jaffa, 
and sixteen hours in Damascus, and much all around, so 
that the American papers remarked upon it as a proof that 
the climate of Palestine is changing. Also when we came 
here, there were very few Jews coming back to this land, 
but the persecutions in Russia and Germany and other places 
began to drive them out; and, in spite of the edicts of 
the Sultan, they began returning to this land, buying land, 
planting and building, and getting possession of the trade 
of the city ; and so to-day there are many thousands more 
than when we came. 

‘« Jerusalem is in reality now in the hands of the Jews, so 
far as trade is concerned ; and the Jew is no longer under 
the heel of the Mohammedan as he once was. They are 
also rapidly building up a new city, exadtly on the line of 
the description in Jer. 31:38-40; 32:43-44, so that even 
the Turks, who are in power, are taking notice of it, and 
are saying one to the other, ‘It is God; and what can we 
do?’ And what can we say to all this, but that God is rap- 
idly fulfilling in our day his Word and the covenant he 
made with Abraham? And weare witnesses of these things.”’ 


Notwithstanding the oppression and tyranny which have 
ground them down in the very dust, we find many of them 
of late years rising to wealth and distin¢tion far beyond 
their Gentile neighbors. And with such means and dis- 
tinction, in many instances, rises the benevolent ambition 
to expend it for the elevation of the Jewish race; and wise 
and well directed efforts are accomplishing much in this 
direction. The attention of thinking men among both Jews 
and Gentiles is being drawn to this turn in Jewish affairs. 


Restoration of Israel. 267 


It is evident from the expressions of leading Jewish jour- 
nals, and from the various movements now in progress for 
the colonization of Palestine, and for the assistance and 
advancement of those already settled there, that thousands 
are now turning with eager eyes to the land of promise. 
This turn in Jewish affairs has been since 1878; and the 
shaping of events since that date has caused and is causing 
a remarkable awakening on this subject, which in itself is 
a significant sign of the times. From the Jewish World 
(Aug. 20th, 1886) we quote, for example, the following :— 

“‘There are rifts in the clouds which have hitherto cast 
so dismal a shadow over the Holy Land. The future of 
that unhappy country, so long wrapped in impenetrable 
darkness, is beginning faintly to brighten ; and the glim- 
merings of a happier state of -hings are almost within meas- 
urable distance of our forecasts. . . . Two institutions are 
destined to play a conspicuous part in the amelioration of 
the condition of the Jews of Palestine—the Agricultural 
School at Jaffa, and the Lionel De Rothschild institution 
in the neighborhood of Jerusalem. We might add a third 
in the shape of the Montefiore Testimonial Fund, which, 
by its promotion of building societies and its erection of 
cheap dwellings, has done much to foster thrift and to re- 
duce the miseries and hardships of domestic life in the 
Holy City. . . . What we are concerned at this moment 
in noting is, that the prospects of the Jews in Palestine 
are no longer gloomy. There are, on the one hand, forces 
at work for the improvement of the condition of our breth- 
ren, which have been wisely devised and ingeniously or- 
ganized, and which are now being assiduously ‘applied ; 
on the other hand, the people are getting tired of their 
misery and inactivity, and are showing an increasing ten- 
dency to take advantage of the efforts made for their rehab- 
ilitation. This is a state of things which is fraught with 
happy consequences, and no Jew will fail to contemplate it 
with pleasure.”’ 

In asucceeding number of the same paper a leading article 
on ‘* The Future of Palestine ’’ closed with these words :— 


268 Thy Kingdom Come. 


‘* With the late influx of an agricultural element in colo- 
nies planted by the Montefiore, Hirsch, and Rothschild 
funds, willing hands should be found to labor at the trans- 
formation scene, when ‘the desert shall blossom as the rose ;’ 
willing hands and willing hearts that shall reclaim the Holy 
Land from its long night of death, and restore to life and 
light the national home of the Jews.’’ 

Another journal, Zhe Jewish Messenger, says :— 

“‘While men are absorbed in their little cares, alternately 
moved by hopes and fears, the grand and stately march of 
human events progresses onward and irresistibly to com- 
pletion, in the fulfilment of an inevitable law which controls 
all human action. Men here and there raise their puny 
voices as if to stay this tide of advancement, and arrest this 
fiat of the Eternal. As well might they attempt to stay the 
law which governs the universe. Races have as fixed a 
course to run as have the stars that dazzle in the blue vault 
above us, and the race of Israel is the bright fixed star 
amongst them. In all its wanderings it has been true to 
its course. Its mission has been foreseen and foretold, and 
its final restoration to the Holy Land prophesied. That 
this prophecy is being fulfilled, the signs of the times indi- 
cate. It is being accomplished so quietly, and so gradually, 
that only those who have given the subject attention real- 
ize the importance. of the work done. 


“« Palestine is a political necessity to the Jewish race. The 
founding of a nation in the Holy Land once more means 
the exaltation ofall Israel. It places her as a nation amongst 
the nations of the earth. It gives to the Jew that political 
power and sovereign right which mean protection. It makes 
him a citizen of his country, and gives him a passport 
amongst the nations of the earth. . . . This may look im- 
practicable to the man in the counting-room absorbed in his 
books, to the man in his store absorbed in figuring up his 
profits and losses, to the man steeped in the bliss of social 
pleasures, but it is as clear as the noon-day’s sun to who-' 
ever makes a study of the political horoscope. 

‘©The political autonomy realized, the Jews scattered 
throughout the world will not flock to Palestine in a body. 
There are 300,000 Jews in Asia, 400,000 in Africa, and 


Restoration of Israel. 269 


5,000,000 live in Europe. It is from these that Palestine 
will draw its life of restoration. The American-born Jew 
will undoubtedly remain an American; and if he should 
ever visit the Holy Land it would be for pleasure and travel, 
and to see a land so famous as the chief birthplace of his 
heroic race. , 

“It may be said that, geographically speaking, Palestine 
is too small to exert much influence as a political, intellec- 
tual or moral power among the nations of the earth. We 
reply that in ancient times Greece was a power, and that in 
modern times the little island of Britain is a power. Geo- 
graphically speaking, what are they? It is intelle¢ét, moral 
force and pride of nationality that make nations great, and 
not the extent of territory. It is intelle¢t and moral power 
that will make Israel renowned among nations.’’ 

The Jewish Chronicle says :— 

‘ The movement is irresistible. We cannot suffer our- 
selves to stand by with folded hands when this new exodus 
is taking place. We Jews have held, for nearly two thousand 
years, that’ the consummation of the ages of suffering we 
have passed through will be reached only when we again 
possess the land-of our fathers. Is that trust to die away 
just at the moment when it appears about to be fulfilled? 
Or, is it to be expected that the return will be brought 
about by means so mysterious as to be beyond the co-opera- 
tion of human beings? God works his will through the 
wills of men; and if the prophecies are to be fulfilled, it 
will be by human wills and energies. These may seem to 
be high topics to drag into conne¢tion with a practical plan 
for placing a few Jewish colonies in Palestine. But it is 
from small beginnings, such as these, that great events often 
arise ; and the return of a small body of Jews to the Holy 
Land can never fail to bring to mind the possibility and 
the practicability of the larger return to which all Jewish 
history and all Jewish aspirations have hitherto pointed.’ 


Others, besides Jews, men of prominence in the world, 
see and comment upon the rising prominence of Israel. For 
instance, note the following from the Central Presbyterian : 


‘‘Instead of dying out, the Jewish body shows increas- 
ing vitality. T hey cannot be stamped out or swallowed 


270 Thy Kingdom Come. 


up. They pass from country to country to become practi- 
cally masters wherever they go. They get the land in 
Germany and Hungary, and grow rich in Russia; they are 
the great bankers in London and Paris and the centers of 
European commerce. In ten (recent) years the Rothschilds 
furnished £ 100,000,000 in loans to England, Austria, Prussia, 
France, Russia and Brazil.’’ 

Lord Shaftesbury of England said recently :— 

‘« There is a great jealousy of that wonderful people who 
are now coming to the front. And what a sign of the times 
it is, that, wherever the Jews are, they are either the most 
prominent people to be persecuted, or the most prominent 
people to take a lead in all the various professions! A prom- 
inent citizen of Berlin was asked, ‘What is the history of 
this strong anti-Jewish feeling which you have in Berlin 
and throughout Germany?’ He replied, ‘I will tell you: 
These Jews, if they go into commerce, become the first 
merchants: if they go into the banking line, they become 
the first bankers; if they go into law, they become the first 
lawyers; or if they go into literature, they beat us all. 
Whatever career they undertake, they drive out the Gen- 
tiles; and I tell you, sir, we won’t stand it.’ 

‘«« The persecution of the Jews in Russia and Poland does 
not depend upon religion or nationality. These have noth- 
ing whatever to do with it. The Russians would persecute 
any people in the same position as the Jews. Bear this in 
mind, that the Jews hold in mortgage a very considerable 
part of the landed property of Russia; that they hold in 
their debt a very large proportion of the peasantry, and 
very many of the shopkeepers in different parts of the em- 
pire. Every single opportunity which now presents itself 
to the Russian people for plunder and spoliation of the 
Jews is almost sure to be seized. In the destruction of the 
Jews, and of their papers, Russians get rid of documents 
by which they are bound, and which might be brought as 
evidence against them; and so long as there is property to 
be laid hold of, so long will you find the Russian people 
rising against the Jews.’ 

The following is an extraét from a letter in an English 


paper by Mr, Charles Reade, the novelist, well known in 


Restoration of Israel. 271 


literary circles, whose conversion to Christ and the Bible 
occurred a few years ago :— 

“« The Jewish nation, though under a cloud, will eventu- 
ally resume their ancient territory, which is so evidently 
kept waiting for them.- The prophecies are clear as day 
on two points: That the Jews are to repossess Palestine, 
and, indeed, to rule from Lebanon to Euphrates; and that 
this event is to be the first of a great series of changes lead- 
ing to a vast improvement in the condition of poor, suffer- 
ing mankind, and of creation in general. Now, we have 
nere in prospect a glorious event, as sure as the sun will rise 
to-morrow. ‘lhe only difference is, that the sun will rise 
at a certain hour, and the Jews will occupy Syria and re- 
sume their national glory at an uncertain day. No doubt 
it is the foible of mankind to assume that an uncertain date 
must be adistant one. But that is unreasonable. Surely it 
is the duty of wise and sober men to watch precursory signs 
and lend their humble co-operation, should so great a priv- 
ilege be accorded to us. 

‘¢ This sudden persecution of the Jews in the very nation 
where they are most numerous—may it not be a precursory 

sign, and a reminder from Providence that their abiding 
city is not European Tartary? Palestine can be colonized 
effectually from Russia alone, where there are three millions 
of Jews trembling for life and property ; and the rest would 
follow. History is a looking-glass at our backs. Whatever 
Jews have done, Jews may do. They are people of genius; 
and genius is not confined by nature, but by will, by habit, 
or by accident. What have these people tried and failed 
in? Warriors, writers, builders, merchants, lawgivers, hus- 
bandmen; and supreme in all! In this, history repeats itself. 

«« They shall be great in the arts of peace and war, and 
their enemies melt away before them like snow off a dyke. 
Should they seem to require help from any other nation at 
starting, dlessed will be the nation that proffers it; and the 
nation that persecutes them will be made an example of in 
some way or other. Therefore, if by any chance recent 
outrages should decide the Jewish leaders to colonize Pales- 
tine trom Russia, let us freely offer ships, seamen, money— 
whatever we are asked for. It will be a better national in- 
vestinent that Egyptian, Brazilian or Peruvian bonds,”’ 


272 Thy Kingdom Come. 


A Jewish proverb of recent years declares :—‘‘ When the 
railway reaches Jerusalem, Messiah comes ;’’ and this is in 
harmony with the symbolic representation of the railway 
by the prophets Nahum (2:3-5) and Isaiah (66:20). And, 
sure enough, the proverb has not much missed the mark ; 
for the railroad will reach Jerusalem ‘‘in the day of his 
preparation ’’—in the time of the presence of Messiah. 
‘The following, which we clip from the daily press, has an 
interesting bearing upon this subject :— 

‘«Galileo was right: the world does move. A railroad 
is to be built from Jerusalem to Jaffa, on the Mediterranean, 
31 miles distance, the ancient port of the Jewish capital, 
and the landing place of the cedars with which the temple 
was constructed. A Jerusalem Jew, Joseph Nabon by name, 
who is an Ottoman subject, has obtained from the Sultan a 
charter for this purpose. The charter holds good for 71 
years. The estimated cost of construction is $250,c00. So, 
then, hereafter civilization is to be domesticated in Pales- 
tine. The nineteenth century will arrive in those parts 
when the first locomotive puffs into Jerusalem.’’ 

The following letter, from a correspondent of the Pit/s- 
burg Dispatch, which recently appeared in that journal, is 
confirmatory of present progress in Palestine and especially 
in Jerusalem : 


Jerusalem, July 12, 1889. 

‘Thirty thousand ont of the forty thousand people in 
Jerusalem are Jews. The Turkish government, which has 
tor ages prohibited them from living longer than three weeks 
at atime in the Holy Land, is, under the influence of for- 
eign governments, relaxing its restrictions ; and at present 
the Jews are coming here by the hundred. They are en- 
gaging in business, and they now control a great part of 
the trade of Jerusalem. Some of them feel that the day 
when the prophecy of the Bible that they shall again inhabit 
their land shall be fulfilled is at hand ; and one curious tribe 
from southern Arabia claims to have received a revelation 
that they must leave their desert country and come back 10 
Palestine. These Jews have lived jn Yemen Arabia for the 


Restoration of Israel. 273, 


past 2,500 years. They are of the tribe of God, and they 
left Palestine 700 years before Christ was born. They are 
bringing with them many valuable documents which prove 
their origin, and are engaging in agriculture near Jerusalem. 
The persecution of the Jews in Russia and Austria is driving 
many of them here, and there are also large numbers of Polish 
and Spanish Jews in Jerusalem. The time of Jews remain- 
ing in Palestine has been extended, and the restrictions 
upon their residence in Jerusalem have been practically 
removed. A half century ago there were only 32 Jewish 
families in all Jerusalem, and the number in all Palestine 
was only 3,000. Now there are nearly 50,000 in the Holy 
Land, and three-fourths of the population of Jerusalem is 
made up of them. ; 

‘© A curious people they are! Like no other Jews on the 
face of the earth. They are nearer the type that existed 
here in the past. “The numbers who have been forced here 
by persecation are supported almost entirely by the different 
Jewish churches over the world. 

‘One of the great sights of Jerusalem is the Jews wail- 
ing place, where every Friday certain sects meet on the out- 
side of the walls of the Mosque of Omar, which occupies 
the site of Solomon’s temple, and with their heads bent 
against the stones, sorrow over the loss of Jerusalem, and 
pray God to give the land back to his chosen people. This 
custom has been observed since the days of the middle ages, 
and it is one of the saddest sights. I visited it last week. 
In a narrow alley surrounded by miserable houses—on stone 
flags which have been worn with the bare feet of thousands 
of Jews—against a wall of great blocks of marble, which 
reached for fitty or more feet above them, a long line of 
men in long gowns and of women with shawls over their 
heads bowed, praying and weeping. Many of the men had 
white beards, and long curly locks of silver. Others were 
just in their prime; and I could not but wonder when I saw 
the forms of these at times almost convulsed with emotion. 
Each had a well-thumbed Hebrew Bible in his hand, and 
from time to time the party broke out into a kind of chant, 
an old gray-haired man acting as leader, and the rest com- 
ing in on the refrain. The chant was in a strange tongue, 
but was translated as follows :— 

18C : 


274 Thy Kingdom Come. 


Leader—For the palace that lies desolate— 
Response—We sit in solitude and mourn. - 
Leader—For the walls that are destroyed— 

+ Response—We sit in solitude and mourn. 
Leader—For our Majesty that is departed— 
Kesponse—We sit in solitude and mourn. 
{eader—For our great men who lie dead— 
Response—We sit in solitude and mourn. 
l.eader—For our priests who have stumbled— 
RKesponse—We sit in solitude and mourn. 
Leader—For our kings who have despised him— 
Response—We sit in solitude and mourn. 

“‘ The effect of this chant cannot be appreciated without 
hearing it. The old men and weeping women, who kiss the 
stones of the wall that separates them from what was once 
the site of Solomon’s temple, and which is even now the 
holiest part of the earth to the Jew ; the genuine feeling ex- 
pressed by all; and the faith they show in thus coming here, 
week after week, and year after year, are wonderfully im- 
pressive. It is indeed one of the strange sights of this 
strangest of cities. 

«There are eight agricultural colonies in different paris 
of Palestine. One of these schools near Jaffa has more 
than seven hundred pupils, and a farm of twenty-eight 
thousand ‘acres. ' It is situated on the plains of Sharon, 
where the Philistines lived, and it has tens of thousands of 
vines and olive trees. The Turks are very much averse to 
selling land to the Jews, but the latter show themselves to 
be as good farmers as they are business men ; and the ter- 
raced condition of the hills about Jerusalem shows that the 
Holy land was far better cultivated under them than it has 
been under their conquerors. A large amount of land just 
outside of the city of Jerusalem is now in the hands either 
of the Jews or of their charitable institutions. Mr. Behar, 
the head of the Rothschild schools, tells me they have just 
bought the Jerusalem Hotel, and will add it to their school. 
Sir Moses de Montefiore, who managed the fund left by a 
rich New Orleans Israelite, built many good houses for Jews 
on the road between Bethlehem and Jerusalem, and there 
are a number of Jewish hospitals. 

«Among the. people who confidently believe that the 
Jews will soon again own Palestine is a colony of fifteen 
persons who live in a fine house built on the very walls of 


Restoration of Israel. "275 


Jerusalem, and who are known as ‘the Americans.’ These 
people are not Jews. ‘They are Christians who have come 
here from different parts of the United States, and more 
especially from Chicago, to await the fulfilment of the 
prophecy that God will regenerate the world, beginning at 
Jerusalem. [They do not see that the selection of the 
Gospel Church must first be accomplished. ] 

‘There is no doubt, whatever, that Jerusalém is improv- 
ing. The most of its streets are now well paved and the 
sanitary condition of the city has been greatly improved. 
The Jerusalem outside the walls is now almost as large as 
the city within, and I am told that land has risen in value 
to such an extent that the holy city may be said to have a 
real estate boom. I learn that along the Jaffa road, just out- 
side of the gate, property has gone up within a year or so 
several hundred per cent. One piece which belongs to a 
charitable institution was bought a short time ago for $500. 
It isnow worth $8,o00,and cannot be bought for that amount. 
A telegraph line now runs from here to the sea coast, and 
a railroad company has been organized to )uild a line from 
Jaffa to Jerusalem. For the first time in its history, Jeru- 
salem has a police force, and its order is now as good as 
that of New York.”’ 

The following, clipped from Zhe Hebrew Christian of 
July, ’89, is another interesting account of an American 
Jew’s visit to the wailing place of the Jews at Jerusalem. 
He says :-— 

“Having spent several hours visiting Jews,my aged friend, 
a Rabbi from Kovno, Russia, asked me if I would go with 
him to the wailing place to mourn over the desolation of 
Jerusalem and pray for Israel’s restoration to her former 
glory. ‘1 will go with you,’ I replied, ‘and pray very 
earnestly that God may hasten the day when Judah will re- 
turn to the Lord.’ Being Friday afternoon, the time when 
many Jews assemble for prayer at the wall of the ancient 
temple, 1 joined their company. It was, indeed, a most 
memorable sight. Here were Jews from among all nations, 
in their peculiar Oriental costumes, and some dressed in 
their Zadith (praying garments). As loud as they possibly 
could they read the 22nd Psalm. Women with great ear- 


276 Thy Kingdom Come. 


nestness cried aloud, ‘ My God, my God, why hast thou for- 
saken me? Why art thou so far from helping me, and from 
the words of my roaring? O my God, I cry in the day-time, 
but thou hearest not; and in the night season, and am not 
silent.’ The men also were weeping and rehearsing psalms, 
litanies and prayers. Most of these earnestly pressed their 
lips against the stones and kissed them. As I listened to 
their pathetic prayers I remembered what the rabbins have 
said in the Talmud—that ‘Since the destruction of the 
Temple, the gates of prayer have been closed, and only the 
gates of tears areopen.’ The rabbi in sad tones repeated :— 
“< For the palace that lies desolate,’ etc. 


«The most touching wailing over Jerusalem is also to be 
witnessed in the homes of the pious Jews. At midnight 
they wrap themselves in their prayer garments, put ashes 
on their heads, and prostrate themselves on the ground. 
Then in melancholy tones they rehearse :— 


“© A voice of woe from Ramah’s hoary tower, 
A voice of wail from Zion’s sainted hill; 
Alas! my diadem and queenly dower, 
The youthful honors I remember still. 
Dark is to me the solitary bower 
Who did of old a throne of splendor fill. 


«“¢T was surnamed Jehovah's fairest bride ; 
But now am forced, forlorn, disconsolate, 
His heavy wrath and vengeance to abide; 
My joys are flown, my heart is desolate. 
Come, weep, ye daughters, at my faltering side, 
For none draws near my sorrows to abate. 


“¢ Degraded from a peerless eminence, 
Victim of pride and wanton vanity, 
My beating heart in trembling violence 
Strikes at her cage of hopeless misery. 
Judah laments in tearful penitence, 
A widow mourning in captivity. 


*4T was in Solyma a radiant queen, 
A golden cloud was I, the mount of God: 
But now by infidels despoiled, I ween, 
No poorer pilgrim o’er the desert trod. 
Wrenched from the bosom all my babes have been, 
The elders murdered, steeped the soil in blood. 


“¢Doth no one lay my wretchedness to heart ? 
And no one check the swiftly rolling tear? 


Restoration of Israel. 274 


And no one soothe the soul-empiercing smart ? 
And no one say, ‘ ‘The heathen shall not dare 

Call him iny husband?’ Oh, the poisoned dart. 
‘The cruel mockings I am bound to bear! 


“‘* Father of mercies, come, return with grace 
To Zion’s dwelling beautified again. 
Let Israel’s eye behold Thy dwelling place 
Restored; then list the hallelujah’s strain, 
The hymning voices of a ransomed race, 
Greeting the rising wall of that eternal fane.’ 


‘* After this several psalms are read and prayers offered. 
When rising from the ground, they say, ‘Shake thyself 
from the dust; arise and sit down, O Jerusalem. Loose thy- 
self from the bands of thy neck, O captive daughter of Zion.’ 

‘A remarkable prayer offered on these occasions, and 
having reference no doubt to Isaiah 7:14, is:— 


“¢In mercy, Lord, Thy people’s prayer attend: 
Grant his desire to mourning Israel. 
O shield of Abraham, our Redeemer send, 
And call His glorious name Immanuel.’ ”’ 


Not until further persecutions shall have driven more of 
the poorer Jews to Palestine, and modern civilization shall 
be still father advanced there, will the wealthier classes of 
Jews be attracted thither ; and then it will be in great meas- 
ure from selfish motives—when the general and great time 
of trouble shall render property less secure in other lands 
than it is now. Then Palestine, far away from socialism 
and anarchism, will appear to be a haven of safety to the 
wealthy Jews. But at the present rate of progress, in these 
various directions, the coming fifteen years will witness 
much in Palestine. 


ISRAEL’S BLINDNESS DEPARTING. 


Tnere is another feature of prophecy relating to Fleshly 
Israel, the fulfilment of which we should now begin to see. 
The Apostle Paul declared: ‘‘ Blindness, in part, is hap- 
pened to Israel, until the fulness of the Gentiles be come 
in ;—that is, until the eleét number from among the Gen- 
tiles, who, together with the remnant of Israel, are to con- 


278 Thy Kingdom Come. 


stitute the spiritual phase of the Kingdom, shall all have 
come in to that highest favor, from which Israel as a nation 
was cast off, and to the advantages of which they as a people 
have continued to be blind. In the fullest sense, therefore, 
the blindness of Fleshly Israel, otherwise called Jacob, will 
not be due to pass away until the selection of Spiritual Israel 
has been completed. And we are expressly advised (Rom. 
11:26) that their recovery and deliverance from blindness 
and prejudice will come out of (mount) Zion, the glorified 
Church or Kingdom. But as the Kingdom of Zion to some 
extent began in 1878, when our King took to himself his 
great power to reign, although the ‘feet ’’ class were not 
yet fully developed and glorified, so the favor of God to- 
ward ‘Jacob,’’ through Zion, properly had a beginning 
there, though it will not reach them in fullest measure until 
the ‘feet’? members of Christ’s body are also glorified. 
And as 1881 was the time parallel to the turning of the 
light from Jacob to the Gentiles, so it marks the time for 
the beginning of the turning back again of special light 
upon the long blinded Jews. And, true to its Jewish pattern, 
the nominat Christian Church is now blindly stumbling, 
while’ only a small remnant of it is being blessed. How 
forcible and applicable the words of the Apostle, here: <‘ Be 
not high minded, but fear; for if God spared not the nat- 
ural branches, take heed, lest he spare not thee,’’ etc. 

But Israel’s general recognition of the true Messiah and his 
Kingdom will doubtless come about under and through the 
restored patriarchs and prophets, whose perfect restoration — 
will be the first work of the Christ after all the ‘‘ body ’’ has 
been glorified. But their blindness will degen to pass away 
before; and already a great movement toward Christ has 
set in, especially among the Russian Jews. 

Looking in this direction, the signs of the times are so 
pronounced as to be startling. The remarkable religious 


Restoration of Israel. 279 


movement in progress among the Jews in Southern Russia 
is bringing thousands of that people to a recognition of 
Jesus Christ as the long promised Messiah, and to an ac- 
knowledgment of their national sin, in rejecting and cru- 
cifying him. And this is in no sense the result of Christian 
missionary a¢tivity: it isan independent movement, spring - 
ing up out of soil entirely Jewish. The leader of the move- 
ment is a Jew, Mr. Joseph Rabinowitch, formerly a mer- 
chant, and later a lawyer, and a man of high reputation 
among his people. Mr. Rabinowitch was not a Jewish rabbi, 
and neither he nor any of the leading men of the move- 
ment were clergymen of any sect or creed. Concerning 
this movement, we quote from an article in Marper’s 
Weekly, and from other reports, as follows :— 

«Its development has been such that it can confidently 
be pronounced no longer a mere experiment with doubt- 
ful chances of permanent existence. It has manifested a 
remarkable vitality ; its growth has been steady and healthy, 
positive in character, yet avoiding all unnatural haste and 
dangerous extremes. Having heen recognized by the Rus- 
sian authorities as a religio Uictta, it now has a legal exist- 
ence and legal rights. Its character stamps it as one of the 
most unique phenomena in the variegated kaleidoscope of 
national, social and religious interests that divide the hearts 
and minds of the Czar’s. one hundred and sixteen million 
of subjects. 

‘¢The faith of this new communion is further peculiar in 

‘this, that they propose not to form any organic connection 
with any existing form of Christianity, but, with the avowed 
aim of ignoring the historical development of doctrines 
since the Apostolic age, to draw their teachings directly from 
the New Testament source, without having any special 
regard for the formulas of doctrines found in the orthodox 
churches of our times. It claims to be modeled after the 
Jewish-Christian congregations in the days of the apostles. 

‘‘Energetic in chara¢ter and ambitious in self-improve- 
ment and the advancement, politically, socially and morally, 
of his people, Mr. Rabinowitch ycars ago became known as 


280 ~ hy Kingdom Come. 


a zealous friend of reform among the Eastern Jews. With an 
education and enterprise far beyond his brethren, he set 
about to devise ways and means to attain his ideals and ends. 
He did what he could to secure for them better political 
rights, but was unable to prote@t them against the fierce per- 
secutions that set in against the unfortunate Israelites in 
Russia, Roumania and neighboring countries. Heacquainted 
himself with the advanced philosophical thought of the West, 
in the hope that its adoption by his people would elevate 
them to a higher plane, and thus secure for them higher 
ideals and nobler ends. But he soon learned to doubt both 
the efficiency of the means and the possibility of applying 
them to a people whom centuries of persecution and ultra— 
conservatism had been hardening to principles so at vari- 
ance with their traditional ideas. He again attempted to 
win them away from their greed for gain, which, next to 
their formalistic religious exercises, is the all-controlling and 
all-degrading factor in the mind of the oriental Jew. But 
his endeavors to establish agricultural colonies for them, both 
at home and in the Holy Land, proved abortive. While 
in Palestine, the conviction ripened in him, through an in- 
dependent study of the New Testament in its relations to the 
Old, that Israel had made the mistake of its national life, 
and had become untrue to its historic mission, by the rejec- 
tion of Jesus Christ. 

“« This conviction concerning Christ, as the embodiment 
and fulfilment of the prophecies of old, and of the ideals 
and aims of Israel as a nation, is the central thought around 
which the whole movement circles. The principles enun- 
ciated by the humble Nazarene are recognized as those which 
alone can accomplish the*destinies of the people, and ena- 
ble them to attain the end for which they were set apart as 
a chosen people. It is thus regarded as a serious break in 
the normal and historical development of Israel, that eighteen 
hundred years ago this people as a nation refused to accept 
those tenets and principles which are regarded by all Chris- 
tians, and now also by Mr. Rabinowitch and his followers, 
as the legitimate and only correct outcome of the whole 
previous historical development of Israel. To heal this. 
breach is the ideal aim of the Kischinev reformer, by setting 
in anew there, where first the chosen people entered upon 


Restoration of Israel. 281 


an erroneous path of national development. In 1880 he 
published a program in which he advocated a complete re- 
organization of the rabbinical system. He was further ac- 
tive in the work of a society for the promotion of agricul- 
ture among the Jews of Southern Russia; and during the 
days of persecution in 1882 he earnestly advocated the re- 
turn of his people to Palestine. During that period the 
change in his religious conviction took place. It was not 
the result of Christian mission work, nor is he a convert in 
the ordinary sense of the word. The change was gradually 
effected, and only after long deliberation did the thought 
of organizing Christian congregations of the Jewish nation- 
ality assume maturity in his mind. After his return from 
Palestine his conviction was: ‘ The key to the Holy Land 
lies in the hand of our brother Jesus.’ In the words, ‘ Jesus 
our Brother,’ lies the kernel of his religious views. His work 
has been successful, and many are accepting his teachings.”’ 

When Mr. Rabinowitch began to think that he ought to 
be an avowed and open believer in Christ, he was much 
perplexed with the number of sects amongst Christians, and 
hesitated to join any of them. He says, ‘‘As the Jordan 
must be crossed to reach Canaan, so Jesus is the way to 
spiritual possession and rest.’’ As to the Lord’s Supper, he 
says that the members. of the New Covenant do not cele- 
brate this, except as a Passover Supper. They (like us) do 
not yet see their way to celebrate it at other times. He 
says the Lord Jesus Christ did not command his disciples 
to remember his resurrection, but to remember him. Neither 
he nor his followers keep Sunday as the Sabbath, but con- 
tinue the observance of the Jewish Sabbath. Circumcision 
is still observed; but it is not considered necessary to 
salvation. 

It is reported that a Lutheran pastor proposed to a com- 
mittee in London that Mr. Rabinowitch should be employed 
by their Society as missionary to the Jews. The committee 
declined, though only on the ground that he was not then 
baptized. He has, however, since then been baptized in 


282 Thy Kingdom Come. 


Berlin, not into the Lutheran Church, nor into the Anglican 
Church, but simply into the Church of Christ. Mr. Rab- 
inowitch is in possession of letters received from Jews in all 
parts of Russia and Roumania, inquiring into the movement, 
its rules and its doctrines, with a view to joining it, or start- 


ing another and similar one. 

‘* Mr. Rabinowitch possesses a very gentle, humble, lov- 
ing spirit, and quickly responds, even to tears, to assurances 
of Christian affection. He does not desire to identify him- 
self with any sect, but wishes to take his Christianity from 
the New Testament, and grow out of old habits and doc- 
trines into new ones, as the Holy Spirit may teach him in his 
continued and prayerful study of the entire Word of God.” 


Prof. Franz Delitzsch, of Leipzig, the leader of the Jew- 
ish missions in Germany and editor of the Saat auf Hoff- 
nung, a quarterly devoted to this work, published a pam- 
phlet of about seventy-five pages on this new religious de- 
velopment, the largest space in which is occupied by origi- 
nal documents, in both the Hebrew and the German trans- 
lation, on this movement. These documents embrace thir- 
teen theses ; a Confession of Faith of the National Jewish 
Church of the New Testament ; an Explanation of the Faith 
in the Messiah, Jesus of Nazareth, in the sense of this con- 
gregation ; a Haggada for the Israelites believing on the 
Messiah, Jesus of Nazareth; and, finally, an Order of the 
Lord’s Supper. As appendices are added a declaration of 
a teacher, Friedmann, to the Jewish believers in Christ, and 
a declaration adopted by a conference of the latter, held in 
Kischinev. The little pamphlet contains all the materials 
for a study of the new movement. 

These theses, which are to be regarded as the basis of the 
new faith, start out with an account of the deplorable state 
of the Jews in Russia, maintain that the endeavors at im- 
provement on the part of the Jews themselves have all 
proved futile, and proceed to say :— 


Restoration of Isracl. 283 


‘«’There is need of a deep and inner moral renewal, ofa 
spiritual regeneration. We must cast aside our false god— 
the love of money—and in the room thereof must establish 
in our hearts a home for the love of truth, and for the fear 
of evil.’’ For this, however, a leader. is necessary. Who 
is he to be? In Israel none can be found. ‘The man who 
possesses all the qualifications of a leader—love of Israel, 
sacrificing of life, pureness, deep knowledge of human na- 
ture, earnestness in the exposal of the sins and evils of his 
people—we have, after a careful research in all the books of 
the history of our people, found only in one man, in Jesus 
of Nazareth.’’ The wise Israelites in his day could not un- 
derstand him; ‘‘but we can say with certainty that he, 
Jesus, he alone has sought the welfare of his brethren. 
‘Therefore we should sanétify the name of our Brother Je- 
sus.’’ ‘* We should receive the Gospel books into our houses 
as a blessing, and unite them with all the Holy Scriptures 
which were handed down to us by our wise men.’’ 


One of the most noteworthy of a series of articles of faith 
which they have drawn up is the following :— 

‘« According to the decree of the inscrutable wisdom of 
God, our fathers were filled with hardness of heart, and the 
Lord punished them with the spirit of deep sleep, so that 
they opposed Jesus Christ and sinned against him until the 
present day. But by their unbelief they led other nations 
to greater zeal, and they thus contributed to the propitia- 
tion of mankind, who have believed in Jesus Christ, the 
son of David, our king, when they heard the good tidings 
through the peace-promising messengers (Isa. 52:7), who 
had been disgracefully expelled from communion with Israel. 
In consequence, however, of this our sin against the Christ 
of God, the world has grown rich by its faith in Christ, 
and the nations in fulness have entered the Kingdom of 
God. [They are not clear here. It is the fu// number of 
the ‘little flock’’ out of the nations, and not the full na- 
tions falsely called Christendom, that Paul refers to in 
Rom. 11:25.] Now, too, the time of our fulness has also 
come, and we, the seed of Abraham, are to be blessed by 
our faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; and the God of our 
forefathers, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, will take pity upon 
us and replant the branches which have been torn out, into 


284 Thy Kingdom Come. 


our own Holy Root—Jesus. And thus all Israel shall share 
the eternal salvation, and Jerusalem, our Holy City, shall 
be rebuilt, and the throne of David be established forever 
and evermore.’’ 


The following is an extract from a letter of Mr. Rabino- 
witch, dated Jan. 2nd, 1885, to a gentleman in London :— 

‘Your valuable letter, etc., were received. My heart 
rejoiced when I read them and perceived how great and 
strong the love of your heart is toward the brethren of the 
Lord Jesus, the Messiah, according to the flesh, and how 
precious the salvation of the Israelitic nation is in your eyes. 

“«T prostrate myself before Jehovah, the God of our Lord 
Jesus; and from the depth of my heart stream forth the 
words of the sweet singer of Israel (Psa. 35), ‘ Let them be 
ashamed and brought to confusion together that rejoice at 
mine hurt. Let them shout for joy and be glad that favor 
my righteous cause ; yea, let them say continually, Let the 
Lord be magnified, which hath pleasure in the prosperity 
of his servant.’ Amen. 

‘¢ Herewith I send you my opinions and statements in 
reference to those children of Israel in Southern Russia who 
believe in Jesus as the Messiah. From them you will learn 
to know the origin of our faith in Jesus (our brother bodily), 
the Messiah. He is the innermost desire and longing of 
our hearts. Our English friends and brethren in Jesus, our 
Savior, may be convinced by the above pamphlet that after 
the Lord has made bare his holy arm in the eyes of.-all 
nations, and all the ends of the earth have seen the salva- 
tion of our God, that now the time has come when there 
shall depart from the midst of Israel all unclean persons, and 
the bearers of the vessels of the Lord shall be cleansed. 

‘¢ True, the salvation of the Lord cannot go out and 
come into the world with haste (Joshua 6:1), nor can it 
walk with rapidity ; but now as Jehovah, the Avantguard 
and King of the Universe, has passed on before the people 
of Israel, the God of Israel shall come also as Rearguard, as 
Gatherer of the outcasts of Israel. I devote my time and 
name to the welfare of my stubborn and unhappy nation, to 
testify unto them with a brazen forehead, in the strength of 
God, the gospel of promise, which our fathers had received ; 


Restoration of Isracl. 285 


viz., that God hath raised Jesus of Nazarcth, out of the 
seed of David, as Savior of Israel. 

«Through the depth of the riches and wisdom of God, 
the highest, our fathers, who were incumbents of the prom- 
ise, rebelled against Jesus, so that grace might be bestowed 
upon the heathen nations, not through any promise, but 
through grace in the gospel of the Messiah. Now, after 
the fulness of the Gentiles hath come in, the time has ar- 
rived for us, the sons of Israel, to return to the God of 
Israel and his King, and be his beloved children. We 
should accept our heritage of Jacob, which is without limit ; 
for we are the legitimate heirs, children of Abraham, disci- 
ples of Moses, servants of the house of David in eternity. 
Thus our fulness (¢. ¢., the coming of many Israelites to 
Christ) will be our riches and the riches of the nations, ac- 
cording to the words of Jehovah by St. Paul, a firstborn of 
Israel, and at the same time the foremost among the return- 
ing heathen. 

“¢ Among ny brethren, and in large meetings, I earnestly 
admonish, ‘Shake thyself from the dust ; arise, put on thy 
beautiful garments, my people; through the son of Jesse, 
Jesus of Nazareth, hath the Lord done great things with 
thee, O Israel, that he might also work great things among 
the nations of the earth, who were blessed in our fathers.’ 

‘TI greatly thank God that I see thousands who cheerfully 
listen. Many and worthy sons of Israel are waiting and 
longing for the hour, the hour of the grace of our God. I 
implore you, in the name of our brethren in Russia who 
seek the salvation, that the friends of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
wherever they be, may not be silent, but that they give 
counsel and speak out boldly, until Immanuel be with us 
also, until Jehovah show us him and his dwelling. 

‘¢ These are humble words written from afar off.’’ 

Jostph Rabinowttch. 


In addition to this remarkable awakening, a similar move- 
ment has been progressing in Siberia, of which we have the 
following account from the Presbyterian Witness :— 


‘* News comes from ice—bound Siberia of a gospel move- 
ment essentially the same as that of Mr. Rabinowitch’s. 
The leader is Jacob Scheinmann, a Polish Jew, who, twenty 


286 Thy Kingdom Come. 


years ago, through independent thought, came to the con- 
clusion that Jesus of Nazareth, the Son of David, was the 
true Savior. The stri¢t Talmudic Jews got him transported 
to Siberia, where for fifteen years he labored, almost un- 
heeded, to awaken faith in his fellow-exiles. Among the 
uncalled—for mail matter which was found at Tomsk, where 
he was engaged in business, was a pamphlet by Rabinowitch, 
with whom he at once communicated. He has been busy 
disseminating his - ‘ews through pamphlets called ‘ The 
Voice of One Crying in the Wilderness.’ Delitzsch’s He- 
brew translation of the New Testament is being eagerly 
read and studied by the Siberian Jews. It is said that fully 
36,000 copies have been thus used.’’ 


Thus we see remarkable indications of God’s returning 
favor to Israel: in driving them out of other countries by 
great persecutions, in opening up Palestine to receive them, 
in inviting them thither by special providences in their favor 
in the way of benevolent enterprises for their improvement 
and assistance, and also in this significant movement which 
is the beginning of the turning away of Israel’s blindness. 
And how evidently it is all of God! In this work for the 
restoration of Fleshly Israel, as well as in the great harvest 
work for the gathering of Spiritual Israel, the agency of the 
now cast-off nominal church is entirely ignored. In both 
of these great works: now in progress the various organiza- 
tions of nominal ‘‘ Christendom ’’ are quietly set aside ; 
and in his own time and way, and by new, humble, untitled 
instruments, as in the Jewish harvest, God is causing his- 
great work to prosper and progress. 

And now we inquire, What does it signify? What will 
be the outcome of this strange and wonderful work, the 
marked beginnings and rapid strides of which are so mani- 
fest in this harvest period? The Apostle Paul distin@ly 
shows that the regathering of Israel signifies a regather- 
ing, or iestitution, for all mankind: ‘‘ Now if the fall of 
them be the riches of the world, and the diminishing of 


Restoration of Israel. 287 


them the riches of the Gentiles [as it was in the turn of 
divine favor to them], how much more their fulness.’’ 
Through the casting away of Fleshly Israel the Gentiles re- 
ceived the favor of the high calling, and the ‘‘ few’’ who 
appreciate it, and who overcome the obstacles in the way 
of attaining it, will be exalted to joint-heirship with Christ. 
They will constitute the body of Christ, the great Deliverer. 
‘This was the intent and will be the result of the casting 
away of Fleshly Israel; but their gathering again and their 
re-establishment in the land of promise mark another step 
in the great divine plan: they declare that the restitution 
of all things, ‘‘ to the Jew first,’’ but ultimately to “all the 
families of the earth,’’ is about to begin. Earth’s Great 
Jubilee is about to be introduced, and it begins in God’s 
order with the Jew. Thus seen, Brothers Rabinowitch and 
Scheinmann and their co-laborers are God’s instruments in 
preparing his ancient people for restitution, even as it is 
our privilege to be co-workers with the Lord in the reapiag 
work connected with the harvesting period of the Gospel 
age and its select, spiritual class. Surely, Israel’s /w// re- 
turn to their own land and to divine favor will mean that 
the great Deliverer, Head and body, through whom resti- 
tution is to be accomplished, Aas deen exalted to power, 
that the Kingdom has come, and that the work of restitu- 
tion, of which Fleshly Israel will be the first fruits, has already 
begun. Therefore, ‘‘If the casting away of them be the rec- 
onciling of the world, what shall the receiving of them be, 
but life from the dead ?’’—restitution—not only for the liv- 
ing, but for the dead also, according to the promise; and not 
only for Israel, but for all mankind, of which Israel was a 
type, and is to be the first frnits. The present beginnings of 
favor to Israel are only droppings before a mighty shower 
which will refresh, not only Israel, but all mankind. And 
though the surgings of strife will yet beat heavily against 


288 Thy Kingdom Come. 


Israel, and for a time bring them into still greater tribula- 
tion and distress, in the midst of it all God will be with them, 
and in due time will help and exalt them. 

In this connection the following item from the public 
press dispatches is certainly very significant. The outcome 
of the movement will be watched with deep interest by all 
who are walking in the light of the present truth, and who 
realize from God’s Word that the time has come which God 
announced through the prophet Isaiah, saying: ‘* Comfort 
ye, comfort ye my people, saith your God. Speak ye com- 
fortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her that her warfare 
{margin, her appointed time] is accomplished, for she hath 
received of the Lord’s hand double* for all her sins.’’— 
Isa. 40:1, 2. 

The dispatch referred to runs as follows: 


A JEWISH KINGDOM PROPOSED. 


Washington, D. C., March 5th, 1891. 

‘William E. Blackstone, of Chicago, to-day visited the 
President of the United States in company with Secretary 
Blaine, and presented a memorial in behalf of the Russian 

ews. 
; “¢He explained that the memorial was the result of a 
Conference of Christians and Jews recently held in Chicago, 
and called special attention to the fa@t that it did not an- 
tagonize Russia, but sought in a peaceable way to give the 
Jews control of their old home—Palestine. 

‘““He pointed out many evidences of the possibility of 
great development of that county, both agriculturally and 
commercially, under an energetic government, and said that 
the railroad now building from Joppa to Jerusalem, if ex- 
tended to Damascus, Tadmor and down the Euphrates, can- 
not fail to become an international highway. 

“He said that the poverty of the Turkish Government 
gives emphasis to the proposed indemnity, by funding a 
portion of the Turkish national debt through Jewish cap- 


 ¥VOL. IL, Chapter vii, 


Restoration of Israel. 289 


italists, and that only peaceable diplomatic negotiations are 
asked for, to the end that all private ownership of land and 
property be carefully respected and protected. In closing 
he said that, being on such friendly terms with Russia and 
having no complications in the Orient, it is most fitting 
and hopeful that our government should initiate this friendly 
movement, to give these wandering millions of Israel a 
settled and permanent home. 

‘The President listened attentively to Mr. Blackstone’s re- 
marks, and promised to give the subject serious consideration. 


THE MEMORIAL. 


The text of the memorial is as follows :— 


«« What shall be done for the Russian Jews? It is both un- 
‘wise and useless to undertake to dictate to Russia concern- 
ing her internal affairs. ‘The Jews have lived as foreigners 
in her dominions for centuries, and she fully believes that 
they are a burden upon her resources and prejudicial to the 
welfare of her peasant population, and will not allow them 
to remain. She is determined that they must go. Hence 
like the Sephardim of Spain, these Ashkenazim must emi- 
grate. But where shall two millions of such poor people go? 
Europe is crowded, and has no room for more peasant pop- 
ulation. Shall they come to America? This would be a 

tremendous expense and would require years. 

‘Why not give Palestine back to them again? Accord- 
ing to God’s distribution of nations it is their home—an in- 
alienable possession from which they were expelled by force. 
Under their cultivation it was a remarkably fruitful land, 
sustaining millions of Israelites, who industriously tilled its 
hillsides and valleys. ‘They were agriculturists and produ- 
cers as well as a nation of great commercial importance— 
the center of civilization and religion. It is said, too, that 
rains are increasing, and there are many evidences that the 
land is recovering its ancient fertility. 

“‘Why shall not the powers which, under the treaty of 
Berlin, in 1878, gave Bulgaria to the Bulgarians and Servia 
to the Servians, now give Palestine back to the Jews? These 

- provinces, as well as Roumania, Montenegro and Greece, 
were wrested from the Turks and given to their natural own- 
ers. Does not Palestine as righttuliy belong to the Jews? 

i9c 


290 Thy Kingdom Come. 


“(If they could have autonomy ‘in government, the Jews 
of the world would rally to transport and establish their 
suffering brethren in their time-honored habitation. For 
over seventeen centuries they have patiently waited for such 
a privileged opportunity. ‘They have not become agricul- 
turists elsewhere because they believed they were sojourners 
in the various nations, and were yet to return to Palestine 
and till their own land. Whatever vested rights, by pos- 
session, may have accrued to ‘Turkey can be easily compen- 
sated for, possibly by the Jews assuming an equitable por- 
tion of the national debt. . 

‘<We believe this is an appropriate time for all nations, 
ahd especially the Christian nations of Europe, to show 
kindness to Israel. A million of exiles, by their terrible 
sufferings, are piteously appealing to our sympathy, justice 
and humanity. Let us now restore to them the land of which 
they were so cruelly despoiled by our Roman ancestors. 

“To this end we respectfully petition His Excellency, 
Benjamin Harrison, President of the United States, and the’ 
Hon. J. G. Blaine, Secretary of State, to use their good 
offices and influence with the governments of their imperial 
majesties—Alexander III., Czar of Russia ; Victoria, Queen 
of Great Britain and Empress of India; William II., Ein- 
peror of Germany ; Francis Joseph, Emperor of Austro-Hun- 
gary; Abdul Hamid II., Sultan of ‘Turkey; Her Royal 
Majesty, Marie Christina, Queen Regent of Spain; with 
the government of the Republic of France ; and with the gov- 
ernments of Belgium, Holland, Denmark, Sweden, Portu- 
gal, Roumania, Servia, Bulgaria and Greece, to secure the 
holding, at an early date, of an international conference to 
consider the condition of the Israelites and their claims to 
Palestine as their ancient home, and to promote in all 
other just and proper ways the alleviation of their suffering 
condition.’’ 

[The memorial is signed by prominent men of all pro- 
fessions and creeds from Chicago, Boston, New York, Phil- 
adelphia, Baltimore and Washington. } 


THE ANGLO-ISRAELITISH QUESTION. 
Since the publication of the first edition of this volume, a 
criticism of it and especially of this chapter appeared in an 


Restoration of Israel. 2g1 


English journal— Zhe Banner of Israe/—devoted to the 
theory that the Anglo-Saxon peoples are representatives of 
the ‘ten lost tribes’’ of Israel. The following appeared 
in the December, 1891, issue of our magazine Z1oNn’s WATCH 
Tower. We publish it here, believing that it will be of 
interest, as it touches additional points, as follows: 


Lo the Editor of The Banner of Israel— 

Dear Sir:—A recent article in your journal, reviewing 
MILLENNIAL Dawn, VOL. 111., and especially its reference to 
the Anglo—Israel Question in conneétion with the return of 
the Jews to Palestine, has come to my attention ; and, as they 
seem to inquire for a reply, I hasten to answer them briefly. 

The point of discussion turns upon the question whether, 
after the separation of the ten tribes from the two tribes of 
Israel, in the days of Rehoboam, they ever again became 
united, either actually or reckonedly. Your correspond- 
ent claims that there was no reunion and that the name, 
Israel, from that date forward belonged exclusively to the 
ten tribes, and not to the two tribes, Judah and Benjamin, 
known as the Jews. This error seems necessary to his the- 
ory; that the Anglo-Saxon people are those ten tribes, and 
that their prosperity is due to this faét. We hold that from 
the period of the seventy years desolation, and especially 
from the return from Babylonian captivity, the nation of 
Israel has been recognized by God as one, including all of 
every tribe who respected God’s promises and returned to 
Palestine when Cyrus issued his decree of permission. We 
hold that all who did not return were not of the common- 
wealth of Israel, not Israelites indeed, but that they were 
thenceforth reckoned as Gentiles. We affirm, too, that 
those ‘‘lost’’ ones who were not Israelites indeed will re- 
quire recognition and blessing under the New Covenant 
during the coming Millennial age, and not during the Gos- 
pel age. Upon some points there seems to bea slight mis- 


292 Thy Kingdom Come. 


understanding of our position. We do not deny that the 
ten tribes separated from the two tribes, nor that the ten, 
representing the majority, retained as such the original 
name of all (Israel), nor that the two tribes became known 
as Judah, nor that there was considerable cause for the sep- 
aration, nor. that it was in accord with God’s plan for their 
chastisement, nor that the ten tribes went into captivity 
some seventy years before the two tribes, nor that God 
possibly has some portion of blessing for the descendants 
of the ten tribes, as well as for those of the two tribes and 
for all the families of the earth, during the ‘< times of resti- 
tution of all things which God hath spoken by the mouth 
of all the holy prophets since the world began.’’—Adts 
3:19-21. 

What we do claim is, that the Great Teacher was right 
when he declared that ‘‘ Salvation is of the Jews,’’ and that 
the great Apostle was right when he declared that God’s 
order is—‘‘ Glory, honor and peace to every man that work- 
eth good, to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile; for 
there is no respect of persons with God.’’ (Rom. 2:10, 11.) 
Our understanding of this is, that after the Babylonish cap- 
tivity the name Jew became synonymous with Israelite, and 
included all who held to the Law and hoped for the fulfil- 
ment of the Abrahamic promises—including some from the 
ten tribes as well as proselytes from the Gentiles—all who 
were circumcised. Moreover, even at the time of the re- 
volt of the ten tribes, all the individual members of those 
tribes did not join in it. Some continued faithful to the 
Kingdom of Judah, and continued to live among the Jews. — 
—1 Kings 12:17. 

Wehave found,and pointed out thesignificant fat, that our 
Lord and the Apostles addressed the ‘‘ twelve tribes’ under 
onename—‘‘the House of Israel’’—and this, too, in speaking 
directly to the people living in Jerusalem, who, as all admit, 


Restoration of Israel. 293 


were chiefly of the tribe of Judah, but partially of all the 
twelve tribes. The fa@t that the Lord and the Apostles 
thus addressed the twelve tribes as one nation, and applied 
prophecies to them as such, seems to us quite sufficient reason 
for our doing the same. 

To quote the texts of Scripture bearing on the different . 
phases of the subjeé&t would require much space; but who- 
ever will take a copy of Young’s Concordance, turn to page 
528 and note the various instances in which the word Israel 
is used in the New Testament, will have what seems to be 
overwhelming evidence that the House of Israel was no 
longer regarded by our Lord and the Apostles as the ‘‘ ten 
tribes’’ merely, but, as it is expressed, ‘‘all Israel.’’ Note 
especially the following texts: Matt. 8:10; 10:63 15:24, 
313 27:9, 42; Mark 12:29; 15:32; Luke 1:54, 68, and 
especially verse 80; also 2:25, 32, 34; 24:21; also note 
carefully John 1:31, 49; 3:10; 12:13; also Acts 2:22, 36; 
31125 4:10, 273; 5:21, 30, 31, 35; 13:16, 24; 21:28; 
Rom. 9:6, 31; 10:19; 11:25, 26; 1 Cor. 10:18; Gal. 
6:16; Eph. 2:12; Phil. 3:5; Heb. 8:8. - 

‘« Salvation is of the Jews,’’ or covenant—keeping Israel- 
ites, in the sense that (1) our Lord Jesus, the Savior, came 
in this line; (2) in that a remnant of these Jews (the Apos- 
tles and most of the early Church), called a remnant of 
Israel (Rom. 9:27; 11:1, 5,7), became ministers of recon- 
ciliation to bear the message to the Gentiles; and (3) in 
that the Lord’s provision is that, in the restitution work of 
the future, fleshly Israel, recovered from blindness, shall 
be used as a medium through whom the streams of salva- 
tion, issuing from the glorified, spiritual Israel, shall flow to 
all the families of the earth ; «as it is written, ‘*‘ Out of Zion 
[the Gospel Church, or spiritual Israel glorified} shall go 
forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem [the 
re~established fleshly Israel]}.’’—Isa. 2:3. 


294 Thy Kingdom Come. 


But in any case the ten tribes are left out of this and all 
such promises; for neither Zion nor Jerusalem (neither the 
typical nor the real) belonged to them. To have a share 
at all in the covenant made with Abraham, they must either 
be united to the spiritual Israel, of which the Lion of the 
tribe of Judah is the head, or they must become associated 
with the literal /xdah at Jerusalem, in order to share his 
portion in the coming times of restitution ; for ‘‘the Lord 
shall save the tents of Judah first.’’—Zech. 12:7. 

The arguments of your correspondent seem to be summed 
up in the following extracts, which we quote from your 
journal. He says:— 


** As to the non-return of Israel, a comparison of Jer. 
29:1, 4, 10 with Ezra 1:1 shows that the edict of Cyrus 
was in fulfilment of a prophecy which referred exclusively 
to the Jews; and from Ezek. 4:3-8 it is patent that Israel’s 
term of captivity had to extend far beyond Judah’s. There 
is no proof whatever that the ten tribes were embraced in 
the offer of Cyrus.’’ 


We must take exceptions to these statements, and ask your 
readers to examine more carefully the texts cited. Jeremiah 
(29:1-10) does not advise the people to settle down con- 
tentedly, zever expecting to return to Jerusalem, but that 
they should make themselves comfortably at home in the 
land of Babylon, because there would be no deliverance for 
seventy years—a much longer period of captivity than they 
had ever before experienced. 

Ezra 1:1 does not limit to the members of Judah and 
Benjamin the privilege or liberty to return. On the con- 
trary, verse 3 declares that Cyrus extended the offer to 
‘Whoever among you that is of a// his people ;’’ verse 4 
repeats the ‘‘ whosoever,’’ and makes the invitation world- 
wide, as was Cyrus’ dominion, by the words “i” every 
place ;"’ and verse 5 declares that not only the chiefs of 
Judah and Benjamin responded, but also ‘‘ the priests and 


Restoration of Israel. 295 


the Levites, with a// those whose spirit God had awakened ”’ 
—i. e., all whose hearts, like Simeon’s, were ‘‘ waiting for 
the consolation of /srae/.’’ Among such were some from 
the ten tribes, even though they were fewer. For instance, 
among those who with Sinteon waited in the temple for the 
consolation of /sxae/ was Anna the prophetess, the daughter 
of Phanuel, of the “7be of Asher.—Luke 2:36. 

As for the citation from Ezekiel (4:3-8), no suggestion 
is offered as to when the forty years upon Judah, or the 
three hundred and ninety years upon the remainder of Israel, 
were fulfilled. Your correspondent overlooks the fact that 
although this trouble is divided into two portions it is all 
represented as coming against one people, as illustrated by 
the one capital city, Jerusalem, which was portrayed by the 
prophet as a part of his tableau teaching. Some suppose 
the lesson taught to be that God’s wrath against the ten 
tribes dated from the time of the revolt, when they went 
into idolatry, about 390 years before the desolation of Jeru- 
salem, and that the wrath against the two tribes dated from 
forty years before the desolation, when, under King Ma- 
nasseh, the two tribes became idolaters, and that God’s 
wrath ceased, or was assuaged, by the- expiation for their 
sins in the utter desolation of Jerusalem and the land. If 
this be correct, his favor returned, while they were in 
Babylon, to all who revered his promises and waited for 
the seventy years of desolation to expire, that they might 
return to God’s worship in his holy city and temple. 

We answer, then, that there is no evidence that the will. 
ing, faithful ones of the ten tribes were hindered and did 
not return to the holy land after its seventy years of deso- 
lation. On the contrary, the evidence shows that they 
had the liberty to return and that some of them exercised it. 

After quoting from MILLENNIAL Dawn, Vot. 11., «They 
[the ten tribes] deserted the Israelitish covenant, and be- 


296 Thy Kingdom Come. 


came idolaters, unbelievers, and practically Gentiles,’’ your 


correspondent continues : 

«« This is perfectly correct: the ten tribes did apostatize, 
and were formally divorced from the Mosaic covenant. (Jer. 
3:8.) But he overlooks the companion jewel—namely, 
they were to be remarried in a new and better covenant. 
(Isa. 54:4-8; Hos. 2:7, 19; Jer. 31:31-33-) The Israel- 
ites were indeed practically Gentiles, and are esteemed 
Gentiles to this day ; but that is concordant with prophecy ; 
for Ephraim’s ‘ multitude of nations’ are goyim or nominal 
Gentiles (Gen. 48:19) ; and the children of Ephraim-Israel, 
‘which cannot be measured nor numbered,’ are the offspring 
of Lo~ammu, or nominal Gentiles.—Hos. 1:9, 10.’’ 


We beg to differ regarding the above statement. The 


Lord has not remarried, nor will he ever remarry the ten 
tribes. The citations prove nothing of this kind. Hosea 
gives some hard pictures of a bad people. Chapter 1:4, 6, 
7 seems to mention the ten tribes separately from the two, 
but promises no more mercy, but, instead, an utter taking 
away of the ten, and mercy upon Judah. Verses 9 and 10 
show the rejection (for a time) of all Israel (the natural 
branches of the olive), and the grafting in of spiritual Israel 
upon the original root or promise—those from among the 
Gentiles who formerly had not been recognized by the Lord 
as his people, who had been strangers and foreigners and al- 
jens to the commonwealth of Israel, but who are now brought 
nigh and made partakers through Christ. This application 
of this Scripture is made by the Apostle Paul. (Rom. 9:23- 
26.) Verse 11 declares that ‘‘then,’’ at the time of their re- 
jection and at the time of the recognition of spiritual Israel, 
Judah and Israel would be reunited under one head. 
Hosea 2:1-7 includes one of the proofs offered ; but the 
most careful search in these verses discloses no promise from 
’ the Lord that he will remarry them. Reading down to 
verse 13 proves to the contrary. Then verses 14-18 show 
the ‘‘ door of hope’’ for these rebellious people, which the 


Restoration of Israels 297 


Millennial reign of the true spiritual seed of Abraham (Gal. 
3:16, 29) will open; for verse 18 locates the date of this 
‘«door of hope,’’ by declaring it to be after the time of 
trouble, when wars shall be no more. 

Verses 19 and 20, if applicable to the fleshly seed at all, 
should be applied to ‘‘a// Israel’’ (last before mentioned) 
—see Chapter 1:11—and in that case would not call for 
fulfilment before the close of the Gospel age, when wars 
shall be no more. But there is good reason for believing 
that these verses (19 and 20) relate to the spiritual class, 
selected during the time when fleshly Israel has been cast 
off. To this view the 23rd verse as well as Chapter 1:10 
gives support, both being quoted in Rom. 9:23-26, and 
agreeing well with the Apostle’s other statement, ‘ Israel 
hath not obtained that which he seeketh for, but the eleCtion 
hath obtained it, and the rest were blinded.’’—Rom. 11:7. 

As for Isaiah 54:1-8, the Apostle Paul has thrown the 
light of superhuman wisdom upon it, and has applied it to 
spiritual Zion, our mother or covenant, symbolized by Sarah. 
The fleshly seed of Abraham had been cast out from being 
heir of the promise, and the true seed, Christ (typified by 
Isaac and Rebecca), had been received-as the only seed of 
promise.—Gal. 4:22, 24, 26-31. 

Jeremiah 31: 29-33 is quite to the point. It was written 
at a time when the ten tribes, called Israel, were separate 
from the two, called Judah ; and hence it was necessary for 
the prophet to mention both, in order not to be misunder- 
stood to mean the ten tribes only. But here, in verse 3r, 
he puts the two together ; and, after thus joining them as 
one, he uses the one name for all, in verses 33 and 36; and 
this is confirmed by verses 38-40, which describe places 
lying in the portion of the two tribes, in and about Jerusalem. 

But next let us notice that this is a prophecy not yet ful- 
filled; so that the ten tribes, even if they could clearly iden- 


298 *Thy Kingdom Come. 


tify themselves now, have as yet no cause for boasting. 
They would do better to wait until the New Covenant is 
made with them, and until the law of that New Covenant 
has been written in their hearts. Then surely they will no 
longer boast themselves of their o/d covenant, but of the new. 

During the Gospel age the New Covenant and its blessed 
heart-writing and spirit-teaching is not for the ten tribes, 
nor for the two, but only for the remnant selected from the 
twelve, and the residue selected from among the Gentiles ; 
the fleshly seed (Ishmael) must wait until the spiritual seed 
(Isaac) has inherited a//, and must then get his portion 
through Isaac. In those days—when the fleshly seed re- 
ceives its portion—the blessed Millennial privileges, men- 
tioned in verses 29 and 30, will be realized. 

Beloved, let us make our calling and ele¢tion sure by the 
obedience of faith, and not hope for spiritual blessings to 
come to us because of flesh/y conneétions—which the Lord’s 
Word clearly shows us cannot be. If the Anglo-Saxon 
races are the literal descendants of the ten lost tribes, it 
certainly is to their advantage that the Lord will overlook 
the relationship and count them as Gentiles; for his favor 
was withdrawn from the natural seed when the remnant had 
been selected, and he turned to take out the people for his 
name from among the Gentiles, who previously were not 
his people ; and, as we have seen, no return of his favor is. 
promised until the eleét Church shall have been completed, 
in the Millennial dawn. 

Nothing in our understanding of the teachings of the 
Scriptures is in opposition to the idea that Great Britain, 
Germany and the United States may contain some of the 
descendants of the ten tribes which separated from the two 
tribes in the days of Rehoboam. It could not be claimed, 
however, by any one who is familiar with the radical mix- 
ture which prevails, especially in the United States, that 


Restoration of Israel. 299 


any of these nations are of pure Israelitish stock. Neither 
do we debate the question whether the prosperity of these 
nations, more than that of some other nations of the world, 
is due to their lineage. Perhaps this is true. What we do 
maintain, however, is that, so far as the Lord’s ‘ high call- 
ing’’ of his Church is concerned, the middle wall of parti- 
tion having been broken down, the Israelitish origin of an 
individual or a nation would, under the terms of the New 
Covenant, gain the individual or the nation no advantage 
over other individuals or nations of a different race. From 
it ‘‘all Israel,’’ ‘‘the natural branches,’’ were broken off, 
except a ‘‘remnant’’ which accepted Christ, the mediator 
of the New Covenant; and that ‘‘remnant’’ had no pre- 
eminence over others because of nationality. God, through 
the Apostles, has preached no favors to Israel according to 
the flesh during the period of the selection of spiritual Israel ; 
but he has declared that when the company of spiritual 
Israel is complete, his favor will return to the fleshly house. 

Because we believe-that the spiritual Israel is nearly com- 
plete, therefore we are expecting blessings upon the Israel- 
ites who are according to the flesh, and the turning away 
of their blindness, anticipating that they will be the first of 
the restitution class to be blessed by spiritual Israel, and so 
“‘ obtain mercy through your mercy.’’ (Rom. 11:31.) After 
they have thus received mercy through the complete and 
glorified Church of Christ, they will indeed be used as the 
Lord’s instruments for blessing all the families of the earth, 
and thus the Abrahamic promises will be fulfilled unto both 
the seeds—both that which is according to the flesh, and 
that which is according to the spirit—‘‘ To the end that 
the promise might be sure to all the seed ; not to that only 
which is of the law, but to that also which is of the faith 
of Abraham.’’—Rom. 4:16. Yours respectfully, 

The author of MILLENNIAL Dawn. 


300 Thy Kingdom Come. 


Those who claim that ‘‘the term Israel applies only to 
the ten lost tribes’? and that “Judah is the only name 
properly applicable to those who returned to Palestine after 
the Babylonian captivity ’’ should cease such assertions until 
they can answer the following simple fats. Our Lord de- 
clared, ‘‘I am not sent but unto the Jost sheep of the House 
of Israel.’’ (Matt. 15:24; 10:6.) He said not one word 
about the House of Judah ;—and yet all of his preaching 
was done in Palestine to what the Anglo-Israelites tell us 
was not the House of Israel at all,—but the House of Judah. 
Then, again, according to this same theory, St. Peter made 
a great blunder when, speaking under the dire&t plenary in- 
spiration of the Holy Spirit at Pentecost, he declared: ‘‘ Let 
all the House of Israel know assuredly, that God hath made 
that same Jesus, whom YE have crucified, both Lord and 
Christ.”’ (Acts 2:36.) Anglo-Israelites tell us that not the 
House of Israel, but the House of Judah, was guilty of cruci- 
fying Christ. Let whoever likes conclude that our Lord and 
his Apostle blundered and that Anglo-Israelitish ideas are 
correét, we shall let God be true—we will take the view that 
is consistent with the word of our Lord and St. Peter and 
with all the New Testament teachings and with reason. 

The curses, mentioned by Moses, ( Deut. 28: 15, 46, 49- 
63-67) that would befall Israel (the twelve tribes) if un- 
faithful to the Lord, seem to have had a very literal fulfil- 
ment upon the Israel of our Lord’s day (chiefly the two 
tribes, Judah and Benjamin, but including also representa- 
tives of the other ten tribes who reverenced the Lord) upon 
whom our Lord declared all things written in the Law and 
Prophets shall be fulfilled, and upon whom the Apostle 
Paul declares that those predictions were fulfilled to the 
uttermost. See 1 Thes. 2:15, 16. 

But if the British nation be any part of the Israel here 
mentioned verses 64 and 65 do not appear to be fulfilled. 


CHAPTER IX. 
THY GOD REIGNETH! 


A Resumsg or THE Propuetic Evipences Wich SHOW THR Presence or Im- 
MANUEL, AND THAT His KinGpom Is In Process oF ESTABLISHMENT. 


“ How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringeth 
good tidings, that publisheth peace, that bringeth good tidings of good, 
that publisheth salvation; that saith unto Zion, Thy God reigneth !’””— 
Isa. §2:7. 

* view of all the evidences presented in this and the pre- 

ceding volumes of this work, we have no hesitancy in 
proclaiming to the Lord’s loyal and faithful people, his be- 
loved Zion, this glorious intelligence: ‘‘ Thy God reigneth !’’ 
The oft-repeated prayer of the Church has been answered : 
the Kingdom of God has indeed come. In the days of the 
present kings of earth, before their lease of dominion ex- 
pires, it is being set up. The dead in Christ are even now 
risen and exalted with our Lord and Head. And the ‘“‘feet’”’ ° 
members of the body of Christ, who still tarry in the flesh, 
catching the inspiration of the glorified throng who have 
already ascended into the mount (kingdom) of God, reflect 
a measure of that transcendent glory, as did Moses when 
he came down from mount Sinai. The faces of these 
messengers shine with that heavenly joy which fills their 
hearts and overflows their lips as they commune together 
and with the Lord, and go heralding to every nation (moun- 


tain) the good tidings of Immanuel’s reign begun. How 
Jor : 


302 . Thy Kingdom Come. 


beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him (the feet 
of the Christ) that bringeth good tidings of Millennial joy 
and peace, assuring Zion that the reign of our Lord is begun! 

Wonderful truths are these !—the Kingdom of God in 
process of setting up; the Lord Jesus and the risen saints 
already here and engaged in the great harvest work, with 
whom we also, as members of that honored body, as the 
‘«feet of him,’’ though still in the flesh, are permitted to be 
co-workers, to herald the good tidings among men and to 
apprise them of the significance of the wonderful and troub- ° 
lous events which must prepare the way for and introduce 
the glorious reign of righteousness. 

These are they of whom the prophets foretold, saying, 
‘“‘The Lord cometh with ten thousand of his saints ;’’ 
‘The Lord, my God, shall come, and all the saints with 
thee ;’’ ‘* The Son of man shall come in his glory, and all 
the holy angels [the saints, his holy messengers] with him ;”’ 
‘A fiery stream [symbolic of severe judgments—a time of 
trouble] issued and came forth from before him; thousand 
thousands ministered unto him [not only of his saints, but 
of numerous other agents and agencies], and ten thousand 
times ten thousand [all mankind] stood before him: the 
judgment was set, and the books were opened.’’—Jude 14; 

Zech. 14:5; Matt. 25:31; Dan. 7:10. 

’ Such is the present situation: the great Judge has come— 
not as at the first advent, in a body of humiliation, for sac- 
rifice, but in the plenitude of his power as a spirit being, 
clothed with the glory of divine authority, as the represent- 
ative of Jehovah, completely and forever to put down evil 
and all unrighteousness, and to restore all who will of the re- ~ 
deemed race to harmony with God, perfe€tion of being and 
lasting life. The plan of God is now made manifest: we 
are made to understand it now as never before. The open- 
ing of the books of the divine revelation will soon be com- - 


Thy God Reigneth ! 303 


pleted. The judgment of the world is already commencing 
upon the institutions df nominal Christendom, and the 
great work thus begun in a manner unsuspected by the world 
will progress to the grand consummation foretold by the 
Lord and the apostles and prophets, until all the world 
shall be led to look upon the pierced One as the Redeemer 
and Deliverer sent of God, even as the saints have long been 
“looking unta Jesus’’ as the author and finisher of their 
faith.* ‘The reckoning or judgment which begins with the 
Church will quickly spread to and include all the living na- 
tions; and in due time and order all the mighty hosts of 
the dead shall be brought upon the scene. 

While the glorified members of the Kingdom beyond the 
vail are doing a work in shaping the current of present 
events and preparing for the glorious reign, those on this 
side the vail have also an important work. It is their 
mission to gather together the elect and to seal them in the 
forehead (intellectually) with the knowledge of the truth 
(Rev. 7:3); to separate the wheat from the tares with the 
sickle of present truth ; and to proclaim unto Zion this :m- 
portant message—‘‘ Thy God reigneth !’’ This work, too, is 
going rapidly forward, and all the faithful, sealed ones are in 
turn busily engaged in sealing others ; and soon the great work 
will be accomplished—the elect all gathered and glorified. 

Blessed was the promise to the early members of the 
Church, that he whom they saw go away should indeed come 
again; and blessed has been the hope of his appearing all 
through the age to the tried and persecuted, faithful ones, 
who anxiously looked for his coming until they fell asleep 
with the prospect of awaking in his likeness ; but still more 
blessed are your eyes, O ye saints of to-day; for your eyes 
see and your ears hear the signa of the presence of the long— 
Jooked—for Hope of Israel. 
~ *5e¢ Vo. U, Chapter v, © 7 


304 Thy Kingdom Come. 


While in nominal Zion, as the Prophet Isaiah predicted, 
the sinners who have forgotten or failed to keep their cov- 
enant with the Lord are afraid of the dark clouds that ob- 
scure the brightness of his face, and fearfulness hath sur- 
prised the hypocrites, true Zion with eyes of faith sees the 
King in his beauty, and beholds the land that-ts yet far off 
—the land of corn and wine, the glorious inheritance into 
which this mighty King and great Deliverer has come to 
lead the fallen race—a land wherein the inhabitants shall 
not say, Iam sick; for the people that dwell therein shall 
be one whose iniquity is forgiven.—Isa. 33:14, 17, 24. 

That glorious land, that Paradise restored, we now clearly 

_discern beyond the vista of a thousand years; and with joy 
and singing, under the leadership of this greater Prophet 
than Moses, who is even now in our midst, shall the triumph- 
ant hosts of the redeemed be led along the grand high- 
way of holiness toward that fair land of rest from sin and 
death and every evil thing. 

««O, sing unto the Lord, ye saints of his, and give thanks 
at the remembrance of his holiness. For his anger [which 
must necessarily be manifested in the great trouble that will 
soon overwhelm the world] endureth but a moment. In 
his favor is life: weeping may endure for a night, but joy 
cometh in the morning.’’ And soon the chastened and con- 
verted world shall catch the strain of praise and sing, 
‘«Thou hast turned my mourning into dancing ; thou hast 
put off my sackcloth, and girded me with gladness, to the 
end that my glory may sing praise to thee and never 
be silent. O Lord, my God, I will give thanks unto thee 
forever.’’—Psa. 30:4, 5, 11, 12. 

Now call to mind the steps, well founded in the ‘sure 
word of prophecy,’’ by which we have come to this heart- 
cheering and soul-stirring knowledge. Behind us are all 
the prophetic landmarks which point to this time as the 


Thy God Reigneth! 305 


most wonderful period in all the history of the world. They 
have shown us that since 1873 we have been living in the 
seventh millennium; that the lease of Gentile dominion, 
‘The Times of the Gentiles,’’ will expire with the year 
1914; and that the advent of him whose right it is to take 
the dominion was due in 1874. They have shown us that 
in the days of these Gentile kings, before their lease of 
power expires, the God of heaven will set up a Kingdom, 
and that the setting up of that Kingdom has actually been 
in progress since the year 1878; that there the resurrection 
of all the dead in Christ was due; and that therefore, since 
that date, not only is our Lord and Head invisibly present 
in the world, but all these holy messengers are also with 
him. And observe, further, that this date of the resurrec- 
tion of the dead in Christ parallels the date of the resurrec- 
tion of the Head of the body. Our Lord’s resurrection 
occurred three and a half years after his advent as the Mes- 
siah, in A. D. 29; and the resurrection of his body, the 
Church, we have seen, was due in the year 1878, three and 
a half years after his second advent, in October 1874. 
Prophecy has also indicated the manner of our Lord’s 
ereturn, so that, though he is present, we should not expect 
to see either him or the risen saints, who are now in his 
likeness, except by the eye of faith—faith in the ‘sure 
word of prophecy ;’’ though we have learned that those who 
now constitute ‘‘ the feet of Christ ’’ shall also shortly be 
changed to the same glorious likeness. They shall then be 
spirit beings, like him, Christ, and like all the risen saints 
who are now with him, and will in due time see him as he ¢s. 
(1 John 3:2.) We have also seen that the coming of the 
foretold Elias and of the predi¢ted Man of Sin, which were 
to precede his advent, are accomplished facts. 
We have marked, too, the fixed dates to which the Prophet 


Daniel calls attention The 2,300 days point to 1846 as 
20 


306 Thy Kingdom Come. 


the time when God’s sanétuary would be cleansed of the 
defiling errors and principles of Papacy ; and we have noted 
the cleansing there accomplished. We have noted the ful- 
filment of the 1,260 days, or the time, times and half a time, 
of Papacy’s power to persecute, and the beginning there, in 
1799, of the Time of the End. We have seen how the 
1,290 days marked the beginning of an understanding of 
the mysteries of prophecy in the year 1829, culminating in 
the great movement of 1844 known as the Second—Advent 
movement, when, aocording to the Lord’s prediction, the 
wise virgins went forth to meet the Bridegroom, thirty years 
prior to his actual coming. We have seen the fulfilment of 
the predicted tarrying ; and for fifteen years the midnight 
cry, ‘¢ Behold the Bridegroom !’’ has gone forth. We have 
marked with special delight the 1,335 days, pointing, as they 
do, to 1874 as the exact date of our Lord’s return; and 
we have since that time experienced the very blessedness 
promised—through the clearer unfoldings of the wonderful 
mysteries of the divine plan. 
Then we have seen the great harvest work, in its ap- 
pointed time and order, beginning in the autumn of the year 
1874, gradually and silently, but rapidly, progressing. We 
have marked the bundling and binding of the tares, and the 
gathering of the wheat. And what blessing and joy come 
to us in the assurance that since the summer of 1878, when 
the King took his great power and began his reign by the 
resurrection of those who slept in Jesus, it is no longer 
needful that his members should ‘sleep’? and wait for 
glory, but that for each the moment of finishing his course 
in death is the moment of the joyful ‘‘ change ”’ to the full 
perfection of the divine nature and likeness. Indeed, 
‘¢ blessed are the dead who die in the Lord from henceforth ”’ 
forever. They rest from their dors, but their works con- 
tinue; for the work on the other side the vail is the same 


Thy God Reigneth ! 307 


work in which all the overcomers are engaged on this side 
the vail; except that, with those who have entered into the 
glory of the divine nature, the work is no longer laborious, 
and no longer costs fatiguing sacrifice. 

In addition to all this, we see the beginnings of the re- 
turn of divine favor to fleshly Israel already manifested in 
the beginning of a turning away of their blindness and preju- 
dice against Christ Jesus, in the opening up of the land of 
promise and their expulsion from other lands, and also in 
the returning fruitfulness of Palestine itself. These outward 
signs alone, aside from all prophetic dates and times, would 
be strong evidences that we are living in the close of the 
age appointed for the selection of the Church or Kingdom 
class, because of the positive assurance of the Scriptures 
that their blindness and cast-off condition would continue 
only until the members of the body of Christ had been se- 
lected. . 

Standing thus, as we do, at this late date in the Time of 
the End, and in the very midst of the harvest of the age, 
and looking forward for the settlement of all the compli- 
cated questions of these feverish times within the brief space 
of the next twenty-three years, how solemn and intense are 
the feelings of those who have faith in the sure word of. 
prophecy. The momentous and perplexing questions which 
will culminate in the great trouble, of which Daniel fore- 
warns us, are now agitating the public mind, and are fast 
approaching the terrible crisis. But this great crisis of the 
‘¢day of vengeance’’ and ‘‘wrath’’ upon the nations we 
must leave for consideration in the succeeding volume, as 
the subject is too large and too important for our present 
space. But let us rejoice in the fact that beyond the trouble, 
and even beyond the helpful discipline of the reign of Christ, 
we see the glorious land of rest, the blessed and eternal in- 
heritance of a redeemed and restored race. 


308 Thy Kingdom Come. 


Wonderful times indeed are these, yet few heed the sure 
word of prophecy ; and consequently the future is viewed 
by most men only from the standpoint of present indications. 
Men see the rapidly gathering clouds, but can know noth- 
ing of their silver lining except from the Word of God. 

Yes, dear Redeemer and Lord, we recognize thy beloved 
presence, and rejoice in the evidences of the establishment 
of thy gracious Kingdom in this our day. Our hearts over- 
flow with gratitude as we see the converging rays of divine 
testimony—from the law, the prophets, the apostles and 
thine own hitherto dark sayings, and even from the long- 
hidden mysteries of Egypt’s wonderful ‘‘ Witness ’—now 
drawn to a glorious focus, showing thy believing followers 
that the glorious day is soon to break, although clouds and 
thick darkness yet obscure thy glory from all eyes except 
the eyes of faith of thy betrothed. In this radiant focal 
light, gem after gem of thy precious truth now gleams with 
a luster hitherto unknown, and thy majestic presence is re- 
flected by them all. 

‘« Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; and give thanks 
at the remembrance of his holiness.’’ ‘‘O, clap your. hands, 
all ye people: shout unto your God with the voice of tri- 
umph ; for the Lord most high is a great King over all 
the earth.’’ 


THE 


CORROBORATIVE TESTIMONY 


OF 
GOD'S STONE WITNESS 
AND 


PROPHET 
THE GREAT PYRAMID IN 


EGYPT. 


PREFACE TO CHAPTER X. 


A KINDLY COMMENT ON THIS CHAPTER WHEN IN 
MANUSCRIPT, FROM THE PEN OF 
THE ESTEEMED 


PROF. C. PIAZZI SMYTH, F. R. S. E., F.R. AS, 


EX-ASTRONOMER ROYAL FOR SCOTLAND. 


Brother William M. Wright, on learning that this chapter 
on the Great Pyramid was written, requested that he might 
have the reading of it before it would be put into type, as 
he had already considerable knowledge of the Pyramid. 
This we gladly granted, assuring him of our desire for all 
the criticism possible. After reading the MS., Bro. Wright 
concluded that, as we desired criticism, the higher the stand- 
ing of the critic the better. Accordingly he made a type-_ 
writer copy of the MS., and by permission mailed it to 
Prof. C. Piazzi Smyth, who is generally accorded a greater 
knowledge of the Great Pyramid’s construction and meas- 
urements than any other man in the world, requesting 
that he examine the MS. carefully and note upon it any crit- 
icism he might have to offer in the interest of the truth. The 
Professor’s answer to that letter, together with the MS. copy 
sent him, which bore his: marks of criticism, when received 
were sent to the author. We thank Bro. Wright and Prof. 
Smyth for their kindness, and have followed the corrections 
indicated ; which, however, only three in all, we were pleased 
to note were not of special importance. Only one of the 
criticisms was upon measurements, and it showed a variance _ 


of only one inch, which we gladly corrected. 
3il 


312 Thy Kingdom Come. 


Thinking it might be interesting to our readers we give 


below 
PROF. C. PIAZZI SMYTH’S LETTER. 


Clova, Ripon, England, Dee. 21, 1890. 
Win. M. Wright, £sq., 

Dear Sir :—I have been rather longer than I could have 
wished in looking over the MS. of your friend, C. T. Rus- 
sell, of Allegheny, Pa., but I have now completed a pretty 
careful examination, word by word. And that was the least I 
could do, when you so kindly took the pains to send tt with 
such care between boards by registered parcel, with every 
page flat, and tndited by the type-writer in place of the hand. 

At first I could only find slips of the said type-writer, but 
as I progressed through the pages, the powers, the specialties 
and the originalities of the Author came out magnificently ; and 
there were nota few passages I should have been glad to take 
a copy of for quotation, with name, in the next possible edition 
of my own Pyramid book. But of course I did nothing of 
that sort, and shall wait with perfe? patience and in most 
thankful mood of mind for when the author of Millennial 
Dawn shall choose his own time for publishing. So I merely 
remark here that he is both good and new in much that he 
says on the chronology of various parts of the Pyramid, es- 
pecially the First Ascending Passage and tts granite plug; 
on the Grand Gallery, as illustrating the Lord’ s life ; on the 
parallelisms between the King’s Chamber and its granite, 
against the Tabernacle and its gold; and generally on the 
confirmations or close agreements between Scripture and the 

Great Pyramid, well commented on. 

In the meanwhile, tt seems that I am indebted to you for 
your kind gift long ago of the first two volumes of Millennial 
_ Dawn. TI did not at the time get further than the first half 
of the first volume, finding the matter, as I thought, not quite 
sonewas I had expedted. But after having profited, as I 
hope, so much by a thorough reading of this advanced Pyra- 
mid chapter of the third volume, I must take up the first tiwo 
volumes again, de novo. 

The parcel will go back between its boards, registered. I 
remain, with many thanks, Yours respetfully, 

C. Piazet Smyth. 


CHAPTER X. 


THE TESTIMONY OF GOD’S STONE WITNESS AND 
PROPHET, THE GREAT PYRAMID IN EGYPT. 


Generac Description OF THE GREAT PYRAMID.—WHY OF SPRCIAL INTEREST TO 
CuRISTIANS.—T'HE GreaT Pyramip A STOREHOUSE OF TRUTH—SCIENTIFIC, 
Historic AND ProrHRtic.—BiBLe ALLusions To It.—WHy, WHEN AND By 
Wuom Buitt.—IMPorTANCE oF ITs Location.—Its Scigntiric Lessons.—I ts 
TESTIMONY CONCERNING THE PLAN OF REDEMPTION—THE PLAN OF THE AGES. 
—Tue DgaTH AND THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST INDICATED.—THE Down- 
WARD Coursg OF THE Wor_pD, ENDING IN A GREAT TimE OF TROUBLE.—THE 
NATURE OF THE TROUBLE. —-THE GRRAT REFORMATION MovEMENT MARKED. 
—LEnctuH or THE Jewish Ace INprcatep.—THe ‘ HiGH CALLING” OF THE 
Gospgt Cuurcn SHown.—TuHE Course oF THE CHURCH ’S CONSECRATION.— 
Tue Enp or THR HicH Catiinc Marxep. Date or THE SrconpD ADVENT 
or Curist.—How Restitution Biessincs FOR THR WORLD ARE INDICATED.— 
Tue Course or THE Woritp Durinc THE MILLENNIAL AGE.—Its END.—Con- 
TRAST OF THE Two ConpITIONS, HUMAN AND SPIRITUAL, AS INDICATED IN THE 
Pyramrp.—Twe Pyramip Rerutes ATHEISM, INFIDELITY AND ALL EVOLUTION 
THRORIES, AND VERIFIES BOTH THE PLAN OF THE B1BLE AND ITS APPOINTED 
‘TIMES AND SEASONS. 


“In that day shall there be an altar to the Lord in the midst of the 
land of Egypt, and a pillar at the border thereof to the Lord. And it 
shall be for a sign and for a witness unto the Lord of hosts in the land 
of Egypt.”’—Isa. 19: 19, 20. 


HE ancients recounted seven wonders of the world, and 

at the very head of the list named the Great Pyramid 

of Gizeh. It is situated in Egypt, not far from the present 
city of Cairo. No other building in the world equals it in 
size. One of the leading granite men of this country, who 
made a personal inspection of the Great Pyramid, says: 
‘* There are blocks of stone in the Pyramid which weigh 


three or four times as much as one of the obelisks. I saw 
313 


314 Thy Kingdom Come. 


a sto whose estimated weight was 880 tons. There are 
stones in it thirty feet in length which fit so closely together 
that you may run a penknife over the surface without dis- 
covering the breaks between them. They are not laid with 
mortar, either. There is now no machinery so perfect that 
it will make two surfaces thirty feet in length which will 
meet together as these wonderful stones in the Great Pyra- 
mid meet.’’ It covers an area of about thirteen acres. It 
is 486 feet high and 764 feet broad at its base. It is esti- 
mated that the Great Pyramid weighs six million tons, and | 
that to remove it would require sixty thousand steam engines, 
each drawing one hundred tons. In fact, the wealth of Egypt 
is not sufficient to pay laborers to demolish it. From these 
facts it is evident that, whoever was its great designer, he 
intended that it should be an enduring monument. 

Viewed from whatever standpoint we please, the Great 
Pyramid is certainly the most remarkable building in the 
world ; but in the light of an investigation which has been 
in progress for the past thirty-two years, it acquires new 
interest to every Christian advanced in the study of God’s 
Word; for it seems in a remarkable manner to teach, in 
harmony with all the prophets, an outline of the plan of 
God, past, present and future. 

It should be remembered that, aside from the Great Pyra- 
mid here referred to, there are others, some of stone and 
some of brick ; but all of them are mere attempts to copy it, 
and are in every way inferior—in size, accuracy and internal 
arrangement. And it has also been demonstrated that, un- 
like the Great Pyramid, they contain no symbolic features, 
but were evidently designed and used as sepulchers for the 
royal families of Egypt. 

The Great Pyramid, however, proves to be a storehouse 
of important truth—scientific, historic and prophetic—and 
its testimony is found to be in perfect accord with the Bible, 


The Great Pyramid. 315 


expressing the prominent features of its truths in Beautiful 
and fitting symbols. It is by no means an addition to the 
written revelation: that revelation is complete and perfect, 
and needs no addition. But it is a strong corroborative 
witness to God's plan; and few students can carefully ex- 
amine it, marking the harmony of its testimony with that 
of the written Word, without feeling impressed that its con- 
struction was planned and direéted by the same divine wis- 
dom, and that it is the pillar of witness referred to by the 
prophet in the above quotation. 

If. it was built under God’s direétion, to be one of his 
witnesses to men, we might reasonably expect some allusion 
to it in the written Word: of God. And yet, since it was 
evidently a part of God’s purpose to keep secret, until the 
Time of the End, features of the plan of which it gives tes- 
timony, we should expect that any reference to it in the 
Scriptures would be, as it is, somewhat under cover—to be 
recognized only when due to be understood. 

Isaiah, as above quoted, testifies of an altar and pillar in 
the land of Egypt, which ‘‘shall be for a sign and for a 
witness unto the Lord of hosts in the land of Egypt.’’ And 
the context shows that it shall be a witness i the day when 
the great Savior and Deliverer shall come to break the chains 
of oppression and to set at liberty Sin’s captives—of which 
things our Lord preached at his first advent. (Luke 4:18.) 
The scope of this prophecy is but dimly seen, however, un- 
til Egypt is recognized as a symbol or type of the world of 
mankind, full of vain philosophies, which only darken their 
understandings, but ignorant of the true light. As Israel 
typified the world which shall be delivered from the bondage 
of Sin by the great antitype of Moses, and whose sin-offer- 
ing has been given by the antitype of Aaron, so Egypt rep- 
resents the empire of Sin, the dominion of death (Heb. 
2:14), which for so long has held in chains of slavery many 


316 Thy Kingdom Come. 


who will be glad to go forth to serve the Lord under the 
leadership of one like unto but greater than Moses.—Acts 
3:22, 23. ; 

In many passages of Scripture the symbolic character of 
Egypt is indicated; for instance, Hosea 11:1 and Matt. 
2:13-15. Here, aside from the fact that our Lord as a 
babe was for a time a¢tually in the land of Egypt, and Israel 
also for a time actually in Egypt, there is evidently a typical 
significance as well. The Son of God was in the world for 
a time for the sake of those he came to redeem and deliver ; 
but he was called out of it—Egypt—to the higher, divine 
nature. Likewise those who are called to be his brethren 
and joint—heirs, the ‘‘ members of his body,’’ the true Israel 
of God, are called out of Egypt; and the Master testifies, 
‘« They are not of this world, even as Iam not of this world.”’ 

Isaiah (31:1, 3), referring to the great trouble now im- 
pending, says, ‘‘ Woe unto them that go down to Egypt [to 
the world] for help [for worldly ideas and plans, and for 
counsel as to how they should a¢t in the crisis of this great 
day]; and stay on horses [who endeavor still to ride the old, 
false doctrinal hobbies], and trust in chariots [worldly organ- 
izations] because they are many ; and in horsemen [the great 
leaders in false doctrines] because they are very strong; but 
who look not unto the Holy One of Israel, neither seek the 
Lord [for the safety and victory in this day of trouble will 
not be with the multitude]! . . . Now the Egyptians are 
men, and not God, and their horses flesh, and not spirit. 
When the Lord shall stretch out his hand [his power—the 
power of the truth and other agencies—as he will do shortly], 
both he that helpeth shall fall, and he that is helped [by the 
powers of Egypt—the world’s ideas] shall fall down, and 
they all shall fail together.’ 

It will be after all human plans and schemes have failed 
them, and when men shall have learned their own sinful- 


The Great Pyramid. 317 


ness and helplessness, that they will begin to cry unto the 
Lord for help. Then Jehovah will show himself a great 
Savior ; and he has already prepared the Great Pyramid as 
a part of his instrumentality for convincing the world of 
his wisdom, foreknowledge and grace. ‘‘It shall be for a 
sign and for a witness unto the Lord of hosts [a witness to 
his foreknowledge and to his gracious plan of salvation, as 
we shall presently see] in the land of Egypt: for they [the 
Egyptians—the poor world, during the great time of trouble 
coming] shall cry unto the Lord because of the oppressors, 
and he shall send them a Savior, and a great one; and he 
shall deliver them. And the Lord shall be known to Egypt 
[the world], and the Egyptians shall know the Lord iz that 
’ day [in the Millennial day—at the close of the time of 
trouble], and shall do service with sacrifice and oblation : 
yea, they shall make vows unto the Lord and perform them. 
But the Lord shall smite Egypt [the world—in the great 
time of trouble just at hand]. He shall smite and heal it. 
And they shall return unto the Lord, and he shall be en- 
treated of them, and shall heal them.’’—Isa. 19: 19-22. 
While the additional, corroborative evidence given by 
the Great Pyramid to the written Word of God will be a 
fresh cause of rejoicing to the saints, it is manifest that its 
witnessing is chiefly intended for the world of mankind 
during the Millennial age. The testimony of this peculiar 
and remarkable witness will give to mankind fresh ground 
for faith and love and zeal, when in due time their hearts 
are prepared for the truth. It is remarkable, too, that (like 
the Plan of the Ages in the written Word) this stone ‘‘ Wit- 
ness’’ kept silence until now, when its testimony shall shortly 
be delivered to (Egypt) the world. But the saints, the friends 
of God from whom he will hide nothing, are privileged to 
hear the testimony of this witness now, before the worldly 
mind is ready to appreciate its testimonies. Only when 


318 Thy Kingdom Come. 


ready to obey the Lord can any appreciate his witnesses. 

Jeremiah (32:20), when speaking of God’s mighty works, 
declares that he hath ‘* se¢ signs and wonders in the land of 
Egypt, even unto this day.”’ God showed signs and won- 
ders in Egypt when he brought Israel out in triumph ; but 
he also ‘‘se¢ signs and wonders ’’ there, which remain “‘ even 
unto this [our] day.’’ The Great Pyramid, we believe, is 
the principle one of these very signs and wonders; and it 
now begins to speak to scientists in their own language, 
and through them to all men. 

The Lord’s questions and statements to Job (38:3-7), 
concerning the earth, find a remarkable illustration in the 
Great Pyramid, which is believed, in itself and by its meas- 
urements, to represent the earth and God’s plan with ref- 
erence to it. The illustration used is that of a building, 
and we believe that it fits only to a structure of pyramid 
shape. The language, while it applies primarily to the earth, 
is framed to fit the illustration given in the Great Pyramid. 
First, the preparation of the foundation, the rock on which 
the Great Pyramid is built, is noted. Second, the arrange- 
ment of its measures, a feature very prominently shown in 
the Great Pyramid, which abounds in significant measure- 
ments. ‘Who hath stretched the line upon it?’’ The per- 
fection of the shape of the Great Pyramid, and its exactness 
in every respect, prove that its construction was guided by 
some master architect. ‘‘ Whereupon are the sockets there- 
of made to sink?’’ The Great Pyramid has four corner 
socket-stones sunk into the solid rock. ‘‘ Or who laid the 
corner-stone thereof?’’ A pyramid has five corner—stones, 
but the reference here is to one particular corner—stone— 
the top stone. The four sunk as socket-stones into the 
rock have already heen referred to, and the remaining one 
is the top corner-stone. This is the most remarkable stone 
in the struéture—itself a perfect pyramid, the lines in the 


The Great Pyramid. 319 


entire structure conform to it. The question, therefore, 
with reference to it is significant, and calls attention to its 
peculiar fitness, and the wisdom and skill which prepared 
and placed it as the top stone. 

This ancient stru€ture being thus repeatedly referred to 
in the Scriptures, we cannot doubt that, if questioned, this 
“* Witness ’’ of the Lord in the land of Egypt will bear such 
testimony as will honor Jehovah, and fully correspond with 
his written Word. We thus introduce this ‘‘ Witness ’’ be- 
cause the inspiration of its testimony will doubtless be as 
much disputed as that of the Scriptures, by the prince of 
darkness, the god of this world, and those whom he blinds 
to the truth. 


WHY, WHEN AND BY WHOM WAS THE GREAT PYRAMID BUILT? 


This question has been much discussed of late years, from 
both scientific and Scriptural standpoints. For thousands 
of years no satisfactory answer to the question was discov- 
ered. The old theory that it was built as a vault or tomb 
for an Egyptian king is unworthy of credence; for, as we 
shal] see, it required more than the wisdom of the present 
day, to say nothing of that of Egypt four thousand years ago, 
to design such a structure. Besides, it contains nothing in 
the way of casket, mummy or inscription. It was not until 
we had come into the time called in Daniel’s prophecy ‘ the 
Time of the End,’’ when knowledge should be increased, and 
the wise should understand God’s plan (Dan. 12:4, 9, 10), 
that the secrets of the Great Pyramid began to be under- 
stood, and our questions began to have a reasonable answer. 

The first work of importance on the subject, proving that 
the Great Pyramid possessed scientific features, was by Mr. 
John Taylor, of England, a. p. 1859, since which time the 
attention of many able minds has been given to the further 
study of the testimony of this wonderful ‘* Witness ; ’’ espe- 


320 Thy Kingdom Come. 


cially since Prof. Piazzi Smyth, Astronomer—Royal for Scot- 
land, visited it, for several months made its peculiarities a 
study and gave to the world the remarkable facts of its con- 
struction and measurements, and his conclusions therefrom. 
To his scholarly and scientific work, ‘‘ Our Inheritance in 
the Great Pyramid,’’ we are mainly indebted for the data 
made use of in this chapter. Our illustrations are copies 
of a few of the twenty-five plates with which the latest edition 
of that work is embellished. 

A few year’s after Prof. Smyth’s return, came the sugges- 
tion that the Great Pyramid is Jehovah’s ‘‘ Witness,’’ and 
that it is as important a witness to divine truth as to natural 
science. This was a new thought to Prof. Smyth, as well 
as to others. The suggestion came from a young Scots- 
man, Robert Menzies, who, when studying the scientific 
teachings of the Great Pyramid, discovered that prophetic. 
and chronological teachings co-exist in it. 

Soon it became apparent that the object of its construc- 
tion was to provide in it a record of the divine plan of sal- 
vation, no less than the record of divine wisdom relating 
to astronomical, chronological, geometrical, and other im- 
portant truths. However, not having discerned the scope 
and completeness of the plan of salvation revealed in the 
Scriptures, these gentlemen have thus far failed to note the 
most wonderful and beautiful features of the Great Pyramid’s 
testimony in this direction, which we now find to be a most 
full and complete corroboration of the plan of the ages and 
the times and seasons therewith associated, as taught in the 
Scriptures and presented in this and the preceding volumes 
of the MILLENNIAL Dawn series. And, further, we see that 
this store-house of knowledge, like the major part of the 
Bible store, was kept purposely sealed until its testimony 
should be needed and appreciated. Does this imply that 
its great Architect knew that a time would come when its tes- 


The Great Pyramid. 321 


timony would be necessary ? in other words, that a time would 
come when God's written Word would be lightly esteemed, 
and even his very existence questioned ? when human phi- 
losophy, under the name of science, would be lauded, and 
every proposition subjected to its tests? Has God decided 
to prove himself and his wisdom by those very tests? So it 
would appear. This structure will yet confound the wisdom 
of the wise as a ‘‘Witness’’ for the Lord of hosts—‘‘ In 
THAT DAY ’’—which is already begun. 

Prof. Smyth has concluded that the Great Pyramid was 
builded in the year 2170 B. C., reaching this conclusion, 
first, from astronomical observations. Perceiving that the 
upward passage angles correspond to a telescope, and that 
the ‘‘ Entrance Passage’’ corresponds to an astronomer’s 
‘¢ pointer,’’ he set about to investigate to what particular 
star it could have pointed at any time in the past. Calcu- 
lations showed that a Draconis, the dragon-star, had occu- 
pied a position in the heavens which looked directly down 
the entrance, at midnight of the autumnal equinox, B. c. 
2170. Then, considering himself as an astronomer at that 
date, with his pointer fixed upon @ Draconis, and consid- 
ering the ascending passages as though they were a telescope, 
which they much resemble, he calculated what constellation 
or what notable star would have been before his telescope 
thus fixed at the particular date indicated by his pointer, 
and found that it must have been the Pleiades. So won- 
derful a coincidence convinced him that the date of the 
Great Pyramid’s building was thus indicated ; for @ Dra- 
conis is no less a symbol of sin and Satan than Pleiades isa 
symbol of God and the center of the universe. The Great 
Pyramid thus indicates that its Architect knew of the prev- 
alence of evil and of its domination over the downward 
course of mankind, and indicates also what lies beyond all 
human sight—that the only hope for the race is in Jehovah, 

alg 


322 Thy Kingdom Come. 


This conclusion of Prof. Smyth’s as to the date of the 
Great Pyramid’s building, was most abundantly corrobo- 
rated, later, by certain measurements by which the Great 
Pyramid indicates its own date of construction. A realiza- 
tion of the fact that the Great Pyramid exhibits a wisdom 
of design which the Egyptians could not have possessed— 
a divine wisdom which must have been worked out under 
the supervision of some inspired servant of God—has led 
to the conjecture that Melchizedek was its builder. He 
was ‘king of Salem [that is, king of peace] and priest of - 
the Most High God,’’ and as a person and type occupied 
so high a position as to be a blesser of Abraham, who also 
paid him tithes. Of this we can know little, except that 
Melchizedek was a great and peaceful king, and that he 
lived about that time, and not far distant from the site of 
the Great Pyramid. 

It is conjectured that Melchizedek, though not himself an 
Egyptian, used Egyptian labor for the construction of the 
Great Pyramid. And to some extent the traditions of Egypt 
support such a theory. They reveal the fact that Egypt 
had a peculiar invasion about this date by a people whom 
tradition merely denominates Ay&sos (7. e., Shepherd Kings 
or Peaceful Kings). These invaders seem not to have 
attempted to disturb the general government of Egypt, and, 
after staying a time for some purpose not recognized by the 
tradition, they left Egypt as peacefully as they had come. 
These Ayksos or Peaceful Kings are supposed to include 
Melchizedek, and are assumed to have been the builders of 
the Great Pyramid—God’s altar and ‘‘ Witness’’ in the 
land of Egypt. 

Manetho, an Egyptian priest and scribe, is quoted by 
Josephus and others as saying: ‘‘ We had formerly a king 
whose name was Timaus. In his time it came to pass, I 
know not how, that the deity was displeased with us; and 


THE GREAT PYRAMID IN THE CENTRE, 
AND AT THE SAME TIME AT THE BORDER OF THE 
SECTOR-SHAPED LAND OF LOWER EGYPT. 


from Greenwich. , 
30 9 12 


LOWER EGYPT IN THE GEOGRAPHICAL CENTRE OF 
THE LAND SURFACE OF THE WHOLE WORLO 
(on the Equal Surface Projection) 


I digi tized by G OC fem = 


The Great Pyramid. 328 


there came up from the East, in a strange manner, men of 
ignoble race [not warriors], Ayésos, who had the confi- 
dence to invade our country and easily subdue it by their 
power without a battle. And when they had our rulers in 
their hands, they demolished the temples of the gods.’’ 


ITS PECULIAR LOCATION. 


The Great Pyramid is situated on an elevated rocky plain, 
overlooking the river Nile, not far from the city of Cairo, 
in Egypt. A remarkable thing.in connection with its sit- 
uation is, that the delta of the Nile forms a sea—coast which 
in shape is a true quarter circle, with the Great Pyramid 
marking the inner angle. 

This relationship of the Great Pyramid to the coast was 
discovered by Mr. Henry Mitchell, Chief Hydrographer 
of the United States Coast Survey, who visited Egypt in 
1868 to report the progress of the Suez Canal. His obser- 
vation of the regularity of the curvature along the whole of 
Egypt’s northern coast led him to conclude that some cen- ° 
tral point of physical origination was indicated. On search- 
ing for this grand center, he found it marked by the Great 
Pyramid, which led him’to exclaim: ‘That monument 
stands in a more important physical situation than any other 
building ereéted by man.’’ 

A line drawn from the entrance passage due north would 
pass through the northernmost point of Egypt’s coast ; and 
lines drawn in continuation of the northeast and northwest 
diagonals of the structure would enclose the delta’s either 
side, thus embracing the fan-shaped country of Lower Egypt. 
(See illustration, page 323.) Built upon the northernmost 
edge of the Gizeh cliff, and looking out over this sector, or ~ 
open-fan-shaped land of Lower Egypt, it may be truly said 
to be at the very border thereof, as well as in its nominal 
center, as described by the prophet Isaiah. ‘‘ In that day 
shall there be an alta to the Lord 7” the midst of the land 


326 Thy Kingdom Come. 


of Egypt, and a pillar [pyramid] at the border thereof, to 
the Lord.’ And it shall be for a sign and for a witness un- 
to the Lord of hosts in the land of Egypt.’’ Another fact 
worthy of notice is that the Great Pyramid is located in the 
geographical center of the land surface of the world—in- 
cluding North and South America, unknown for centuries 
after the location and construction of the Great Pyramid. 


ITS SCIENTIFIC LESSONS. 


The Great Pyramid speaks to us, not by hieroglyphics, 
nor by sketches, but only by its location, its construction 
and its measurements. The only original marks or figures 
found were in the ‘ Construction Chambers’’ over the 
‘‘King’s Chamber: ’’ there are none whatever in the pas- 
sages and rooms of the Pyramid proper. The scientific 
lessons of the Great Pyramid we omit for economy of space, 
because not one in a hundred ordinary readers would under- 
stand the scicntific terms, so as to appreciate the demonstra- 
tions, and especially because they would be no part of the 
gospel which it is our misson to present. Suffice it, there- 
fore, that we merely suggest the manner in which it teaches 
the scientist. For instance: The measure of the base of the 
four sides, at the level of the ‘‘ sockets,’’ added, is found to 
be as many pyramid cubits as there are days in four years, to 
the fraction—including the leap-year fraction. The meas- 
ures diagonally across the base from northeast to southwest, 
and from northwest to southeast, added, give as many inches 
as there are years in the precessional cycle. This cycle as- 
tronomers had already concluded to be 25,827 years, and 
the Great Pyramid corroborates their conclusion. The dis- 
tance to the sun it is claimed is indicated, by the height and 
angle of the Great Pyramid, to be 91,840,270 miles, which 
almost exactly corresponds with the latest figures reached 
by astronomers. Astronomers until recently had calculated 


- 


The Great Pyramid. 324 


this distance to be from ninety to ninety-six millions of 
miles, their latest calculation and conclusion being ninety- 
two millions. The Great Pyramid has also its own way of 
indicating the most correét standard of all weights and 
measures, based upon the size and weight of the earth, which 
’ it is also claimed to indicate. , 

Commenting upon the scientific testimony and the loca- 
tion of this majestic ‘‘ Witness,’’ Rev. Joseph Seiss, D. D. 
suggests : 


‘«There is a yet grander thought embodied in this won- 
derful structure. Of its five points there is one of special 
pre-eminence, in which all its sides and exterior lines ter- 
minate. It is the summit corner, which lifts its solemn in- 
dex finger to the sun at midday, and by its distance from 
the base tells the mean distance to that sun from the earth. 
And if we go back to the date which the Pyramid gives it- 
self, and look for what that finger pointed to at midnight, 
we find a far sublimer indication. Science has at last dis- 
covered that the sun is not a dead center, with planets 
wheeling about it, but itself stationary. It is now ascer- 
tained that the sun also is in motion, carrying with it its 
splendid retinue of comets, planets, its satellites and theirs, 
- around some other and vastly mightier center. Astrono- 
mers are not yet fully agreed as to what or where that cen- 
ter is. Some, however, believe that they have found the 
direéton of it to be the Pleiades, and particularly Alcyone, 
the central one of the renowned Pleiadic stars. To the 
distinguished German astronomer, Prof. J. H. Maedler, 
belongs the honor of having made this discovery. Alcy- 
one, then, as far as science has been able to perceive, would 
seem to be ‘the midnight throne’ in which the whole sys- 
tem of gravitation has its central seat, and from which the 
Almighty governs his universe. And here is the wonderful 
corresponding fact, that at the date of the Great Pyramid’s 
building, at midnight of the autumnal equinox, and hence 
the true beginning of the year* as still preserved in the 
traditions of many nations, the Pleiades were distributed 


* The beginning of the Jewish year, introduced by the Day of Atone- 
ment, as shown in MILLENNIAL Dawn, VOL. 1. 


328 Thy Kingdom Come. 


over the meridian of this Pyramid, with Alcyone (nq Zaurt) 
precisely on the line. Here, then, is a pointing of the highest 
and sublimest character that mere human science has ever 
been able so much as to hint, and which would seem to 
breathe an unsuspected and mighty meaning into that 
speech of God to Job, when he demanded, ‘ Canst thou 
bind the sweet influences of Pleiades?’ ’’ 


ITS TESTIMONY RELATING TO THE PLAN OF REDEMPTION. 

While every feature of the Great Pyramid’s teaching is 
important and of interest, our greatest interest centers in 
its silent but eloquent symbolism of the plan of God—the 
Plan of the Ages. It would be impossible, however, to un- 
derstand God’s plan as illustrated by it, had we not first 
discovered that plan in the Bible. But having seen it por- 
trayed there, it is strengthening to faith to see it again so 
beautifully outlined here; and to notice, further, that both 
the truths of Nature and the truths of Revelation are owned 
and testified to by the same great Author in this wonderful 
stone ‘‘ Witness.”’ 

In this aspect of its teaching, the Great Pyramid, viewed 
from without, has a beautiful significance, representing the 
plan of God completed, as it shall be at the end of the Mil- 
" Jennial age. The crowning feature will be Christ, the ac- 
knowledged Head over all; and each other stone will be 
fitly framed into the glorious building, complete and perfect. 
All this chiseling, polishing and fitting process will then be 
completed, and all will be bound and cemented together, to 


each other and to the Head, with love. If theGreat Pyramid, 


* See Vou. 1., Chap. v.; alsothe Chart of the Ages, VOL. I., 7, 9, 2, W. 


The Great Pyramid. 329 
by prophets and apostles and by our Lord Jesus himself. 


‘stone.’’ Zechariah (4:7) refers to its placement at the top 
of the completed edifice, with great rejoicing, saying, ‘‘ He 
shall bring forth the head-stone thereof with shoutings, 
crying, ‘ Grace, grace unto it.’’’ Doubtless when the head— 
stone of the Great Pyramid was laid there was great rejoic- 
ing among the builders and all interested in it, to see this 
crowning feature of the finished work. Job also (38:6, 7) 
speaks of the rejoicing when the chief corner-stone was laid, 
and he specifies the head, or crowning corner-stone, by 
mentioning the other four corner-—stones first, saying, 
«¢ Whereupon are the socket-stones made to sink? or who 
laid the corner-stone thereof, when the morning stars sang 
together and all the sons of God shouted for joy?’’ (See 
margin.) The Prophet David, too, refers to our Lord, and 
uses a figure of speech exactly corresponding to that of this 
stone ‘‘ Witness’’ of Egypt. He says, prophetically, from 
the standpoint of the future, ‘* The stone which the build- 
ers rejected is become the head-corner-stone. This is 
Jehovah’s doing. It is marvelous in our eyes. This is the 
day [the Millennial day of Christ’s glory as the Head and 
Ruler of the world] which Jehovah hath made; we will 
rejoice and be glad in it.’’ (Psa. 118:22~24.) Fleshly 
Israel failed to accept Christ as their head-stone, and hence 
were rejected from being the special house of God—Spiritual 
Israel instead being built up into Christ the Head. And 
* we remember that our Lord applied this very prophecy to 
himself, and showed that he was the reje¢éted stone, and 
that Israel, through their builders, the priests and Pharisees, 
were the rejecters.— Matt. 21:42, 44; Act 4:11. 
How perfeétly the head-stone of the Great Pyramid illus- 
trates all this! The head-stone, being first finished, would 
serve the workmen as a pattern or model for the whole 


330 Thy Kingdom Come. 


structure, whose angles and proportions must all be con- 
formed to it. But we can readily imagine that, before this 
top-stone was recognized as a pattern for the whole struc- 
ture, it would be rejected, set at naught, by the builders, 
some of whom could think of no place suitable for it ; its five 
sides, five corners and sixteen different angles making it un- 
suitable to the structure until the very top-stone was needed, 
and then no other stone would do. During all the years in 
which the building work progressed, this Chief Corner-stone 
would be a ‘stone of stumbling ’’ and a “ rock of offense ’’ 
to those not acquainted with its use and place ; just as Christ 
is, and will continue to be, to many, until they have seen 
him exalted as the Head—Corner-Stone of God’s plan. 
The pyramid figure represents perfection and complete- 
ness, and speaks to us in symbol of the plan of God, show- 
ing that ‘in the dispensation of the fulness of times, he 
will gather together [into one harmonious family, though 
on different planes of being}, under one Head, all things in 
heaven and on earth, under Christ ’’—all not being con- 
formable being cut off.—Eph. 1:10; 2:20-22.—Diaglott. 


HOW THE INTERNAL CONSTRUCTION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID 
OUTLINES THE PLAN OF REDEMPTION. 


But while the outward testimony of this great structure 
is thus complete, and in accord with God’s written revela- 
tion, its inner construction is even more wonderful. While 
its outward form illustrates the completed results of God’s 
Plan of Redemption,* the inner construction marks and 
illustrates every prominent feature of that plan as it has de- 
veloped from age to age, down to its glorious and complete 
consummation. Here the stones upon the various levels or 
planes represent the perfection of all who, under Christ Jesus 
our Head, shall become conformed, to God’s perfeét will, 


* See Chart of the Ages in VOL. I. 


The Great Pyramid. , 331 


as we have already seen from Scripture testimony. Some 
will be perfeéted on the human plane and some on the 
spiritual and divine planes or natures. Thus the floor of 
the ‘‘ King’s Chamber ’’ is described as being on the fiftieth 
course of masonry, that of the ‘* Queen’s Chamber’’ on 
the twenty-fifth course, and the lower end of the “ First 
Ascending Passage,’’ if extended by the ‘ Plug,’’ as will 
presently be shown, would reach down to the basal line of 
the Pyramid. Thus from its base-line upward the Great 
Pyramid seems to stand as an emblem of God’s plan of sal- 
vation, or lifting up out of sin and death, provided for all 
mankind. ‘The base-line thus corresponds with the date 
of the confirmation of God’s promise to typical Israel—the 
beginning of the uplifting or saving process. 

A careful study of the accompanying diagram, showing 
the interior arrangement of this wonderful structure, is sug- 
gested. The Great Pyramid has but one proper ‘‘ Entrance 
Passage.’’ This passage is regular, but low and slanting, 
and leads down toa little room or ‘‘ Subterranean Chamber,”’ 
cut in therock. This room is of peculiar construction, the 
ceiling being well finished, while the sides are only com- 
menced and the bottom is rough and unfinished. This to 
some minds has suggested the thought, ‘‘ bottomless pit,’’ 
which term is used in the Scriptures to represent disaster, 
oblivion and extinétion. This ‘‘ Entrance Passage ’’ fitly 

“represents the present downward course of mankind toward 
destruction ;- while the ‘‘ Subterranean Chamber,’’ by its 
peculiar construction, illustrates the great trouble, disaster, 
destruction, the ‘‘ wages of sin,’’ to which the downward 
course leads. 

The ‘First Ascending Passage’’ is of about the same 
size as the ‘“‘ Entrance Passage,’’ from which it branches off. 
It is small, low and difficult of ascent, but opens at its 
upper end into a large, elegant hall—-way, called the ‘‘ Grand 


432 Thy Kingdom Come. 


Gallery,’’ the ceiling of which is at seven Ames the height 
of the passages leading to it. The low ‘‘ Ascending Passage’’ 
is supposed to represent the Law dispensation, and Israel 
as a nation, from the going out of Egypt. There they left 
the nations of the world and their downward course, to be 
God's holy nation and under his law—proposing thence- 
forth to walk an upward and more difficult path than tnat 
of the heathen world, viz., to keep the Law. The ‘Grand 
Gallery "’ is understood to represent the period of the Gos- 
pel call—still upward and difficult, but not hampered as 
that behind it. ‘The loftiness and greater width of this pass- 
age-way well represent the grander hopes and greater lib- 
erties of the Christian dispensation. ; 

On a level with the floor of the ‘‘ Grand Gallery ’’ at its 
lower end, there starts a ‘‘ Horizontal Passage ’’ under it, 
which leads to a little room commonly termed the Queen’s 
Chamber.”” At the upper end of the ‘‘Grand Gallery,’’ 
is another low passage-way, leading into a little room called 
the ‘‘ Ante-Chamber ’’ which is of very peculiar construc- 
tion, and which to some has suggested the idea of a school 
— a place for instruction and testing. 

But the chief room of the Great Pyramid, for both size 
and importance of location, is a little farther along, and 
separated from the ‘¢ Ante-Chamber ’’ by another low pass- 
age-way. This room is known as the ‘‘ King’s Chamber.”’ 
Over it are a number of small apartments called ‘‘ Construc- 
tion Chambers.’’ The significance of these, if they have any 
significance, relates not to man, nor to any other creature 
which walks, but to spirit beings; for it will be observed 
from the diagram that though the sides and the top are 
squared and finished, there is no floor surface to any of them. 
The ‘‘ King’s Chamber’’ contains a ‘‘ Coffer’? or stone 
box, the only piece of furniture found in the Great Pyramid. 
Ventilation is provided in the ‘‘ King’s Chamber ’’ by two 


so® 


Hortzontal Masonry courses, from = . CHAMBER AND. 
the base upwards . So! PASSAGE SYSTEM OF 


GREAT PYRAMID. 


enlarged from the 
Frontispiece. 


ey 


=< A 


wo 
x 
< 
4 
< 
o 
5 
« 
we 
> 
E 


BASAL PLANE | 1 BASAL PLANE 


NATURAL NATURAL ROCK 


levelled on tep previous to building 


SUBTERRANEAN 
CHAMBER, 


ra 
rm OF BRITISH INCHES. 
g eee 


The Great Pyramid. 335 


air—passages which pierce its walls on opposite sides and 
extend to the outer surface—left for this purpose by the 
builders. It has been speculated by some that there are 
yet other rooms and passages for future discovery ; but we 
do not share this opinion: to us it seems that the passages 
and rooms already discovered fully serve the divinely—in- 
tended purpose, in witnessing to the entire plan of God. 

From the west sidé of the lower or north end of the: 
‘¢ Grand Gallery,’’ extending downward, there is an irreg- 
ular passage called the ‘‘ Well,’’ leading into the descend- 
ing ‘‘ Entrance Passage.’’ Its route passes through a grotto 
in the natural rock. The connection between this passage 
and the ‘‘Grand Gallery’’ is very disordered. It would 
appear that originally the passage-way into the ‘‘ Queen’s 
Chamber ’’ had been concealed, being covered by the floor- 
ing slabs of the ‘‘ Grand Gallery ;’’ and also that a stone 
slab covered the mouth of the ‘‘ Well.’’ But now the whole 
‘WSwer end of the ‘Grand Gallery ’’ is torn away, opening 
the passage to the ‘‘ Queen’s Chamber,”’ and leaving the 
‘Well’? open. ‘Those who have been there and who have 
examined it say that it looks as though an explosion had 
taken place at the mouth of the ‘ Well,’’ bursting it open 
from beneath. It is our opinion, however, that no such ex- 
plosion ever occurred; but that things were left by the 
builders as they are, purposely, to indicate the same thing 
that would be indicated by the supposed explosion, which 
will be referred to later. As a matter of fact, none of these 
stones are now to be found, and it would have been very 
difficult to remove them. 

At the upper or south end of the ‘‘ Grand Gallery,”’ the 
floor—line of the ‘¢ Ante~Chamber ’’ and the ‘‘ King’s Cham- 
ber ’’ extends into the ‘‘ Grand Gallery,”’ forming an abrupt 
barrier, or high step at its upper end. This step projects 
from the south wall sixty-one inthes, This south end wall 


336 Thy Kingdom Come. 


of the ‘Grand Gallery’’ has a peculiarity also: it is not 
vertical, but leans northward—at the top seven inches— 
and at its very top there is an opening or passage—way con- 
necting with the so-called ‘‘ Construction Chambers ’’ over 
the ‘‘ King’s Chamber.”’ 

The passage-ways and floors of the Pyramid are of lime- 
stone, as indeed is the entire structure, except in the ‘‘King’s 
Chamber,’’ the ‘‘ Ante-Chamber’’ and the passage between 
them, where the floors and ceilings are of granite. The 
only piece of granite elsewhere in the structure is the gran- 
ite ‘* Plug,’’ which is tightly wedged in the lower end of 
the ‘‘ First Ascending Passage.’’ As originally left by the 
builders, the ‘‘ First Ascending Passage ’’ was sealed with a 
close—fitting angular stone at its lower end, where it con- 
nects with the ‘‘ Entrance Passage ;’’ and this was so neatly 
done that the “First Ascending Passage’’ was unknown 
until, in ‘‘due time,’’ the stone fell. Close to the lower 
end of this ‘‘ First Ascending Passage,’’ and just behind the 
sealing stone, was the granite ‘ Plug,’’ made slightly wedge— 
shaped, and evidently intended to remain there, as it has 
thus far resisted all efforts to remove it. 

Though the ‘‘ Entrance Passage ’’ was well known to the 
ancients, as attested by historians, yet Al Mamoun, an Ara- 
bian Caliph, was evidently ignorant of its exact situation, 
except that tradition located it on the north side of the 
Pyramid, when, in A. D. 825, at great expense he forced an 
entrance, as shown on the diagram, in the hope of finding 
wonderful treasures. But though it contained vast intel- 
leétual treasures, now being appreciated, it contained none 
of the kind sought by the Arabs. Their labor, however, 
was not wholly in vain; for, while they worked, the stone 
which sealed the upward passaged jarred from its position, 
fell into the ‘‘ Entrance Passage’’ and told the secret, thns 
disclosing the ‘ First Ascending Passage.’? The Arabs sup 


The Great Pyramid. 337 


posed that they had at last found the way to secreted wealth, 
and, unable to remove the granite ‘‘ Plug,’’ they forced a 
passage alongside, quarrying much more easily the softer 
. limestone. 


THE GREAT PYRAMID’S TESTIMONY CONCERNING 
THE PLAN OF THE AGES. 


Ina letter to Prof. Smyth, Mr. Robert Menzies, the young* 
Scotsman who first suggested the religious or Messianic 
feature of the Great Pyramid’s teaching, said :— 


‘From the north beginning of the Grand Gallery, in 
upward progression, begin the years of our Savior’s life, 
expressed at the rate of an inch to a year. Three and 
thirty inch-years, therefore, bring us right over against the 
mouth of the Well.”’ 


Yes, that ‘‘Well’’ is the key, so to speak, to the whole 
story. It represents not only our Lord’s death and burial, 
but also his resurrection. This last is shown by the feature 
already noted, that the mouth of the ‘‘ Well’’ and its sur- 
roundings look as though an explosion had burst it open 
from beneath. Thus our Lord burst the bonds of death, 
thereby bringing life and immortality to light—opening up 
a new way to life. (Heb. 10:20.) It was not possible for him 
to be holden of death (Acts 2:24), is the seeming language 
of the torn rocks surrounding the upper opening: of this 
‘*Well.”’ As the ‘‘ Well’’ was the only way of access to each 
of these upward passages of the Great Pyramid, so by the 
death and resurrection. of our Redeemer is the only avenue to 
life on any plane for the fallen race. As the ‘‘ First Ascend- 
ing Passage ’’ was there, but impassable, so the Jewish or Law 
Covenant stood as a way to or offer of life, but a useless or 
impassable way to life: none of the fallen race ever could 
or ever did reach life by walking its prescribed course. 
‘¢ By the deeds of the law shall no flesh be justified ’’ to 


life. (Rom. 3:20.) ‘That which the ‘‘Well’’ symbolizes, 
22¢ : 


338 Thy Kingdom Come. 


viz., the ransom, is the only way by which any member of 
the condemned race can reach the grand provision of the 
divine plan—lasting life. 

Years before this suggestion, that the ‘‘ Grand Gallery ”’ 
represents the Christian dispensation, Prof. Smyth had, by 
astronomical observation, fixed the date of the building of 
the Pyramid at B. c. 2170; and when Mr. Menzies suggested 
that the floor—line inches of the ‘‘ Grand Gallery ’’ repre- 
sent years, it occurred to some one that, if that theory were 
true, the measuring of the floor—line backward from the 
lower edge of the ‘‘ Grand Gallery,’’ down the ‘ First As- 
cending Passage ’’ to its junction with the ‘* Entrance ‘Pass- 
age,’’ and thence upward along the ‘‘ Entrance Passage ’’ 
toward the Pyramid’s entrance, should discover some mark 
or indication in the passage—way to correspond, and thus 
prove the date of the Pyramid’s construction, and the cor- 
rectness of the inch-year theory. This, though not unreas- 
onable, was a crucial test, and the service of a civil engi- 
neer was obtained to visit the Great Pyramid again and 
make very accurate measurements of passages, chambers, 
etc. This was in 1872; and the report of this gentleman 
was confirmatory to the last degree. His measurements show 
the floor—line just described to be 217¢14 inches to a very 
jinely ruled line in the walls of the ‘‘ Entrance Passage.’’ 
Thus the date of its construction is doubly attested, while 
the floor-lines of its passages are shown to be scrolls of his- 
tory and chronology, which shall yet be generally heard as 
‘a witness unto the Lord in the land of Egypt.” 

Here, thanks to the very accurate measurements of all 
the passages, furnished by Prof. Smyth, we are enabled to 
reach what to us are by far the most interesting features of 
the testimony of this ‘‘ Witness’’ yet delivered. 

When we first came to appreciate what we have already 
mentioned of the testimony of the Great Pyramid, we said 


SECTION 


fvertical atud 


long itindouad / 


LOOKING WEST 


NOATHERN END 
— ‘ oF 
Nevizonial Passage } e ‘ GRAND GALLERY 


to Queers Chaniher N i” 
, GR PYR? 


* 
$ 
: 
: 
z 
: 
3 
? 
: 
s 


ENLARGED 
PENSPECTIVE 
View 


or tue 
BROKEN OUT 
RAMP STOWE 

| AnD 
THE ENTRANCE 


To THe 


WELL, 


sa called. 


Digitized by Google 


Digitized by Google 


The Great Pyramid. 341 


at once, If this, indeed, prove to be a Bible in stone; if it 
be a record of the secret plans of the Great Architect of 
the universe, displaying his foreknowledge and wisdom ; it 
should and will be in full accord with his written Word. 
The fact that the Pyramid’s secrets were kept until the close 
of six thousand years of the world’s history, but that it now 
begins to give its testimony as the Millennial Dawn draws 
on, is in perfeét harmony with the written Word, whose 
abundant testimony relative to the glorious plan of God 
has likewise been kept secret from the foundation of the 
world, and only now is beginning to shine forth in its com- 
pleteness and glory. 

We have already presented, in previous volumes, and in 
previous chapters of this volume, the clear testimony of the 
written Word, showing that we stand on the threshold of a 
new age—that the Millennial Day is dawning, with its 
change of earth’s rulership from the control of the ‘ prince 
of this world’’ and his faithful, to the control of him ‘‘ whose 
right it is’’ (by purchase) and his faithful saints. We have 
seen that though the result of this change will be a great 
blessing, yet the time of the transfer, while the present 
prince, the ‘‘strong man,’’ is being bound and his house- 
hold driven out of power (Matt. 12:29; Rev. 20:2), will 
be a time of intense trouble. The Scriptural time-proofs 
which we have considered show that this trouble was due 
to date from the time of Christ’s second advent (October, 
1874), when the judging of the nations would commence, 
under the enlightening influences of the Day of the Lord. 
This is shown in the Great Pyramid thus :— 

The <‘‘ Descending Passage,’’ from the entrance of the 
Great Pyramid, leading to the ‘‘ Pit’’ or ‘ Subterranean 
Chamber,’’ represents the course of the world in general 
(under the prince of this world), into the great time of 
trouble (the ‘ Pit’’), in which evil shall be brought to an 


342 Thy Kingdom Come. 


end. ‘The measuring of this period and determining when 
the pit of trouble shall be reached are easy enough if we 
have a definite date—a point in the Pyramid from which to 
start. We have this date—mark in the junction of the ‘‘ First 
Ascending Passage’’ with the “Grand Gallery.’’ That 
point marks the birth of our Lord Jesus, as the ‘‘ Well,”’ 
33 inches farther on, indicates his death. So, then, if we 
measure backward down the ‘ First Ascending Passage ”’ 
to its junction with the ‘‘ Entrance Passage,’’ we shall have 
a fixed date to mark upon the downward passage. This 
measure is 1542 inches, and indicates the year B. c. 1542, 
as the date at that point. Then measuring down the ‘‘ En- 
trance Passage’’ from that point, to find the distance to the 
entrance of the ‘ Pit,’’ representing the great trouble and 
destruction with which this age is to close, when evil will 
be overthrown from power, we find it to be 3416 inches, 
symbolizing 3416 years from the above date, B. Cc. 1542. 
This calculation shows a. D. 1874 as marking the beginning 
of the period of trouble ; for 15 42 years B. C. plus 1874 years 
A. D. equals 3416 years. Thus the Pyramid witnesses that the 
close of 1874 was the chronological beginning of the time 
of trouble such as was not since there was a nation—no, nor 
ever shall be afterward. And thns it will be noted that this 
‘Witness ’’ fully corroborates the Bible testimony on this 
subject, as shown by the ‘‘ Parallel Dispensatidns ’’ in MiL- 
LENNIAL Dawn, VOL. 11., Chap. vii. 

Nor should any doubt the fact that the forty years of 
judgment and trouble began in the fall of 1874 because the 
trouble has not yet reached an unendurable stage; and be- 
cause, in some respects, the period since that date has been 
one of great advancement in knowledge. Remember that 
all this is shown in the Great Pyramid and illustrated in the 
diagram of the “ Pit’? which was draughted by Prof. Smyth 
without any reference to this application. 


The Great Pyramid. 343 


Besides, we should remember that the Word of the Lord 
clearly shows that the judgments of this time of trouble will 
begin with the nominal Church, preparatory to its over- 
throw, and in the strife of selfishness between capital and 
labor, both of which are now organizing for the culminat- 
ing trouble. 

The shape and finish of this lowest room or ‘ Pit’’ are 
peculiarly significant. While the top and parts of the sides 
are regular, it has no floor—its rough, unfinished bottom 
dropping lower and lower to its eastern side, giving reason 
for the name, ‘‘ Bottomless Pit,’’ sometimes applied to it. 
This room speaks of liberty and freedom as well as of trouble, 
of elevation as well as of degradation ; for, as the traveler 
reaches it, cramped and weary from the crouched position 
enforced by the smallness of the ‘‘ Entrance Passage,’’ he 
here finds not only a step downward into greater depths, 
and upon ‘‘a troublesome floor,’’ very uneven and broken, 
but he finds a great e/evation also, part of this room being 
much more lofty than the passage—way to it, which is sug- 
gestive of greatly enlarged room for his mental organism. 

How true this is to facts, too. It is mainly since 1874 
that the spirit of liberty has reached the masses of civilized 
nations. We do not pause here to consider the consisten- 
cies and inconsistencies of the liberties being felt and claimed 
by the masses, though this, too, is indicated in this room 
by the e/evation of the top and the depression of the bottom: 
we merely note the fact that the light of our day—the Day 
of the Lord—induces the spirit of liberty ; and the spirit 
of liberty, coming in contact with the pride, wealth and 
power of those still in control, will be the cause of the 
trouble which the Seriptures assure us will eventually be 
very great. Though as yet it has scarcely begun, kings and 
emperors and statesmen and capitalists, and all men, see it 
coming, and ‘‘ men’s hearts are failing them for fear, and 


344 Thy Kingdom Come. 


for looking after the things coming ;’’ for the powers of 
the heavens are being shaken, and shall ultimately be re- 
moved. The evil systems—civil, social and religious—of 
‘‘the present evil world’’ will there sink into oblivion, 
into destruction, which the subterranean chamber or ‘‘ Pit ’’ 
also symbolizes. For we regard the ‘‘ Pit’’ as not only 
a symbol of the overwhelming trouble which will involve 
the present order of things in an overthrow and destruction 
(because of their inconsistency with the better order of 
things to be established under God’s Kingdom), but also as 
a symbol of the certain end of every being who continues 
to pursue the downward course, and who, under the full 
enlightenment of the Millennial age, will refuse to break 
off his sins and pursue righteousness. 

Notice another item in this connection: The ‘* Entrance 
Passage ’’ has a regular slope downward until it nears the 
“Pit”? when it ceases to slope and runs horizontally. 
Measuring backward from the entrance of the subterranean 
chamber or ‘‘ Pit’’ to the juncture of the horizontal with 
the angling portion of the passage, we find the distance to 
he 324 inches; consequently, the beginning of the level 
portion of the passage marks a date 324 years before 1874, 
viz., the year 1550. This would seem to say that at that 
- date (A. D. 1550) something transpired which had a great 
influence upon the course of civilization, and which in some 
measure arrested its downward tendency. What transpired 
at that time? What great movement, marked by that date, 
has had such an influence? 

We answer, the Reformation Movement is thus marked 
—the great protest against the errors and corruption of the 
Church of Rome, whose power and influence in the pre- 
ceding centuries had so baneful an effect that they are now 
known in history as ‘‘ the dark ages.’? This date, A. D. 1550, 
marks no one particular event of the Reformation Move- 


The Great Pyramid. - 345 


ment; nor should it. ‘To have marked any one event 
would seem to have attached too much importance to that 
event. The fact is, the Reformation was not one act, but 
many acts: not by one reformer or class of reformers, but 
by many reformers and many reforms; and though none 
were complete, all helped to arrest the corruption and down- 
ward course of the world. And _note also that this ‘ Wit- 
ness’’ points out an even, and not an odd, date or partic- 
ular year, just as we would do. If any one should ask the 
date of the Protestant Reformation, we would not say 1539 
nor 1567, but would describe it exactly as the Pyramid has 
indicated: we would say, About 1550 marks the Reforma- 
tion Movement, and especially the time its influence began 
to be felt in the world. Who, at the time of the building 
of the Pyramid, knew of that movement and its influence? 
The same great Being whose foreknowledge had expressed 
the same thought in words to the prophet Daniel (11:34), 
saying: ‘When they shall fall [or in the-midst of their 
falling], they shall be holpen with a little help.’’? That help 
was the influence of the Reformation upon the world, which 
prevented the utter extermination of the truth by the then 
flourishing harlot, “drunken with the blood of the saints, 
and with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus.’’—Rev. 17:6. 


But while the above measurements were giving their har- 
monious testimonies, another measurement seemed quite 
out of harmony with the Bible account; viz., that of the 
“First Ascending Passage,’’ which presumably represented 
the period from the time of Israel’s exodus from Egypt to 
the birth of our Lord Jesus.** ‘The Bible account of the 
time, as already given,t we cou/d net doubt, having demon- 


* This period is not the same as that which, in Vor. 11., Chap. vii., we 
have denominated and described as the Jewish age. ‘The latter began 
198 years before the Exodus, at the death of Jacob, and did not end 
until the Lord, whom they rejected, left their house desolate, five days 
before his crucifixion. 


¢ VOL. II., pages 230-232. 


346 Thy Kingdom Come. 


strated its correctness in so many ways. It showed the 
time from the exodus from Egypt to the year A. D. 1 to be 
exactly 1614 years, while the floor-line of the ‘‘ First As- 
cending Passage ’’ measures only 1542 inches. Then, again, 
we knew beyond a doubt, from the words of our Lord and 
the prophets, that the Law age, and the ‘‘ favor’’ to Israel 
after the flesh, did not cease at the birth of Jesus, but three 
and a half years after his death, at the close of their seventy 
weeks of favor, A. D. 36.* This would make the period 
from the exodus to the full end of their favor (1614 plus 36) 
equal 1650 years. And though, in a sense, the grandeur 
and blessing of the new dispensation began at the birth of 
Jesus (Luke 2: 10-14, 25-38), yet the Great Pyramid should, 
in some way, indicate the full length of Israel’s favor. This’ 
we finally found to be most ingeniously shown. The granite 
«« Plug ’’ proved to be the exact length to fill out this period 
to the very limit. Then we knew why that ‘‘ Plug’’ was so 
securely fixed that none had succeeded in displacing it. 
The great Master-Builder had placed it there to stay, that 
we might hear its testimony. to-day corroborating the Bible, 
as to both its plan and its chronology. 

In measuring this passage with its ‘* Plug,’’ we should 
consider it as though it were a telescope, with the “ Plug ’”’ 
drawn out until the upper end reaches the place originally 
marked by the lower end of it. The distance downward 
from the north entrance of the ‘‘Grand Gallery ’’ to the 
lower end of the granite ‘‘ Plug’’ is 1470 inches, to which 
if we add the length of the ‘ Plug,’’ 179 inches, we have 
a total of 1649 inches, representing 1649 years; and the 
one inch-year of difference between this and the 1650 years 
shown by the Bible chronology of that period is easily ac- 
counted for when we remember that one end of this granite 
‘* Plug’’ had been considerably chipped by those who en- 


’ 


* See VOL. 11., Chap. vii. 


The Great Pyramid. 347 


deavored to force it from its fixed position in the passage—way. 

Thus, exactly, does the stone ‘‘Witness’’ corroborate 
the testimony of the Bible, and show that the period from 
the exodus of Israel from Egypt until the full end of their 
national favor,* a. D. 36, was 1650 years. But let none 
confound this period with the period shown in the Parallels 
of the Jewish and Christian dispensations—showing the two 
ages to be each 1845 years in length, the one from the death 
of Jacob to a. D. 33, and the other from A. D. 33 toa -D. 1878. 

’ And not only was this an ingenious way of hiding and 
yet furnishing the length of the period from the exodus to 
the birth of our Lord (to be, in due time, a corroboration 
of the Bible testimony), but the careful reader will readily 
see that it could have been done only in some such way, 

‘for two reasons: First, because the Jewish dispensation and 
favor not only began at the death of Jacob, before the ex- 
odus from Egypt, but also ran into and parallel to the 

Christian dispensation for the thirty-three years of our Lord 
Jesus’ earthly life; and, second, because to have made the 
‘« First Ascending Passage ’’ long enongh to represent fully 
the Jewish age in year~inches would have necessitated the 
making of the Pyramid still larger, which in turn would 
have destroyed its scientific features and lessons. 

Let us now examine the ‘‘ Grand Gallery,’’ at the end of 
the ‘‘ First Ascending Passage,’’ noting also its symbolic 
testimony. It is seven times as high as the ‘ First Ascend- 
ing Passage.’’ It has seven courses of overlapping stones in 
‘its walls, of smooth, highly polished and once beautiful, 
cream—colored limestone. It is twenty-eight feet high, 
though very narrow, being only six feet broad anywhere, 
but contraéted to three feet at the floor and less at the roof. 
Prof. Greaves, an Oxford professor of the fifteenth century, 
describing it, wrote: 


* See VoL. 11., Chap. iii. 


348 Thy Kingdom Come. 


“It is a very stately piece of work, and not inferior, 
either in respect of the curiosity of art or richness of mate- 
rials, to the most sumptuous and magnificent buildings. . . . 
This gallery, or corridor, or whatsoever else I may call 
it, is built of white and polished marble (limestone), the 
which is very evenly cut in spacious squares or tables. 
Of such materials as is the pavement, such is the roof, and 
such are the side walls that flank it; the knitting of the 
joints is so close that they are scarce discernible to a curious 
eye; and that which adds grace to the whole structure, 
though it makes the passage the more slippery and difficult, 
is the acclivity and rising of the ascent. . . . In the cast- 
ing and ranging of the marbles (limestone) in both the 
side walls, there is one piece of archite€ture, in my judg- 
ment, very graceful, and that is that all the courses or ranges, 
which are but seven (so great are these stones), do set and 
flag over one another about three inches ; the bottom of the 
uppermost course overflagging the top of the next, and so 
in order the rest as they descend.’’ 

And Prof. Smyth declares that it would be impossible 
fairly to represent it by pictures, saying :— 

“¢ The circumstances are above the scope of orthodox pic- 
tures by reason of the narrow breadth, the lofty, vaulting 
height, and the very peculiar sloping angle of the long floor ; 
a floor, when one looks from its north end southward, as- 
cending and ascending through the darkness, apparently for- 
ever; and with such steepness that no artist’s view of it, 
painted on a vertical plane, could ever hope to represent 
more than a small part of that floor, rising upward through 
the whole canvas and going out at the top. While, on look- 
ing northward from the south end of the Gallery, you lose 
the floor instantly, and see on the level of your eyes, in the 
distance, part of the steeply descending ceiling. Other- 
wise, it is the solemn overlappings of the high, dark walls, 
passing you by on either side; but all on an uneasy slant, 
speaking of toil in one direction, danger in another, and a 
mountain of strength everywhere.’’ 


What a wonderful illustration is given in this ‘‘ Grand 
Gallery ’’ of the course of the ¢-we Christian Church and of 
the path of the little flock of overcomers during the long 


The Great Pyramid. 349 


period of the Gospel age. Its once beautiful, cream—white 
walls and ceiling, formed of regular overlapping stones, all 
sloping upward, give not the history of the nominal Church, 
as some have supposed—else they would be far from regular 
and upward—but they tell of God’s great favor bestowed 
during the Gospel age, the ‘‘ high-calling ’’ to certain lib- 
erties and privileges, offered conditionally to all the justified 
during the Gospel age, opened up by the Well—the ransom. 

The lofty height of this ‘“‘ Grand Gallery ’’~-seven times 
the height of the passage representing the Jewish dispensa- 
tion (seven being a symbol of completeness or fulness)— 
represents that fulness of blessing contained in the Abra- 
hamic promise, which is actually set before the Gospel 
Church. The ‘‘ King’s Chamber,”’ at the end of the ‘Grand 
Gallery,’’ represents the end of the race to which the 
present high calling leads all the faithful; and this ‘‘ King’s 
Chamber,’’ as we shall shortly see, is a most apt symbol of 
the ultimate destiny of the Church. By-the ‘ Well”’ (which 
represents the ransom), at the very entrance of this Gallery, 
and which all must recognize who enter upon this way, our 
justification is beautifully symbolized. Thus the Great 
Pyramid tells us, ‘¢ There is therefore now no condemnation 
to them that are in Christ Jesus.”’ 

The apparently interminable length of the ‘‘ Grand Gal- 
lery’’ shows how long the Gospel age has appeared to in- 
dividual members of the Church, while its narrowness well 
represents the ‘* narrow way to life ;’’ and its steepness, the 
difficulty with which the way is pursued, and the continual 
danger of backsliding to those who. fail to watch vigilantly 
their steps. Yet, within the confines of these walls of di- 
vine favor is the safety and security of all those who con- 
tinue in well-doing, who continue to grow in grace, to 
ascend the difficult way, to “‘ walk not after the flesh, but 
after the spirit.’’ 


350 Thy Kingdom Come. 


+ 


Looking upward along the ‘‘Grand Gallery,’’ we see 
that st Aas an end as well as a beginning. Thus we are 
told that the exceeding great and precious privileges ex- 
tended during this Gospel age will some time cease—the 
wonderful high-calling to joint-heirship with Christ, as his 
‘‘ bride,’’ will terminate when a sufficient number to com- 
plete the ‘little flock ’’ shall have accepted the call. That 
which this stone ‘‘ Witness’ thus points out in illustration, 
the written Word makes very plain, showing, as we have 
seen, that the privilege of running for the great prize of the 
‘high calling ’’ belongs exclusively to the Gospel age. It was 
never granted to any before—our Captain, Jesus, being the first 
to whom it was offered, the first to accept its conditions of 
sacrifice and the first to enter into its rewards. The south 
end of the ‘‘ Grand Gallery ’’ as positively marks the end 
or limit of the call to, the divine nature as the north end of 
it marks the beginning of the offer of that great favor. 

But since the ‘‘Grand Gallery’ represents our ‘high 
calling ’’ of God, let us look beyond and note what this 
call leads to in the case of each individual. We have already 
seen in the Scriptures that we are called to suffer with Christ, 
to become dead with him, and afterward #0 enter into his 
glory. And all this we find strikingly symbolized in the pe- 
culiar manner by which entrance is gained to the ‘‘ King’s 
Chamber,”’ at the end of the ‘‘ Grand Gallery.’’ The way 
by which those who accept the ‘ high-calling ’’ may enter 
the heavenly glory, represented by the ‘‘ King’s Chamber,’’ 
is not direct. They must first be tested in all points and 
be found obedient to the will of God, else they cannot 
enter into the rest that remaineth. This, the Scriptural 
teaching, and the experience of all running for the great 
prize, is thus forcibly illustrated by the Great Pyramid. 
As the call leads to consecration and lessons of sacrifice, so 
the ‘Grand Gallery ’’ leads to certain low passages which 


The Great Pyramid. 351° 


symbolize these. Having arrived at its upper end, the trav- 
eler must stoop very. low at the door-way or passage which 
leads into the ‘‘ Ante-Chamber.’’ This stoop symbolizes 
the consecration or death of the human will, the beginning 
of the self-sacrifice, whereunto all are called who would at- 
tain to the divine nature. How much this self-sacrifice 
means is known only to those who have accepted the call, 
and who have actually surrendered the human will. 

This low passage, representing consecration, being passed, 
we are in what is known as the ‘‘ Ante-Chamber.’’ Here 
the floor ceases to be limestone: from this point onward 
the tread is to be on solid granite, which may be inter- 
preted as a xew standing, or a standing as ‘‘ new creatures.’’ 
But when placing foot upon the granite floor, to enter upon 
the new standing as new creatures, a huge obstruction of 
granite is noticed: it is known as the ‘‘ Granite Leaf.’’ 
This, like a drop—door, partly closes the way, leaving only 
a low passage like the one just passed, forty-four inches 
high, so that we must stoop again before we can enjoy fully 
the privileges represented in the ‘‘ Ante-Chamber’’ This 
‘*« Granite Leaf’’ represents the divine will, and seems to say 
to one who has just passed the low passage representing tne 
surrender of his own will, ‘‘ It is not enough that you should 
sacrifice your will, plans and arrangements; you might do 
all that, and then take up the will and plan of another ; 
you must not only sacrifice your own will, but you must 
bow to the divine will, and accept it instead of your own, 
and become active in God’s service, before you can be 
counted a new creature and an heir of the divine nature.’’ 

The ‘‘ Granite Leaf’’ passed, we stand unhampered upon 
the granite floor in the ‘‘ Ante-Chamber.”’ (See illustration.) 
This is a peculiar room: its walls are different from each 
other; it seems to have a kind of wainscoating on parts ; 
and in some of its walls grooves are cut. It certainly seems 


352 Thy Kingdom Come. 


to be full of lessons not vet fully deciphered. However, 
the suggestion of those who have visited it, that it resem- 
bles a school-room, seems in perfect harmony with what we 
should expect as representing the experiences of those sanc- 
tified ones begotten of the Truth. ‘This ¢¢ Ante-Chamber ”’ 
symbolizes the school of Christ, and the discipline—the 
trials of faith, patience, endurance, etc.—to which all are 
subjected who have made a full consecration of themselves 
to the will of God; which affords them opportunities for 
overcoming, and for proving their worthiness of a-place, as 
overcomers, with Christ in his coming reign of glory. If 
we be without such lessons and trials, we are not sos and 
heirs on this divine plane. (Heb. 12:8.) It is in the present 
life, after our consecration to his service, that God schools 
and disciplines us, and thereby not: only tests our fidelity 
to him, according to our covenant, but also prepares us to 
sympathize with others in trial and trouble, over whom he 
wills shortly to make us rulers and judges.—1 Cor. 6:2, 3. 

And not only the death of the will, but also actual death, 
must be passed before we enter fully and a¢é2uadly the con- 
ditions of our ‘‘ new,’’ ‘‘ divine nature.’’ And this, too, is 
shown by the stone ‘‘ Witness ;’’ for at the farther end of 
the «« Ante-Chamber”’ is a very low passage through which 
entrance to the ‘‘ King’s Chamber’’ is gained. Thus the 
“‘ King’s Chamber,’’ the grandest and highest room of 
the Pyramid, becomes the symbol of the perfection of the 
divine nature to be gained by the ‘little flock,’’ the few 
overcomers chosen out of the ‘‘ many called’’ (whose cad/- 
ing is symbolized by the ‘‘Grand Gallery’’), who pass 
through self-sacrifice and trial (symbolized by the ‘‘ Ante— 
Chamber,’’ and the low passages into and from it). The 
call to the ‘divine nature ’’ came first to our Lord Jesus, 
whose mission to earth was for a two-fold purpose: (1) to 
save sinners by paying the ransom price for Adam, and all 


WORTH WALL SOUTH WALL 


SOUTH WALL 


NORT 


SIDES OF ANTE-CHAMBER, 
OPENED OUT OM PLaRE OF LAST WALL, 


Lume stone blocks marked i: others are Granite, 


ae Sectional parts, 
$17. 20 Si Nga Lume stone 
Seis sang Granite, 


Scale of British Inches 
50 ° 


Digitized by Google 


The Great Pyramid. 355 


in him, and (2) that by that obedience unto death he might 
be’ proved worthy of the divine nature and glory. Hence 
it is that the ‘‘ Grand Gallery’ is shown as commencing 
at our Lord’s birth. It does not, therefore, symbolize the 
Gospel age, for that did not commence until Jesus had made 
an end of the Law age by his sacrifice on the cross, thirty- 
three years after his birth; but it does symbolize the high 
or heavenly cad/ing (through sacrifice) to the divine nature 
—the “‘ King’s Chamber.’’ Our Lord Jesus was thus called 
from the moment of his birth ; and, since Pentecost, all justi- 
fied believers are called to the same high privilege, however 
few accept the call to sacrifice, and however few make their 
calling and election sure by hearty compliance with the con- 
ditions—walking in the Master’s footsteps. And the length 
of time during which this ‘high-calling’’ to the divine 
nature lasts, and when it ceases, is what is indicated by this 
‘Grand Gallery’s’’ lengthand termination,as already shown. 

The King’s Chamber,’’ which can be reached only by way 
of the “Grand Gallery’’ and the ‘‘ Ante~Chamber,’’ is in 
every way the highest and noblest apartment in the Great 
Pyramid, and fitly symbolizes the divine nature. Mr. 
“Henry F. Gordon, describing it, says :— 

“Tt isa very noble apartment, 34 feet long, 17 feet broad, 
and 1g feet high, of polished red granite throughout; walls, 
floor and ceiling in blocks squared, true, and joined together 
with such exquisite skill that no autocrat emperor of mod- 
ern times could desire anything more solidly noble and re- 
fined. The only thing this chamber contains is an empty 
[granite] coffer [or stone box] without a lid ; and it is worthy 
of notice that this coffer corresponds with the sacred ark of 
the Mosaic Tabernacle in capacity.”’ 

In the Great Pyramid granite is used to symbolize divine 
things or the divine nature, just as gold symbolized it in 
Israel’s typical Tabernacle and Temple: the low passages 
leading into the ‘‘ Ante-Chamber”’ and into the ‘‘ King’s 
Chamber ’’ correspond to the vails before the Holy and the 
Most Holy; and the granite coffer, the only furniture in the 
“ King’s Chamber,’’ corresponds to the Ark of the Covenant, 
which was the only furniture in the Most Holy of the Tab- 
ernacle and the Temple. What in the one was gold, in the 
ether is granite, and of the same symbolic significance, 


356 Thy Kingdom Come. 


Nor is this all: we find that the same great truths which 
were symbolically represented in the two apartments of the 
Tabernacle and the Temple, the Holy and the Most Holy, 
and their separating vails, are exactly matched in the Great 
Pyramid by the teachings of the two apartments, the ‘‘ Ante- 
Chamber ’’ and the ‘* King’s Chamber,”’ and their low sep- 
arating passages. The ‘‘ Ante-Chamber,”’ like the Holy of 
the ‘Tabernacle, represents that condition of relationship 
to God, as a reckoned new creature, and joint-heir with 
Christ of the divine nature and glory, which the de/ever 
enters when, after accepting forgiveness of sins and recon- 
ciliation with God through the ransom, he presents his just- 
ified self a Living sacrifice to God’s service. As the first vail 
of the Tabernacle represented the consecration or resigna- 
tion or death of our own will, and the full submission toGod’s 
will, so the low entrance to the ‘‘ Ante-Chamber ’’ symbol- 
izes this same great event, which begins the newness of life 
in all who will ever be members of the royal priesthood. 

This test, representing the laying of our all upon the altar, 
having been passed, the believer is no longer reckoned as a 
human being, but as a ‘‘ new creature,’’ a ‘‘ partaker of the 
divine nature.’’ Though, as a matter of fact, he will not be 
made an actual sharer of the divine nature until he shall 
have faithfully learned the lesson of obedience to the divine 
will, in the a¢tual experiences and daily sacrifices and school- 
ings of the present life (represented in the “‘ Ante-Cham- 
ber’’ walls, of peculiar construction, and in the Table of 
Shew~bread, the Golden Candlestick and the Incense Altar 
in the Holy of the Tabernacle); and not until he shall 
have passed through death itself (represented by the second 
vail of the Tabernacle and by the second low passage lead- 
ing into the ‘‘ King’s Chamber’’ of the Pyramid); and 
until, by a share in the First Resurrection, he shall have 
entered with Christ into the fulness of the promised divine 
nature and glory—his everlasting portion, symbolized in the 
«« King’s Chamber.”’ 

Thus the Great Pyramid witnesses, not only the down- 
ward course of man in sin, but also the various steps in the 
divine plan by which preparation is made for his full re- 
covery from the fall, through the way of life, opened up by 
the death and resurrection of our Lord Jesus. 


Lhe Great Pyramid. 357 


It will be noticed from the illustration that the granite 
floor does not reach quite to the front of the ‘* Ante—Cham- 
ber,’’ while the granite of the ceiling reaches the full length 
of the room. This seems to teach a lesson in harmony with 
what we have already seen to bea feature of the divine plan, 
as it relates to those called—out ones who are seeking to 
enter upon the divine nature. The first low passage sym- 
bolizes the consecration of the believer’s human will, which 
really gives him entrance into the ‘“‘ Holy’’ or sanctified 
condition as a prospective heir of glory and immortality, 
represented in the ‘‘ Ante~Chamber,’’ whose granite ceiling 
now covers him; yet such a one is not to be considered as 
having entered fully into the new nature until ‘‘ quickened ’’ 
into activity and newness of life ; and this test is represented 
by the ‘‘ Granite Leaf,’’ which, from its peculiar position, 
hanging, as though ready to drop and thus block all further 
progress, seems to say, ‘‘ Pilgrim, even though you have 
come thus far and have consecrated yourself to God, unless 
you become quickened by the spirit of the truth to activity in 
his service, you will still have no real standing in the divine 
nature to which you have been called or invited.’’ The 
three steps by which the called ones of the Gospel age are 
to enter the glory of their Lord are thus marked in the 
Great Pyramid as well as in the Scriptures. They are (1) 
Consecration, or begetting of the spirit through the Word 
of truth, symbolized by the low passage into the ‘* Ante— 
Chamber ;’’ (2) Quickening to active service and sacrifice 
through sanctification of the spirit and belief of the truth, 
symbolized by the low passage under the ‘“‘ Granite Leaf; ’’ 
(3) Birth of the spirit into the perfect likeness of our Lord 
by a share in the First Resurrection, symbolized by the low 
passage—way into the ‘‘ King’s Chamber.”’ 


THE NATURAL AND SPIRITUAL NATURES SHOWN. 


By reference to the [lustration, page 333, it will be noticed 
that an imaginary line drawn through the vertical axis of 
the Great Pyramid would leave the ‘‘ Queen’s Chamber’’ 
and its ‘‘ Horizontal Passage,’’ the ‘‘ Entrance Passage,’’ 
the ‘‘ First Ascending Passage ’’ and the ‘‘ Grand Gallery,’”’ 
all on the north side of that line or axis, and only the “ Ante-- 
Chamber ’’ and the ‘‘ King’s Chamber ’’ on the south side 


358 Thy Kingdom Come. 


ofit. By this arrangement the designer of the Great Pyramid 
(Jehovah) points out to us the distinction of natures, as 
noted in VoL. 1., Chap. x. 

The ‘ Queen’s Chamber,’’ representing the perfection of 
humanity after the Millennial age shall have restored all the 
obedient and worthy ones to the moral likeness of the Crea- 
tor, teaches, by the fat that its back or farthest wall is on 
a line with the Pyramid’s axis, that, thus restored to God’s 
image and likeness, though stil! human, mankind will be 
close to the divine nature—as close as one nature could be 
to another nature of which it is a likeness. And all the up- 
ward passages leading in the direétion of that axis teach that 
the desires and efforts of God’s people are all to be toward 
human perfeétion, while those of the called-out Church of 
the Gospel age are to go beyond human perfection. They, 
as joint-heirs with Christ, are to enter into the fulness of 
the divine nature. 

The fa&t that the ‘“‘ Subterranean Chamber ”’ or “ Pit,’’ 
representing trouble and death, does not lie wholly on the 
same side of the vertical axis as the ‘‘ Queen’s Chamber ’’ 
and its passage does not militate against this interpretation ; 
for, stri@tly speaking, it is no part of the Pyramid structure 
at all. It lies under the Pyramid, far below its basal line. 
But it may have another lesson to impart. A vertical line 
from its farthest wall would pass exactly along the farthest 
wall of the ‘‘ Ante-Chamber ;’’ and the lesson drawn might 
be, in harmony with the Scriptural warning, that #7 7s 
possible for some who have entered the ‘‘ Holy ’’ or san¢ti- 
fied condition (who have been begotten by the word of truth, 
and who have even been quickened by it) to commit the sin 
that is unto death—the second death. 

So, then, the relation of the location of the ‘‘ Pit’’ to the 
axis, if it have any significance in connection with the ar- 
rangement of the Pyramid adgve it, would seem to indicate 
that the second death—end/ess, hopeless destruction—will 
be the penalty, not only of the wilful sinfulness of men who, 
during the Millennial age of blessed opportunity, will re- 
fuse to go on to human perfection, but also of any of 
those sanctified during the Gospel Age, who wilfully reject 
Christ’s profferred and previously accepted robe of imputed 
righteousness. 


; 
VERTICAL Section (Looking West/or KINGS CHAMBER;a.s0 or 
*NTE-CHAM@ER, SOUTH ENO OF GRANO GALLERY, AND VYSE'S HOLLOWS OF 
CONSTRUCTION. ABOVE RING'S CHAMBER, CROSSED LINES INOICATE OMAMITE, 


Scale of British Inches 
ry 


Digitizer 


Digitized by Google 


The Great Pyramid. 361 


Another item worthy of note in connection with the ver- 
tical axis of the Great Pyramid’s structure above its basal 
line is this: our Lord’s first advent and his death, marked 
by. the ‘*Well’s’’ mouth, are on that side of the Pyramid’s 
axis which represents the human nature; and its location 
on the same Jeve/ as the passage leading to the ‘“‘ Queen’s 
Chamber,’’ which symbolizes human perfection, is also note- 
worthy. The Great Pyramid thus seems to say: ‘* He was 
made flesh ’’—the man Christ Jesus gave hiniself'a ransom for 
all; ” yet he knew no sin, was holy, harmless, separate 
from sinners, and had no part whatever in the downward, 
sinful course of Adam’s race (symbolized in the passage to 
the ‘‘ Pit’’). Moreover, the location of the ‘‘ Grotto ’’ and 
the fact that it was natural and not hewn are significant. It 
evidently symbolizes the death of our Lord Jesus. ‘he fact + 
that it was zafural teaches that the Lord’s sacrifice of him- 
self was not an expediency, but a fore—ordained, pre-ar- 
. ranged matter in Jehovah’s plan, before the outworking of 
the plan symbolized by the Pyramid began. ‘The fact that 
it is located above and not below the basal line of the Pyra- 
mid seems to teach another lesson in harmony with the Script- 
ures—that though our Lord died as a ransom for sinners, he 
did not descend into sin and degradation, but even in his 
death was within the limits and bounds of the divine plan, 
as symbolized in the Pyramid structure above the basal line. 

Now aquestion of great interest arises: Will the Pyramid’s 
testimony concerning the time of the close of the high—calling 
corroborate the testimony of the Scriptures on this subject ? 
-Will it show the end of the ‘‘ Grand Gallery ’’ at the exact 
time the Scriptures assure us that God’s call to this favor 
ceased? Or will it contradi€t what we have learned from 
the Scriptures, and show either a longer or a shorter period 
of calling to the divine nature ? 

This will be another “ crucial test,’’ not however a test 
of God’s Word and its wonderful testimony, which is para- 
mount to all others, but a test of this stone ‘‘ Witness. ’’ 
Will it further prove its divine architeture by confirming 
the Scripture testimony ? or will it show more or less of a 
discrepancy ? Should it corroborate the Bible account par- 
ticularly and minutely, it would indeed well merit the name 
given it by Dr. Seiss—‘‘ A Miracle in Stone.’’ 


362 Thy Kingdom Come. 


Well, we can say nothing less of it; for its testimony 
agrees fully and in every detail with the entire plan of God 
as we have learned that plan from the Scriptures. Its won- 
derful correspondencies with the Bible leave no room for 
doubt that the same divine inspirer of the prophets and 
apostles inspired this ‘‘Witness’’ also. Let us examine 
some of these harmonies particularly. 

Call to mind that the Scriptures showed us that the full 
end of Gentile power in the world, and of the time of trouble 
which brings its overthrow, will be in the end of a. D. 1914, 
and that some time before that date the last members of the 
Church of Christ will have been ‘‘changed,’’ glorified. 
Remember, too, that the Scriptures proved to us in various 
ways—by the Jubilee Cycles, the 1335 days of Daniel, the 
Parallel Dispensations, etc.—that the ‘‘ harvest ’’ or end of 
this age was due to begin in October, 1874, and that the 
Great Reaper was then due to be present; that seven years 
later—in October, 1881—the “‘ high calling’’ ceased, though 
some will be admitted to the same favors afterward, without 
a general call being made, to fill the places of some of the 
called ones who, on being tested, will be found unworthy. 
Then look at the manner in which the stone ‘‘ Witness ’’ 
testifies to those same dates and illustrates the very same 
lessons. ‘Thus :— ‘ 

The floor line of the ‘‘ Grand Gallery,’’ from the north 
to the south wall, has been twice very carefully measured in 
recent years, and three distinct sets of measures have been 
obtained. One measure (4) is from the wall at the north 
end, measured to the ‘‘ Step’’ and then—omitting its riser or 
front—along its upper surface, the walking surface of the 
‘*Grand Gallery’s’’ floor ; another measure (4) shows the 
length measured through the ‘“Step,”’ as though the ‘‘ Step ’”’ 
were not there ; another measure (¢) gives the entire surface 
of the floor and up the front or riser of the ‘‘ Step”’ and along 
its top surface. Prof. Smyth found the first of these measures 
(a) to be 1874 Pyramid inches, the second (4), 1881 Pyra- 
mid inches, and the third (¢), 1910 Pyramid inches ; while 
Mr. Flinders Petrie reports these measures eight-tenths of 
an inch longer. A reasonable estimate, therefore, and un- 
doubtedly very nearly a correct one, would be to call these 
figures (a) 1875, (4) 1882 and (¢) 1911 Pyramid inches. 


The Great Pyramid. 363 


Now we inquire, If the inches of the floor-lines of these 
passages represent a year, each, as claimed and admitted 
by Pyramid students, what date would these measures of the 
“«Grand Gallery ’’ indicate as the end of the high calling 
to the divine nature, which the ‘‘ Grand Gallery ’’ symbo- 
lizes? We answer, that in applying these inch-years to our 
present reckoning of time, we must remember that our date 
A. D. is one year and three months behind the actual date, 
as shown in VOL. U., pages 54-62. And while this would 
make no difference in calculating a period from a fixed date 
B. C., or from a fixed date a. D., it should be recognized 
in this case. Where the same event, the birth of Jesus, is 
the starting point, the error in our date a. bv. must be 
allowed for, to reach correét results. For simplicity we will 
take our erroneous A. D. as the standard, and will scale down 
the Pyramid figures to correspond, by deducting one and 
one-fourth inches from them, so that they will correspond 
with our common reckoning. Thus reduced, they would 
show (a) 1875 less 1% equal 187334 ; (4) 1882 less 114 
equal 188034 ; and (c) rg11 less 1144 equal 190934, and give 
the dates (4) O@ober, 1874, (6) October, 1881 and (¢) 
Otober, 1910, A. D. 

This threefold ending is in full accord with what we have 
found taught in the Scriptures: that the ‘‘ harvest, the end 
of the age,’’ was reached in October, 1874, and that the 
‘‘call’’ proper ended in Oétober, 1881, while a period would 
follow during which, though the genera? call had ceased, 
the same privileges would be extended to some worthy ones, 
in order to supply the places of some already among the 
called who, under trial, will be found unworthy of the 
crowns allotted to them when they accepted the call. How 
long this sifting of the consecrated will last, during which 
some will be granted the crowns of those adjudged unworthy, 
and their names written zstead of some whose names will 
be blotted out (Rev. 3:5, 11), the Scriptures do not, so far 
as we have yet seen, indicate; but this date, 1g1o, indi- 
cated by the Pyramid, seems to harmonize well with the 
dates furnished by the Bible. It is but four years before 
the full close of the time of trouble which ends the Gentile 
times ; and when we remember the Lord’s words—that the 
overcomers shall be accounted worthy to escape the severest 


364 Thy Kingdom Come. 


of the trouble coming upon the world, we may well accept 
as correct the testimony of the Great Pyramid, that the last 
members of the ‘‘ budy’”’ or ‘‘ bride’’ of Christ will have 
been tested and accepted and will have passed beyond the 
vail before the close of A. D. 1910. 

Is not this a most remarkable agreement between this 
stone ‘‘ Witness ’’ and the Bible ? The dates, October, 1874, 
and October, 1881, are exact, while the date 1910, though 
not furnished in the Scriptures, seems more than a reason- 
able one. Though the Bible gives us no exact date for the 
end of this trial of the Church, it does give us, as we have 
seen, a date limit previous to which it must certainly be 
concluded. And in this conneétion let us remember that 
this date limit—a. D. 1914—must not only witness the com- 
pletion of the selection and trial and glorification of the 
entire body of Christ, but it must also witness the purifying 
of that larger company of consecrated believers who, through 
fear and faint—heartedness, failed to render acceptable sac- 
rifices to God, and who therefore became more or less con- 
taminated with the world’s ideas and ways. These, before 
the end of this period, must come up out of the great trib- 
ulation. (Rev. 7:14.) Many such are now being closely 
bound in with the various bundles of tares for the burning ; 
and not until the fiery trouble of the latter end of the har- 
vest period shall burn the binding cords of Babylon’s bond- 
age shall these be able to make their escape—‘‘ saved so as 
by fire.’ They must see the utter wreck of Great Babylon 
and receive some measure of her plagues. (Rev. 18:4.) 
The four years from 1910 to the end of 1914, indicated 
thus in the Great Pyramid, will be quite sufficient for the 
extreme of all that trouble; for when it reaches its terrible 
climax it cannot last long ; and ‘‘ Except those days should 
be shortened there should no flesh be saved.’’—-Matt. 24:22. 

Nor is this all of the wonderful symbolism of the Great 
Pyramid. Its marvelous harmony with the divine plan is 
still further shown in another remarkable feature. We 
should expect that the date of the two great events con- 
nected with the close of this age; viz., (1) our Lord’s sec- 
ond advent and (2) the beginning of the harvest, would in 
some manner be marked at the upper end of the ‘‘ Grand 
Gallery,’’ even as his death and resurrection are marked 


The Great Pyramid. 365 


by the ‘‘Well’’ at its lower end. And in this we are not 
disappointed. In the upper or south end of the east wall, 
at its top, high above the step, there is an opening connect- 
ing with the unfinished space above the ‘‘ King’s Chamber,”’ 
as shown on the diagram. In the Pyramid’s symbolic lan- 
guage that opening says, ‘‘ Here a heavenly One entered— 
One who needs no floors to walk upon, but who can come 
and go lixe the wind.’’ And Prof. Smyth’s careful measure- 
ments of this south wall of the «Grand Gallery ”’ inform us 
that it is not exactly perpendicular, but leans over at the 
top seven inches. ‘Yhe Pyramid thus says to us, ‘‘ Seven 
years before the close of the high—calling [before October, 
18814] the great One from the heavens will enter.’’ And it 
further indicates that from that time—Od¢tober, 1874—grad- 
ually, as indicated by the sloping of the south wall, the call 
would be drawn to a close and fully end in O¢tober, 1881. 
This, it will be noticed, is in exact accord with the Bible’s 
testimony as outlined in this and preceding volumes of 
MILLENNIAL Dawn. ; 

And let it be remembered, too, that we who understood 
the Scriptural presentation of these times and seasons had 
nothing to do with the taking of these measurements of the 
Great Pyramid ; and that they who took the meqsurements 
knew nothing of our application of the prophecy at the 
time the measurements were taken, nor do they yet, so far 
as we know. We ask, therefore, Could such exaétness in 
matters which concern six thousand years of history on the 
one hand, and thousands of inches of Pyramid measurements 
on the other, be a mere accidental coincidence? Nay ; 
but verily truth is stranger and more wonderful than fiction. 
“This is the Lord’s doing ; it is marvelous in our eyes.’’ 

Further, where the special favor of the general Gospel 
call ceased (October, 1§81), the blessing upon the world 
would seem to be due to have a beginning. The ‘‘ Well,’’ 
which marks at its upper end the ransom which secures the 
coming blessing, should, it would seem, at its lower end 
(where it connects with the downward passage) mark the 
date when restitution blessings would begin to reach the 
world. It seems to say, Here the benefits of the ransom will 
begin to bless all the families of the earth, when the elections 
or selections of the Jewish and Gospel ages are completed. 


366 Thy Kingdom Come. 


Now if we adopt the clearly marked close of the special 
call and favor of the Gospel age, 1881, as the date at which 
the call to restitution blessings was due to have a begin- 
ning, and if we regard the lower terminus of the ‘‘ Well’’ 
as marking that date (1881), we find something of interest 
by measuring back along that ‘‘ Entrance Passage ’’ to the 
original entrance of the Pyramid. This distance we find 
to be 3826 pyramid inches, thus representing 3826 years. 
And if our supposition be well founded, 3826 years before 
A. D. 1881 some notable event must have occurred. And as 
we search the historic records of God’s Word to see if any 
notable event occurred at that time, we find a remarkable 
confirmation of our supposition ; for, just 3826 years Defore 
A. D. 1881, which would be B. c. 1945, Isaac, the typical 
seed of promise, became the heir of all his father Abraham’s 
wealth, and was thus in position to bless all his brethren— 
Ishmael, the son of Hagar (type of fleshly Israel), and the 
many sons and daughters of Keturah, Abraham’s second 
wife (typical of the world in general). 

Thus the ‘‘ Entrange Passage,’’ from the outside edge 
down to the nearest edge of the passage comecting with 
the ‘‘ Well,’’ marks in year-inches the period of time from 
the day tke typical Isaac (in whom typically centered the 
promise of blessing to the world) became heir of all, B. c. - 
1945, to A. D. 1881, when the blessing was actually due to 
the world through the antitypical Isaac—the Christ, the 
heir of all things. —Gal. 3:16, 29. 

We measure the time from the date of Isaac’s inheritance, 
and consequent privilege of blessing his brethren, to the 
year A. D. 1881, thus: Isaac came into possession of his in- 
heritance at the death of his father Abraham, which occured 
Ioo years after the Abrahamic Covenant was made (for 
Abraham was 75 years old when the Covenant was made, 
and he died at the age of 175 years). Then from the Cov- 
enant to the death of Jacob, Isaac’s son, was 232 years ;* 
and from the time that Isaac came into his inheritance— 
1oo years after the Covenant was made—to the death of 
Jacob would be 132 years (232 years less 100 years). To 
this we add the 1813 years from the death of Jacob to our 
Anno Domini, and we have the date 1945 B. c., the date 


* See VOL. 11.) pages 231, 232, 


The Great Pyramid. 367 


when the typical Isaac came into possession of all that 
Abraham had. (Gen. 25:5.) And this 1945 years B. c. 
added to the 1881 years a. D. makes the 3826 years indi- 
cated in the Pyramid inches as the length of time that must 
elapse between the typical blessing of his brethren by the 
typical seed Isaac and the blessing of the whole World 
through the antitypical Isaac, the Christ. 

Does the question arise with any, What beginning of res- 
titution work was marked by October, 1881? We answer, 
Nothing occurred which the world could discern. We still 
walk by faith and not by sight. All the preparatory steps 
toward the great restitution work since the date 1881 are to 
he reckoned as droppings of the great shower of bless- 
ing which shall ere long refresh the whole earth. That 
which occurred in 1881, like that which occurred in 1874, 
can be discerned only by the eye of faith in the light of 
God’s Word. It was the date of the close of the high—call- 
ing, and hence the date for the beginning of the restitution 
call to mankind in general. About that date the author, 
and, so far as he knows, no one else, had noticed the dis- 
tinétion between the call to the divine nature, open during 
the Gospel age, and the call to restitution of Auman pertec- 
tion and all that was lost in Adami, due at the close of the 
Gospel high-calling.* : 

Another point to be noticed is, the pathway upon which 


* Although we Lad not thought of the coincidence until now, while 
writing this chapter, it is not a little remarkable that it was during the 
last six months of the year 1881 that Foop FOR THINKING CHRIs- 
TIANS, a book of 166 pages, was issued, and circulated to the extent 
of one million four hundred thousand copies throughout the United 
States and Great Britain. 

Three items connected with that book and its wide and sudden diz 
tribution contribute to mark it as at least peculiar: (1) Perhaps no 
other book ever reached so large a circulation in so brief a space cf time, 
os by the same methods. It was distributed gratuitously at the church 
doors in all the largest cities of the United States and Great Britain by 
the messenger boys of the Distri€t Messenger Service on three succes- 
sive Sundays, and in the smaller towns through the mails. (2) The 
money to defray this expense ($42,000) was voluntarily donated for 
the purpose without solicitation. (3) It was, so far as we know, the 
first book ever published which pointed out the distinétion between the 
high-calling of the Gospel Church and the Restitution calling for the 
world in general; and it pointed out the date of the close pf that high- 
calling as Oftober, 1881, 


368 Thy Kingdom Come. 


the world will be invited to come and receive life everlast- 
ing in the Millennial age. 

As the upper apartment, known as the ‘“‘ King’s Cham- 
ber,’’ represents the divine nature, and the ‘‘ Grand Gallery ’”’ 
represents the call to it, so the one under it (the “‘ Queen’s 
Chamber ’’) represents the perfect human nature; and the 
way to it illustrates the path to life in which the world must 
walk to reach human perfection during the Millennium. 
Both of these ways, and hence both of these ultimate results, 
were opened up and made possible by the ransom-—sacrifice 
which the Mediator gave on behalf of all: all of which is 
forcibly indicated in the Pyramid by the ‘‘ appearance of 
an explosion,’’ which opened the mouth of the ‘ Well,’’ 
and gave access to the two passage—ways (intended to sym- 
bolize the call of the Church now, leading to the divine 
nature, and the call of the world during the Millennium, 
leading to the restitution of human perfection). 

Thus the Great Pyramid, in harmony with the Scriptures, 
declares that ‘‘ Christ brought 4/¢ [restitution to human life, 
represented in that called the ‘‘Queen’s Chamber ’’] and 
immortality [the divine nature, represented in that called 
the ‘*King’s Chamber ’’] To Licut, through the Gospel ”’ 
—the good news of redemption.—2 Tim. 1:10. 

The only entrance to the ‘‘ Queen’s Chamber,’ or to the 
*¢ Grand Gallery,’’ was by way of the ‘‘ Well,”’ the ‘* First 
Ascending Passage’’ having been originally impassable by 
reason of*the granite ‘‘ Plug.’ Thus the stone ‘‘ Witness ’’ 
testifies that by the Law Call or Law Covenant none of 
the fallen race could reach either life (human life) or im- 
mortality (the divine nature). Though the ‘ First Ascend- 
ing Passage ’’ was a way, yet none could walk in it. So the 
Law Covenant was a passage—way to life; but because of 
the weakness of the flesh, none could walk in it so as to at- 
tain the life offered. (Rom. 3:20.) The cross, the sacrifice, 
the ransom, is thus specta//y marked by this stone ‘‘ Witness,”’ 
just as in the Scriptures it is more prominently marked than 
any other feature of the plan. ‘‘No man cometh to the 
Father but by me,”’ said Jesus. ‘«I declared unto you first 
of all that which I also received [first of all], how that Christ 
died for our sins,’’ said Paul. (1 Cor. 15:3.) ‘* The ‘Well’ 
[representative of Christ’s sacrifice and resurrection] is the 


Tne Great Pyramid. 369 


only way to life and immortality,’ says the Great Pyramid. 

The passage to the ++ Queen’s Chamber ’’ is low, and the 
traveler must humbly bow his head to its requirements. 
The path of right-doing has always been one of humility 
and will be so in the Millennium, when a7? will be required 
to bow to the strict regulations of Christ’s Kingdom. He 
will rule with an iron rod. (Rev. 2:27.) He will then lay 
judgment to the line. and righteousness to the plummet ; 
and to his greatness and power every tongue must confess, 
and to his rule and law every knee must bow ; so that in his 
day the humble and righteous, and they only, shall flourish. 
—Isa. 28:17; Rom. 14:11; Psa. 92:12, 13. 

The ‘* Queen’s Chamber ’’ symbolizes the end of the res- 
titution work—human perfection—in that it has seven sides, 
counting the floor one side, and the roof two sides, as shown 
in the diagram. ‘lhe path to it tells the same story of 
sevenness, or perfection, for the floor of it is depressed for 
one-seventh of its length. And not only is the number 
seven a general symbol of perfection and completeness, but 
it is specially suggestive in this connection, since the Millen- 
nial age is the seventh thousand years of the earth’s history, 
and the one in which perfection is to be attained by the 
willing and obedient of the race. 

Prof. Smyth remarks the peculiarity of the floor of this 
“«Queen’s Chamber’’ and the passage-way leading to it, 
that it is rough and entirely unfinished, thus differing from 
the other passages, which were originally very smooth, prob- 
ably polished. This, he suggests, may indicate that its 
floor is not subject to measurement by year-inches as are 
the other passages—as if the Pyramid by this unevenness 
would say, ‘* Time—measures are not recorded here.’’ 

But though the Pyramid inch-year is not observed in the 
passage to the ‘‘ Queen’s Chamber,” nor in its floor, another 
matter did require to be shown, namely, ‘he way of resti- 
tution to perfect life and perfeét human organism. As this 
perfection of human nature is illustrated in the ‘ Queen’s 
Chamber,’’ so the way to it represents the seven thousand 
years of experience and discipline through which the fallen 
human race must pass before full restitution to perfection 
can be gained. Inasmuch as the first six-sevenths of the 
passage—way to the ‘‘ Queen’s Chamber ’’ is extremely low, 

24 


370 Thy Kingdom Come. 


it represents the six thousand years past, and illustrates the 
extreme difficulty and humility necessary to walk a justi- 
fied life, even on the part of such as sought so to walk— 
the patriarchs, prophets and others, justified through faith 
—during this six thousand years of the reign of sin and 
death. On the contrary, the /as¢ seventh of the way rep- 
resents the Millennial age, just dawning upon men. Its 
height being nearly twice as great indicates that during the 
coming thousand years of grace and peace on earth men 
can progress with comfort and ease toward full perfection. 

Is it asked whether any have walked in this way during 
the past six thousand years? We answer, Yes; dr .fasth 
some have walked in it. It is the way of justification of 
Auman nature, though wholly different from the way and 
calling of the Gospel Church, which, though through justi- 
fication, is to the new, divine nature. Abraham, Isaac and 
Jacob and the faithful prophets walked that way—entering 
by the « Well’’—by faith in the ransom-sacrifice of Christ, 
which they represented by typical sacrifices before ourLord’s 
death, and before the stone ‘‘ Witness’’ pointed to it; for 
in God’s purpose and revelation Christ was the slain Lamb 
of atonement from before the foundation of the world. 

And this way to the ‘‘ Queen’s Chamber’’ agrees well 
with the Bible record concerning the way to perfect human 
nature and life during the Millennium. The length of time 
needed to reach perfection will differ in individual cases, 
according to the rapidity or slowness of the individual to 
submit his heart and life to the conditions of the New Cov- 
enant. It will no longer be a strugg/e upward, continually 
opposed by downward tendencies within and without, as it 
has been during the Law and Gospel dispensations ; but it 
will be a way in which everything will favor the traveler, 
and facilitate his rapid progress toward full perfection of 
restitution—life, with all its resultant blessings. / 

As the ‘‘ King’s Chamber,’’ by its ventilating tubes, in- 
dicates that it symbolizes a permanent residence, an ever- 
lasting condition, so the ‘‘ Queen’s Chamber ’’ symbolizes 
the fact that the condition of human perfection, when 
reached, may be made an everlasting state; for it also has 
similar ventilating tubes or air passages provided. In one 
case we may say it symbolizes a permanent condition, and 


- SOUTH WALL: WEST WALL—— 


F3 Vveahele 


NORTH WALL. 


az 


eC SI 


Migrant Unvons 
Channe 


ne ee 


THE SEVEN SIDES of rue QUEENS CHAMBER, 
LASO OPEN ON THE PLANE OF THE SAST WALL, 


Masonry courses of malls and ceding 
acihorvanuntiushed exammnatiory 
by Wea Lyra Lon. 2 


Scale of British Liches. 


Marz) OMY BE ARITCRIE Comme 


The Great Pyramid. 373 


in the other that it may de made a permanent or everlast- 
ing condition, because this is the fact as indicated both by 
the Scriptures and by the testimony of the stone ‘‘ Witness.”’ 
The Scriptures say of those who attain the condition repre- 
sented by the “‘ King’s Chamber,’’ that they partake of the 
divine nature, and are zmmorta/, or proof against death— 
that they cannot die thereafter. And they show that 
those others who reach the full restitution, and stand the 
last test of loyalty, at the end of the Millennial age, though 
they will not possess that quality termed /mmortalit, which 
is essentially an element of the divine nature only, will be 
supplied with life everlasting under provisions already ar- 
ranged by the great Architect of the plan of salvation. If 
they abide in harmony with God and in obedience’ to his 
will, they will live forever. — 
The Great Pyramid declares these same truths ; for while 
the ‘‘ King’s Chamber ’” had open ventilators, the ventila- 
tors in the “* Queen’s Chamber’? were originally peculiarly 
covered. The air-tubes were complete from the outside of 
the Great Pyramid to within about half an inch of the sur- 
face of the inner walls of the ‘‘ Queen’s Chamber,’’ the 
stones on either side of the ‘‘ Queen’s Chamber,’’ except 
the said half-inch in thickness, having been chiseled out, 
‘showing design on the part of the Great Pyramid’s Archi- 
tect, just as every other feature shows it. Mr. Waynman 
Dixon made this discovery while examining the walls of the 
“*Queen’s Chamber.’’ He noticed that the wall at a cer- 
tain spot sounded hollow, and, breaking through the surface, 
he found one ventilating tube; and then by the same pro- 
cess he found its mate in the opposite wall. Thus the Pyra- 
mid, in harmony with the Scriptures, declares that amp/e 
provision has been made, whereby the perfect human con- 
dition, represented by the ‘‘ Queen’s Chamber,’’ may de 
an everlasting condition to each one who conforms to its 
regulations and laws. 

And now, having heard it speak, what shall we think of 
the stone ‘‘ Witness’’ and its testimony? Such testimony 
would be peculiar and striking indeed, even if there were 
no Scriptures found to bear on the subjects examined ; but 
when the Scriptures had already clearly and positively de- 
elared to us these same circumstances and dates, before the 


374 Thy Kingdom Come. 


Pyramid’s testimony was heard, its wonderful agreement 
with and corroboration of the same become doubly signifi- 
cant and striking. Now, when the worldly—wise are repudi- 
ating God’s Word as ‘‘obselete’’ and “‘unscientific,’’ to have 
this stone ‘‘ Witness ’’ speak, and corroborate the testimony 
of the Bible, is truly astounding. ‘lo hear its testimony as 
to man’s fall at the very time that the worldly—wise are 
claiming that man never was perfect, never was in God’s 
image, and consequently never fell from it, is remarkable. 
To hear its testimony that zone could enter either the Gos- 
pel high-calling to the divine nature or the state of human 
justification and life through the Law Covenant or passage— 
way, at a time when so many are preaching that the Law 
of Moses is the only way to life, is certainly gratifying. 
Surely in the Great Pyramid ‘‘ The invisible things [plans] 
of God from the creation of the world are clearly seen ; be- 
ing understood by the things that are made’’—Rom. 1:20. 

Some may scoff at the testimony of this stone ‘‘ Witness,’’ 
as they also scoff at God’s written Word ; but to their scoffs 
we answer: Account for this peculiar fitness of things, or 
else venture to prophesy of the future, and see how your 
prophecies will result. Prove to us that it requires no in- 
spiration to foretell future events. Show us a sample of 
worldly wisdom. ‘‘ Produce your cause, saith the Lord ; 
bring forth your strong reasons, saith the King of Jacob. 
Let them bring them forth and show us what will happen ; 
let them show the former things, what they be, that we may 
consider them and know the latter end of them ; or declare 
to us things to come. Show the things that are to come 
hereafter, that we may know that ye are gods [mighty 
ones].’’—Isa. 41: 21-23. 

Not only does the Great Pyramid confound atheistical 
scientists, but it refutes utterly their modern and anti—Scrip- 
tural theory of ‘‘ Evolution ’’—on which subject we cannot 
do better than quote the following words of Dr. Joseph 
Seiss, from his excellent treatise on the Great Pyramid, en- 
titled ‘‘ A Miracle in Stone.’’ He says: 

‘< If the primeval man were nothing but a gorilla or trog- 
lodyte, how, in those prehistoric times, could the builders 
of this mighty structure have known what our profoundest 
Savants, after a score of centuries of observation and exper- 


The Great Pyramid. "375 


iment, have been able to find out only imperfectly? How 
could they know how even to make and _ handle the tools, 
machines and expedients, indispensable to the construction 
of an edifice so enormous in dimensions, so massive in its 
materials, so exalted in its height and so perfect in its work- 
manship that to this day it is without a rival on earth? 
How could they know the spherity, rotation, diameter, 
density, latitude, poles, land distribution and temperature 
of the earth, or its astronomical relations? How could 
they solve the problem of the squaring of the circle, calcu- 
late the proportions or determine the four cardinal points ? 
How could they frame charts of history and dispensations, 
true to fact in every particular, for the space of four thous- 
and years after their time, and down to the final consum- 
mation ? How could they know when the Mosaic economy 
would start, how long continue, and in what eventuate? 
How could they know when Christianity would be intro- 
duced, by what great facts and features it would be marked, 
and what would be the characteristics, career and end of 
the Church of Christ ? How could they know of the grand 
precessional cycle, the length of its duration, the number 
of days in the true year, the mean distance of the sun from 
the earth, and the exaét positions of the stars at the time 
the Great Pyramid was built? How could they devise a 
standard and system of measures and weights, so evenly 
fitted to each other, so beneficently conformed to the com- 
mon wants of man, and so perfectly harmonized with all 
the facts of nature? And how could they know how to put 
all these things on record in a single piece of masonry, 
without one verbal or pictorial inscription, yet proof against 
all the ravages and changes of time, and capable of being 
read and understood down to the very end ? 

‘*Men may sneer, but they cannot laugh down this 
mighty structure, nor scoff out of it the angles, proportions, 
measures, nature references and sacred correspondencies 
which its Maker gave it. Here they are in all their speak- 
ing significance, stubborn and invincible beyond all power 
to suppress them.”’ 

The voice of this wonderful ‘‘ Witness’’ brings forcibly 
to mind the words of our Lord on that notable occasion of 
his triumphal entry into Jerusalem, when he typically pre- 


376 ‘Thy Kingdom Come. 


sented himself to Igrael as their king, amidst the acclama- 
tions of the whole multitude of his disciples, who were 
loudly praising God for the mighty works that had been 
done, saying, ‘‘ Blessed be the king that cometh in the 
name of the Lord ! peace in heaven, and glory in the high- 
est.’’ And when the Pharisees were urging him to rebuke 
them, he answered, ‘‘I tell you that if these should hold 
their peace, the stones would immediately cry out.’’ (Luke 
19:37-40.) And so it is to-day: while the King of glory 
has actually come, and while the great majority of his pro- 
fessed living witnesses, who should be loudly rejoicing, and 
saying, Blessed be the King that cometh in the name of 
the Lord, are dumb—some from fear of being put out of 
the synagogue, and some from drowsy slothfulness, or from 
the intoxication of worldliness which keeps them in igno- 
rance of the time of our visitation—lo, the very stones of 
this Great Pyramid of ‘Testimony are crying out in no uncer- 
tain tones. Every inch of this massive structure is eloquently 
proclaiming the wisdom and power and grace of our God. 

Firmly incased in this solid-rocky structure, beyond the 
power of nature’s storms or of the ruthless hand of the de- 
stroyer, the outline drawings of God’s great plan have stood 
for four thousand years, prepared to give their testimony 
at the time appointed, in corroboration of the similarly re- 
vealed, but for ages hidden, testimony of the sure Word of 
Prophecy. The testimony of this ‘‘ Witness to the Lord in 
the land of Egypt,’’ like that of the written Word, points 
with solemn and unerring precision to the final wreck of 
the old order of things in the ‘‘ Pit’’ of oblivion, and to 
the glorious establishment of the new, under Christ Jesus, 
the great Chief Corner-stone of God’s eternal building, in 
conformity with the lines of whose glorious character all 
things worthy of everlasting existence must be built up un- 
der him. Amen! Amen! Thy Kingdom come! Thy will 
be done on earth as it is done in heaven t 


APPENDIX. 


We append a letter from a missionary in China, received 
while this volume is on the press. It serves to illustrate how, 
under divine providence, the message of present truth is be- 
ing sent to the truth-hungry in every quarter of the world. 
Evidently the Lord of the harvest is so directing the work 
of the reapers that not a solitary one of his wholly conse- 
crated saints will be left in darkness.—1 ‘hes. 5:4. 


My Dear Mr. RussELL:—It is now several years since 
an apparently incidental conversation on some religious 
topic led my good friend, Mass Downing [also a mission- 
ary, and for some years a Tower and M. Dawn reader], 
to place a number of Zion’s WarcH Tower in my hands. 
Above I say incidental—I will now correét myself and say 
providential, for this I most firmly believe it to have been, 
inasmuch as from that day to this I have been, not only what 
_the periodicals call a ‘‘ constant reader, ardent admirer,’’ 
etc., but one who has been truly blessed, comforted, en- 
lightened and strengthened, yea, and spiritualized, too, by 
the seemingly entirely new (but really the old and true), . 
the fearless and dignified (yet humble and Christlike), the 
‘indisputably orthodox (yet reckoned heterodox) expositions 
of divine truth, which you and your helpers have been priv- 
ileged to publish, and I, together with so many others, have 
been privileged to read in its monthly addresses, 

But if all this can be said of its serial outcomings, what 
shall I now say when we are placed on the higher vantage 


377 


378 Appendix. 


ground of the two volumes of the MILLENNIAL Dawn, in 
their compact, methodical, chapter after chapter extending 
view of these divine mysteries, now given to the Church 
' for the mere trouble of reading them as they issue from a 
sacrificing Church and a loving God. Truly does it seem 
that but a few more steps remain ere we reach the very top 
balcony of the Watch Tower, and see spread out before our 
wondering eyes, in rich panoramic undulations, all the 
glories of the day of God’s unfolding; all the startling 
promises relating to earth’s harvest fulfilling: the descent 
of the crowned Reaper, the numbering of the jewels, the 
sifting of the Church, the binding of Satan, Jehovah’s 
account with the world settled, earth’s turmoil over, the 
way of holiness opened, glimpses of the bright age beyond, 
even to the age of perfection and glory, when’God shall be 
all in all. 

Is it not wonderful to observe the ways and means which 
God, by his Spirit, has been employing (more emphatically 
during the last twenty years) in bringing numbers of his 
people into a clearer understanding of Bible truths, cleans- 
ing the Word, as it were, from the dust of centuries, bring- 
ing out things new as well as old to the forefront for ex- 
amination, clinching and dovetailing its various books so 
that it can be seen that not a single one can in anywise be 
done without, and causing the whole Scripture to shine 
forth in all its undimmed glory as the one great, glorious, 
all-sufficient, perfec? Word of God to our fallen but Christ- 
redeemed world? How truly can we watchers see, not 
merely the promise of the morning which has gladdened 
the Church through the past eighteen lingering centuries, 
but the actual dawning of the Sun; not the forefulgence, 
merely, but the actual body of the great luminary himself; 
and this not on a level. with—or just above and beyond— 
but a good way up above the horizon. 

On the plain, perhaps only the light before the dawn 
may be visible; but ascend the ladder, mount the watch- 
tower, use the telescope, apply the sextant, then take your 
bearings and see if it is not the very sun himself. To be 
further convinced of this, let us just get to where his rays 
focus a bit, hold up the Bible to its light, and see how it 
causes every page to shine forth with the divine effulgence 


Appendix. ; 379 


of truth; how its foundation do¢trines stand out aglow to 
whiteness of brilliancy, clearly revealing to the humble ones 
the hitherto hidden purposes of God; laying bare, as it 
were, the mind of infinite love; yea, in a manner disclos- 
ing those very mysteries that angels desired to look into, 
and were not able. 

The world may be in darkness still, and will probably re- 
main so till the more open display of his power discloses 
the fact of his presence; but to his Church, to the really 
watching ones, to those who look for his coming in the 
manner in which he said he would come—what do these 
truths say to them? What is the meaning of this super- ~ 
natural glow, this focusing of prophetic truths on these few 
latter days of the earth’s harvest, this intensifying of light, 
this increase of knowledge, this ardent longing of the soul, 
this breaking asunder of creed bonds, this spiritual discern- 
ment? Sir, to me the one word, parousta, explains it all. 
Christ is present, the King of glory i is here, the time is ful- 
filled, the divine Jesus, the Anointed of God, the exalted 
Bridegroom, is already amongst us, arranging the prelimi- 
naries of his earthly reign. In all probability the first 
resurrection of the saints who slept is an accomplished fact, 
and in some important measure it may be due to their sweet 
influences—the impetus which we experience, the constrain- 
ing, spiritual, forcing power which we feel and which leads 
us, as it were, to look and long for Christ, may be the 
offspring of their early efforts in their divine Redeemer’s 
cause. Soon the living saints shall all have received in 
their foreheads the mark of their King; soon every jewel 
shall be numbered, the last consecrated life shall be com- 
pletely offered, the victory of all the saints openly asserted, 
the momentary change from human life to divine glory 
effected. Then the whole Church, with Christ at its head, 
shall be revealed in power, the kingdom shall be given to 
him whose right it is, the mighty One shall marshal his hosts 
for battle. A short but sharp, a hand-to-hand but effectual, 
conflict with the powers of darkness takes place. And then, 
O happy thought, the faHen—human order of things on earth 
shall give way to the divine. O blessed hope, O glorious 
consummation, O happy, happy day, O joyous heaven, O 
gladsome earth, O infinite Son of God, O worthy exalted 


380 Appendix. 


Savior! Who that feels anything of these powers of the 
world to come would not reiterate, in the closing words of 
the Book of God, ‘‘ Even so, come, Lord Jesus!’ 

I crave your pardon, dear sir, if, in my overflow of thanks, 
I have obtruded too much on your valuable time. I had 
no intention of doing so, but when I began to write I found 
the subjeét was a widening one, and I desired to express 
recognition and thankfulness to my Heavenly Father as well 
as to yourself. The fact of the matter is, I am a believer 
in the great truth you enunciate; viz., that we are in the 
time of the world’s harvest. By God’s grace I ama watcher, 
and can therefore see the dawn for myself; and what is 
more precious still, I can feel it, and do not hesitate to say 
I know it is true. Can I therefore but be most deeply in- 
terested in all subjeéts (and they are many) radiating around 
Millennial Dawn ? 

In my humble opinion, your works, the volumes of MiL- 
LENNIAL Dawn and the issues of* ZION’s WATCH TOWER, 
furnish the very best commentaries and helps I have met 
with, on the Scripture texts and prophecies relating to the 
second coming of our Lord. I read them again and again 
with ever increasing pleasure, and my writing is simply the 
embodiment in words of a sense of obligation which has 
long urged me to write an acknowledgment, thanking you, 
as the human instrument, for the good I have derived from 
them. I trust, therefore, that, though I am an entire stranger 
to you, you will receive my epistle as the outflowing of a 
grateful heart, from one who not only feels, but desires to 
express, his obligations for any help and enlightenment re- 
ceived and appropriated, on what is to him the first of all 
subjeéts, the coming or actual presence of our divine Lord 
and Savior. 

I remain, dear sir, yours in the love of Christ, 

W. R. FULLER. 


March 2, 1891. 


THE CENTURY PLANT. 


“ATEEPED in sunshine, bathed in dew, 
> Year by year the strange plant grew, 
ut no grace of flower knew. 
“Seeing it a zealot said, 
Hotly shaking his young head, 
‘Without works, one is as dead!’ 


* Did she start impatient then ? 
Strive to burst her bands of green 
With the life that throbbed between ? 


“ Nay! she seemed but as before, 
‘Though her heart may more and more 
Life’s sweet pain have pondered o’er. 

* * * * * * 


“Ilalf a century had passed, 
And the plant, still bloomless, cast 
Broader shadows. But at last 
Some one looked, and, with a cry, 
Called the people, far and nigh. 
.For from out the circling green 
‘Shere uprose a wondrous sheen ; 
Bud and lloom did overlean 
‘Phe broad leaves, and climb so high 
All their beauty none could spy, 
Save the tender, smiling sky. 

“<> Tis a tree of soft, pale flame, 
Greenly whorled,’ said one who came, 
‘Trying vainly thus to name 
Such unwonted loveliness. 

In their prodigal excess 
Bud and bloom seemed numberless. 


“ Now the zealot humbly said, 
Bowing low his hoary head, 
‘Lo! she teaches in my stead! 


« * Now I know that soul is great 
Which, aware of its estate, 
Nobly is content to wait. 


+ As for me, O foolish man! 
I have learned that no man can 
Sit in judgment on God’s plan. 


«“ «When ’tis time for deed or flower, 
He alone can strike the hour 
From the height of Ilis Watch Tower!’ ” 


ZiON’S WATCH TOWER. 


A SEMI-MONFHLY MAGAZINE, 


DEVOTED TO THE DISSEMINATION UF RELIGIOUS TRUTH IN ALL Ifs PHASES. 


ALL WHO HAVE BECOME INTERESTED IN THE THEMES TREATED IN MILLENNIAL 
DAWN wILL WAST THIS MAGAZINE, EDITED BY THE SAME PEN. 


BIBLE STUDENTS’ HELPS. 


WE AKE PREPARED TO SUPPLY VARIOUS OF THE SIMPLE HELPS FOR BIBLE STUDY, 
WHICH AKE NOW SO ABUNDANT AND CHEAP. 


BIBLES AT COST PRICES, 
AND ALL BIBLE-STUDY HELPS AT VERY LOW RATES. 


VARIOUS TRANSLATIONS OF THE BIBLE, DICTIONARIES, CONCOKDANCEBS, BTC. 
SEND FOR CATALOGUE. 


OUR INHERITANCE IN 
THE GREAT PYRAMID. 


(STH EDITION, 452 PAGES, 25 ILLUSTRATIONS.) 


By Pror, C. Piazz1 SMYTH. 


THIS Ib THE MOST COMPREHENSIVE TREATISE ON THIS SUBJECT, BY A MAN OF EDU- 
CATION AND RENOWN, WHO HAS STUDIED THE SUBJECT, DWELT FOK A TIME 
AT THE STRUCTURE, AND KEPT IN TOUCH WITH ALL SUCCEEDING 
SCIENTIFIC VISITORS. 


“A MIRACLE IN STONE,” 


THE GREAT PYRAMID. 


(346 PAGES.) 
By JosrrH Serrss, D. D. 


FOR THE ABOVE, ADDRESS 
TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
BIBLE HOUSE, ALLEGHENY, PA ? U. S. A. 


Digitized by Google 


LE DES 
Gere 


ENTERED AT THE ALLEGHENY, PA., POST-OFFICE AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER. 


SZ jon’s Uateh Power. 


A SEMI-MONTHLY MAGAZINE, 
EDITED BY THE AUTHOR OF MILLENNIAL DAWN. 
TERMS, INCLUDING POSTAGB, ONE DOLLAR A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 
It is devoted to'sacred literature and current events relating to the parousia (pres- 
ence] and Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the unfolding and disseminating of all 


truths contained in the Holy Scriptures—* things new and old,” “ meat in due season” 
for the household of faith. - Sample cepies will be mailed Arce to addresses sent us. 


Address Business Communicatins to the . 


TOWER PUBLISHING CO.,_ 
“ BIBLE HOUSE,” ARCH ST., , ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S. A. 


TERMS FOR THE LORD’S POOR. 


Those of the Lord’s children who, from the infirmities of age, or accident, or any 
other misfortune, are su#ad/e to pay for this paper, can, if they desire, have it free so 
long as it is published, by sending a postal card stating the facts, each December. 
These, to comply with the law, are paid for out of a special fund of voluntary donations, 


Nfillennial Dawn Series. 
VOLS. L., IL, Tl. 


In cloth binding, embossed, $1.00. (Supplied to Zton’s WATCH TOWER sub- 
scribers at wholesale rates, 50 cents per copy.) In paper covers, 25 cents. 


THESE VOLUMES IN GERMAN ALSO; AND VOL. I.IN SWEDISH, AND IN DANO-NORWEGIAN, 
All interested in these works are urged to spend their time disseminating the 
Truth in this form. Liberal arrangements have been made to meet the expenses 


of such. Address us for particulars if you have time and other abilities (talents) to 
invest thus in the service of the Truth. 


THE WONDERFUL STORY ILLUSTRATED. 


The Gospel in Verse (156 stanzas)—The Old, Old Story tothe End. Fifteen ~ 
Illustrations—Limp Leatherette covers. Price reduced to 10 cents. It contains a 


. blessing for Old and Young. Delivered by Colporteurs, 15 cents each. 


‘THE TABERNACLE AND THE BETTER SACRIFICES. 


The Gospel in types and shadows. Strong meat for matured Christians. 110 
pages, illustrated, Limp Leatherette covers. Price, post-paid, only 10 cents. Deliv- 
ered by Colporteurs, 15 cents each.
