The ABC of Relativity (Bertrand Russell, 1925)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/bwb_T4-AKA-914). Russell's clear popular exposition of Einstein's special and general relativity.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Taoteeinott
seer didence


sta ctee


Pit heen. Siete OP RELATUVET ¥


HARPER'S
MODERN SCIENCE
SERIES


Sir Witiiam Brace, K.B.E., D.Sc., F.R.S.


Concerning the Nature of Things


Ricwarp Swann LutLt, Pb.D., D.Sc.


Professor of Paleontology, Yale University; Director,
Peabody Museum; Fellow of the American Academy
of Arts and Sciences, etc.


The Ways of Life


Grorce A. Dorszy, LL.D., Ph.D.


Formerly Curator of Anthropology, Field Museum,
and Associate Professor of Anthropology, University
of Chicago.


Why We Behave Like Human Beings


BerTRAND RUSSELL


The A BC of Relativity


IN PREPARATION
Epwin Grant Conkxiin, Ph.D., Sc.D.


Professor of Biology, Princeton University; Fellow of
the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, etc.


The Revolt Against Darwinism


Cxarwes SINGER, D.Litt., M.D., F.R.C.P., F.S.A.


Late University Lecturer in History of Biological
Sciences, Oxford.


History of Science


HARPER & BROTHERS
PUBLISHERS


HARPER'S MODERN SCIENCE SERIES


tie AB C OF
Reel LEY TT Y


BY
BERTRAND RUSSELL


AUTHOR OF
“*THE PRINCIPLES OF MATHEMATICS
‘PROPOSED ROADS TO FREEDOM ”
AND “WHY MEN FIGHT"


PUBLISHERS
HARPER & BROTHERS
NEW YORK AND LONDON


THE ABC OF RELATIVITY
nt RS eee
Copyright, 1925, by Harper & Brothers
Printed in the United States of America
Fh Ae In OL ee
L7A


Contents


CHAPTER PAGE
I. TOUCH AND SIGHT: THE EARTH AND THE
HEAVENS I
II. WHAT HAPPENS AND WHAT IS OBSERVED 14
III. THE VELOCITY OF LIGHT 28
IV. CLOCKS AND FOOT RULES 43
V. SPACE-TIME 58
VI. THE SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 7I
VII. INTERVALS IN SPACE-TIME gI
VIII. EINSTEIN'S LAW OF GRAVITATION Tit
IX. PROOFS OF EINSTEIN'S LAW OF GRAVITA-
TION 131
X. MASS, MOMENTUM, ENERGY AND ACTION 144
XI. IS THE UNIVERSE FINITE? 163
XII. CONVENTIONS AND NATURAL LAWS Noid
XIII. THE ABOLITION OF ‘FORCE’ 192
XIV. WHAT IS MATTER? 206


XV. PHILOSOPHICAL CONSEQUENCES 219


Stee G OF RELATIVITY


THE ABC OF RELATIVITY
ry


CHAPTER ONE: TOUCH AND SIGHT:
THE EARTH AND THE HEAVENS


vERYBODY knows that Einstein has done
something astonishing, but very few people
know exactly what it is that he has done. It is
generally recognized that he has revolutionized
our conception of the physical world, but his new
conceptions are wrapped up in mathematical
technicalities. It is true that there are innumer-
able popular accounts of the theory of relativity,
but they generally cease to be intelligible just at.
the point where they begin to say something im-
portant. The authors are hardly to blame for
this. Many of the new ideas can be expressed
in non-mathematical language, but they are
none the less difficult on that account. What
is demanded is a change in our imaginative
picture of the world—a picture which has been


handed down from remote, perhaps pre-human,
I


Zz THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


ancestors, and has been learned by each one of us
in early childhood. A change in our imagination
is always difficult, especially when we are no
longer young. The same sort of change was
demanded by Copernicus, when he taught that
the earth is not stationary and the heavens do
not revolve about it once a day. To us now there
is no difficulty in this idea, because we learned it
before our mental habits had become fixed. EKin-
stein’s ideas, similarly, will seem easy to a gen-
eration which has grown up with them; but for
our generation a certain effort of imaginative
reconstruction is unavoidable.

In exploring the surface of the earth, we make
use of all our senses, more particularly of the
senses of touch and sight. In measuring lengths,
parts of the human body are employed in pre-
scientific ages: a “foot,” a “cubit,” a “span” are
defined in this way. For longer distances, we
think of the time it takes to walk from one place
to another. We gradually learn to judge dis-
tances roughly by the eye, but we rely upon
touch for accuracy. Moreover it is touch that
gives us our sense of “reality.” Some things
cannot be touched: rainbows, reflections in look-
ing-glasses, and so on. These things puzzle


TOUCH AND SIGHT 3
children, whose metaphysical speculations are
arrested by the information that what is in the
looking-glass is not “real.” Macbeth’s dagger
was unreal because it was not “sensible to feeling
as to sight.” Not only our geometry and physics,
but our whole conception of what exists outside
us, is based upon the sense of touch. We carry
this even into our metaphors: a good speech is
“solid,” a bad speech is “gas,” because we feel
that a gas is not quite “real.”

In studying the heavens, we are debarred from
all senses except sight. We cannot touch the
sun, or travel to it; we cannot walk round the
moon, or apply a foot rule to the Pleiades. Nev-
ertheless, astronomers have unhesitatingly ap-
plied the geometry and physics which they found
serviceable on the surface of the earth, and which
they had based upon touch and travel. In doing
so, they brought down trouble on their heads,
which it has been left for Einstein to clear up.
It has turned out that much of what we learned
- from the sense of touch was unscientific preju-
dice, which must be rejected if we are to have
a true picture of the world.

An illustration may help us to understand
how much is impossible to the astronomer as


4 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


compared to the man who is interested in things
on the surface of the earth. Let us suppose that
a drug is administered to you which makes you
temporarily unconscious, and that when you
wake you have lost your memory but not your
reasoning powers. Let us suppose further that
while you were unconscious you were carried into
a balloon, which, when you come to, is sailing
with the wind in a dark night—the night of the
fifth of November if you are in England, or of
the fourth of July if you are in America. You
can see fireworks which are being sent off from
the ground, from trains, and from aeroplanes
traveling in all directions, but you cannot see
the ground or the trains or the aeroplanes be-
cause of the darkness. What sort of picture of
the world will you form? You will think that
nothing is permanent: there are only brief
flashes of light, which, during their short exist-
ence, travel through the void in the most various
and bizarre curves. You cannot touch these
flashes of light, you can only see them. Obvi-
ously your geometry and your physics and
your metaphysics will be quite different from
those of ordinary mortals. If an ordinary
mortal is with you in the balloon, you will find


TOUCH AND SIGHT 5


his speech unintelligible. But if Einstein is
with you, you will understand him more easily
than the ordinary mortal would, because you
will be free from a host of preconceptions which
prevent most people from understanding him.
The theory of relativity depends, to a consid-
erable extent, upon getting rid of notions which
are useful in ordinary life but not to our
drugged balloonist. Circumstances on the sur-
face of the earth, for various more or less acci-
dental reasons, suggest conceptions which turn
out to be inaccurate, although they have come to
seem like necessities of thought. The most im-
portant of these circumstances is that most ob-
jects on the earth’s surface are fairly persistent
and nearly stationary from a terrestrial point of
view. If this were not the case, the idea of going
a journey would not seem so definite as it does.
If you want to travel from King’s Cross to Edin-
burgh, you know that you will find King’s Cross
where it always has been, that the railway line
will take the course that it did when you last
made the journey, and that Waverley Station
in Edinburgh will not have walked up to the
Castle. You therefore say and think that you
have traveled to Edinburgh, not that Edinburgh


6 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


has traveled to you, though the latter statement
would be just as accurate. The success of this
common-sense point of view depends upon a
number of things which are really of the nature
of luck. Suppose all the houses in London were
perpetually moving about, like a swarm of bees;
suppose railways moved and changed their
shapes like avalanches; and finally suppose that
material objects were perpetually being formed
and dissolved like clouds. There is nothing im-
possible in these suppositions: something like
them must have been verified when the earth
was hotter than it is now. But obviously what
we call a journey to Edinburgh would have no
meaning in such a world. You would begin, no
doubt, by asking the taxi-driver: “Where is
King’s Cross this morning?” At the station you
would have to ask a similar question about Edin-
burgh, but the booking-office clerk would reply:
“What part of Edinburgh do you mean, Sir?
Prince’s Street has gone to Glasgow, the Castle
has moved up into the Highlands, and Waverley
Station is under water in the middle of the Firth
of Forth.” And on the journey the stations
would not be staying quiet, but some would be
travelling north, some south, some east or west,


—


. TOUCH AND SIGHT ey:


" rhaps much faster than the train. Under these

“ditions you could not say where you were at
any moment. Indeed the whole notion that one
is always in some definite “place” is due to the
fortunate immovability of most of the large ob-
jects on the earth’s surface. The idea of “place”
is only a rough practical approximation: there
is nothing logically necessary about it, and it
cannot be made precise.

If we were not much larger than an electron,
we should not have this impression of stability,
which is only due to the grossness of our senses.
King’s Cross, which to us looks solid, would be
too vast to be conceived except by a few eccentric
mathematicians. The bits of it that we could see
would consist of little tiny points of matter,
never coming into contact with each other, but
perpetually whizzing round each other in an
inconceivably rapid ballet-dance. The world of
our experience would be quite as mad as the one
in which the different parts of Edinburgh go for
walks in different directions. If—to take the
opposite extreme—you were as large as the sun
and lived as long, with a corresponding slowness
of perception, you would again find a higgledy-
piggledy universe without permanence—stars


8 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


and planets would come and go like Bi
mists, and nothing would remain in ¢ an ats.
tion relatively to anything else. T ce
comparative stability which forms ,
ordinary outlook is thus due to the g


are about the size we are, and live o.. a planet of
which the surface is no longer very hot. If this
were not the case, we should not find pre-rela-
tivity physics intellectually satisfy 3. Indeed,
we should never have invented such theories. We
should have had to arrive at relativity physics at
one bound, or remain ignorant of scientific laws.
It is fortunate for us that we were not faced
with this alternative, since it is almost inconceiv-
able that one man could have done the work of
Euclid, Galileo, Newton, and Einstein. Yet
without such an incredible genius physics could
hardly have been discovered in a world where
the universal flux was obvious to non-scientific
observation.

In astronomy, although the sun, moon, and
stars continue to exist year after year, yet in
other respects the world we have to deal with is
very different from that of everyday life. As
already observed, we depend exclusively on
sight: the heavenly bodies cannot be touched,


\


,


s20§
ov. “gai * faster than an express train, towards
> @ )0ing} in the constellation “Hercules,” the


TOUCH AND SIGHT 9


ig ~~ smelt or tasted. Everything in the heav-


i moving relatively to everything else. The
~ \,igzoing round the sun, the sun is moving,


“i xed» ts are scurrying hither and thither
like a lot of frightened hens. There are no well-
marked places in the sky, like King’s Cross and
Edinbus 4. When you travel from place to
place on the earth, you say the train moves and
not the stations, because the stations preserve
their topographical relations to each other and
the surrounding country. But in astronomy it is
arbitrary which you call the train and which the
station: the question is to be decided purely by
convenience and as a matter of convention.

In this respect, it is interesting to contrast
Einstein and Copernicus. Before Copernicus,
people thought that the earth stood still and the
heavens revolved about it once a day. Coper-
nicus taught that “really” the earth rotates once
a day, and the daily revolution of sun and stars
is only “apparent.” Galileo and Newton en-
dorsed this view, and many things were thought
to prove it—for example, the flattening of the


earth at the poles, and the fact that bodies are


IO THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


heavier there than at the equator. But in the
modern theory the question between Copernicus
and his predecessors is merely one of convenience ;
all motion is relative, and there is no difference
between the two statements: “the earth rotates
once a day” and “the heavens revolve about the
earth once a day.” The two mean exactly the
same thing, just as it means the same thing if I
say that a certain length is six feet or two yards.
Astronomy is easier if we take the sun as fixed
than if we take the earth, just as accounts are
easier in a decimal coinage. But to say more for
Copernicus is to assume absolute motion, which
is a fiction. All motion is relative, and it is a
mere convention to take one body as at rest. All
such conventions are equally legitimate, though
not all are equally convenient.

There is another matter of great importance,
in which astronomy differs from terrestrial
physics because of its exclusive dependence upon
sight. Both popular thought and old-fashioned
physics used the notion of “force,”’ which seemed
intelligible because it was associated with familiar
sensations. When we are walking, we have sen-
sations connected with our muscles which we do
not have when we are sitting still. In the days


TOUCH AND SIGHT Ai


before mechanical traction, although people could
travel by sitting in their carriages, they could
see the horses exerting themselves and evidently
putting out “force” in the same way as human
beings do. Everybody knew from experience
what it is to push or pull, or to be pushed or
pulled. These very familiar facts made “force”
seem a natural basis for dynamics. But New-
ton’s law of gravitation introduced a difficulty.
The force between two billiard balls appeared
intelligible, because we know what it feels like
to bump into another person; but the force be-
tween the earth and the sun, which are ninety-
three million miles apart, was mysterious.
Newton himself regarded this “action at a dis-
tance” as impossible, and believed that there was
some hitherto undiscovered mechanism by which
the sun’s influence was transmitted to the planets.
However, no such mechanism was discovered,
and gravitation remained a puzzle. The fact is
that the whole conception of “force” is a mistake.
The sun does not exert any force on the planets;
in Einstein’s law of gravitation, the planet only
pays attention to what it finds in its own neigh-
borhood. The way in which this works will be
explained in a later chapter; for the present we


Iz THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


are only concerned with the necessity of aban-
doning the notion of “force,” which was due to
misleading conceptions derived from the sense
of touch.

As physics has advanced, it has appeared more
and more that sight is less misleading than touch
as a source of fundamental notions about matter.
The apparent simplicity in the collision of bil-
liard balls is quite illusory. As a matter of fact,
the two billiard balls never touch at all; what
really happens is inconceivably complicated, but
is more analogous to what happens when a comet
penetrates the solar system and goes away again
than to what common sense supposes to happen.

Most of what we have said hitherto was al-
ready recognized by physicists before Einstein
invented the theory of relativity. “Force” was
known to be merely a mathematical fiction, and
it was generally held that motion is a merely rel-
ative phenomenon—that is to say, when two
bodies are changing their relative position, we
cannot say that one is moving while the other .is
at rest, since the occurrence is merely a change
in their relation to each other. But a great
labor was required in order to bring the actual
procedure of physics into harmony with these


TOUCH AND SIGHT 13


new convictions. Newton believed in force and
in absolute space and time; he embodied these
beliefs in his technical methods, and his methods
remained those of later physicists. Einstein in-
vented a new technique, free from Newton’s
assumptions. But in order to do so he had to
change fundamentally the old ideas of space and
time, which had been unchallenged from time
immemorial. This is what makes both the dif-
ficulty and the interest of his theory. But be-
fore explaining it there are some preliminaries
which are indispensable. These will occupy the
next two chapters.


CHAPTER II: WHAT HAPPENS AND WHAT
IS OBSERVED


CERTAIN type of superior person is fond of
A asserting that “everything is relative.”
This is, of course, nonsense, because, if every-
thing were relative, there would be nothing for
it to be relative to. However, without falling
into metaphysical absurdities it is possible to
maintain that everything in the physical world
is relative to an observer. ‘This view, true or
not, is not that adopted by the “theory of rel-
ativity.” Perhaps the name is unfortunate; cer-
tainly it has led philosophers and uneducated
people into confusions. They imagine that the
new theory proves everything in the physical
world to be relative, whereas, on the contrary,
it is wholly concerned to exclude what is relative
and arrive at a statement of physical laws that
shall in no way depend upon the circumstances
of the observer. It is true that these circum-
stances have been found to have more effect
upon what appears to the observer than they

4


WHAT HAPPENS 1§


were formerly thought to have, but at the same
time Einstein showed how to discount this effect
completely. This was the source of almost
everything that is surprising in his theory.
When two observers perceive what is regarded
as one occurrence, there are certain similarities,
and also certain differences, between their per-
ceptions. The differences are obscured by the
requirements of daily life, because from a busi-
ness point of view they are as a rule unimportant.
But both psychology and physics, from their
different angles, are compelled to emphasize the
respects in which one man’s perception of a given
occurrence differs from another man’s. Some of
these differences are due to differences in the


brains or minds of the observers, some to differ-
ences in their sense organs, some to differences of
physical situation: these three kinds may be
called respectively psychological, physiological,
and physical. A remark made in a language we
know will be heard, whereas an equally loud re-
mark in an unknown language may pass entirely
unnoticed. Of two men in the Alps, one will per-
ceive the beauty of the scenery while the other
will notice the waterfalls with a view to obtaining
power from them. Such differences are psycho-


16 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


logical. The difference between a long-sighted
and a short-sighted man, or between a deaf man
and a man who hears well, are physiological.
Neither of these kinds concerns us, and I have
mentioned them only in order to exclude them.
‘The kind that concerns us is the purely physical
kind. Physical differences between two observ-
ers will be preserved when the observers are re-
placed by cameras or phonographs, and can be
reproduced on the movies or the gramophone. If
two men both listen to a third man speaking, and
one of them is nearer to the speaker than the
other is, the nearer one will hear louder and
slightly earlier sounds than are heard by the
other. If two men both watch a tree falling, they
see it from different angles. Both these differ-
ences would be shown equally by recording in-
struments: they are in no way due to idio-
syncrasies in the observers, but are part of the
ordinary course of physical nature as we ex-
perience it.

The physicist, like the plain man, believes that
his perceptions give him knowledge about what
is really occurring in the physical world, and not
only about his private experiences. Profession-
ally, he regards the physical world as “real,”’ not


WHAT HAPPENS 17


merely as something which human beings dream.
An eclipse of the sun, for instance, can be ob-
served by any person who is suitably situated,
and is also observed by the photographic plates
that are exposed for the purpose. The physicist
is persuaded that something has really happened
over and above the experiences of those who have
looked at the sun or at photographs of it. I
have emphasized this point, which might seem a
trifle obvious, because some people imagine that
Einstein has made a difference in this respect.
In fact he has made none.

But if the physicist is justified in this belief
that a number of people can observe the ‘“‘same”
physical occurrence, then clearly the physicist
must be concerned with those features which the
occurrence has in common for all observers, for
the others cannot be regarded as belonging to
the occurrence itself. At least, the physicist
must confine himself to the features which are
common to all “equally good” observers. The
observer who uses a microscope or a telescope
is preferred to one who does not, because he sees
all that the latter sees and more too. A sensi-
tive photographic plate may “see” still more, and
is then preferred to any eye. But such things


18 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


as differences of perspective, or differences of
apparent size due to difference of distance, are
obviously not attributable to the object; they be-
long solely to the point of view of the spec-
tator. Common sense eliminates these in judg-
ing of objects; physics has to carry the same
process much further, but the principle is the
same.

I want to make it clear that I am not con-
cerned with anything that can be called inac-
curacy. I am concerned with genuine physical
differences between occurrences each of which is
a correct record of a certain event, from its own
point of view. When a man fires a gun, peo-
ple who are not quite close to him see the flash
before they hear the report. This is not due
to any defect in their senses, but to the fact
that sound travels more slowly than light. Light
travels so fast that, from the point of view of
phenomena on the surface of the earth, it may
be regarded as instantaneous. Anything that
we can see on the earth happens practically at
the moment when we see it. In a second, light
travels 300,000 kilometers (about 186,000 miles).
It travels from the sun to the earth in about
eight minutes, and from the stars to us in any-


WHAT HAPPENS ie)


thing from three to a thousand years. But of
course we cannot place a clock in the sun, and
send out a flash of light from it at 12 noon,
Greenwich Mean Time, and have it received at
Greenwich at 12.08 p.m. Our methods of es-
timating the speed of light have to be more or
less indirect. The only direct method would be
that which we apply to sound when we use an
echo. We could send a flash to a mirror, and
observe how long it took for the reflection to
reach us; this would give the time of the double
journey to the mirror and back. On the earth,
however, the time would be so short that a great
deal of theoretical physics has to be utilized if
this method is to be employed—more even than
is required for the employment of astronomical
data.

The problem of allowing for the spectator’s
point of view, we may be told, is one of which
physics has at all times been fully aware; indeed
it has dominated astronomy ever since the time
of Copernicus. This is true. But principles
are often acknowledged long before their full
consequences are drawn. Much of traditional
physics is incompatible with the principle, in


pA@) THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


spite of the fact that it was acknowledged theo-
retically by all physicists.

There existed a set of rules which caused un-
easiness to the philosophically minded, but were
accepted by physicists because they worked in
practice. Locke had distinguished “secondary”
qualities—colors, noises, tastes, smells, etc.—as
subjective, while allowing “primary” qualities—
shapes and positions and sizes—to be genuine
properties of physical objects. The physicist’s
rules were such as would follow from this doc-
trine. Colors and noises were allowed to be sub-
jective, but due to waves proceeding with a def-
inite velocity—that of light or sound as the case
may be-—from their source to the eye or ear of
the percipient. Apparent shapes vary accord-
ing to the laws of perspective, but these laws are
simple and make it easy to infer the “real”
shapes from several visual apparent shapes;
moreover, the “real” shapes can be ascertained
by touch in the case of bodies in our neighbor-
hood. The objective time of a physical occur-
rence can be inferred from the time when we
perceive it by allowing for the velocity of trans-
mission—of light or sound or nerve currents
according to circumstances. This was the


WHAT HAPPENS 21


view adopted by physicists in practice, what-
ever qualms they may have had in unprofes-
sional moments.

This view worked well enough until physicists
became concerned with much greater velocities
than those that are common on the surface of the
earth. An express train travels about a mile in
a minute; the planets travel a few miles in a
second. Comets, when they are near the sun,
travel much faster, and behave somewhat oddly;
but they were puzzling in various ways. Prac-
tically, the planets were the most swiftly moving
bodies to which dynamics could be adequately
applied. With radio-activity a new range of
observations became possible. Individual elec-
trons can be observed, emanating from radium
with a velocity not far short of that of light.
The behavior of bodies moving with these enor-
mous speeds is not what the old theories would
lead us to expect. For one thing, mass seems
to increase with speed in a perfectly definite
manner. When an electron is moving very fast,
a bigger force is required to have a given effect
upon it than when it is moving slowly. Then
reasons were found for thinking that the size
of a body is affected by its motion—for example,


pio THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


if you take a cube and move it very fast, it gets
shorter in the direction of its motion, from the
point of view of a person who is not moving with
it, though from its own point of view (i.e. for
an observer traveling with it) it remains just
as it was. What was still more astonishing was
the discovery that lapse of time depends on mo-
tion; that is to say, two perfectly accurate clocks,
one of which is moving very fast relatively to the
other, will not continue to show the same time if
they come together again after a journey. It
follows that what we discover by means of clocks
and foot rules, which used to be regarded as the
acme of impersonal science, is really in part de-
pendent upon our private circumstances, 7.e.
upon the way in which we are moving relatively
to the bodies measured.

This shows that we have to draw a different
line from that which is customary in distinguish-
ing between what belongs to the observer and
what belongs to the occurrence which he is ob-
serving. If a man is wearing blue spectacles he
knows that the blue look of everything is due to
his spectacles, and does not belong to what he
is observing. But if he observes two flashes of
lightning, and notes the interval of time between


WHAT HAPPENS 23


his observations; if he knows where the flashes
took place, and allows, in each case, for the time
the light took to reach him—in that case, if his
chronometer is accurate, he naturally thinks that
he has discovered the actual interval of time be-
tween the two flashes, and not something merely
personal to himself. He is confirmed in this
view by the fact that all other careful observers
to whom he has access agree with his estimates.
This, however, is only due to the fact that all
these observers are on the earth, and share its
motion. Even two observers in aeroplanes mov-
ing in opposite directions would have at the most
a relative velocity of 400 miles an hour, which is
very little in comparison with 186,000 miles a
second (the velocity of light). If an electron
shot out from a piece of radium with a velocity
of 170,000 miles a second could observe the time
between the two flashes, it would arrive at a quite
different estimate, after making full allowance
for the velocity of light. How do you know
this? the reader may ask. You are not an
electron, you cannot move at these terrific speeds,
no man of science has ever made the observations
which would prove the truth of your assertion.
Nevertheless, as we shall see in the sequel, there


24 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


is good ground for the assertion—ground, first
of all, in experiment, and—what is remarkable—
ground in reasonings which could have been
made at any time, but were not made until ex-
periments had shown that the old reasonings
must be wrong.

There is a general principle to which the theory
of relativity appeals, which turns out to be more
powerful than anybody would suppose. If you
know that one man is twice as rich as another,
this fact must appear equally whether you esti-
mate the wealth of both in pounds or dollars or
francs or any other currency. The numbers rep-
resenting their fortunes will be changed, but one
number will always be double the other. The
same sort of thing, in more complicated forms,
reappears in physics. Since all motion is relative,
you may take any body you like as your standard
body of reference, and estimate all other motions
with reference to that one. If you are in a train
and walking to the dining-car, you naturally, for
the moment, treat the train as fixed and estimate
your motion by relation to it. But when you
think of the journey you are making, you think
of the earth as fixed, and say you are moving at
the rate of sixty miles an hour. An astronomer


WHAT HAPPENS 25


who is concerned with the solar system takes the
sun as fixed, and regards you as rotating and
revolving; in comparison with this motion, that
of the train is so slow that it hardly counts. An
astronomer who is interested in the stellar uni-
verse may add the motion of the sun relatively
to the average of the stars. You cannot say
that one of these ways of estimating your mo-
tion is more correct than another; each is per-
fectly correct as soon as the reference body is
assigned. Now just as you can estimate a man’s
fortune in different currencies without altering
its relations to the fortunes of other men, so you
can estimate a body’s motion by means of dif-
ferent reference bodies without altering its re-
lations to other motions. And as physics is
entirely concerned with relations, it must be
possible to express all the laws of physics by re-
ferring all motions to any given body as the
standard.

We may put the matter in another way.
Physics is intended to give information about
what really occurs in the physical world, and
not only about the private perceptions of sep-
arate observers. Physics must, therefore, be
_ concerned with those features which a physical


26 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


process has in common for all observers, since
such features alone can be regarded as belonging
to the physical occurrence itself. This requires
that the Jaws of phenomena should be the same
whether the phenomena are described as they
appear to one observer or as they appear to an-
other. This single principle is the generating
motive of the whole theory of relativity.

Now what we have hitherto regarded as the
spatial and temporal properties of physical oc-
currences are found to be in large part depend-
ent upon the observer; only a residue can be
attributed to the occurrences in themselves, and
only this residue can be involved in the formula-
tion of any physical law which is to have an a
priort chance of being true. Einstein found
ready to his hand an instrument of pure mathe-
matics, called the theory of tensors, which en-
abled him to discover laws expressed in terms
of the objective residue and agreeing approxi-
mately with the old laws. Where Einstein’s
laws differed from the old ones, they have
hitherto proved more in accord with observation.

If there were no reality in the physical world,
but only a number of dreams dreamed by dif-
ferent people, we should not expect to find any


WHAT HAPPENS 27


laws connecting the dreams of one man with the
dreams of another. It is the close connection
between the perceptions of one man and the
(roughly) simultaneous perceptions of another
that makes us believe in a common external
origin of the different related perceptions.
Physics accounts both for the likenesses and for
the differences between different people’s per-
ceptions of what we call the “same” occurrence.
But in order to do this it is first necessary for
the physicist to find out just what are the like-
nesses. They are not quite those traditionally
assumed, because neither space nor time sep-
arately can be taken as strictly objective. What
is objective is a kind of mixture of the two called
“space-time.” To explain this is not easy, but
the attempt must be made; it will be begun in the
next chapter.


CHAPTER III: THE VELOCITY OF LIGHT


ost of the curious things in the theory
M of relativity are connected with the ve-
locity of light. If the reader is to grasp the
reasons for such a serious theoretical reconstruc-
tion, he must have some idea of the facts which
made the old system break down.

The fact that light is transmitted with a
definite velocity was first established by astro-
nomical observations. Jupiter’s moons are some-
times eclipsed by Jupiter, and it is easy to
calculate the times when this ought to occur. It
was found that when Jupiter was unusually near
the earth an eclipse of one of his moons would be
observed a few minutes earlier than was ex-
pected; and when Jupiter was unusually remote,
a few minutes later than was expected. It was
found that these deviations could all be ac-
counted for by assuming that light has a certain
velocity, so that what we observe to be happen-
ing in Jupiter really happened a little while ago


—longer ago when Jupiter is distant than when
28


THE VELOCITY OF LIGHT 29


it is near. Just the same velocity of light was
found to account for similar facts in regard to
other parts of the solar system. It was there-
fore accepted that light in vacuo always travels
at a certain constant rate, almost exactly 300,000
kilometers a second. (A kilometer is about five-
eighths of a mile.) When it became established
that light consists of waves, this velocity was
that of propagation of waves in the ether—at
least they used to be in the ether, but now the
ether has grown somewhat shadowy, though the
waves remain. ‘This same velocity is that of the
waves used in wireless telegraphy (which are
like light waves, only longer) and in X-rays
(which are like light waves, only shorter). It is
generally held nowadays to be the velocity with |
which gravitation is propagated, though Edding-
ton considers this not yet certain. (It used
to be thought that gravitation was propagated
instantaneously, but this view is now abandoned. )

So far, all is plain sailing. But as it became
possible to make more accurate measurements,
difficulties began to accumulate. The waves
were supposed to be in the ether, and therefore
their velocity ought to be relative to the ether.
Now since the ether (if it exists) clearly offers


30 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


no resistance to the motions of the heavenly bod-
ies, it would seem natural to suppose that it does
not share their motion. If the earth had to push
a lot of ether before it, in the sort of way that a
steamer pushes water before it, one would ex-
pect a resistance on the part of the ether analo-
gous to that offered by the water to the steamer.
Therefore the general view was that the ether
could pass through bodies without difficulty, like
air through a coarse sieve, only more so. If this
were the case, then the earth in its orbit must
have a velocity relative to the ether. If, at some
point of its orbit, it happened to be moving
exactly with the ether, it must at other points
be moving through it all the faster. If you go
for a circular walk on a windy day, you must
be walking against the wind part of the way,
whatever wind may be blowing; the principle
in this case is the same. It follows that, if you
choose two days six months apart, when the earth
in its orbit is moving in exactly opposite direc-
tions, it must be moving against an ether wind
on at least one of these days.

Now if there is an ether wind, it is clear that,
relatively to an observer on the earth, light sig-
nals will seem to travel faster with the wind than


ZHE VELOCITY OF LIGHT®= © 31


across it, and faster across it than against it.
This is what Michelson and Morley set them-
selves to test by their famous experiment. They
sent out light signals in two directions at right
angles; each was reflected from a mirror, and
came back to the place from which both had been
sent out. Now anybody can verify, either by
trial or by a little arithmetic, that it takes longer
to row a given distance on a river upstream and
then back again, than it takes to row the same
distance across the stream and back again.
Therefore, if there were an ether wind, one of
the two light signals, which consist of waves in
the ether, ought to have traveled to the mirror
and back at a slower average rate than the other.
Michelson and Morley tried the experiment,
they tried it in various positions, they tried it
again later. Their apparatus was quite accu-
rate enough to have detected the expected differ-
ence of speed or even a much smaller difference,
if it had existed, but not the smallest difference
could be observed. The result was a surprise to
them as to everybody else; but careful repetitions
made doubt impossible. The experiment was
first made as long ago as 1881, and was re-
peated with more elaboration in 1887. But it


32 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


was many years before it could be rightly
interpreted.

The supposition that the earth carries the
neighboring ether with it in its motion was found
to be impossible, for a number of reasons. Con-
sequently a logical deadlock seemed to have
arisen, from which at first physicists sought to
extricate themselves by very arbitrary hypothe-
ses. ‘The most important of these was that of
Fitzgerald, developed by Lorentz, and known
as the Fitzgerald contraction hypothesis.

According to this hypothesis, when a body is
in motion it becomes shortened in the direction
of motion by a certain proportion depending
upon its velocity. The amount of the contrac-
tion was to be just enough to account for the
negative result of the Michelson-Morley experi-
ment. The journey up stream and down again
was to have been really a shorter journey than
the one across the stream, and was to have been
just so much shorter as would enable the slower
light wave to traverse it in the same time. Of
course the shortening could never be detected
by measurement, because our measuring rods
would share it. A foot rule placed in the line
of the earth’s motion would be shorter than the


THE VELOCITY OF LIGHT 33


same foot rule placed at right angles to the
earth’s motion. This point of view resembles
nothing so much as the White Knight’s “plan
to dye my whiskers green, and always use so
large a fan that they could not be seen.” The
odd thing was that the plan worked well enough.
Later on, when Einstein propounded his special
theory of relativity (1905), it was found that
the theory was in a certain sense correct, but
only in a certain sense. That is to say, the sup-
posed contraction is not a physical fact, but a
result of certain conventions of measurement
which, when once the right point of view has
been found, are seen to be such as we are almost
compelled to adopt. But I do not wish yet to
set forth Einstein’s solution of the puzzle. For
the present, it is the nature of the puzzle itself
that I want to make clear.

On the face of it, and apart from hypotheses
ad hoc, the Michelson-Morley experiment (in
conjunction with others) showed that, relatively
to the earth, the velocity of light is the same in
all directions, and that this is equally true at all
times of the year, although the direction of the
earth’s motion is always changing as it goes
round the sun. Moreover, it appeared that this


34 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


is not a peculiarity of the earth, but is true of all
bodies: if a light signal is sent out from a body,
that body will remain at the center of the waves
as they travel outwards, no matter how it may
be moving—at least, that will be the view of
observers moving with the body. ‘This was the
plain and natural meaning of the experiments,
and Einstein succeeded in inventing a theory
which accepted it. But at first it was thought
logically impossible to accept this plain and
natural meaning.

A few illustrations will make it clear how
very odd the facts are. When a shell is fired,
it moves faster than sound: the people at whom
it is fired first see the flash, then (if they are
lucky) see the shell go by, and last of all hear
the report. It is clear that if you could put a
scientific observer on the shell, he would never
hear the report, as the shell would burst and
kill him before the sound had overtaken him.
But if sound worked on the same principles as
light, our observer would hear everything just as
if he were at rest. In that case, if a screen,
suitable for producing echoes, were attached to
the shell and traveling with it, say a hundred
yards in front of it, our observer would hear the


THE VELOCITY OF LIGHT 35


echo of the report from the screen after just
the same interval of time as if he and the shell
were at rest. This, of course, is an experiment
which cannot be performed, but others which can
be performed will show the difference. We
might find some place on a railway where there
is an echo from a place further along the rail-
way—say a place where the railway goes into a
tunnel—and when a train is traveling along the
railway, let a man on the bank fire a gun. If
the train is traveling towards the echo, the pas-
sengers will hear the echo sooner than the man
on the bank; if it is traveling in the opposite
direction, they will hear it later. But these are
not quite the circumstances of the Michelson-
Morley experiment. The mirrors in that ex-
periment correspond to the echo, and the mirrors
are moving with the earth, so that echo ought to
move with the train. Let us suppose that the
shot is fired from the guard’s van, and the
echo comes from a screen on the engine. We
will suppose the distance from the guard’s van
to the engine to be the distance that sound can
travel in a second (about one-fifth of a mile),
and the speed of the train to be one-twelfth of
the speed of sound (about sixty miles an hour).


36 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


We now have an experiment which can be per-
formed by the people in the train. If the train
were at rest, the guard would hear the echo in
two seconds; as it is, he will hear it in 2 and “43
seconds. From this difference, if he knows the
velocity of sound, he can calculate the velocity of
the train, even if it is a foggy night so that he
cannot see the banks. But if sound behaved like
light, he would hear the echo in two seconds how-
ever fast the train might be traveling.

Various other illustrations will help to show
how extraordinary—from the point of view of
tradition and common sense—are the facts about
the velocity of light. Every one knows that if
you are on an escalator you reach the top sooner
if you walk up than if you stand still. But if
the escalator moved with the velocity of light
(which it does not do even in New York), you
would reach the top at exactly the same moment
whether you walked up or stood still. Again:
if you are walking along a road at the rate of
four miles an hour, and a motor-car passes you
going in the same direction at the rate of forty
miles an hour, if you and the motor-car both
keep going the distance between you after an
hour will be thirty-six miles. But if the motor-


THE VELOCITY OF LIGHT 37


car met you, going in the opposite direction, the
distance after an hour would be forty-four miles.
Now if the motor-car were traveling with the
velocity of light, it would make no difference
whether it met or passed you: in either case, it
would, after a second, be 186,000 miles from
you. It would also be 186,000 miles from any
other motor-car which happened to be passing
or meeting you less rapidly at the previous sec-
ond. ‘This seems impossible: how can the car be
at the same distance from a number of different
points along the road?

Let us take another illustration. When a
fly touches the surface of a stagnant pool, it
causes ripples which move outwards in wid-
ening circles. The center of the circle at any
moment is the point of the pool touched by the
fly. If the fly moves about over the surface of
the pool, it does not remain at the center of the
ripples. But if the ripples were waves of light,
and the fly were a skilled physicist, it would find
that it always remained at the center of the
ripples, however it might move. Meanwhile a
skilled physicist sitting beside the pool would
judge, as in the case of ordinary ripples, that
the center was not the fly, but the point of the


38 THE A BeClOF RELATIVITY


pool touched by the fly. And if another fly
had touched the water at the same spot at the
same moment, it also would find that it
remained at the center of the ripples, even if it
separated itself widely from the first fly. This
is exactly analogous to the Michelson-Morley
experiment. The pool corresponds to the ether;
the fly corresponds to the earth; the contact of
the fly and the pool corresponds to the light sig-
nal which Messrs. Michelson and Morley send
out; and the ripples correspond to the light
waves.

Such a state of affairs seems, at first sight,
quite impossible. It is no wonder that, although
the Michelson-Morley experiment was made in
1881, it was not rightly interpreted until 1905.
Let us see what, exactly, we have been saying.
Take the man walking along a road and passed
by a motor-car. Suppose there are a number
of people at the same point of the road, some
walking, some in motor-cars; suppose they are
going at varying rates, some in one direction
and some in another. I say that if, at this
moment, a light flash is sent out from the place
where they all are, the light waves will be 186,-
000 miles from each one of them after a second


THE VELOCITY OF LIGHT 39


by his watch, although the travelers will not any
longer be all in the same place. At the end of a
second by your watch it will be 186,000 miles
from you, and it will also be 186,000 miles from
a person who met you when it was sent out, but
was moving in the opposite direction, after a
second by his watch—assuming both to be per-
fect watches. How can this be?

There is only one way of explaining such
facts, and that is, to assume that watches and
clocks are affected by motion. I do not mean
that they are affected in ways that could be
remedied by greater accuracy in construction;
I mean something much more fundamental. I
mean that, if you say an hour has elapsed be-
tween two events, and if you base this assertion
upon ideally careful measurements with ideally
accurate chronometers, another equally precise
person, who has been moving rapidly relatively
to you, may judge that the time was more or less
than an hour. You cannot say that one is right
and the other wrong, any more than you could
if one used a clock showing Greenwich time
and another a clock showing New York time.
How this comes about, I shall explain in the
next chapter.


40 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


There are other curious things about the
velocity of light. One is, that no material body
can ever travel as fast as light, however great
may be the force to which it is exposed, and how-
ever long the force may act. An illustration
may help to make this clear. At exhibitions
one sometimes sees a series of moving platforms,
going round and round in a circle. The out-
side one goes at four miles an hour; the next
goes four miles an hour faster than the first;
and so on. You can step across from each to
the next, until you find yourself going at a tre-
mendous pace. Now you might think that, if
the first platform does four miles an hour, and
the second does four miles an hour relatively to
the first, then the second does eight miles an hour
relatively to the ground. This is an error; it
does a little less, though so little less that not
even the most careful measurements could de-
tect the difference. I want to make quite clear
what it is that I mean. I will suppose that, in
the morning, when the apparatus is just about
to start, three men with ideally accurate chro-
nometers stand in a row, one on the ground, one
on the first platform, and one on the second.
The first platform moves at the rate of four


THE VELOCITY OF LIGHT 41


miles an hour with respect to the ground. Four
miles an hour is 352 feet in a minute. The man
on the ground, after a minute by his watch, notes
the place on the ground opposite the man on the
first platform, who has been standing still while
the platform carried him along. The man on
the ground measures the distance on the ground
from himself to the point opposite the man on
the first platform, and finds it is 352 feet. The
man on the first platform, after a minute by his
watch, notes the point on his platform opposite to
the man on the second platform. The man on
the first platform measures the distance from
himself to the point opposite the man on the sec-
ond platform; it is again 352 feet. Problem: how
far will the man on the ground judge that the
man on the second platform has traveled in a
minute? That is to say, if the man on the
ground, after a minute by his watch, notes the
place on the ground opposite the man on the
second platform, how far will this be from the
man on the ground? You would say, twice 352
feet, that is to say, 704 feet. But in fact it will
be a little less, though so little less as to be in-
appreciable. The discrepancy is owing to the
fact that the two watches do not keep perfect


42 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


time, in spite of the fact that each is accurate
from its owner’s point of view. If you had a
long series of such moving platforms, each mov-
ing four miles an hour relatively to the one be-
fore it, you would never reach a point where the
last was moving with the velocity of light rel-
atively to the ground, not even if you had mil-
lions of them. The discrepancy, which is very
small for small velocities, becomes greater as the
velocity increases, and makes the velocity of
light an unattainable limit. How all this hap-
pens, is the next topic with which we must deal.

Note. The negative result of the Michelson-Morley experiment
has recently been called in question by Professor Dayton C.
Miller, as a result of observations by what is said to be an
improved method. His claim is set forth by Professor Silberstein
in Nature, May 23, 1925, and discussed unfavorably by Edding-
ton in the issue of June 6. The matter is sub judice, but it seems


highly questionable whether the results bear out the interpretation
which is put upon them.


CHAPTER IV: CLOCKS AND FOOT RULES


NTIL the advent of the special theory of rel-
U ativity, no one had thought that there could
be any ambiguity in the statement that two events
in different places happened at the same time.
It might be admitted that, if the places were
very far apart, there might be difficulty in find-
ing out for certain whether the events were
simultaneous, but every one thought the mean-
ing of the question perfectly definite. It turned
out, however, that this was a mistake. "Two
events in distant places may appear simultane-
ous to one observer who has taken all due precau-
tions to insure accuracy (and, in particular, has
allowed for the velocity of light), while another
equally careful observer may judge that the first
event preceded the second, and still another may
judge that the second preceded the first. This
would happen if the three observers were all
moving rapidly relatively to each other. It
would not be the case that one of them would
be right and the other two wrong: they would

43


44 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


all be equally right. The time order of events
is in part dependent upon the observer; it is
not always and altogether an intrinsic relation
between the events themselves. Einstein has
shown, not only that this view accounts for the
phenomena, but also that it is the one which
ought to have resulted from careful reasoning
based upon the old data. In actual fact, how-
ever, no one noticed the logical basis of the
theory of relativity until the odd results of ex-
periment had given a jog to people’s reasoning
powers.

How should we naturally decide whether two
events in different places were simultaneous?
One would naturally say: they are simultaneous
if they are seen simultaneously by a person who
is exactly half-way between them. (There is no
difficulty about the simultaneity of two events in
the same place, such, for example, as seeing a
light and hearing a noise.) Suppose two
flashes of lightning fall in two different places,
say Greenwich Observatory and Kew Observa-
tory. Suppose that St. Paul’s is half-way
between them, and that the flashes appear simul-
taneous to an observer on the dome of St. Paul’s.
In that case, a man at Kew will see the Kew


CLOCKS AND FOOT RULES 45


flash first, and a man at Greenwich will see the
Greenwich flash first, because of the time taken
by light to travel over the intervening distance.
But all three, if they are ideally accurate ob-
servers, will judge that the two flashes were
simultaneous, because they will make the neces-
sary allowance for the time of transmission of
the light. (I am assuming a degree of accuracy
far beyond human powers.) Thus, so far as
observers on the earth are concerned, the defini-
tion of simultaneity will work well enough, so
long as we are dealing with events on the sur-
face of the earth. It gives results which are
consistent with each other, and can be used for
terrestrial physics in all problems in which we
can ignore the fact that the earth moves.

But our definition is no longer so satisfactory
when we have two sets of observers in rapid mo-
tion relatively to each other. Suppose we see
what would happen if we substitute sound for
light, and defined two occurrences as simultane-
ous when they are heard simultaneously by a
man half-way between them. This alters noth-
ing in the principle, but makes the matter easier
owing to the much slower velocity of sound.
Let us suppose that on a foggy night two men


46 THE ABC OF RELATIVITY


belonging to a gang of brigands shoot the guard
and engine driver of a train. The guard is at
the end of the train; the brigands are on the line,
and shoot their victims at close quarters. An
old gentleman who is exactly in the middle of the
train hears the two shots simultaneously. You
would say, therefore, that the two shots were
simultaneous. But a station master who is ex-
actly half-way between the two brigands hears
the shot which kills the guard first. An Aus-
tralian millionaire uncle of the guard and the
engine driver (who are cousins) has left his
whole fortune to the guard, or, should he die
first, to the engine driver. Vast sums are in-
volved in the question of which died first. The
case goes to the House of Lords, and the lawyers
on both sides, having been educated at Oxford,
are agreed that either the old gentleman or the
station master must have been mistaken. In
fact, both may perfectly well be right. The
train travels away from the shot at the guard,
and towards the shot at the engine driver; there-
fore the noise of the shot at the guard has farther
to go before reaching the old gentleman than
the shot at the engine driver has. Therefore
if the old gentleman is right in saying that he


CLOCKS AND FOOT RULES 47


heard the two reports simultaneously, the sta-
tion master must be right in saying that he heard
the shot at the guard first.

We, who live on the earth, would naturally, in
such a case, prefer the view of simultaneity ob-
tained from a person at rest on the earth to the
view of a person traveling in a train. But in
theoretical physics no such parochial prejudices
are permissible. A physicist on a comet, if there
were one, would have just as good a right to his
view of simultaneity as an earthly physicist has
to his, but the results would differ, in just the
same sort of way as in our illustration of the
train and the shots. ‘The train is not any more
“really” in motion than the earth; there is no
“really” about it. You might imagine a rabbit
and a hippopotamus arguing as to whether man
is “really” a large animal; each would think his
own point of view the natural one, and the other
a pure flight of fancy. There is just as little
substance in an argument as to whether the earth
or the train is “really” in motion. And, there-
fore, when we are defining simultaneity between
distant events, we have no right to pick and
choose among different bodies to be used in de-
fining the point half-way between the events.


48 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


All bodies have an equal right to be chosen.
But if, for one body, the two events are simul-
taneous according to the definition, there will
be other bodies for which the first precedes the
second, and still others for which the second pre-
cedes the first. We cannot therefore say unam-
biguously that two events in distant places are
simultaneous. Such a statement only acquires
a definite meaning in relation to a definite ob-
server. It belongs to the subjective part of our
observation of physical phenomena, not to the
objective part which is to enter into physical
laws.

This question of time in different places is
perhaps, for the imagination, the most difficult
aspect of the theory of relativity. We are ac-
customed to the idea that everything can be
dated. Historians make use of the fact that
there was an eclipse of the sun visible in China
on August 29 in the year 776 B. C.*. No doubt
astronomers could tell the exact hour and minute
when the eclipse began to be total at any given


1A contemporary Chinese ode, after giving the day of the
year correctly, proceeds:


“For the moon to be eclipsed

Is but an ordinary matter.

Now that the sun has been eclipsed,
How bad it is.”


CLOCKS AND FOOT RULES 49


spot in North China. And it seems obvious that
we can speak of the positions of the planets at
a given instant. The Newtonian theory enables
us to calculate the distance between the earth
and (say) Jupiter at a given time by the Green-
wich clocks; this enables us to know how long
light takes at that time to travel from Jupiter to
the earth—say half an hour; this enables us to
infer that half an hour ago Jupiter was where
we see it now. All this seems obvious. But
in fact it only works in practice because the rel-
ative velocities of the planets are very small
compared with the velocity of light. When we
judge that an event on the earth and an event
on Jupiter have happened at the same time—
for example, that Jupiter eclipsed one of his
moons when the Greenwich clocks showed twelve
midnight—a person moving rapidly relatively
to the earth would judge differently, assuming
that both he and we had made the proper allow-
ance for the velocity of light. And naturally
the disagreement about simultaneity involves a
disagreement about periods of time. If we
judged that two events on Jupiter were sep-
arated by twenty-four hours, another person
might judge that they were separated by a


50 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


longer time, if he were moving rapidly relatively
to Jupiter and the earth.

The universal cosmic time which used to be
taken for granted is thus no longer admissible.
For each body, there is a definite time order for
the events in its neighborhood; this may be called
the “proper” time for that body. Our own ex-
perience is governed by the proper time for our
own body. As we all remain very nearly sta-
tionary on the earth, the proper times of dif-
ferent human beings agree, and can be lumped
together as terrestrial time. But this is only the
time appropriate to large bodies on the earth.
For Beta particles in laboratories, quite different
times would be wanted; it is because we insist
upon using our own time that these particles
seem to increase in mass with rapid motion.
From their own point of view, their mass re-
mains constant, and it is we who suddenly grow
thin or corpulent. The history of a physicist
as observed by a Beta particle would resemble
Gulliver’s travels.

The question now arises: what really is meas-
ured by a clock? When we speak of a clock in
the theory of relativity, we do not mean only
clocks made by human hands: we mean anything


CLOCKS AND FOOT RULES §i


which goes through some regular periodic per-
formance. ‘The earth is a clock, because it ro-
tates once in every twenty-three hours and
fifty-six minutes. An atom is a clock, because
the electrons go round the nucleus a certain num-
ber of times in a second; its properties as a clock
are exhibited to us in its spectrum, which is due
to light waves of various frequencies. The
world is full of periodic occurrences, and fun-
damental mechanisms, such as atoms, show an
extraordinary similarity in different parts of the
universe. Any one of these periodic occurrences
may be used for measuring time; the only ad-
vantage of humanly manufactured clocks is that
they are specially easy to observe. One ques-
tion is: If cosmic time is abandoned, what is
really measured by a clock in the wide sense
that we have just given to the term?

Each clock gives a correct measure of its own
“proper” time, which, as we shall see presently,
is an important physical quantity. But it does
not give an accurate measure of any physical
quantity connected with events on bodies that
are moving rapidly in relation to it. It gives
one datum towards the discovery of a physical
quantity connected with such events, but another


52 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


datum is required, and this has to be derived
from measurement of distances in space. Dis-
tances in space, like periods of time, are in gen-
eral not objective physical facts, but partly
dependent upon the observer. How this comes
about must now be explained.

First of all, we have to think of the distance
between two events, not between two bodies.
This follows at once from what we have found
as regards time. If two bodies are moving rel-
atively to each other—and this is really always
the case—the distance between them will be con-
tinually changing, so that we can only speak of
the distance between them at a given time. If
you are in a train traveling towards Edinburgh,
we can speak of your distance from Edinburgh
at a given time. But, as we said, different ob-
servers will judge differently as to what is the
“same” time for an event in the train and an
event in Edinburgh. This makes the measure-
ment of distances relative, in just the same way
as the measurement of times has been found to
be relative. We commonly think that there are
two separate kinds of interval between two
events, an interval in space and an interval in
time: between your departure from London and


CLOCKS AND FOOT RULES 53


your arrival in Edinburgh, there are 400 miles
and ten hours. We have already seen that an-
other observer will judge the time differently;
it is even more obvious that he will judge the
distance differently. An observer in the sun
will think the motion of the train quite trivial,
and will judge that you have traveled the dis-
tance traveled by the earth in its orbit and its
diurnal rotation. On the other hand, a flea in
the railway carriage will judge that you have
not moved at all in space, but have afforded him
a period of pleasure which he will measure by his
“proper” time, not by Greenwich Observatory.
It cannot be said that you or the sun dweller or
the flea are mistaken: each is equally justified,
and is only wrong if he ascribes an objective
validity to his subjective measures. The dis-
tance in space between two events is, therefore,
not in itself a physical fact. But, as we shall
see, there is a physical fact which can be inferred
from the distance in time together with the dis-
tance in space. This is what is called the “in-
terval” in space time.

Taking any two events in the universe, there
are two different possibilities as to the relation
between them. It may be physically possible


54 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


for a body to travel so as to be present at both
events, or it may not. This depends upon the
fact that no body can travel as fast as light.
Suppose, for example, that it were possible to
send out a flash of light from the earth and
have it reflected back from the moon. The time
between the sending of the flash and the return
of the reflection would be about two and a half
seconds. No body could travel so fast as to be
present on the earth during any part of those
two and a half seconds and also present on the
moon at the moment of the arrival of the flash,
because in order to do so the body would have to
travel faster than light. But theoretically a
body could be present on the earth at any time
before or after those two and a half seconds and
also present on the moon at the time when the
flash arrived. When it is physically impossible
for a body to travel so as to be present at both
events, we shall say that the interval* between
the two events is “space-like”; when it is physi-
cally possible for a body to be present at both
events, we shall say that the interval between
the two events is “time-like.” When the in-
terval is “space-like,” it is possible for a body to


1T shall define “interval” in a moment.


CLOCKS AND FOOT RULES 55


move in such a way that an observer on the body
will judge the two events to be simultaneous. In
that case, the “interval” between the two events
is what such an observer will judge to be the
distance in space between them. When the in-
terval is “time-like,” a body can be present at
both events; in that case, the “interval” between
the two events is what an observer on the body
will judge to be the time between them, that
is to say, it is his “proper” time between the
two events. There is a limiting case between
the two, when the two events are parts of one
light flash—or, as we might say, when the one
event is the seeing of the other. In that case, the
interval between the two events is zero.

There are thus three cases. (1) It may be
possible for a ray of light to be present at both
events; this happens whenever one of them is the
seeing of the other. In this case the interval
between the two events is zero. (2) It may
happen that no body can travel from one event
to the other, because in order to do so it would
have to travel faster than light. In that case,
it is always physically possible for a body to
travel in such a way that an observer on the body
would judge the two events to be simultaneous.


56 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


The interval is what he would judge to be the
distance in space between the two events. Such
an interval is called “space-like.” (3) It may
be physically possible for a body to travel so as
to be present at both events; in that case, the in-
terval between them is what an observer on such
a body will judge to be the time between them.

Such an interval is called

N “time-like.”

The interval between
two events is a physical
fact about them, not de-
pendent upon the par-
ticular circumstances of
the observer.

There are two forms
of the theory of relativity, the special and
the general. ‘The former is in general only
approximate, but is exact at great distances
from gravitating matter. When the special
theory can be applied, the interval can be
calculated when we know the distance in space
and the distance in time between the two
events, estimated by any observer. If the dis-
tance in space is greater than the distance that
light would have traveled in the time, the sep-


CLOCKS AND FOOT RULES 57


aration is space-like. Then the following con-
struction gives the interval between the two
events: Draw a line AB as long as the distance
that light would travel in the time; round A
describe a circle whose radius is the distance in
space between the two events; through B draw
BC perpendicular to AB, meeting the circle in
C. Then BC is the length of the interval be-
tween the two events.

When the distance is time-like, use the same
figure, but let AC be now the distance that light
would travel in the time, while AB is the dis-
tance in space between the two events. The in-
terval between them is now the time that light
would take to travel the distance BC,

Although AB and AC are different for differ-
ent observers, BC is the same length for all
observers, subject to corrections made by the
general theory. It represents the one interval
in “space-time” which replaces the two intervals
in space and time of the older physics. So far,
this notion of interval may appear somewhat
mysterious, but as we proceed it will grow less
so, and its reason in the nature of things will
gradually emerge.


CHAPTER V: SPACE-TIME


VERYBODY who has ever heard of relativity
knows the phrase “space-time,” and knows
that the correct thing is to use this phrase when
formerly we should have said “space and time.”
But very few people who are not mathematicians
have any clear idea of what is meant by this
change of phraseology. Before dealing further
with the special theory of relativity, I want to
try to convey to the reader what is involved in
the new phrase “space-time,” because that is,
from a philosophical and imaginative point of
view, perhaps the most important of all the nov-
elties that Einstein has introduced.

Suppose you wish to say where and when some
event has occurred—say an explosion on an air-
ship—you will have to mention four quantities,
say the latitude and longitude, the height above
the ground, and the time. According to the
traditional view, the first three of these give the
position in space, while the fourth gives the posi-


tion in time. The three quantities that give the
58


SPACE-TIME 59


position in space may be assigned in all sorts of
ways. You might, for instance, take the plane
of the equator, the plane of the meridian of
Greenwich, and the plane of the ninetieth merid-
jan, and say how far the airship was from each of
these planes; these three distances would be what
are called “Cartesian co-ordinates,” after Des-
cartes. You might take any other three planes
all at right angles to each other, and you would
still have Cartesian co-ordinates. Or you might
take the distance from London to a point ver-
tically below the airship, the direction of this
distance (northeast, west-southwest, or what-
ever it might be), and the height of the airship
above the ground. ‘There are an infinite num-
ber of such ways of fixing the position in space,
all equally legitimate; the choice between them is
merely one of convenience.

When people said that space had three dimen-
sions, they meant just this: that three quantities
were necessary in order to specify the position of
a point in space, but that the method of assigning
these quantities was wholly arbitrary.

With regard to time, the matter was thought
to be quite different. The only arbitrary ele-
ments in the reckoning of time were the unit, and


60 THE A B GOFF RELATIVITY


the point of time from which the reckoning
started. One could reckon in Greenwich time,
or in Paris time, or in New York time; that made
a difference as to the point of departure. One
could reckon in seconds, minutes, hours, days, or
years; that was a difference of unit. Both these
were obvious and trivial matters. There was
nothing corresponding to the liberty of choice
as to the method of fixing position in space.
And, in particular, it was thought that the
method of fixing position in space and the
method of fixing position in time could be made
wholly independent of each other. For these
reasons, people regarded time and space as quite
distinct.

The theory of relativity has changed this.
There are now a number of different ways of
fixing position in time, which do not differ
merely as to the unit and the starting point. In-
deed, as we have seen, if one event is simultane-
ous with another in one reckoning, it will precede
it in another, and follow it in a third. More-
over, the space and time reckonings are no
longer independent of each other. If you alter
the way of reckoning position in space, you may
also alter the time interval between two events.


SPACE-TIME 61


If you alter the way of reckoning time, you may
also alter the distance in space between two
events. ‘Thus space and time are no longer in-
dependent, any more than the three dimensions
of space are. We still need four quantities to
determine the position of an event, but we can-
not, as before, divide off one of the four as quite
independent of the other three.

It is not quite true to say that there is no
longer any distinction between time and space.
As we have seen, there are time-like intervals
and space-like intervals. But the distinction is
of a different sort from that which was formerly
assumed. There is no longer a universal time
which can be applied without ambiguity to any
part of the universe; there are only the various
“proper” times of the various bodies in the uni-
verse, which agree approximately for two bodies
which are not in rapid relative motion, but never
agree exactly except for two bodies which are
at rest relatively to each other.

The picture of the world which is required for
this new state of affairs is as follows: Suppose
an event EH occurs to me, and simultaneously a
flash of light goes out from me in all directions.
Anything that happens to any body after the


62 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


light from the flash has reached it is definitely
after the event EH’ in any system of reckoning
time. Any event anywhere which I could have
seen before the event EH’ occurred to me is def-
initely before the event H in any system of reck-
oning time. But any event which happened in
the intervening time is not definitely either be-
fore or after the event ZH. To make the matter
definite: suppose I could observe a person in
Sirius, and he could observe me. Anything
which he does, and which I see before the event
E occurs to me, is definitely before H'; anything
he does after he has seen the event £ is definitely
after HZ. But anything that he does before he
sees the event H, but so that I see it after the
event H has happened, is not definitely before or
after H. Since light takes many years to travel
from Sirius to the earth, this gives a period of
twice as many years in Sirius which may be called
“contemporary” with EH, since these years are
not definitely before or after E.

Dr. A. A. Robb, in his Theory of Time and
Space, suggests a point of view which may or
may not be philosophically fundamental, but is
at any rate a help in understanding the state
of affairs we have been describing. He main-


SPACE-TIME 63


tains that one event can only be said to be def-
initely before another if it can influence that
other in some way. Now influences spread from
a center at varying rates. Newspapers exer-
cise an influence emanating from London at an
average rate of about twenty miles an hour—
rather more for long distances. Anything a man
does because of what he reads in the newspaper
is clearly subsequent to the printing of the news-
paper. Sounds travel much faster: it would be
possible to arrange a series of loud speakers
along the main roads, and have newspapers
shouted from each to the next. But telegraph-
ing is quicker, and wireless telegraphy travels
with the velocity of light, so that nothing quicker
can ever be hoped for. Now what a man does
in consequence of receiving a wireless message
he does after the message was sent; the mean-
ing here is quite independent of conventions as
to the measurement of time. But anything that
he does while the message is on its way cannot
be influenced by the sending of the message, and
cannot influence the sender until some little time
after he sent the message. That is to say, if
two bodies are widely separated, neither can in-
fluence the other except after a certain lapse of


64 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


time; what happens before that time has elapsed
cannot affect the distant body. Suppose, for in-
stance, that some notable event happens on the
sun: there is a period of sixteen minutes on the
earth during which no event on the earth can
have influenced or been influenced by the said
notable event on the sun. ‘This gives a substan-
tial ground for regarding that period of sixteen
minutes on the earth as neither before nor after
the event on the sun.

The paradoxes of the special theory of rel-
ativity are only paradoxes because we are un-
accustomed to the point of view, and in the habit
of taking things for granted when we have no
right todo so. This is especially true as regards
the measurement of lengths. In daily life, our
way of measuring lengths is to apply a foot rule
or some other measure. At the moment when
the foot rule is applied, it is at rest relatively to
the body which is being measured. Conse-
quently the length that we arrive at by measure-
ment is the “proper” length, that is to say, the
length as estimated by an observer who shares
the motion of the body. We never, in ordinary
life, have to tackle the problem of measuring a
body which is in continual motion. And even if


SPACE-TIME 65


we did, the velocities of visible bodies on the earth
are so small relatively to the earth that the anom-
alies dealt with by the theory of relativity would
not appear. But in astronomy, or in the investi-
gation of atomic structure, we are faced with
problems which cannot be tackled in this way.
Not being Joshua, we cannot make the sun stand
still while we measure it; if we are to estimate its
size, we must do so while it is in motion relatively
tous. And similarly if you want to estimate the
size of an electron, you have to do so while it is
in rapid motion, because it never stands still for
a moment. This is the sort of problem with
which the theory of relativity is concerned.
Measurement with a foot rule, when it is pos-
sible, gives always the same result, because it
gives the “proper” length of a body. But when
this method is not possible, we find that curious
things happen, particularly if the body to be
measured is moving very fast relatively to the ob-
server. A figure like the one at the end of the
previous chapter will help us to understand the
state of affairs.

Let us suppose that the body on which we wish
to measure lengths is moving relatively to our-
selves, and that in one second it moves the dis-


66 THE -A Be@ OF RELATIVELY


tance OM. Let us draw a circle round O whose
radius is the distance that light travels in a sec-
ond. Through M draw MP perpendicular to
OM, meeting the circle in P. Thus OP is the
distance that light travels in a second. The ratio
of OP to OM is the ratio of the velocity of light
to the velocity of the
body. The ratio of OP
to MP is the ratio in
which apparent lengths
are altered by the motion.
That is to say, if the ob-
server judges that two
points in the line of
motion on the moving
body are at a distance from each other repre-
sented by MP, a person moving with the
body would judge that they were at a dis-
tance represented (on the same scale) by OP.
Distances on the moving body at right angles to
the line of motion are not affected by the motion.
The whole thing is reciprocal; that is to say, if an
observer moving with the body were to measure
lengths on the previous observer’s body, they
would be altered in just the same proportion.
When two bodies are moving relatively to each


P


SPACE-TIME 67


other, lengths on either appear shorter to the
other than to themselves. This is the Fitzgerald
contraction, which was first invented to account
for the result of the Michelson-Morley experi-
ment. But it now emerges naturally from the
fact that the two observers do not make the same
judgment of simultaneity.

The way in which simultaneity comes in is this:
We say that two points on a body are a foot
apart when we can simultaneously apply one end
of a foot rule to the one and the other end to the
other. If, now, two people disagree about simul-
taneity, and the body is in motion, they will ob-
viously get different results from their measure-
ments. Thus the trouble about time is at the
bottom of the trouble about distance.

The ratio of OP to MP is the essential thing
in all these matters. Times and lengths and
masses are all altered in this proportion when
the body concerned is in motion relatively to the
observer. It will be seen that, if OM is very
much smaller than OP, that is to say, if the body
is moving very much more slowly than light,
MP and OP are very nearly equal, so that the
alterations produced by the motion are very
small, But if OM is nearly as large as OP, that


68 THE A BQ OF RELATIVITY


is to say, if the body is moving nearly as fast as
light, MP becomes very small compared to OP,
and the effects become very great. The appar-
ent increase of mass in swiftly moving particles
had been observed, and the right formula had
been found, before Einstein invented his special
theory of relativity. In fact, Lorentz had arived
at the formulae called the “Lorentz transforma-
tion,” which embody the whole mathematical es-
sence of the special theory of relativity. But it
was Einstein who showed that the whole thing
was what we ought to have expected, and not a
set of makeshift devices to account for surpris-
ing experimental results. Nevertheless, it must
not be forgotten that experimental results were
the original motive of the whole theory, and have
remained the ground for undertaking the tre-
mendous logical reconstruction involved in Ein-
stein’s theories.

We may now recapitulate the reasons which
have made it necessary to substitute “space-
time” for space and time. The old separation of
space and time rested upon the belief that there
was no ambiguity in saying that two events in
distant places happened at the same time; con-
sequently it was thought that we could describe


SPACE-TIME 69


the topography of the universe at a given instant
in purely spatial terms. But now that simul-
taneity has become relative to a particular ob-
server, this is no longer possible. What is, for
one observer, a description of the state of the
world at a given istant, is, for another observer,
a series of events at various different times,
whose relations are not merely spatial but also
temporal. For the same reason, we are con-
cerned with events, rather than with bodies. In
the old theory, it was possible to consider a num-
ber of bodies all at the same instant, and since
the time was the same for all of them it could
be ignored. But now we cannot do that if we
are to obtain an objective account of physical
occurrences. We must mention the date at which
a body is to be considered, and thus we arrive at
an “event,” that is to say, something which hap-
pens at a given time. When we know the time
and place of an event in one observer’s system of
reckoning, we can calculate its time and place ac-
cording to another observer. But we must know
the time as well as the place, because we can no
longer ask what is its place for the new observer
at the “same” time as for the old observer. There
is no such thing as the “same” time for different


7O THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


observers, unless they are at rest relatively to
each other. We need four measurements to fix
a position, and four measurements fix the posi-
tion of an event in space-time, not merely of a
body in space. ‘Three measurements are not
enough to fix any position. That is the essence
of what is meant by the substitution of space-
time for space and time.


CHAPTER VI: THE SPECIAL: THEORY OF
RELATIVITY


HE special theory of relativity arose as a

way of accounting for the facts of electro-
magnetism. We have here a somewhat curious
history. In the eighteenth and early nineteenth
centuries the theory of electricity was wholly
dominated by the Newtonian analogy. Two
electric charges attract each other if they are of
different kinds, one positive and one negative,
but repel each other if they are of the same kind;
in each case, the force varies as the inverse square
of the distance, as in the case of gravitation.
This force was conceived as an action at a dis-
tance, until Faraday, by a number of remarkable
experiments, demonstrated the effect of the in-
tervening medium. Faraday was no mathema-
tician; Clerk Maxwell first gave a mathematical
form to the results suggested by Faraday’s ex-
periments. Moreover Clerk Maxwell gave
grounds for thinking that light is an electromag-
netic phenomenon, consisting of electromagnetic

71


72 THE AcBoC7OF RELATIVIZY


waves. The medium for the transmission of
electromagnetic effects could therefore be taken
to be the ether, which had long been assumed for
the transmission of light. The correctness of
Maxwell’s theory of light was proved by the ex-
periments of Hertz in manufacturing electro-
magnetic waves; these experiments afforded the
basis for wireless telegraphy. So far, we have
a record of triumphant progress, in which theory
and experiment alternately assume the leading
role. At the time of Hertz’s experiments, the
ether seemed securely established, and in just as
strong a position as any other scientific hypoth-
esis not capable of direct verification. But a new
set of facts began to be discovered, and gradually
the whole picture was changed.

The movement which culminated with Hertz
was a movement for making everything contin-
uous. The ether was continuous, the waves in
it were continuous, and it was hoped that matter
would be found to consist of some continuous
structure in the ether. Then came the discovery
of the electron, a small finite unit of negative
electricity, and the proton, a small finite unit of
positive electricity. ‘The most modern view is
that electricity is never found except in the form


SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 73


of electrons and protons; all electrons have the
same amount of negative electricity, and all pro-
tons have an exactly equal and opposite amount
of positive electricity. It appeared that an elec-
tric current, which had been thought of as a con-
tinuous phenomenon, consists of electrons travel-
ing one way and positive ions traveling the other
way; it is no more strictly continuous than the
stream of people going up and down an escalator.
Then came the discovery of quanta, which seems
to show a fundamental discontinuity in all such
natural processes as can be measured with suf-
ficient precision. Thus physics has had to digest
new facts and face new problems.

But the problems raised by the electron and
the quantum are not those that the theory of
relativity can solve, at any rate at present; as
yet, it throws no light upon the discontinuities
which exist in nature. The problems solved by
the special theory of relativity are typified by
the Michelson-Morley experiment. Assuming
the correctness of Maxwell’s theory of electro-
magnetism, there should have been certain dis-
coverable effects of motion through the ether;
in fact, there were none. Then there was the
observed fact that a body in very rapid motion


74. THE’ AsBvG7OFr RELATIVIEY


appears to increase its mass; the increase is in
the ratio of OP to MP in the figure in the pre-
ceding chapter. Facts of this sort gradually ac-
cumulated, until it became imperative to find
some theory which would account for them all.

Maxwell’s theory reduced itself to certain
equations, known as “Maxwell’s equations.”
Through all the revolutions which physics has
undergone in the last fifty years, these equa-
tions have remained standing; indeed they have
continually grown in importance as well as in
certainty—for Maxwell’s arguments in their fa-
vor were so shaky that the correctness of his re-
sults must almost be ascribed to intuition. Now
these equations were, of course, obtained from
experiments in terrestrial laboratories, but there
was a tacit assumption that the motion of the
earth through the ether could be ignored. In
certain cases, such as the Michelson-Morley ex-
periment, this ought not to have been possible
without measurable error; but it turned out to
be always possible. Physicists were faced with
the odd difficulty that Maxwell’s equations were
more accurate than they should be. A very sim-
ilar difficulty was explained by Galileo at the
very beginning of modern physics. Most people


SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 75


think that if you let a weight drop it will fall
vertically. But if you try the experiment in the
cabin of a moving ship, the weight falls, in rela-
tion to the cabin, just as if the ship were at rest;
for instance, if it starts from the middle of the
ceiling it will drop onto the middle of the floor.
That is to say, from the point of view of an ob-
server on the shore it does not fall vertically,
since it shares the motion of the ship. So long
as the ship’s motion is steady, everything goes
on inside the ship as if the ship were not moving.
Galileo explained how this happens, to the great
indignation of the disciples of Aristotle. In
orthodox physics, which is derived from Galileo,
a uniform motion in a straight line has no discov~
erable effects. This was, in its day, as astonish-
ing a form of relativity as that of Einstein is to
us. Einstein, in the special theory of relativity,
set to work to show how electromagnetic phe-
nomena could be unaffected by uniform motion
through the ether if there be an ether. This was
a more difficult problem, which could not be
solved by merely adhering to the principles of
Galileo.

The really difficult effort required for solving
this problem was in regard to time. It was nec-


76 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


essary to introduce the notion of “proper” time
which we have already considered, and to aban-
don the old belief in one universal time. The
quantitative laws of electromagnetic phenomena
are expressed in Maxwell’s equations, and these
equations are found-to be true for any observer,
however he may be moving.’ It is a straight-
forward mathematical problem to find out what
differences there must be between the measures
applied by one observer and the measures ap-
plied by another, if, in spite of their relative mo-
tion, they are to find the same equations verified.
The answer is contained in the “Lorentz trans-
formation,” found as a formula by Lorentz, but
interpreted and made intelligible by Einstein.
The Lorentz transformation tells us what es-
timate of distances and periods of time will be
made by an observer whose relative motion is
known, when we are given those of another ob-
server. We may suppose that you are in a train
on a railway which travels due east. You have
been traveling for a time which, by the clocks at
the station from which you started, is t Ata
distance w from your starting point, as meas-


ured by the people on the line, an event occurs


1 So long as he has no considerable acceleration. The treatment
of acceleration belongs to the general theory of relativity.


SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 77


at this moment—say the line is struck by light-
ning. You have been traveling all the time with
a uniform velocity v. The question is: How far
from you will you judge that this event has taken
place, and how long after you started will it be
by your watch, assuming that your watch is cor-
rect from the point of view of an observer on
the train?

Our solution of this problem has to satisfy cer-
tain conditions. It has to bring out the result
that the velocity of light is the same for all ob-
servers, however they may be moving. And it
has to make physical phenomena—in particular,
those of electromagnetism—obey the same laws
for different observers, however they may find
their measures of distances and times affected by
their motion. And it has to make all such effects
on measurement reciprocal. That is to say, if
you are in a train and your motion affects your
estimate of distances outside the train, there
must be an exactly similar change in the estimate
which people outside the train make of distances
inside it. These conditions are sufficient to de-
termine the solution of the problem, but the
method of obtaining the solution cannot be ex-


;


78. THE Ay BIGHOF RELATIVITY


plained without more mathematics than is pos-
sible in the present work.

Before dealing with the matter in general
terms, let us take an example. Let us suppose
that you are in a train on a long straight railway,
and that you are traveling at three-fifths of the
velocity of light. Suppose that you measure the
length of your train, and find that it is a hundred
yards. Suppose that the people who catch a
glimpse of you as you pass succeed, by skilful
scientific methods, in taking observations which
enable them to calculate the length of your train.
If they do their work correctly, they will find
that it is eighty yards long. Everything in the
train will seem to them shorter in the direction of
the train than it does to you. Dinner plates,
which you see as ordinary circular plates, will
look to the outsider as if they were oval: they
will seem only four-fifths as broad in the direc-
tion in which the train is moving as in the direc-
tion of the breadth of the train. And all this is
reciprocal, Suppose you see out of the window
a man carrying a fishing rod which, by his meas-
urement, is fifteen feet long. If he is holding it
upright, you will see it as he does; so you will if
he is holding it horizontally at right angles to the


SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 79


railway. But if he is pointing it along the rail-
way, it will seem to you to be only twelve feet
long. All lengths in the direction of motion are
diminished by twenty per cent, both for those
who look into the train from outside and for
those who look out of the train from inside.

But the effects in regard to time are even more
strange. This matter has been explained with
almost ideal lucidity by Eddington in Space,
Time and Gravitation. He supposes an aviator
traveling, relatively to the earth, at a speed of
161,000 miles a second, and he says:

“If we observed the aviator carefully we
should infer that he was unusually slow in his
movements; and events in the conveyance mov-
ing with him would be similarly retarded—as
though time had forgotten to go on. His cigar
lasts twice as long as one of ours. I said ‘infer’
deliberately; we should see a still more extrava-
gant slowing down of time; but that is easily ex-
plained, because the aviator is rapidly increasing
his distance from us and the light impressions
take longer and longer to reach us. The more
moderate retardation referred to remains after
we have allowed for the time of transmission of
light. But here again reciprocity comes in, be-


80 THE, A-BiGClOPeR ELATIVELY.


cause in the aviator’s opinion it is we who are
traveling at 161,000 miles a second past him; and
when he has made all allowances, he finds that it
is we who are sluggish. Our cigar lasts twice as
long as his.”

What a situation for envy! Each man thinks
that the other’s cigar lasts twice as long as his
own. It may, however, be some consolation to
reflect that the other man’s visits to the dentist
also last twice as long.

This question of time is rather intricate, owing
to the fact that events which one man judges to
be simultaneous another considers to be sepa-
rated by a lapse of time. In order to try to make
clear how time is affected, I shall revert to our
railway train traveling due east at a rate three-
fifths of that of light. For the sake of illustra-
tion, I assume that the earth is large and flat, in-
stead of small and round.

If we take events which happen at a fixed
point on the earth, and ask ourselves how long
after the beginning of the journey they will seem
to be to the traveler, the answer is that there will
be that retardation that Eddington speaks of,
which means in this case that what seems an hour
in the life of the stationary person is judged to


SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 81


be an hour and a quarter by the man who ob-
serves him from the train. Reciprocally, what
seems an hour in the life of the person in the
train is judged by the man observing him from
outside to be an hour and a quarter. Each makes
periods of time observed in the life of the other
a quarter as long again as they are to the person
who lives through them. The proportion is the
same in regard to times as in regard to lengths.
But when, instead of comparing events at the
same place on the earth, we compare events at
widely separated places, the results are still more
odd. Let us now take all the events along the
railway which, from the point of view of a person
who is stationary on the earth, happen at a given
instant, say the instant when the observer in the
train passes the stationary person. Of these
events, those which occur at points towards which
the train is moving will seem to the traveler to
have already happened, while those which occur
at points behind the train will, for him, be still in
the future. When I say that events in the for-
ward direction will seem to have already hap-
pened, I am saying something not strictly accu-
rate, because he will not yet have seen them; but
when he does see them, he will, after allowing for


82 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


the velocity of light, come to the conclusion that
they must have happened before the moment in
question. An event which happens in the for-
ward direction along the railway, and which the
stationary observer judges to be now (or rather,
will judge to have been now when he comes to
know of it), if it occurs at a distance along the
line which light could travel in a second, will be
judged by the traveler to have occurred three-
quarters of a second ago. If it occurs at a dis-
tance from the two observers which the man on
the earth judges that light could travel in a year,
the traveler will judge (when he comes to know
of it) that it occurred nine months earlier than
the moment when he passed the earth dweller.
And generally, he will ante-date events in the
forward direction along the railway by three-
quarters of the time that it would take light to
travel from them to the man on the earth whom
he is just passing, and who holds that these
events are happening now—or rather, will hold
that they happened now when the light from
them reaches him. Events happening on the
railway behind the train will be post-dated by an
exactly equal amount.

We have thus a two-fold correction to make in


Seeocrau LHEORY OF RELATIVITY 83


the date of an event when we pass from the ter-
restrial observer to the traveler. We must first
take five-fourths of the time as estimated by the
earth dweller, and then subtract three-fourths of
the time that it would take light to travel from
the event in question to the earth dweller.

Take some event in a distant part of the uni-
verse, which becomes visible to the earth dweller
and the traveler just as they pass each other.
The earth dweller, if he knows how far off the
event occurred, can judge how long ago it oc-
curred, since he knows the speed of light. If
the event occurred in the direction towards which
the traveler is moving, the traveler will infer that
it happened twice as long ago as the earth
dweller thinks. But if it occurred in the direc-
tion from which he has come, he will argue that
it happened only half as long ago as the earth
dweller thinks. If the traveler moves at a differ-
ent speed, these proportions will be different.

Suppose now that (as sometimes occurs) two
new stars have suddenly flared up, and have just
become visible to the traveler and to the earth
dweller whom he is passing. Let one of them
be in the direction towards which the train is
traveling, the other in the direction from which


84 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


it has come. Suppose that the earth dweller is
able, in some way, to estimate the distance of the
two stars, and to infer that light takes fifty years
to reach him from the one in the direction to-
wards which the traveler is moving, and one hun-
dred years to reach him from the other. He will
then argue that the explosion which produced the
new star in the forward direction occurred fifty
years ago, while the explosion which produced
the other new star occurred a hundred years ago.
The traveler will exactly reverse these figures:
he will infer that the forward explosion occurred
a hundred years ago, and the backward one fifty
years ago. I assume that both argue correctly
on correct physical data. In fact, both are right,
unless they imagine that the other must be
wrong. It should be noted that both will have
the same estimate of the velocity of light, because
their estimates of the distances of the two new
stars will vary in exactly the same proportion as
their estimates of the times since the explosions.
Indeed, one of the main motives of this whole
theory is to secure that the velocity of light shall
be the same for all observers, however they may
be moving. This fact, established by experi-
ment, was incompatible with the old theories, and


SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 85


made it absolutely necessary to admit something
startlng. The theory of relativity is just as
little startling as is compatible with the facts.
Indeed, after a time, it ceases to seem startling
at all.

There is another feature of very great impor-
tance in the theory we have been considering, and
that is that, although distances and times vary
for different observers, we can derive from them
the quantity called “interval,” which is the same
for all observers. The “interval,” in the special
theory of relativity, is obtained as follows: Take
the square of the distance between two events,
and the square of the distance traveled by light
in the time between the two events; subtract the
lesser of these from the greater, and the result
is defined as the square of the interval between
the events. The interval is the same for all ob-
servers, and represents a genuine physical rela-
tion between the two events, which the time and
the distance do not. We have already given a
geometrical construction for the interval at the
end of Chapter IV; this gives the same result as
the above rule. The interval is “time-like” when
the time between the events is longer than light
would take to travel from the place of the one to


86 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


the place of the other; in the contrary case it is
“space-like.” When the time between the two
events is exactly equal to the time taken by light
to travel from one to the other, the interval is
zero; the two events are then situated on parts
of one light ray, unless no light happens to be
passing that way.

When we come to the general theory of rela-
tivity, we shall have to generalize the notion of
interval. The more deeply we penetrate into the
structure of the world, the more important this
concept becomes; we are tempted to say that it
is the reality of which distances and periods of
time are confused representations. The theory
of relativity has altered our view of the funda-
mental structure of the world; that is the source
both of its difficulty and of its importance.

The remainder of this chapter may be omitted
by readers who have not even the most elemen-
tary acquaintance with geometry or algebra.
But for the benefit of those whose education has
not been entirely neglected, I will add a few ex-
planations of the general formula of which I
have hitherto given only particular examples.
The general formula in question is the “Lorentz
transformation,” which tells, when one body is


SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 87


moving in a given manner relatively to another,
how to infer the measures of lengths and times
appropriate to the one body from those appro-
priate to the other. Before giving the algebrai-
cal formule, I will give a geometrical construc-
tion. As before, we will suppose that there are
two observers, whom we will call O and O’, one
of whom is stationary on the earth while the
other is traveling at a uniform speed along a
straight railway. At the beginning of the time
considered, the two observers were at the same
point of the railway, but now they are separated
by a certain distance. A flash of lightning
strikes a point X on the railway, and O judges
that at the moment when the flash takes place
the observer in the train has reached the point O’.
The problem is: how far will O’ judge that he is
from the flash, and how long after the beginning
of the journey (when he was at O) will he judge
that the flash took place? We are supposed to
know O’s estimates, and we want to calculate
those of O’.

In the time that, according to O, has elapsed
since the beginning of the journey, let OC be the
distance that light would have traveled along the
railway. Describe a circle about O, with OC as


88 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


radius, and through O’ draw a perpendicular to
the railway, meeting the circle in D. On OD
take a point Y such that OY is equal to OX (X
is the point of the railway where the lightning
strikes). Draw YM perpendicular to the rail-


way, and OS perpendicular to OD. Let YM
and OS meet in §. Also let DO’ produced and
OS produced meet in R. Through X and C
draw perpendiculars to the railway meeting OS


SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 89


produced in @ and Z respectively. Then RQ
(as measured by O) is the distance at which O’
will believe himself to be from the flash, not O’/X
as it would be according to the old view. And
whereas O thinks that, in the time from the be-
ginning of the journey to the flash, light would
travel a distance OC, O’ thinks that the time
elapsed is that required for light to travel the
distance SZ (as measured by O). The interval
as measured by O is got by subtracting the
square on OX from the square on OC; the inter-
val as measured by O’ is got by subtracting the
square on RQ from the square on SZ. A little
very elementary geometry shows that these are
equal.

The algebraical formule embodied in the
above construction are as follows: From the
point of view of O, let an event occur at a
distance w along the railway, and at a time ¢ after
the beginning of the journey (when O’ was at
O). From the point of view of O’, let the same
event occur at a distance 2’ along the railway,
and at a time ?’ after the beginning of the jour-
ney. Let c be the velocity of light, and v the
velocity of O’ relative to O. Put


go THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


ig Aes
oe
Then x’ = 6 (x— I)


This is the Lorentz transformation, from which
everything in this chapter can be deduced.


CHAPTER VII: INTERVALS IN SPACE-TIME


HE special theory of relativity, which we

have been considering hitherto, solved com-
pletely a certain definite problem: to account for
the experimental fact that, when two bodies are
in uniform relative motion, all the laws of
physics, both those of ordinary dynamics and
those connected with electricity and magnetism,
are exactly the same for the two bodies. ‘“Uni-
form” motion, here, means motion in a straight
line with constant velocity. But although one
problem was solved by the special theory,
another was immediately suggested: what if the
motion of the two bodies is not uniform? Sup-
pose, for instance, that one is the earth while the
other is a falling stone. The stone has an accel-
erated motion: it is continually falling faster and
faster. Nothing in the special theory enables us
to say that the laws of physical phenomena will
be the same for an observer on the stone as for
one on the earth. This is particularly awkward,
as the earth itself is, in an extended sense, a

or


92 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


falling body: It has at every moment an accel-
eration’ towards the sun, which makes it go
round the sun instead of moving in a straight
line. As our knowledge of physics is derived
from experiments on the earth, we cannot rest
satisfied with a theory in which the observer is
supposed to have no acceleration. The general
theory of relativity removes this restriction, and
allows the observer to be moving in any way,
straight or crooked, uniformly or with an accel-
eration. In the course of removing the restric-
tion, Einstein was led to his new law of gravita-
tion, which we shall consider presently. The
work was extraordinarily difficult, and occupied
him for ten years. The special theory dates from
1905, the general theory from 1915.

It is obvious from experiences with which we
are all familiar that an accelerated motion is
much more difficult to deal with than a uniform
one. When you are in a train which is traveling
steadily, the motion is not noticeable so long as
you do not look out of the window; but when the
brakes are applied suddenly you are precipi-


tated forwards, and you become aware that

1 This does not mean that its velocity is increasing, but that it
is changing its direction. The only sort of motion which is called
“unaccelerated” is motion with uniform velocity in a@ straight line.


INTERVALS IN SPACE-TIME 93


something is happening without having to notice
anything outside the train. Similarly in a lift
everything seems ordinary while it is moving
steadily, but at starting and stopping, when its
motion is accelerated, you have odd sensations
in the pit of the stomach. (We call a motion
“accelerated” when it is getting slower as well
as when it is getting quicker; when it is getting
slower the acceleration is negative.) The same
thing applies to dropping a weight in the cabin
of a ship. So long as the ship is moving uni-
formly, the weight will behave, relatively to the
cabin, just as if the ship were at rest: if it starts
from the middle of the ceiling, it will hit the mid-
dle of the floor. But if there is an acceleration
everything is changed. If the boat is increasing
its speed very rapidly, the weight will seem to an
observer in the cabin to fall in a curve directed
towards the stern; if the speed is being rapidly
diminished, the curve will be directed towards
the bow. All these facts are familiar, and they
led Galileo and Newton to regard an accelerated
motion as something radically different, in its
own nature, from a uniform motion. But this
distinction could only be maintained by regard-
ing motion as absolute, not relative. If all mo-


94 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


tion is relative, the earth is accelerated relatively
to the lift just as truly as the lift relatively to
the earth. Yet the people on the ground have
no sensations in the pits of their stomachs when
the lift starts to go up. This illustrates the dif-
ficulty of our problem. In fact, though few
physicists in modern times have believed in ab-
solute motion, the technique of mathematical
physics still embodied Newton’s belief in it, and
a revolution in method was required to obtain a
technique free from this assumption. This revo-
lution was accomplished in Einstein’s general
theory of relativity.

It is somewhat optional where we begin in ex-
plaining the new ideas which Einstein intro-
duced, but perhaps we shall do best by taking
the conception of “interval.” This conception,
as it appears in the special theory of relativity,
is already a generalization of the traditional no-
tion of distance in space and time; but it is neces-
sary to generalize it still further. However, it
is necessary first to explain a certain amount of
history, and for this purpose we must go back
as far as Pythagoras.

Pythagoras, like many of the greatest char-
acters in history, perhaps never existed: he is a


INTERVALS IN SPACE-TIME 95


semi-mythical character, who combined mathe-
matics and priestcraft in uncertain proportions.
I shall, however, assume that he existed, and that
he discovered the theorem attributed to him. He
was roughly a contemporary of Confucius and
Buddha; he founded a religious sect, which
thought it wicked to eat beans, and a school of
mathematicians, who took a particular interest in
right-angled triangles. The theorem of Pythag-
oras (the forty-seventh proposition of Euclid)
states that the sum of the squares on the two
shorter sides of a right-angled triangle is equal
to the square on the side opposite the right angle.
No proposition in the whole of mathematics has
had such a distinguished history. We all learned
to “prove” it in youth. It is true that the
“proof” proved nothing, and that the only way
to prove it is by experiment. It is also the case
that the proposition is not quite true—it is only
approximately true. But everything in geome-
try, and subsequently in physics, has been de-
rived from it by successive generalizations. The
latest of these generalizations is the general
theory of relativity.

The theorem of Pythagoras was itself, in all
probability, a generalization of an Egyptian rule


96 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


of thumb. In Egypt, it had been known for ages
that a triangle whose sides are 3, 4, and 5 units
of length is a right-angled triangle; the Kgyp-
tians used this knowledge practically in measur-
ing their fields. Now if the sides of a triangle are
3, 4, and 5 inches, the squares on these sides will
contain respectively 9, 16, and 25 square inches;
and 9 and 16 added together make 25. Three
times three is written “3?”; four times four,
“4”. five times five, “57.” So that we have
37+ 4 = 5°,

It is supposed that Pythagoras noticed this fact,
after he had learned from the Egyptians that a
triangle whose sides are 3, 4 and 5 has a right
angle. He found that
this could be generalized,
and so arrived at his
famous theorem: In a
right-angled triangle, the

square on the side oppo-
site the right angle is
equal to the sum of the
squares on the other two sides.

Similarly in three dimensions: if you take a
right-angled solid block, the square on the diag-


INTERVALS IN SPACE-TIME 97


onal (the dotted line in the figure) is equal to
the sum of the squares on the three sides.
This is as far as the ancients got in this matter.
The next step of importance is due to Des-
cartes, who made the theorem of Pythagoras the
basis of his method of analytical geometry. Sup-
pose you wish to map out systematically all the
places on a plain—we will suppose it small
enough to make it possible to ignore the fact that
the earth is round. We
will suppose that you live E
in the middle of the plain.
One of the simplest ways
of describing the position
of a place is to say: e
starting from my house,
go first such and such a distance east, then
such and such a distance north (or it may
be west in the first case, and south in the
second). This tells you exactly where the
place is. In the rectangular cities of America,
it is the natural method to adopt: in New York
you will be told to go so many blocks east (or
west) and then so many blocks north (or south).
The distance you have to go east is called wv, and
the distance you have to go north is called y. (If


98 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


you have to go west, wv is negative; if you have to
go south, y is negative.) Let O be your start-
ing-point (the “origin’’) ; let OM be the distance
you go east, and MP the distance you go north.
How far are you from home in a direct line when
you reach P? The theorem of Pythagoras gives
the answer. The square on OP is the sum of the
squares on OM and MP. If OM is four miles,
and MP is three miles, OP is 5 miles. If OM is
12 miles and MP is 5 miles, OP is 13 miles, be-
cause 12” + 5° = 13°. So that if you adopt Des-
cartes’ method of mapping, the theorem of
Pythagoras is essential in giving you the distance
from place to place. In three dimensions the
thing is exactly analogous. Suppose that, in-
stead of wanting merely to fix positions on the
plain, you want to fix stations for captive bal-
loons above it, you will then have to add a third
quantity, the height at which the balloon is to be.
If you call the height zg, and if r is the direct dis-
tance from O to the balloon, you will have


pe a cea aa,
and from this you can calculate r when you know


xv, y, and z. For example, if you can get to the
balloon by going 12 miles east, 4 miles north, and


INTERVALS IN SPACE-TIME 99


then 3 miles up, your distance from the balloon
in a straight line is 13 miles, because 12 x 12 =
144, 4x4=16,3x3 =9, 144+164+9 =
169°=13 x 13:

But now suppose that, instead of taking a
small piece of the earth’s surface which can be
regarded as flat, you consider making a map of
the world. An accurate map of the world on
flat paper is impossible. A globe can be accu-
rate, in the sense that everything is produced to
scale, but a flat map cannot be. I am not talking
of practical difficulties, I am talking of a theo-
retical impossibility. For example: the northern
halves of the meridian of Greenwich and the
ninetieth meridian of west longitude, together
with the piece of the equator between them, make
a triangle whose sides are all equal and whose
angles are all right angles. On a flat surface,
a triangle of that sort would be impossible. On
the other hand, it is possible to make a square on
a flat surface, but on a sphere it is impossible.
Suppose you try on the earth: walk 100 miles
west, then 100 miles north, then 100 miles east,
then 100 miles south. You might think this
would make a square, but it wouldn’t, because
you would not at the end have come back to


I0o0 THE ABC OF RELATIVITY


your starting point. If you have time, you may
convince yourself of this by experiment. If not,
you can easily see that it must be so. When you
are nearer the pole, 100 miles takes you through
more longitude than when you are nearer the
equator, so that in doing your 100 miles east (if
you are in the northern hemisphere) you get to
a point further east than that from which you
started. As you walk due south after this, you
remain further east than your starting point, and
end up at a different place from that in which
you began. Suppose, to take another illustra-
tion, that you start on the equator 4,000 miles
east of the Greenwich meridian; you travel till
you reach the meridian, then you travel north-
wards along it for 4,000 miles, through Green-
wich and up to the neighborhood of the Shetland
Islands; then you travel eastward for 4,000
miles, and then 4,000 miles south. This will take
you to the equator at a point 4,000 miles further
east than the point from which you started.

In a sense, what we have just been saying is
not quite fair, because, except on the equator,
traveling due east is not the shortest route from
a place to another place due east of it. A ship
traveling (say) from New York to Lisbon,


INTERVALS IN SPACE-TIME IOI


which is nearly due east, will start by going a
certain distance northward. It will sail on a
“great circle,” that is to say, a circle whose centre
is the centre of the earth. This is the nearest ap-
proach to a straight line that can be drawn on
the surface of the earth. Meridians of longitude
are great circles, and so is the equator, but the
other parallels of latitude are not. We ought,
therefore, to have supposed that, when you reach
the Shetland Islands, you travel 4,000 miles, not
due east, but along a great circle which lands you
at a point due east of the Shetland Islands. This,
however, only reinforces our conclusion: you
will end at a point even further east of your
starting point than before.

What are the differences between the geome-
try on a sphere and the geometry on a plane? If
you make a triangle on the earth, whose sides are
great circles, you will not find that the angles of
the triangle add up to two right angles: they
will add up to rather more. The amount by
which they exceed two right angles is propor-
tional to the size of the triangle. On a small
triangle such as you could make with strings on
your lawn, or even on a triangle formed by three
ships which can just see each other, the angles


10: THE A-BsGeOr eRe LALTTY 11 y


will add up to so little more than two right
angles that you will not be able to detect the dif-
ference. But if you take the triangle made by
the equator, the Greenwich meridian, and the
ninetieth meridian, the angles add up to three
right angles. And you can get triangles in
which the angles add up to anything up to six
right angles. All this you could discover by
measurements on the surface of the earth, with-
out having to take account of anything in the
rest of space.

The theorem of Pythagoras also will fail for
distances on a sphere. From the point of view
of a traveler bound to the earth, the distance be-
tween two places is their great-circle distance,
that is to say, the shortest journey that a man
can make without leaving the surface of the
earth. Now suppose you take three bits of great
circles which make a triangle, and suppose one
of them is at right angles to another—to be defi-
nite, let one be the equator and one a bit of the
meridian of Greenwich going northward from
the equator. Suppose you go 3,000 miles along
the equator, and then 4,000 miles due north; how
far will you be from your starting point, esti-
mating the distance along a great circle? If


INTERVALS IN SPACE-TIME 103


you were on a plane, your distance would be
5,000 miles, as we saw before. In fact, however,
your great-circle distance will be considerably
less than this. In a right-angled triangle on a
sphere, the square on the side opposite the right
angle is less than the sum of the squares on the
other two sides.

These differences between the geometry on a
sphere and the geometry on a plane are intrinsic
differences; that is to say, they enable you to find
out whether the surface on which you live is like
a plane or like a sphere, without requiring that
you should take account of anything outside the
surface. Such considerations led to the next
step of importance in our subject, which was
taken by Gauss, who flourished a hundred years
ago. He studied the theory of surfaces, and
showed how to develop it by means of measure-
ments on the surfaces themselves, without going
outside them. In order to fix the position of a
point in space, we need three measurements; but
in order to fix the position of a point on a surface
we need only two—for example, a point on the
earth’s surface is fixed when we know its latitude
and longitude.

Now Gauss found that, whatever system of


I0o4 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


measurement you adopt, and whatever the na-
ture of the surface, there is always a way of cal-
culating the distance between two not very dis-
tant points of the surface, when you know the
quantities which fix their positions. The for-
mula for the distance is a generalization of the
formula of Pythagoras: it tells you the square
of the distance in terms of the squares of the dif-
ferences between the measure quantities which
fix the points, and also the product of these two
quantities. When you know this formula, you
can discover all the intrinsic properties of the
surface, that is to say, all those which do not de-
pend upon its relations to points outside the sur-
face. You can discover, for example, whether
the angles of a triangle add up to two right
angles, or more, or less, or more in some cases
and less in others.

But when we speak of a “triangle,” we must
explain what we mean, because on most surfaces
there are no straight lines. On a sphere, we
shall replace straight lines by great circles, which
are the nearest possible approach to straight
lines. In general, we shall take, instead of
straight lines, the lines that give the shortest
route on the surface from place to place. Such


INTERVALS IN SPACE-TIME 1O§


lines are called “geodesics.” On the earth, the
geodesics are great circles. In general, they are
the shortest way of traveling from point to point
if you are unable to leave the surface. They take
the place of straight lines in the intrinsic geome-
try of a surface. When we inquire whether the
angles of a triangle add up to two right angles
or not, we mean to speak of a triangle whose
sides are geodesics. And when we speak of the
distance between two points, we mean the dis-
tance along a geodesic.

The next step in our generalizing process is
rather difficult: it is the transition to non-EKu-
clidean geometry. We live in a world in which
space has three dimensions, and our empirical
knowledge of space is based upon measurement
of small distances and of angles. (When I speak
of small distances, I mean distances that are
small compared to those in astronomy; all dis-
tances on the earth are small in this sense.) It
was formerly thought that we could be sure a
priori that space is Kuclidean—for instance, that
the angles of a triangle add up to two right
angles. But it came to be recognized that we
could not prove this by reasoning; if it was to be
known, it must be known as the result of meas-


106° THE ASBSCrOr RELATIVITY


urements. Before Einstein, it was thought that
measurements confirm Euclidean geometry
within the limits of exactitude attainable; now
this is no longer thought. It is still true that we
can, by what may be called a natural artifice,
cause Euclidean geometry to seem true through-
out a small region, such as the earth; but in ex-
plaining gravitation Kinstein is led to the view
that over large regions where there is matter we
cannot regard space as Euclidean. The reasons
for this will concern us later. What concerns us
now is the way in which non-Kuclidean geome-
try results from a generalization of the work of
Gauss.

There is no reason why we should not have
the same circumstances in three-dimensional
space as we have, for example, on the surface of
a sphere. It might happen that the angles of a
triangle would always add up to more than two
right angles, and that the excess would be pro-
portional to the size of the triangle. It might
happen that the distance between two points
would be given by a formula analogous to what
we have on the surface of a sphere, but involving
three quantities instead of two. Whether this
does happen or not, can only be discovered by


INTERVALS IN SPACE-TIME 107


actual measurements. There are an infinite
number of such possibilities.

This line of argument was developed by Rie-
mann, in his dissertation “On the hypotheses
which underlie geometry” (1854), which applied
Gauss’s work on surfaces to different kinds of
three-dimensional spaces. He showed that all
the essential characteristics of a kind of space
could be deduced from the formula for small dis-
tances. He assumed that, from the small dis-
tances in three given directions which would to-
gether carry you from one point to another not
far from it, the distances between the two points
could be calculated. For instance, if you know
that you can get from one point to another by
first moving a certain distance east, then a cer-
tain distance north, and finally a certain distance
straight up in the air, you are to be able to cal-
culate the distance from the one point to the
other. And the rule for the calculation is to be
an extension of the theorem of Pythagoras, in
the sense that you arrive at the square of the re-
quired distance by adding together multiples of
the squares of the component distances, together
possibly with multiples of their products. From
certain characteristics in the formula, you can


108 THE ABC OF RELATIVITY


tell what sort of space you have to deal with.
These characteristics do not depend upon the
particular method you have adopted for deter-
mining the positions of points.

In order to arrive at what we want for the
theory of relativity, we now have one more gen-
eralization to make: we have to substitute the
“interval” between events for the distance be-
tween points. This takes us to space-time. We
have already seen that, in the special theory of
relativity, the square of the interval is found by
subtracting the square of the distance between
the events from the square of the distance that
light would travel in the time between them. In
the general theory, we do not assume this special
form of interval, except at a great distance from
matter. Elsewhere, we assume to begin with a
general form, lke that which Riemann used for
distances. Moreover, like Riemann, Einstein
only assumes his formula for neighboring
events, that is to say, events which have only a
small interval between them. What goes beyond
these initial assumptions depends upon observa-
tion of the actual motion of bodies, in ways
which we shall explain in later chapters.

We may now sum up and re-state the process


INTERVALS IN SPACE-TIME I09


we have been describing. In three dimensions,
the position of a point relatively to a fixed point
(the “origin”) can be determined by assigning
three quantities (“co-ordinates”). For example,
the position of a balloon relatively to your house
is fixed if you know that you will reach it by
going first a given distance due east, then
another given distance due north, then a third
given distance straight up. When, as in this
case, the three co-ordinates are three distances all
at right angles to each other, which, taken suc-
cessively, transport you from the origin to the
point in question, the square of the direct dis-
tance to the point in question is got by adding up
the squares of the three co-ordinates. In all
cases, whether in Euclidean or in non-Kuclidean
spaces, it is got by adding multiples of the
squares and products of the co-ordinates accord-
ing to an assignable rule. The co-ordinates may
be any quantities which fix the position of a
point, provided that neighboring points must
have neighboring quantities for their co-ordi-
nates. In the general theory of relativity, we
add a fourth co-ordinate to give the time, and
our formula gives “interval” instead of spatial
distance; moreover we assume the accuracy of


IIo THE ABC OF RELATIVITY


our formula for small distances only. We as-
sume further that, at great distances from mat-
ter, the formula approximates more and more
closely to the formula for interval which is used
in the special theory.

We are now at last in a position to tackle Kin-
stein’s theory of gravitation.


CHAPTER VIII: EINSTEIN’S LAW OF
GRAVITATION


EFORE tackling Einstein’s new law, it is as

well to convince ourselves, on logical

grounds, that Newton’s law of gravitation can-
not be quite right.

Newton said that between any two particles of
matter there is a force which is proportional to
the product of their masses and inversely propor-
tional to the square of their distance. That is to
say, ignoring for the present the question of
mass, if there is a certain attraction when the
particles are a mile apart, there will be a quarter
as much attraction when they are two miles
apart, a ninth as much when they are three miles
apart, and so on: the attraction diminishes much
faster than the distance increases. Now, of
course, Newton, when he spoke of the distance,
meant the distance at a given time: He thought
there could be no ambiguity about time. But
we have seen that this was a mistake. What one


observer judges to be the same moment on the
III


liz THE AB ClOPRELATIViITLY


earth and the sun, another will judge to be two
different moments. “Distance at a given mo-
ment” is therefore a subjective conception, which
can hardly enter into a cosmic law. Of course,
we could make our law unambiguous by saying
that we are going to estimate times as they are
estimated by Greenwich Observatory. But we
can hardly believe that the accidental circum-
stances of the earth deserve to be taken so seri-
ously. And the estimate of distance, also, will
vary for different observers. We cannot, there-
fore, allow that Newton’s form of the law of
gravitation can be quite correct, since it will give
different results according to which of many
equally legitimate conventions we adopt. This
is as absurd as it would be if the question
whether one man had murdered another were to
depend upon whether they were described by
their Christian names or their surnames. It is ob-
vious that physical laws must be the same
whether distances are measured in miles or in
kilometers, and we are concerned with what is
essentially only an extension of the same prin-
ciple. |

Our measurements are conventional to an even
greater extent than is admitted by the special


EINSTEIN'S GRAVITATION LAW 113


theory of relativity. Moreover, every measure-
ment is a physical process carried out with phys-
ical material; the result is certainly an experi-
mental datum, but may not be susceptible of the
simple interpretation which we ordinarily assign
to it. Weare, therefore, not going to assume to
begin with that we know how to measure any-
thing. We assume that there is a certain phys-
ical quantity, called “interval,” which is a rela-
tion between two events that are not widely
separated ; but we do not assume in advance that
we know how to measure it, beyond taking it for
granted that it is given by some generalization
of the theorem of Pythagoras such as we spoke
of in the preceding chapter.

We do assume, however, that events have an ~
order, and that this order is four-dimensional.
We assume, that is to say, that we know what
we mean by saying that a certain event is nearer
to another than to a third, so that before making
accurate measurements we can speak of the
“neighborhood” of an event; and we assume that,
in order to assign the position of an event in
space-time, four quantities (co-ordinates) are
necessary—e.g. in our former case of an explo-
sion on an air-ship, latitude, longitude, altitude


IlI4 THE ABC OF RELATIVITY


and time. But we assume nothing about the way
in which these co-ordinates are assigned, except
that neighboring co-ordinates are assigned to
neighboring events.

The way in which these numbers, called co-
ordinates, are to be assigned is neither wholly ar-
bitrary nor a result of careful measurement—it
lies in an intermediate region. While you are
making any continuous journey, your co-ordi-
nates must never alter by sudden jumps. In
America one finds that the houses between (say)
Fourteenth Street and Fifteenth Street are
likely to have numbers between 1400 and 1500,
while those between Fifteenth Street and Six-
teenth Street have numbers between 1500 and
1600, even if the 1400’s were not used up. This
would not do for our purposes, because there is
a sudden jump when we pass from one block to
the next. Or again we might assign the time co-
ordinate in the following way: take the time that
elapses between two successive births of people
called Smith; an event occurring between the
births of the 3000th and the 3001st Smith
known to history shall have a co-ordinate lying
between 3000 and 3001; the fractional part of
its co-ordinate shall be the fraction of a year that


EINSTEIN'S GRAVITATION LAW II5


has elapsed since the birth of the 3000th Smith.
(Obviously there could never be as much as a
year between two successive additions to the
Smith family.) This way of assigning the time
co-ordinate is perfectly definite, but it is not ad-
missible for our purposes, because there will be
sudden jumps between events just before the
birth of a Smith and events just after, so that
in a continuous journey your time co-ordinate
will not change continuously. It is assumed that,
independently of measurement, we know what a
continuous journey is. And when your position
in space-time changes continuously, each of your
four co-ordinates must change continuously.
One, two, or three of them may not change at all;
but whatever change does occur must be smooth,
without sudden jumps. This explains what is
not allowable in assigning co-ordinates.

To explain all the changes that are legitimate
in your co-ordinates, suppose you take a large
piece of soft india-rubber. While it is in an un-
stretched condition, measure little squares on it,
each one-tenth of an inch each way. Put in little
tiny pins at the corners of the squares. We can
take as two of the co-ordinates of one of these
pins the number of pins passed in going to the


I16 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


right from a given pin until we come just below
the pin in question, and then the number of pins
we pass on the way up to this pin. In the figure,
let O be the pin we start from and P the pin to
which we are going to assign co-ordinates. P is
in the fifth column and the third row, so its co-
ordinates in the plane of the india-rubber are
to be 5 and 3.


Now take the india-rubber and stretch it and
twist it as much as you like. Let the pins now
be in the shape they have in Fig. 2. The divi-
sions now no longer represent distances accord-
ing to our usual notions, but they will still do
just as well as co-ordinates. We may still take
P as having the co-ordinates 5 and 3 in the plane
of the india-rubber; and we may still regard the
india-rubber as being in a plane, even if we have
twisted it out of what we should ordinarily call


EINSTEIN'S GRAVITATION LAW 117


a plane. Such continuous distortions do not
matter.

To take another illustration: instead of using
a steel measuring-rod to fix our co-ordinates, let
us use a live eei, which is wriggling all the time.
The distance from the tail to the head of the eel
is to count as one from the point of view of co-
ordinates, whatever shape the creature may be
assuming at the moment. The eel is continuous,
and its wriggles are continuous, so it may be
taken as our unit of distance in assigning co-
ordinates. Beyond the requirement of conti-
nuity, the method of assigning cc-ordinates is
purely conventional, and therefore a live eel is
just as good as a steel rod.

We are apt to think that, for really careful
measurements, it is better to use a steel rod than
a live eel. This is a mistake: not because the eel
tells us what the steel rod was thought to tell,
but because the steel rod really tells no more
than the eel obviously does. The point is, not
that eels are really rigid, but that steel rods
really wriggle. To an observer in just one pos-
sible state of motion, the eel would appear rigid,
while the steel rod would seem to wriggle just as
the eel does to us. For everybody moving dif-


118 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


ferently both from this observer and ourselves,
both the eel and the rod would seem to wriggle.
And there is no saying that one observer is right
and another wrong. In such matters, what is
seen does not belong solely to the physical proc-
ess observed, but also to the standpoint of the
observer. Measurements of distances and times
do not directly reveal properties of the things
measured, but relations of the things to the meas-
urer. What observation can tell us about the
physical world is therefore more abstract than we
have hitherto believed.

It is important to realize that geometry, as
taught in schools since Greek times, ceases to
exist as a separate science, and becomes merged
in physics. ‘The two fundamental notions in ele-
mentary geometry were the straight line and the
circle. What appears to you as a straight road,
whose parts all exist now, may appear to another
observer to be like the flight of a rocket, some
kind of curve whose parts come into existence
successively. 'The circle depends upon measure-
ment of distances, since it consists of all the
points at a given distance from its center. And
measurement of distances, as we have seen, is a
subjective affair, depending upon the way in


EINSTEIN'S GRAVITATION LAW 119


which the observer is moving. The failure of
the circle to have objective validity was demon-
strated by the Michelson-Morley experiment,
and is thus, in a sense, the starting point of the
whole theory of relativity. Rigid bodies, which
we need for measurement, are only rigid for cer-
tain observers; for others, they will be constantly
changing all their dimensions. It is only our
obstinately earth-bound imagination that makes
us suppose a geometry separate from physics to
_be possible.

That is why we do not trouble to give physical
significance to our co-ordinates from the start.
Formerly, the co-ordinates used in physics were
supposed to be carefully measured distances;
now we realize that this care at the start is
thrown away. It is at a later stage that care is
required. Our co-ordinates now are hardly
more than a systematic way of cataloguing
events. But mathematics provides, in the
method of tensors, such an immensely powerful
technique that we can use co-ordinates assigned
in this apparently careless way just as effectively
as if we had applied the whole apparatus of mi-
nutely accurate measurement in arriving at them.
The advantage of being haphazard at the start is


I20 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


that we avoid making surreptitious physical as-
sumptions, which we can hardly help making, if
we suppose that our co-ordinates have initially
some particular physical significance.

We assume that, if two events are close to-
gether (but not necessarily otherwise), there is an
interval between them which can be calculated
from the differences between their co-ordinates
by some such formula as we considered in the pre-
ceding chapter. That is to say, we take the
squares and products of the differences of co-
ordinates, we multiply them by suitable amounts
(which in general will vary from place to place),
and we add the results together. The sum ob-
tained is the square of the interval. We do not
assume in advance that we know the amounts
by which the squares and products must be mul-
tiplied; this is going to be discovered by observ-
ing physical phenomena. We know, however,
certain things. We know that the old New-
tonian physics is very nearly accurate when our
co-ordinates have been chosen in a certain way.
We know that the special theory of relativity is
still more nearly accurate for suitable co-ordi-
nates. From such facts we can infer certain
things about our new co-ordinates, which, in a


EINSTEIN S GRAVITATION LAW I2I


logical deducation, appear as postulates of the
new theory.

As such postulates we take:

1. That every body travels in a geodesic in
space-time, except in so far as electromagnetic
forces act upon it.

2. That a light ray travels so that the interval
between two parts of it is zero.

3. That at a great distance from gravitating
matter, we can transform our co-ordinates by
mathematical manipulation so that the interval
shall be what it is in the special theory of rel-
ativity; and that this is approximately true
wherever gravitation is not very powerful.

Each of these postulates requires some ex-
planation.

We saw that a geodesic on a surface is the
shortest line that can be drawn on the surface
from one point to another; for example, on the
earth the geodesics are great circles. When we
come to space-time, the mathematics is the same,
but the verbal explanations have to be rather
different. In the general theory of relativity, it
is only neighboring events that have a definite in-
terval, independently of the route by which we
travel from one to the other. The interval be-


122 THE-ApBIGa0 FP REDALIV 1 Tx


tween distant events depends upon the route pur-
sued, and has to be calculated by dividing the
route into a number of little bits and adding
up the intervals for the various little bits. If
the interval is space-like, a body cannot travel
from one event to the other; therefore when we
are considering the way bodies move, we are con-
fined to time-like intervals. The interval be-
tween neighboring events, when it is time-like,
will appear as the time between them for an ob-
server who travels from the one event to the
other. And so the whole interval between two
events will be judged by a person who travels
from one to the other to be what his clocks show
to be the time that he has taken on the journey.
For some routes this time will be longer, for
others shorter; the more slowly the man travels,
the longer he will think he has been on the jour-
ney. This must not be taken as a platitude. I
am not saying that if you travel from London
to Edinburgh you will take longer if you travel
more slowly. Iam saying something much more
odd. I am saying that if you leave London at
10 a.m. and arrive in Edinburgh at 6.30 p.m.
Greenwich time, the more slowly you travel the
longer you will take—if the time is judged by


EINSTEIN ’S GRAVITATION LAW pe)


your watch. This is a very different statement.
From the point of view of a person on the earth,
your journey takes eight and a half hours. But
if you had been a ray of light traveling round
the solar system, starting from London at 10
A.M., reflected from Jupiter to Saturn, and so
on, until at last you were reflected back to Edin-
burgh and arrived there at 6.30 P.m., you would
judge that the journey had taken you exactly no
time. And if you had gone by any circuitous
route, which enabled you to arrive in time by
traveling fast, the longer your route the less time
you would judge that you had taken; the dim-
inution of time would be continual as your speed
approached that of light. Now I say that when
a body travels, if it is left to itself, it chooses the
route which makes the time between two stages
of the journey as long as possible; if it had
traveled from one event to another by any other
route, the time, as measured by its own clocks,
would have been shorter. This is a way of say-
ing that bodies left to themselves do their jour-
neys as slowly as they can; it is a sort of law of
cosmic laziness. Its mathematical expression is
that they travel in geodesics, in which the total
interval between any two events on the journey


I24 THE ABC OF RELATIVITY


is greater than by any alternative route. (The
fact that it is greater, not less, is due to the fact
that the sort of interval we are considering is
more analogous to time than to distance.) For
example, if a person could leave the earth and
travel about for a time and then return, the time
between his departure and return would be less
by his clocks than by those on the earth: the earth,
in its journey round the sun, chooses the route
which makes the time of any bit of its course by
its clocks longer than the time as judged by
clocks which move by a different route. This
is what is meant by saying that bodies left to
themselves move in geodesics in space-time.
We assume that the body considered is not
acted upon by electromagnetic forces. We are
concerned at present with the law of gravitation,
not with the effects of electromagnetism. These
effects have been brought into the framework of
the general theory of relativity by Weyl,’ but for
the present we will ignore his work. The plan-
ets, in any case, are not subject, as wholes, to
appreciable electromagnetic forces; it is only
gravitation that has to be considered in account-


1See his Space, Time, Matter, Methuen, 1922.


EINSTEIN'S GRAVITATION LAW 1295


ing for their motions, with which we are con-
cerned in this chapter.

Our second postulate, that a light ray travels
so that the interval between two parts of it is
zero, has the advantage that it does not have
to be stated only for small distances. If each
little bit of interval is zero, the sum of them all
is zero, and so even distant parts of the same
light ray have a zero interval. The course of a .
light ray is also a geodesic according to the
definition. Thus we now have two empirical
ways of discovering what are the geodesics in
space-time, namely light rays and bodies moving
freely. Among freely-moving bodies are in-
cluded all which are not subject to constraints or
to electromagnetic forces, that is to say, the sun,
stars, planets and satellites, and also falling bod-
ies on the earth, at least when they are falling in
a vacuum. When you are standing on the earth,
you are subject to electromagnetic forces: the
electrons and protons in the neighborhood of
your feet exert a repulsion on your feet which is
just enough to overcome the earth’s gravitation.
This is what prevents you from falling through
the earth, which, solid as it looks, is mostly empty
space.


126 THE-A B COP RELATIVITY


The third postulate, which relates the general
to the special theory, is very useful. It is not
necessary for the application of the special theory
to a limited region that there should be no gravi-
tation in the region; it is enough if the intensity
of gravitation is practically the same throughout
the region. ‘This enables us to apply the special
theory within any small region. How smail it
will have to be, depends upon the neighborhood.
On the surface of the earth, it would have to be
small enough for the curvature of the earth to
be negligible. In the spaces between the plan-
ets, it need only be small enough for the attrac-
tion of the sun and the planets to be sensibly con-
stant throughout the region. In the spaces be-
tween the stars it might be enormous—say half
the distance from one star to the next—without
introducing measurable inaccuracies.

At a great distance from gravitating matter,
we can so choose our co-ordinates as to obtain
a Euclidean space; this is really only another
way of saying that the special theory of relativity
applies. In the neighborhood of matter, al-
though we can make our space Euclidean in any
small region, we cannot do so throughout any re-
gion within which gravitation varies sensibly—


EINSTEIN §S GRAVITATION LAW 127


at least, if we do, we shall have to abandon the
view that bodies move in geodesics. In the
neighborhood of a piece of matter, there is, as it
were, a hill in space-time; this hill grows steeper
and steeper as it gets nearer the top, like the neck
of a champagne bottle. It ends in a sheer preci-
pice. Now by the law of cosmic laziness which we
mentioned earlier, a body coming into the neigh-
borhood of the hill will not attempt to go straight
over the top, but will go round. This is the es-
sence of Einstein’s view of gravitation. What
a body does, it does because of the nature of
space-time in its own neighborhood, not because
of some mysterious force emanating from a dis-
tant body.

An analogy will serve to make the point clear.
Suppose that on a dark night a number of men
with lanterns were walking in various directions
across a huge plain, and suppose that in one part
of the plain there was a hill with a flaring beacon
on the top. Our hill is to be such as we have
described, growing steeper as it goes up, and
ending in a pregipice. I shall suppose that there
are villages dotted about the plain, and the men
with lanterns are walking to and from these
various villages. Paths have been made show-


128 THE ABC OF RELATIVITY


ing the easiest way from any one village to any
other. These paths will all be more or less
curved, to avoid going too far up the hill; they
will be more sharply curved when they pass near
the top of the hill than when they keep some way
off from it. Now suppose that you are observ-
ing all this, as best you can, from a place high
up in a balloon, so that you cannot see the
ground, but only the lanterns and the beacon.
You will not know that there is a hill, or that the
beacon is at the top of it. You will see that
people turn out of the straight course when they
approach the beacon, and that the nearer they
come the more they turn aside. You will
naturally attribute this to an effect of the beacon;
you may think that it is very hot and people are
afraid of getting burnt. But if you wait for
daylight you will see the hill, and you will find
that the beacon merely marks the top of the hill
and does not influence the people with lanterns
in any way.

Now in this analogy the beacon corresponds
to the sun, the people with lanterns correspond
to the planets and comets, the paths correspond
to their orbits, and the coming of daylight corre-
sponds to the coming of Einstein. Einstein says


EINSTEIN'S GRAVITATION LAW I29


that the sun is at the top of a hill, only the hill is
in space-time, not in space. (I advise the reader
not to try to picture this, because it is impossible. )
Each body, at each moment, adopts the easiest
course open to it, but owing to the hill the easiest
course is not a straight line. Each little bit of
matter is at the top of its own little hill, like the
cock on his own dung-heap. What we call a big
bit of matter is a bit which is at the top of a big
hill. The hill is what we know about; the bit of
matter at the top is assumed for convenience.
Perhaps there is really no need to assume it, and
we could do with the hill alone, for we can never
get to the top of any one else’s hill, any more
than the pugnacious cock can fight the peculiarly
irritating bird that he sees in the looking-glass.

I have given only a qualitative description of
Ejinstein’s law of gravitation; to give its exact
quantitative formulation is impossible without
more mathematics than I am permitting myself.
The most interesting point about it is that it
makes the law no longer the result of action at a
distance: the sun exerts no force on the planets
whatever. Just as geometry has become physics,
so, in a sense, physics has become geometry. The


I30 THE ABCOF RELATIVITY


law of gravitation has become the geometrical
law that every body pursues the easiest course
from place to place, but this course is affected by
the hills and valleys that are encountered on the
road.


CHAPTER IX: PROOFS OF EINSTEIN’S LAW
OF GRAVITATION


HE reasons for accepting Einstein’s law of

gravitation rather than Newton’s are partly
empirical, partly logical. We will begin with
the former.

Einstein’s law of gravitation gives very nearly
the same results as Newton’s, when applied to the
calculation of the orbits of the planets and their
satellites. If it did not, it could not be true,
since the consequences deduced from Newton’s
law have been found to be almost exactly veri-
fied by observation. When, in 1915, Kinstein
first published his new law, there was only one
empirical fact to which he could point to show
that his theory was better than Newton’s. This
was what is called the “motion of the perihelion
of Mercury.”

The planet Mercury, like the other planets,
moves round the sun in an ellipse, with the sun
in one of the foci. At some points of its orbit


it is nearer to the sun than at other points. ‘The
"131


132 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


point where it is nearest to the sun is called its
“perihelion.” Now it was found by observation
that, from one occasion when Mercury is nearest ©
to the sun until the next, Mercury does not go
exactly once round the sun, but a little bit more.
The discrepancy is very small; it amounts to an
angle of forty-two seconds in a century. That
is to say, in each year the planet has to move
rather less than half a second of angle after it
has finished a complete revolution from the last
perihelion before it reaches the next perihelion.
This very minute discrepancy from Newtonian
theory had puzzled astronomers. ‘There was a
calculated effect due to perturbations caused by
the other planets, but this small discrepancy was
the residue after allowing for these perturba-
tions. instein’s theory accounted for this resi-
due, as well as for its absence in the case of the
other planets. (In them it exists, but is too
small to be observed.) ‘This was, at first, his only
empirical advantage over Newton.

His second success was more sensational. Ac-
cording to orthodox opinion, light in a vacuum
ought always to travel in straight lines. Not be-
ing composed of material particles, it ought to be
unaffected by gravitation. However, it was


PROOFS OF EINSTEIN'S LAW 133


possible, without any serious breach with old
ideas, to admit that, in passing near the sun,
light might be deflected out of the straight path
as much as if it were composed of material par-
ticles. Einstein, however, maintained, as a de-
duction from his law of gravitation, that light
would be deflected twice as much as this. That
is to say, if the light of a star passed very near
the sun, Einstein maintained that the ray from
the star would be turned through an angle of
just under one and three quarters seconds. His
opponents were willing to concede half of this
amount. Now it is not every day that a star
almost in line with the sun can be seen. This
is only possible during a total eclipse, and not
always then, because there may be no bright stars
in the right position. Eddington points out that,
from this point of view, the best day of the year
is May 29, because then there are a number of
bright stars close to the sun. It happened by
incredible good fortune that there was a total
eclipse of the sun on May 29, 1919—the first
year after the armistice. Two British expedi-
tions photographed the stars near the sun during
the eclipse, and the results confirmed Hinstein’s
prediction. Some astronomers who remained


134 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


doubtful whether sufficient precautions had been
taken to insure accuracy were convinced when
their own observations in a subsequent eclipse
gave exactly the same result. instein’s esti-
mate of the amount of the deflection of light by
gravitation is therefore now universally accepted.

The third experimental test is on the whole
favorable to Einstein, though the quantities con-
cerned are so small that it is only just possible
to measure them, and the result is therefore not
decisive. But successive investigations have
made it more and more probable that the small
effect predicted by Einstein really occurs. Be-
fore explaining the effect in question, a few pre-
liminary explanations are necessary. The spec-
trum of an element consists of certain lines of
various shades of light, separated by a prism,
and emitted by the element when it glows. They
are the same (to a very close approximation)
whether the element is in the earth or the sun or
a star. Each line is of some definite shade of
color, with some definite wave length. Longer
wave lengths are towards the red end of the spec-
trum, shorter ones towards the violet end. When
the source of light is moving towards you, the
apparent wave lengths grow shorter, just as


PROOFS OF EINSTEIN'S LAW 135


waves at sea come quicker when you are travel-
ing against the wind. When the source of light
is moving away from you, the apparent wave
lengths grow longer, for the same reason. This
enables us to know whether the stars are mov-
ing towards us or away from us. If they are
moving towards us, all the lines in the spectrum
of an element are moved a little toward violet;
if away from us, toward red. You may notice
the analogous effect in sound any day. If you
are in a station and an express comes through
whistling, the note of the whistle seems much
more shrill while the train is apprcaching you
than when it has passed. Probably many peo-
ple think the note has “really” changed, but in
fact the change in what you hear is only due to
the fact that the train was first approaching and
then receding. To people in the train, there
was no change of note. This is not the effect
with which Einstein is concerned. The distance
of the sun from the earth does not change much;
for our present purposes, we may regard it as
constant. Kinstein deduces from his law of
gravitation that any periodic process which takes
place in an atom in the sun (whose gravitation is
very intense) must, as measured by our clocks,


136 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


take place at a slightly slower rate than it would
in a similar atom on the earth. The “interval”
involved will be the same in the sun and on the
earth, but the same interval in different regions
does not correspond to exactly the same time;
this is due to the “hilly” character of space-time
which constitutes gravitation. Consequently
any given line in the spectrum ought, when the
light comes from the sun, to seem to us a little
nearer the red end of the spectrum than if the
light came from a source on the earth. The ef-
fect to be expected is very small—so small that
there is still some slight uncertainty as to whether
it exists or not. But it now seems highly prob-
able that it exists.

No other measurable differences between the
consequences of Kinstein’s law and those of New-
ton’s have hitherto been discovered. But the
above experimental tests are quite sufficient to
convince astronomers that, where Newton and
Einstein differ as to the motions of the heavenly
bodies, it is Einstein’s law that gives the right
results. Even if the empirical grounds in favor
of Einstein stood alone, they would be conclu-
sive. Whether his law represents the exact
truth or not, it is certainly more nearly exact


PROOFS OF EINSTEIN'S LAW 137


than Newton’s, though the inaccuracies in New-
ton’s were all exceedingly minute.

But the considerations which originally led
Einstein to his law were not of this detailed
kind. Even the consequence about the peri-
helion of Mercury, which could be verified at
once from previous observations, could only be
deduced after the theory was complete, and could
not form any part of the original grounds for in-
venting such a theory. These grounds were of a
more abstract logical character. I do not mean
that they were not based upon observed facts,
and I do not mean that they were a priori fan-
tasies such as philosophers indulged in formerly.
What I mean is that they were derived from cer-
tain general characteristics of physical experi-
ence, which showed that Newton must be wrong
and that something like Einstein’s law must be
substituted.

The arguments in favor of the relativity of
motion are, as we saw in earlier chapters, quite
conclusive. In daily life, when we say that
something moves, we mean that it moves rel-
atively to the earth. In dealing with the mo-
tions of the planets, we consider them as moving
relatively to the sun, or to the center of mass of


138 THE A BeGeOP RELATIVITY


the solar system. When we say that the solar
system itself is moving, we mean that it is mov-
ing relatively to the stars. There is no physical
occurrence which can be called “absolute mo-
tion.” Consequently the laws of physics must
be concerned with relative motions, since these
are the only kind that occur.

We now take the relativity of motion in con-
junction with the experimental fact that the ve-
locity of light is the same relatively to one body
as relatively to another, however the two may be
moving. ‘This leads us to the relativity of dis-
tances and times. This in turn shows that there
is no objective physical fact which can be called
“the distance between two bodies at a given
time,” since the time and the distance will both
depend on the observer. Therefore Newton’s
law of gravitation is logically untenable, since it
makes use of “distance at a given time.”

This. shows that we cannot rest content with
Newton, but it does not show what we are to put
in his place. Here several considerations enter
in. We have in the first place what is called
“the equality of gravitational and inertial mass.”
What this means is as follows: When you apply


PROOFS OF EINSTEIN’S LAW 139


a given force * to a heavy body, you do not give
it as much acceleration as you would to a light
body. What is called the “inertial” mass of a
body is measured by the amount of force re-
quired to produce a given acceleration. At a
given point of the earth’s surface, the “mass” is
proportional to the “weight.” What is meas-
ured by scales is rather the mass than the weight:
the weight is defined as the force with which the
earth attracts the body. Now this force is
greater at the poles than at the equator, because
at the equator the rotation of the earth produces
a “centrifugal force” which partially counteracts
gravitation. The force of the earth’s attraction
is also greater on the surface of the earth than it
is at a great height or at the bottom of a very
deep mine. None of these variations are shown
by scales, because they affect the weights used
just as much as the body weighed; but they are
shown if we use a spring balance. The mass
does not vary in the course of these changes of
weight.

The “gravitational” mass is differently de-


1 Although “force” is no longer to be regarded as one of the
fundamental concepts of dynamics, but only as a convenient way
of speaking, it can still be employed, like “sunrise” and “sunset,”
provided we realize what we mean. Often it would require very
roundabout expressions to avoid the term “force,”


140 THE A BEC OF RELATIVITY


fined. It is capable of two meanings. We may
mean (1), the way a body responds in a situation
where gravitation has a known intensity, for
example, on the surface of the earth, or on the
surface of the sun; or (2), the intensity of the
gravitational force produced by the body, as, for
example, the sun produces stronger gravitational
forces than the earth does. Newton says that
the force of gravitation between two bodies is
proportional to the product of their masses.
Now let us consider the attraction of different
bodies to one and the same body, say the sun.
Then different bodies are attracted by forces
which are proportional to their masses, and
which, therefore, produce exactly the same ac-
celeration in all of, them. Thus if we mean
“gravitational mass” in sense (1), that is to say,
the way a body responds to gravitation, we find
that “the equality of inertial and gravitational
mass,” which sounds formidable, reduces to this:
that in a given gravitational situation, all bodies
behave exactly alike. As regards the surface
of the earth, this was one of the first discoveries
of Galileo. Aristotle thought that heavy bodies
fall faster than light ones; Galileo showed that
this is not the case, when the resistance of the air


PROOFS OF EINSTEIN'S LAW I4I


is eliminated. In a vacuum, a feather falls as
fast as a lump of lead. As regards the planets,
it was Newton who established the corresponding
facts. At a given distance from the sun, a
comet, which has a very small mass, experiences
exactly the same acceleration towards the sun as
a planet experiences at the same distance. Thus
the way in which gravitation affects a body de-
pends only upon where the body is, and in no
degree upon the nature of the body. This sug-
gests that the gravitational effect is a character-
istic of the locality, which is what Einstein
makes it.

As for the gravitational mass in sense (2), #.e.,
the intensity of the force produced by a body,
this is no longer exactly proportional to its iner-
tial mass. ‘The question involves some rather
complicated mathematics, and I shall not go
into it.”

We have another indication as to what sort of
thing the law of gravitation must be, if it is to
be a characteristic of a neighborhood, as we have
seen reason to suppose that it is. It must be
expressed in some law which is unchanged when


1See Eddington, The Mathematical Theory of Relativity, Cam-
bridge University Press, 2d edition, p. 128.


I42 THE ABC OF RELATIVITY


we adopt a different kind of co-ordinates. We
saw that we must not, to begin with, regard our
co-ordinates as having any physical significance:
they are merely systematic ways of naming dif-
ferent parts of space-time. Being conventional,
they cannot enter into physical laws. That
means to say that, if we have expressed a law
correctly in terms of one set of co-ordinates, it
must be expressed by the same formula in terms
of another set of co-ordinates. Or, more exactly,
it must be possible to find a formula which ex-
presses the law, and which is unchanged how-
ever we change the co-ordinates. It is the busi-
ness of the theory of tensors to deal with such
formule. And the theory of tensors shows that
there is one formula which obviously suggests it-
self as being possibly the law of gravitation.
When this possibility is examined, it is found to
give the right results; it is here that the empirical
confirmations come in. But if Einstein’s law had
not been found to agree with experience, we
could not have gone back to Newton’s law. We
should have been compelled by logic to seek
some law expressed in terms of “tensors,” and
therefore independent of our choice of co-ordi-
nates. It is impossible without mathematics to


PROOFS OF EINSTEIN’S LAW 143


explain the theory of tensors; the non-mathema-
tician must be content to know that it is the
technical method by which we eliminate the con-
ventional element from our measurements and
laws, and thus arrive at physical laws which are
independent of the observer’s point of view. Of
this method, Einstein’s law of gravitation is the
most splendid example.


CHAPTER X: MASS, MOMENTUM, ENERGY
AND ACTION


HE pursuit of quantitative precision is as

arduous as it is important. Physical meas-
urements are made with extraordinary exacti-
tude; if they were made less carefully, such mi-
nute discrepancies as form the experimental data
for the theory of relativity could never be re-
vealed. Mathematical physics, before the com-
ing of relativity, used,a set of conceptions which
were supposed to be as precise as physical meas-
urements, but it has turned out that they were
logically defective, and that this defectiveness
showed itself in very small deviations from ex-
pectations based upon calculation. In this chap-
ter I want to show how the fundamental ideas of
_ pre-relativity physics are affected, and what
modifications they have had to undergo.

We have already had occasion to speak of
mass. For purposes of daily life, mass is much
the same as weight; the usual measures of weight
—ounces, grams, etc.—are really measures of

144


ENERGY AND ACTION 145


mass. But as soon as we begin to make accu-
rate measurements, we are compelled to distin-
guish between mass and weight. Two different
methods of weighing are in common use, one,
that of scales, the other that of the spring bal-
ance. When you go a journey and your lug-
gage is weighed, it is not put on scales, but on a
spring; the weight depresses the spring a certain
amount, and the result is indicated by a needle
on a dial. ‘The same principle is used in auto-
matic machines for finding your weight. The
spring balance shows weight, but scales show
mass. So long as you stay in one part of the
world, the difference does not matter; but if you
test two weighing machines of different kinds
in a number of different places, you will find, if
they are accurate, that their results do not always
agree. Scales will give the same result any-
where, but a spring balance will not. That is to
say, if you have a lump of lead weighing ten
pounds by the scales, it will also weigh ten
pounds by scales in any other part of the world.
But if it weighs ten pounds by a spring balance
in London, it will weigh more at the North Pole,
less at the equator, less high up in an aeroplane,
and less at the bottom of a coal mine, if it is


146 THE ABC OF RELATIVITY


weighed in all those places on the same spring
balance. The fact is that the two instruments
measure quite different quantities. The scales
measure what may be called (apart from refine-
ments which will concern us presently) “quan-
tity of matter.” There is the same “quantity
of matter” in a pound of feathers as in a pound
of lead. Standard “weights,” which are really
standard “masses,” will measure the amount of
mass in any substance put into the opposite
scales. But “weight” is a property due to the
earth’s gravitation: It is the amount of the force
by which the earth attracts a body. ‘This force
varies from place to place. In the first place,
anywhere outside the earth the attraction varies
inversely as the square of the distance from the
center of the earth; it is therefore less at great
heights. In the second place, when you go down
a coal mine, part of the earth is above you, and
attracts matter upwards instead of downwards,
so that the net attraction downwards is less than
on the surface of the earth. In the third place,
owing to the rotation of the earth, there is what
is called a “centrifugal force,” which acts against
gravitation. This is greatest at the equator, be-
cause there the rotation of the earth involves the


ENERGY AND ACTION 147


fastest motion; at the poles it does not exist, be-
cause they are on the axis of rotation. For all
these reasons, the force with which a given body
is attracted to the earth is measureably differ-
ent at different places. It is this force that is
measured by a spring balance; that is why a
spring balance gives different results in different
places. In the case of scales, the standard
“weights” are altered just as much as the body
to be weighed, so that the result is the same
everywhere; but the result is the “mass,” not the
“weight.” A standard “weight” has the same
mass everywhere, but not the same “weight”; it
is in fact a unit of mass, not of weight. For
theoretical purposes, mass, which is almost in-
variable for a given body, is much more im-
portant than weight, which varies according to
circumstances. Mass may be regarded, to begin
with, as “quantity of matter”; we shall see that
this view is not strictly correct, but it will serve
as a starting point for subsequent refinements.
For theoretical purposes, a mass is defined as
being determined by the amount of force re-
quired to produce a given acceleration: The
more massive a body is, the greater will be the
force required to alter its velocity by a given


148 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


amount in a given time. It takes a more power-
ful engine to make a long train attain a speed
of ten miles an hour at the end of the first half-
minute, than it does to make a short train do so.
Or we may have circumstances where the force
is the same for a number of different bodies; in
that case, if we can measure the accelerations
produced in them, we can tell the ratios of their
masses: the greater the mass, the smaller the ac-
celeration. We may take, in illustration of this
method, an example which is important in con-
nection with relativity. Radio-active bodies emit
beta-particles (electrons) with enormous veloci-
ties. We can observe their path by making them
travel through water vapor and form a cloud as
they go. We can at the same time subject them
to known electric and magnetic forces, and ob-
serve how much they are bent out of a straight
line by these forces. This makes it possible to
compare their masses. It is found that the
faster they travel, the greater is their mass, as
measured by the stationary observer; the increase
is greatest as applied to their mass as measured
by the effect of a force in the line of motion. In
regard to forces at right angles to the line of
motion, there is a change of mass with velocity


ENERGY AND ACTION 149


in the same proportion as the changes of length
and time. It is known otherwise that, apart
from the effect of motion, all electrons have the
same mass. .

All this was known before the theory of rel-
ativity was invented, but it showed that the tra-
ditional conception of mass had not quite the
definiteness that had been ascribed to it. Mass
used to be regarded as “quantity of matter,” and
supposed to be quite invariable. Now mass was
found to be relative to the observer, like length
and time, and to be altered by motion in exactly
the same proportion. However, this could be
remedied. We could take the “proper mass,”
the mass as measured by an observer who shares
the motion of the body. This was easily inferred
from the measured mass, by taking the same pro-
portion as in the case of lengths and times.

But there is a more curious fact, and that is,
that after we have made this correction we still
have not obtained a quantity which is at all times
exactly the same for the same body. When a
body absorbs energy—for example, by growing
hotter—its “proper mass” increases slightly.
The increase is very slight, since it is measured
by dividing the increase of energy by the square


IgO0 THE ABC OF RELATIVITY


of the velocity of light. On the other hand,
when a body parts with energy it loses mass.
The most notable case of this is that four hydro-
gen atoms can come together to make one helium
atom, but a helium atom has rather less than
four times the mass of one hydrogen atom.

We have thus two kinds of mass, neither of
which quite fulfils the old ideal. The mass as
measured by an observer who is in motion rel-
ative to the body in question is a relative quantity,
and has no physical significance as a property
of the body. The “proper mass” is a genuine
property of the body, not dependent upon the
observer; but it, also, is not strictly constant.
As we shall see shortly, the notion of mass be-
comes absorbed into the notion of energy; it rep-
resents, so to speak, the energy which the body
expends internally, as opposed to that which it
displays to the outer world.

Conservation of mass, conservation of momen-
tum, and conservation of energy were the great
principles of classical mechanics. Let us next
consider conservation of momentum.

The momentum of a body in a given direction
is its velocity in that direction multiplied by its
mass. Thus a heavy body moving slowly may


ENERGY AND ACTION Igl


have the same momentum as a light body moving
fast. When a number of bodies interact in any
way, for instance by collisions, or by mutual
gravitation, so long as no outside influences come
in, the total momentum of all the bodies in any
direction remains unchanged. This law remains
true in the theory of relativity. For different
observers, the mass will be different, but so will
the velocity; these two differences neutralize each
other, and it turns out that the principle still re-
mains true.

The momentum of a body is different in dif-
ferent directions. The ordinary way of meas-
uring it is to take the velocity in a given direc-
tion (as measured by the observer) and multi-
ply it by the mass (as measured by the observer).
Now the velocity in a given direction is the dis-
tance traveled in that direction in unit time. Sup-
pose we take instead the distance traveled in that
direction while the body moves through unit “in-
terval.” (In ordinary cases, this is only a very
slight change, because, for velocities consider-
ably less than that of light, interval is very nearly
equal to lapse of time.) And suppose that in-
stead of the mass as measured by the observer


I§2 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


we take the proper mass. These two changes in-
crease the velocity and diminish the mass, both in
the same proportion. Thus the momentum re-
mains the same, but the quantities that vary ac-
cording to the observer have been replaced by
quantities which are fixed independently of the
observer—with the exception of the distance
traveled by the body in the given direction.

When we substitute space-time for time, we
find that the measured mass (as opposed to the
proper mass) is a quantity of the same kind as
the momentum in a given direction; it might be
called the momentum in the time direction. The
measured mass is obtained by multiplying the in-
variant mass by the time traversed in traveling
through unit interval; the momentum is obtained
by multiplying the same invariant mass by the
distance traversed (in the given direction) in
traveling through unit interval. From a space-
time point of view, these naturally belong
together.

Although the measured mass of a body de-
pends upon the way the observer is moving rel-
atively to the body, it is none the less a very im-
portant quantity. For any given observer, the
measured mass of the whole physical universe is


ENERGY AND ACTION I$3


constant." The proper mass of all the bodies in
the world is not necessarily the same at one time
as at another, so that in this respect the meas-
ured mass has an advantage. The conservation
of measured mass is the same thing as the con-
servation of energy. ‘This may seem surprising,
since at first sight mass and energy are very dif-
ferent things. But it has turned out that energy
is the same thing as measured mass. To ex-
plain how this comes about is not easy; neverthe-
less we will make the attempt.

In popular talk, “mass” and “energy” do not
mean at all the same thing. We associate
“mass” with the idea of a fat man in a chair,
very slow to move, while “energy” suggests a
thin person full of hustle and “pep.” Popu-
lar talk associates “mass” and “inertia,” but its
view of inertia is one-sided: it includes slowness
in beginning to move, but not slowness in stop-
ping, which is equally involved. All these terms
have technical meanings in physics, which are
only more or less analogous to the meanings of
the terms in popular talk. For the present, we


1 This is subject to the explanations given below as regards
conservation of energy.


154 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


are concerned with the technical meaning of
“energy.”

Throughout the latter half of the nineteenth
century, a great deal was made of the “conserva-
tion of energy,” or the “persistence of force,” as
Herbert Spencer preferred to call it. This prin-
ciple was not easy to state in a simple way, be-
cause of the different forms of energy; but the
essential point was that energy is never created
or destroyed, though it can be transformed from
one kind into another. The principle acquired
its position through Joule’s discovery of “the
mechanical equivalent of heat,’ which showed
that there was a constant proportion between the
work required to produce a given amount of heat
and the work required to raise a given weight
through a given height: in fact, the same sort of
work could be utilized for either purpose accord-
ing to the mechanism. When heat was found to
consist in motion of molecules, it was seen to be
natural that it should be analogous to other forms
of energy. Broadly speaking, by the help of a
certain amount of theory, all forms of energy
were reduced to two, which were called respec-
tively “kinetic” and “potential.” These were
defined as follows:


ENERGY AND ACTION 1$§


The kinetic energy of a particle is half the
mass multiplied by the square of the velocity.
The kinetic energy of a number of particles is
the sum of the kinetic energies of the separate
particles.

The potential energy is more difficult to de-
fine. It represents any state of strain, which
can only be preserved by the application of force.
To take the easiest case: If a weight is lifted
to a height and kept suspended, it has potential
energy, because, if left to itself, it will fall. Its
potential energy is equal to the kinetic energy
which it would acquire in falling through the
same distance through which it was lifted. Sim-
ilarly when a comet goes round the sun in a very
eccentric orbit, it moves much faster when it
is near the sun than when it is far from it, so
that its kinetic energy is much greater when it is
near the sun. On the other hand, its potential
energy is greatest when it is farthest from the
sun, because it is then like the stone which has
been lifted to a height. The sum of the kinetic
and potential energies of the comet is con-
stant, unless it suffers collisions or loses matter
by forming a tail. We can determine accurately
the change of potential energy in passing from


156 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


one position to another, but the total amount of
it is to a certain extent arbitrary, since we can
fix the zero level where we like. For example,
the potential energy of our stone may be taken
to be the kinetic energy it would acquire in falling
to the surface of the earth, or what it would ac-
quire in falling down a well to the center of the
earth, or any assigned lesser distance. It does
not matter which we take, so long as we stick to
our decision. We are concerned with a profit-
and-loss account, which is unaffected by the
amount of the assets with which we start.

Both the kinetic and the potential energies
of a given set of bodies will be different for dif-
ferent observers. In classical dynamics, the
kinetic energy differed according to the state of
motion of the observer, but only by a constant
amount; the potential energy did not differ at
all. Consequently, for each observer, the total
energy was constant—assuming always that the
observers concerned were moving in straight
lines with uniform velocities, or, if not, were able
to refer their motions to bodies which were so
moving. Butinrelativity dynamics the matter be-
comes more complicated. We cannot profitably
adapt the idea of potential energy to the theory


ENERGY AND ACTION 1$7


of relativity, and therefore the conservation of
energy, in a strict sense, cannot be maintained.
But we obtain a property, closely analogous to
conservation, which applies to kinetic energy
alone. As Eddington puts it: the kinetic energy
is not always strictly conserved, and the classical
theory therefore introduces a supplementary
quantity, the potential energy, so that the sum
of the two is strictly conserved. The relativity
treatment, on the other hand, discovers another
formula, analogous to the one expressing con-
servation, which holds always for the kinetic
energy. “The relativity treatment adheres to the
physical quantity and modifies the law; the
classical treatment adheres to the law and modi-
fies the physical quantity.” The new formula,
he continues, may be spoken of “as the law of
conservation of energy and momentum, because,
though it is not formally a law of conservation,
it expresses exactly the phenomena which classi-
cal mechanics attributes to conservation.”* It
is only in this modified and less rigorous sense
that the conservation of energy remains true.
What is meant by “conservation” in practice
is not exactly what it means in theory. In theory


1 Mathematical Theory of Relativity, p. 1385.


158 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


we say that a quantity is conserved when the
amount of it in the world is the same at any one
time as at any other. But in practice we cannot
survey the whole world, so we have to mean
something more manageable. We mean that,
taking any given region, if the amount of the
quantity in the region has changed, it is because
some of the quantity has passed across the
boundary of the region. If there were no births
and deaths, population would be conserved; in
that case the population of a country could only
change by emigration or immigration, that is to
say, by passing across the boundaries. We
might be unable to take an accurate census of
China or Central Africa, and, therefore, we
might not be able to ascertain the total popula-—
tion of the world. But we should be justified in
assuming it to be constant if, wherever statis-
tics were possible, the population never changed
except through people crossing the frontiers. In
fact, of course, population is not conserved. A
physiologist of my acquaintance once put four
mice into a thermos. Some hours later, when he
went to take them out, there were eleven of them.
But mass is not subject to these fluctuations: the


ENERGY AND ACTION I$9


mass of the eleven mice at the end of the time
was no greater than the mass of the four at the
beginning.

This brings us back to the problem for the
sake of which we have been discussing energy.
We stated that, in relativity theory, measured
mass and energy are regarded as the same thing,
and we undertook to explain why. It is now
time to embark upon this explanation. But here,
as at the end of Chapter VI, the totally un-
mathematical reader will do well to skip, and
begin again at the following paragraph.

Let us take the velocity of light us the unit of
velocity; this is always convenient in relativity
theory. Let m be the proper mass of a particle,
v its velocity relative to the observer. Then its
measured mass will be


ee
yf 1-0?


while its kinetic energy, according to the usual
formula, will be


mov”


As we saw before, energy only occurs in a profit-
and-loss account, so that we can add any con-


160. THE Ao BeGsOF- RELATIVITY
stant quantity to it that we like. We may there-
fore take the energy to be

m + 4 mv”.


Now if v is a small fraction of the velocity of
light, m + 14 mv? is almost exactly equal to


m Se
ji Consequently, for velocities such as
~v


large bodies have, the energy and the measured
mass turn out to be indistinguishable within the
limits of accuracy attainable. In fact, it is
better to alter our definition of energy, and take


]-y?’
which the law analogous to conservation holds.
And when the velocity is very great, it gives a
better measure of energy than the traditional
formula. The traditional formula must there-
fore be regarded as an approximation, of which
the new formula gives the exact version. In this


m
it to be 1-0 because this is the quantity for


way, energy and measured mass become iden-
tified. |

I come now to the notion of “action,” which
is less familiar to the general public than energy,
but has become more important in relativity


ENERGY AND ACTION I61


physics, as well as in the theory of quanta.’
(The quantum is a small amount of action.)
The word “action” is used to denote energy mul-
tiplied by time. That is to say, if there is one
unit of energy in a system, it will exert one unit
of action in a second, 100 units of action in 100
seconds, and so on; a system which has 100 units
of energy will exert 100 units of action in a
second, and 10,000 in 100 seconds, and so on.
“Action” is thus, in a loose sense, a measure of
how much has been accomplished: it is in-
creased both by displaying more energy and by
working for a longer time. Since energy is the
same thing as measured mass, we may also take
action to be measured mass multiplied by time.
In classical mechanics, the “density” of matter
in any region is the mass divided by the volume;
that is to say, if you know the density in a small
region, you discover the total amount of matter
by multiplying the density by the volume of the
small region. In relativity mechanics, we always
want to substitute space-time for space; there-
fore a “region” must no longer be taken to be
merely a volume, but a volume lasting for a


1Qn this subject, see the present author’s 4.B.C. of Atoms,
chaps. vi and x1m1.


162 -THER-AtBGiOr RELATIVITY


time; a small region will be a small volume last-
ing fora small time. It follows that, given the
density, a small region in the new sense contains,
not a small mass merely, but a small mass multi-
plied by a small time, that is to say, a small
amount of “action.” This explains why it is to
be expected that “action” will prove of funda-
mental importance in relativity mechanics. And
so in fact it is.

All the laws of dynamics have been put to-
gether into one principle, called “The Principle
of Least Action.” This states that, in passing
from one state to another, a body chooses a route
involving less action than any slightly different
route—again a law of cosmic laziness. The
principle is subject to certain limitations, which
have been pointed out by Eddington,’ but it
remains one of the most comprehensive ways
of stating the purely formal part of mechanics.
The fact that the quantum is a unit of action
seems to show that action is also fundamental in
the empirical structure of the world. But at
present there is no bridge connecting the quan-
tum with the theory of relativity.


1Op. cit. § 60.


CHAPTER XI: IS THE UNIVERSE FINITE?


E HAVE been dealing hitherto with matters
that must be regarded as acquired scien-
tific results—not that they will never be found
to need improvement, but that further progress
must be built upon them, as Einstein is built
upon Newton. Science does not aim at estab-
lishing immutable truths and eternal dogmas:
its aim is to approach truth by successive ap-
proximations, without claiming that at any stage
final and complete accuracy has been achieved.
There is a difference, however, between results
which are pretty certainly in the line of advance,
and speculations which may or may not prove to
be well founded. Some very interesting specu-
lations are connected with the theory of rela-
tivity, and we shall consider certain of them.
But it must not be supposed that we are dealing
with theories having the same solidity as those
with which we have been concerned hitherto.
One of the most fascinating of the specula-


tions to which I have been alluding is the sug-
163


164 THE ABC OF RELATIVITY


gestion that the universe may be of finite extent.
Two somewhat different finite universes have
been constructed, one by Einstein, the other by
De Sitter. Before considering their differences,
we will discuss what they have in common.

There are, to begin with, certain reasons for
thinking that the total amount of matter in the
universe is limited. If this were not the case,
the gravitational effects of enormously distant
matter would make the kind of world in which
we live impossible. We must therefore suppose
that there is some definite number of electrons
and protons in the world: theoretically, a com-
plete census would be possible. These are all
contained within a certain finite region; what-
ever space lies outside that region is, so to speak,
waste, like unfurnished rooms in a house too
large for its inhabitants. This seems futile, but
in former days no one knew of any alternative
possibility. It was obviously impossible to con-
ceive of an edge to space, and therefore, it was
thought, space must be infinite.

Non-Euclidean geometry, however, showed
other possibilities. The surface of a sphere has
no boundary, yet it is not infinite. In travel-
ing round the earth, we never reach “the edge


IS THE UNIVERSE FINITE? 165


of the world,” and yet the earth is not infinite.
The surface of the earth is contained in three-
dimensional space, but there is no reason in
logic why three-dimensional space should not be
constructed on an analogous plan. What we
imagine to be straight lines going on for ever
will then be like great circles on a sphere: they
will ultimately return to their starting point.
There will not be in the universe anything
straighter than these great circles; the Euclidean
straight line may remain as a beautiful dream,
but not as a possibility in the actual world. In
particular, light rays in empty space will travel
in what are really great circles. If we could
make measurements with sufficient accuracy, we
should be able to infer this state of affairs even
from a small part of space, because the sum of
the angles of a triangle would always be greater
than two right angles, and the excess would be
proportional to the size of the triangle. The
suggestion we have to consider is the suggestion
that our universe may be spherical in this sense.

The reader must not confuse this suggestion
with the non-Euclidean character of space upon
which the new law of gravitation depends. The
latter is concerned with small regions such as


166 THE AQBcC7OF“RELATIVITY


the solar system. The departures from flatness
which it notices are like hills and valleys on the
surface of the earth, local irregularities, not
characteristics of the whole. We are now con-
cerned with the possible curvature of the uni-
verse as a whole, not with the occasional ups and
downs due to the sun and the stars. It is sug-
gested that on the average, and in regions remote
from matter, the universe is not quite flat, but
has a slight curvature, analogous, in three di-
mensions, to the curvature of a sphere in two
dimensions.

It is important to realize, in the first place,
that there is not the slightest reason a@ priori why
this should not be the case. People unaccus-
tomed to non-Kuclidean geometry may feel that,
even if such a thing be logically possible, the
world simply cannot be so odd as all that. We
all have a tendency to think that the world must
conform to our prejudices. The opposite view
involves some effort of thought, and most people
would die sooner than think—in fact, they do so.
But the fact that a spherical universe seems odd
to people who have been brought up on
Kuclidean prejudices is no evidence that it is
impossible. There is no law of nature to the


IS THE UNIVERSE FINITE? 167


effect that what is taught at school must be true.
We cannot therefore dismiss the hypothesis of a
spherical universe as in any degree less worthy
of examination than any other. We have to ask
ourselves the same two questions as we should
in any other case, namely: (1) Are the facts
consistent with this hypothesis? (2) Is this
hypothesis the only one with which the facts are
consistent ?

With regard to the first question, the answer
is undoubtedly in the affirmative. All the
known facts are perfectly consistent with the
hypothesis of a spherical universe. A very slight
modification of the law of gravitation—a modi-
fication suggested by Einstein himself—leads to
a spherical space, without producing any meas-
urable differences in a small region such as the
solar system. The known stars are all within a
certain distance from us. There is nothing what-
ever in the stellar universe as we know it to
show that space must be infinite. There can
therefore be no doubt whatever that, so far as
our present knowledge goes, the hypothesis of a
finite universe may be true.

But when we ask whether the hypothesis of
a finite universe must be true, the answer is dif-


168 THE A BU@ OF RELATIVITY


ferent. It is obvious, on general grounds, that
we cannot, from what we know, draw conclusive
inferences as to the totality of things. A very
slight change in the Newtonian formula for
gravitation would prevent masses beyond the
limits of the visible universe from having appre-
ciable effects if they existed, and would there-
fore destroy our reason for supposing that they
do not exist. All arguments as to regions which
are too distant to be observed depend upon ex-
tending to them the laws which hold in our part
of the world, and upon assuming that there is
not, in these laws, some inaccuracy which is
inappreciable for observable distances, but fatal
to inferences in which very much greater dis-
tances are involved. We cannot, therefore, say
that the universe must be finite. We can say
that it may be, and we can even say a little more
than this. We can say that a finite universe fits
in better with the laws that hold in the part we
know, and that awkward adjustments of the
laws have to be made in order to allow the uni-
verse to be infinite. From the point of view of
choosing the best framework into which to fit
what we know—best, I mean, from a logico-
esthetic point of view—there is no doubt that the


IS THE UNIVERSE FINITE? 169


hypothesis of a finite universe is preferable.
This, I think, is the extent of what can be said
in its favor.

Let us now see what the two finite universes
are like. The difference between them is that in
Einstein’s world it is only space that is queer,
whereas in De Sitter’s time is queer too. Con-
sequently Einstein’s world is less puzzling, and
we will describe it first.

In Einstein’s world, light travels round the
whole universe in a time which is supposed to
be something like a thousand million years. The
odd thing is that all the rays of light which start
(say) from the sun will meet again, after their
enormous journey, in the place where the sun
was when they started. The case is exactly
analogous to that of a number of travelers who
set out from London to go round the world in
great circles, all traveling at the same rate in
different aeroplanes. One starts due north,
passes the North Pole, then the South Pole, and
finally comes home. Another starts due south,
reaches the South Pole first and then the North
Pole. Another starts westward, but he must not
continue to travel due west, because then he
would not be traveling on a great circle. An-


I70 THE ABC OF RELATIVITY


other starts eastward, and so on. They all meet
in the antipodes of London, and then they all
meet again in London. Now if instead of aero-
nauts going round the earth you take rays of
light going round the universe, the same sort of
thing happens: they all meet first at the antip-
odes of their starting point, and then meet
again at their starting point. That means to say
that a person who is near the antipodes of the
place where the sun was about five hundred
million years ago will see what is apparently a
body as bright as the sun then was (except for
the small amount of light that has been stopped
on the way by opaque bodies), and having the
same shape and size. And a person who is near
where the sun was a thousand million years ago
will see what is apparently a body just like what
the sun was a thousand million years ago. And
the same applies to the antipodes of the sun
fifteen hundred million years ago, and to the
place of the sun two thousand million years ago,
and so on. This series only ends when it carries
us back to a time before the sun existed.

But all these suns are only ghosts; that is to
say, you could pass through them without ex-
periencing resistance, and they do not exert


IS THE UNIVERSE FINITE? I71


gravitation. They are, in fact, like images in a
mirror: they exist only for the sense of sight, not
for any other sense. It is rather disturbing to
reflect that, if this theory is true, any number of
the objects we see in the heavens may be merely
ghosts. They are like ghosts in their habit of re-
visiting the scenes of their past life. Suppose a
star had exploded at a certain place, as stars
sometimes will. Kvery thousand million years
its ghost would return to the scene of the dis-
aster and explode again in the same place.
There is, however, considerable doubt whether
rays of light could perform the journey with
sufficient accuracy to produce a clear image.
Some would be stopped by matter on the way,
some would be turned out of the straight course
by passing near heavy bodies, as in the eclipse
observations described in Chapter IX, and for
one reason or another their return would not be
punctual and exact.

There are various reasons for doubting
whether Einstein’s universe can be quite right.’
Some of these are rather complicated. But there
is one objection which is easily appreciated: in
Kinstein’s theory, absolute space and time re-


1See Eddington, Space, Time and Gravitation, p. 162ff.


I72 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


enter by another door. The ghostly sun is
formed in the “place” where it was a thousand
million years ago. Both the “place” and the
period of time are in a sense absolute. We saw
as early as Chapter I that “place” is a vague
and popular notion, incapable of scientific pre-
cision. It seems hardly worth while to go
through such a vast intellectual labor if the
errors we set out to correct are to reappear at
the end.

De Sitter’s world is even odder than Ein-
stein’s, because time goeg mad as well as space.
I despair of explaining, in non-mathematical
language, the particular form of lunacy with
which time is afflicted, but some of its manifesta-
tions can be described. An observer in this
world, if he observes a number of clocks, each
of which is perfectly accurate from its own point
of view, will think that distant clocks are going
slow as compared with those in his neighborhood. —
They will seem to go slower and slower, until,
at a distance of one quarter of the circumference
of the universe, they will seem to have stopped
altogether. That region will seem to our ob-
server a sort of lotus land, where nothing is ever
done. He will not be able to have any cog-


IS THE UNIVERSE FINITE? 173


nizance of things farther off, because no light
waves can get across the boundary. Not that
there is any real boundary: the people who live
in what our observer takes to be lotus land live
just as bustling a life as he does, but get the
impression that he is eternally standing still. As
a matter of fact, you would never become aware
of the lotus land, because it would take an infinite
time for light to travel from it to you. You
could become aware of places just short of it, but
it would remain itself always just beyond your
ken. There will not be the ghostly suns of
Einstein’s world, because light cannot travel so
far.

One of the oddest things about this state of
affairs is that empirical evidence for or against
it is possible, and that there is actually some
slight evidence in its favor. If all “clocks” are
slowed down at a great distance from the ob-
server, this will apply to the periodic motions of
atoms, and therefore to the light which they emit.
Consequently all rays of light emitted by dis-
tant objects ought, when they reach us, to look
rather more red or less violet than when they
started. This can be tested by the spectroscope.
We can compare a known line, as it appears in


174 THE ABC OF RELATIVITY


the spectrum of a spiral nebula, with the same
line as it appears in a terrestrial laboratory. We
find, as a matter of fact, that in a large majority
of spiral nebule there is a considerable displace-
ment of spectral lines towards the red. ‘The
spiral nebule are the most distant objects we can
see: Eddington states that their distances “may
perhaps be of the order of a million light-years.”
(A. light-year is the distance light travels in a
year.) The usual interpretation of a shifting
of spectral lines towards the red is that it is a
“Doppler effect,” due to the fact that the source
of light is moving away from us. But one would
expect to find the nebule just as often moving
towards us as moving away from us, if nothing
operated but the law of chances. If the world
is such as De Sitter says it is, the spectral lines
of the spiral nebule will be displaced towards
the red owing to the slowing down of distant
clocks, even if in fact they are not moving away
from us. This, for what it is worth, is an argu-
ment in favor of De Sitter.

The same facts afford another argument in
favor of De Sitter, for another reason. If, at a
given moment, a body is at rest relatively to
the observer, and at a distance from him, it will


IS THE UNIVERSE FINITE? 175


(in the absence of counteracting causes) not
remain at rest from his point of view, but will
begin to move away from him, and will continue
to move away faster and faster; the further it is
from him, the more its retreat will be accelerated.
For bodies which are not too distant from each
other, gravitation may overcome this tendency;
but as this tendency increases with the distance,
while gravitation diminishes, we should expect
to find very distant bodies receding from us if
De Sitter’s theory is right. Thus we have two
reasons for the displacement of spectral lines in
spiral nebule: one, the slowing down of time;
the other, the movement away from us which we
should expect at distances too great for gravita-
tion to be sensible. However, it cannot be said
that the argument, on either ground, is very
strong. Eddington gives a list of forty-one
spiral nebule, of which five have their spectral -
lines shifted towards the violet, not towards the
red. Thus the material is neither very copious
nor quite harmonious.

Hinstein’s and De Sitter’s hypotheses do not
exhaust the possibilities of a finite world: they
are merely the two simplest forms of such a
world. There are arguments against each, and


176 THE ABC OF RELATIVITY


it hardly seems probable that either is quite true.
But it does seem probable that something more
or less analogous is true. If the universe is
finite, it is theoretically conceivable that there
should be a complete inventory of it. We may
be coming to the end of what physics can do in
the way of stretching the imagination and
systematizing the world. The period since
Galileo has been essentially the period of phys-
ics, as the age of the Greeks was the period of
geometry. It may be that physics will lose its
attractions through success: if the fundamental
laws of physics come to be fully known, adven-
’ turous and inquiring intellects will turn to other
fields. This may alter profoundly the whole
texture of human life, since our present absorp-
tion in machinery and industrialism is the reflec-
tion in the practical world of the theorist’s inter-
est in physical laws. But such speculations are
even more rash than those of De Sitter, and I do
not wish to lay any stress upon them.


CHAPTER XII: CONVENTIONS AND NATURAL
LAWS


NE of the most difficult matters in all con-
troversy is to distinguish disputes about
words from disputes about facts: it ought not to
be difficult, but in practice it is. This is quite as
true in physics as in other subjects. In the
seventeenth century there was a terrific debate
as to what “force” is; to us now, it was obviously
a debate as to how the word “force” should be
defined, but at the time it was thought to be
much more. One of the purposes of the method
of tensors, which is employed in the mathematics
of relativity, is to eliminate what is purely verbal
(in an extended sense) in physical laws. It is
of course obvious that what depends on the choice
of co-ordinates is “verbal” in the sense concerned.
A man punting walks along the boat, but keeps
a constant position with reference to the river
bed so long as he does not pick up his pole. The
Lilliputians might debate endlessly whether he is
walking or standing still: the debate would be
177


178 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


as to words, not as to facts. If we choose co-
ordinates fixed relatively to the boat, he is walk-
ing; if we choose co-ordinates fixed relatively to
the river bed, he is standing still. We want to
express physical laws in such a way that it shall
be obvious when we are expressing the same law
by reference to two different systems of co-
ordinates, so that we shall not be misled into
supposing we have different laws when we only
have one law in different words. ‘This is accom-
plished by the method of tensors. Some laws
which seem plausible in one language cannot be
translated into another; these are impossible as
laws of nature. The laws that can be translated
into any co-ordinate language have certain char-
acteristics: this is a substantial help in looking
for such laws of nature as the theory of rela-
tivity can admit to be possible. Combined with
what we know of the actual motions of bodies,
it enables us to decide what must be the correct
expression of the law of gravitation: logic and
experience combine in equal proportions in ob-
taining this expression.

But the problem of arriving at genuine laws
of nature is not to be solved by the method of
tensors alone; a good deal of careful thought is


CONVENTIONS, NATURAL LAWS 179


wanted in addition. Some of this has been done,
especially by Eddington; much remains to be
done.

To take a simple illustration: Suppose, as in
the hypothesis of the Fitzgerald contraction, that
lengths in one direction were shorter than in
another. Let us assume that a foot rule point-
ing north is only half as long as the same foot
rule pointing east, and that this is equally true
of all other bodies. Does such an hypothesis
have any meaning? If you have a fishing rod
fifteen feet long when it is pointing west, and you
then turn it to the north, it will still measure
fifteen feet, because your foot rule will have
shrunk too. It won’t “look” any shorter, because
your eye will have been affected in the same way.
If you are to find out the change, it cannot be by
ordinary measurement; it must be by some such
method as the Michelson-Morley experiment, in
which the velocity of light is used to measure
lengths. Then you still have to decide whether
it is simpler to suppose a change of length or a
change in the velocity of light. The experi-
mental fact would be that light takes longer to
traverse what your foot rule declares to be a
given distance in one direction than in another—


180 THE ABC OF RELATIVITY


or, as in the Michelson-Morley experiment, that
it ought to take longer but doesn’t. You can
adjust your measures to such a fact in various
ways; in any way you choose to adopt, there will
be an element of convention. This element of
convention survives in the laws that you arrive
at after you have made your decision as to meas-
ures, and often it takes subtle and elusive forms.
To eliminate the element of convention is, in fact,
extraordinarily difficult; the more the subject is
studied, the greater the difficulty is seen to be.

A more important example is the question of
the size and shape of the electron. We find ex-
perimentally that all electrons are the same size,
and that they are symmetrical in all directions.
How far is this a genuine fact ascertained by
experiment, and how far is it a result of our
conventions of measurement? We have here a
number of different comparisons to make: (1)
between different directions in regard to one
electron at one time; (2) in regard to one
electron at different times; (3) in regard to two
electrons at the same time. We can then arrive
at the comparison of two electrons at different
times, by combining (2) and (3). We may dis-
miss any hypothesis which would affect all


CONVENTIONS, NATURAL LAWS I81


electrons equally; for example, it would be use-
less to suppose that in one region of space-time
they were all larger than in another. Such a
change would affect our measuring appliances
just as much as the things measured, and would
therefore produce no discoverable phenomena.
This is as much as to say that it would be no
change at all. But the fact that two electrons
have the same mass, for instance, cannot be re-
garded as purely conventional. Given sufficient
minuteness and accuracy, we could compare the
effects of two different electrons upon a third;
if they were equal under like circumstances, we
should be able to infer equality in a not purely
conventional sense. ‘The question of the sym-
metry of the forces exerted by an electron—i.e.,
that these forces depend only upon the distance
from the electron, and not upon the direction—
is more complicated. Eddington finally comes
to the conclusion that this, too, is a matter of
convention. The argument is difficult and I have
not fully understood it; but I feel some hesita-
tion in accepting it as valid.

Eddington describes the process concerned in
the more advanced portions of the theory of rela-
tivity as “world-building.” The structure to be


182 THE AGBse7OR RELATIVILY


built is the physical world as we know it; the
economical architect tries to construct it with the
smallest possible amount of material. This is a
question for logic and mathematics. The greater
our technical skill in these two subjects, the more
real building we shall do, and the less we shall
be content with mere heaps of stones. But be-
fore we can use in our building the stones that
nature provides, we have to hew them into the
right shapes: this is all part of the process of
building. In order that this may be possible, the
raw material must have some structure (which
Wwe may conceive as analogous to the grain in
timber), but almost any structure will do. By
successive mathematical refinements, we whittle
away our initial requirements until they amount
to very little. Given this necessary minimum of
structure in the raw material, we find that we
can construct from it a mathematical expression
which will have the properties that are needed
for describing the world we perceive—in particu-
lar, the properties of conservation which are
characteristic of momentum and energy (or
mass). Our raw material consisted merely of
events; but when we find that we can build out
of it something which, as measured, will seem to


CONVENTIONS, NATURAL LAWS 183


be never created or destroyed, it seems not sur-
prising that we should come to believe in
“bodies.” These are really mere mathematical
constructions out of events, but owing to their
permanence they are practically important, and
our senses (which were presumably developed by
biological needs) are adapted for noticing them,
rather than the crude continuum of events which
is theoretically more fundamental. From this
point of view, it is astonishing how little of the
real world is revealed by physical science: our
knowledge is limited, not only by the conven-
tional element, but also by the selectiveness of
our perceptual apparatus.

We assume that there is an “interval” be-
tween two events, in the sense explained in Chap-
ter VII, but we no longer assume that we can
unambiguously compare the length of an in-
terval in one region with the length of an interval
in another. It is assumed by Weyl, who intro-
duced this limitation, that we can compare a
number of small intervals which all start from
the same point; also that, in a very small jour-
ney, our measuring rod will not alter its length
much, so that there will only be a small error if
we compare lengths in neighboring places by


184 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


the usual methods. Weyl found that, by dimin-
ishing our assumptions as to interval in this way,
it was possible to bring electromagnetism and
gravitation into one system. The mathematics
of Weyl’s theory is complicated, and I shall not
attempt to explain it. For the present, I am
concerned with a different consequence of his
theory. If lengths in different regions cannot
be compared directly, there is an element of con-
vention in the indirect comparisons which we
actually make. This element will be at first un-
recognized, but will be such as to simplify to the
utmost the expression of the laws of nature. In
particular, conditions of symmetry may be en-
tirely created by conventions as to measurement,
and there is no reason to suppose that they repre-
sent any property of the real world. The law
of gravitation itself, according to Eddington,
may be regarded as expressing conventions of
measurement. “The conventions of measure-
ment,” he says, “introduce an isotropy* and
homogeneity into measured space which need not
originally have any counterpart in the relation-


structure which is being surveyed. This isotropy
1“Tsotropy” means being similar in all directions—e.g., that a
foot rule is as long when it points north as when it points east,


CONVENTIONS, NATURAL LAWS 185


and homogeneity is exactly expressed by Kin-
stein’s law of gravitation.” ?

The limitations of knowledge introduced by
the selectiveness of our perceptual apparatus
may be illustrated by the indestructibility of
matter. This has been gradually discovered by
experiment, and seemed a well-founded em-
pirical law of nature. Now it turns out that,
from our original space-time continuum, we can
construct a mathematical expression which will
have properties causing it to appear indestructi-
ble. The statement that matter is indestructible
then ceases to be a proposition of physics, and
becomes instead a proposition of linguistics and
psychology. As a proposition of linguistics:
“Matter” is the name of the mathematical ex-
pression in question. As a proposition of
psychology: Our senses are such that we notice
what is roughly the mathematical expression in
question, and we are led nearer and nearer to it
as we refine upon our crude perceptions by
scientific observation. This is much less than
physicists used to think they knew about matter.

The reader may say: What then is left of
physics? What do we really know about the

2 Mathematical Theory of Relativity, p. 238.


I86 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


world of matter? Here we may distinguish
three departments of physics. There is first
what is included within the theory of relativity,
generalized as widely as possible. Next, there
are laws which cannot be brought within the
scope of relativity. Thirdly, there is what may
be called geography. Let us consider each of
these in turn.

The theory of relativity, apart from conven-
tion, tells us that the events in the universe have
a four-dimensional order, and that, between any
two events which are near together in this order,
there is a relation called “interval,” which is
capable of being measured if suitable precau-
tions are taken. We make also an assumption
as to what happens when a little measuring rod
is carried round a closed circuit in a certain man-
ner; the consequences of this assumption are such
as to make it highly probable that it is true.
Beyond this, there is little in the theory of rela-
tivity that can be regarded as physical laws.
There is a great deal of mathematics, showing
that certain mathematically-constructed quanti-
ties must behave like the things we perceive; and
there is a suggestion of a bridge between
psychology and physics in the theory that these


CONVENTIONS, NATURAL LAWS 187


mathematically-constructed quantities are what
our senses are adapted for perceiving. But
neither of these things is physics in the strict
sense.

The part of physics which cannot, at present,
be brought within the scope of relativity is large
and important. There is nothing in relativity
to show why there should be electrons and
protons; relativity cannot give any reason why
matter should exist in little lumps. With this
goes the whole theory of the structure of the
atom. ‘The theory of quanta also is quite out-
side the scope of relativity. Relativity is, in a
sense, the most extreme application of what may
be called next-to-next methods. Gravitation is
no longer regarded as due to the effect of the
sun upon a planet, but as expressing character-
istics of the region in which the planet happens
to be. Distance, which used to be thought to
have a definite meaning however far apart two
points might be, is now only definite for neigh-
boring points. The distance between widely
separated places depends upon the route chosen.
We may, it is true, define the distance as the
geodesic distance, but that can only be estimated
by adding up little bits, that is to say, by the


188 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


method we use in estimating the length of a
curve. What applies to distance applies equally
to the straight line. There is nothing in the
actual world having exactly the properties that
straight lines were supposed to have; the nearest
approach is the track of a light ray. Straight
lines have to be replaced by geodesics, which are
defined by what they do at each point, not all at
once, like Euclidean straight lines. Measure-
ment, in Weyl’s theory, suffers the same fate.
We can only use a measuring rod to give lengths
in one place: when we move it to another region,
there is no knowing how it will alter. We do
assume, however, that, if it alters, it alters bit by
bit, gradually, continuously, and not by sudden
jumps. Perhaps this assumption is unjustified.
It belongs to the general outlook of relativity,
which is that of continuity. No doubt it is owing
to this outlook that relativity is unable to account
for the discontinuities in physics, such as quanta,
electrons and protons. Perhaps relativity will
conquer these domains when it learns to dispense —
with the assumption of continuity.

Finally we come to geography, in which I
include history. The separation of history from
geography rests upon the separation of time


CONVENTIONS, NATURAL LAWS 189


from space; when we amalgamate the two in
space-time, we need one word to describe the
combination of geography and history. For the
sake of simplicity, I shall use the one word
geography in this extended sense.

Geography, in this sense, includes everything
that, as a matter of crude fact, distinguishes one
part of space-time from another. One part is
occupied by the sun, one by the earth; the inter-
mediate regions contain light waves, but no mat-
ter (apart from a very little here and there).
There is a certain degree of theoretical connec-
tion between different geographica! facts; to
establish this is the purpose of physical laws. It
is thought that a sufficient knowledge of the
geographical facts of the solar system through-
out any finite time, however short, would enable
an ideally competent physicist to predict the
future of the solar system so long as it remained
remote from other stars. We are already in a
position to calculate the large facts about the
solar system backwards and forwards for vast
periods of time. But in all such calculations we
need a basis of crude fact. The facts are inter-
connected, but facts can only be inferred from
other facts, not from general laws alone. ‘Thus


I90 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY

the facts of geography have a certain independ-
ent status in physics. No amount of physical
Jaws will enable us to infer a physical fact unless
we know other facts as data for our inference.
And here when I speak of “facts” I am thinking
of particular facts of geography, in the extended
sense in which I am using the term.

In the theory of relativity, we are concerned
with structure, not with the material of which
the structure is composed. In geography, on the
other hand, the material is relevant. If there is
to be any difference between one place and an-
other, there must either be differences between
the material in one place and that in another, or
places where there is material and places where
there is none. The former of these alternatives
seems the more satisfactory. We might try to
say: ‘There are electrons and protons, and the
rest is empty. But in the “empty” regions there
are light waves, so that we cannot say nothing
happens in them. Some people maintain that the
light waves take place in the ether, others are
content to say simply that they take place; but
in any case events are occurring where there are
light waves. That is all that we can really say
for the places where there is matter, since matter


ds


CONVENTIONS, NATURAL LAWS Igf


has turned out to be a mathematical construction
built out of events. We may say, therefore, that
there are events everywhere in space-time, but
they must be of a somewhat different kind ac-
cording as we are dealing with a region where
there is an electron or proton or with the sort
of region we should ordinarily call empty. But
as to the intrinsic nature of these events we can
know nothing, except when they happen to be
events in our own lives. Our own perceptions
and feelings must be part of the crude material
of events which physics arranges into a pattern—
or rather, which physics finds to be arranged in
a pattern. As regards events which do not form
part of our own lives, physics tells us the pattern
of them, but is quite unable to tell us what they
are like in themselves. Nor does it seem possi-
ble that this should be discovered by any other
method.


(CHAPTER XIII: THE ABOLITION OF ‘‘FORCE”’


N THE Newtonian system, bodies under the
if action of no forces move in straight lines with
uniform velocity; when bodies do not move in
this way, their change of motion is ascribed to
a “force.” Some forces seem intelligible to our
imagination: those exerted by a rope or string,
by bodies colliding, or by any kind of obvious
pushing or pulling. As explained in an earlier
chapter, our apparent imaginative understand-
ing of these processes is quite fallacious; all that
it really means is that past experience enables
us to foresee more or less what is going to hap-
pen without the need of mathematical calcula-
tions. But the “forces” involved in gravitation
and in the less familiar forms of electrical action
do not seem in this way “natural” to our imag-
ination. It seems odd that the earth can float
in the void: the natural thing to suppose is that
it must fall. That is why it has to be supported
on an elephant, and the elephant on a tortoise,


according to some early speculators. The New-
192


THE ABOLITION OF “FORCE” 193


tonian theory, in addition to action at a distance,
introduced two other imaginative novelties.
The first was, that gravitation is not always and
essentially directed what we should call “down-
wards,” 2.e., towards the center of the earth.
The second was, that a body going round and
round in a circle with uniform velocity is not
“moving uniformly” in the sense in which that
phrase is applied to the motion of bodies under
no forces, but is perpetually being turned out of
the straight course towards the center of the
circle, which requires a force pulling it in that
direction. Hence Newton arrived at the view
that the planets are attracted to the sun by a
force, which is called gravitation.

This whole point of view, as we have seen, is
superseded by relativity. ‘There are no longer
such things as “straight lines” in the old
geometrical sense. There are “straightest lines,”
or geodesics, but these involve time as well as
space. A light ray passing through the solar
system does not describe the same orbit as a
comet, from a geometrical point of view; never-
theless each moves in a geodesic. The whole
imaginative picture is changed. A poet might
say that water runs down hill because it is at-


194 THE AsB COOP RE DA LEV At,


tracted to the sea, but a physicist or an ordinary
mortal would say that it moves as it does, at
each point, because of the nature of the ground
at that point, without regard to what lies ahead
of it. Just as the sea does not cause the water
to run towards it, so the sun does not cause the
planets to move round it. The planets move
round the sun because that is the easiest thing
to do—in the technical sense of “least action.”
It is the easiest thing to do because of the nature
of the region in which they are, not because of
an influence emanating from the sun.

The supposed necessity of attributing gravi-
tation to a “force” attracting the planets towards
the sun has arisen from the determination to pre-
serve Euclidean geometry at all costs. If we
suppose that our space is Euclidean, when in
fact it is not, we shall have to call in physics to
rectify the errors of our geometry. We shall
find bodies not moving in what we insist upon
regarding as straight lines, and we shall demand
a cause for this behavior. Eddington has stated
this matter with admirable lucidity. He sup-
poses a physicist who has assumed the formula
for interval which is used in the special theory


THE ABOLITION OF “FORCE Io§
of relativity—a formula which still supposes that
the observer’s space is Euclidean. He continues:


Since intervals can be compared by experimental meth-
ods, he ought soon to discover that his (formula for the
interval) cannot be reconciled with observational results,
and so realize his mistake. But the mind does not so
readily get rid of an obsession. It is more likely that our
observer will continue in his opinion, and attribute the
discrepancy of the observations to some influence which is
present and affects the behavior of his test-bodies. He
will, so to speak, introduce a supernatural agency which he
can blame for the consequences of his mistake. . . . The
mame given to any agency which causes deviation from
uniform motion in a straight line is force according to the
Newtonian definition of force. Hence the agency invoked
through our observer’s mistake is described as a “field of
force.” ... A field of force represents the discrepancy
between the natural geometry of a co-ordinate system and


the abstract geometry arbitrarily ascribed to it.


If people were to learn to conceive the world
in the new way, without the old notion of ‘‘force,”
it would alter not only their physical imagina-
tion, but probably also their morals and politics.
The latter effect would be quite illogical, but is


1 Mathematical Theory of Relatwity, pp. 37-38. Italics in the
original,


196 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


none the less probable on that account. In New-
ton’s theory of the solar system, the sun seems
like a monarch whose behests the planets have to
obey. In Einstein’s world there is more indi-
vidualism and less government than in Newton’s.
There is also far less hustle: we have seen that
laziness is the fundamental law of Einstein’s uni-
verse. The word “dynamic” has come to mean,
in newspaper language, “energetic and force-
ful”; but if it meant “illustrating the principles
of dynamics,” it ought to be applied to the people
in hot climates who sit under banana trees wait-
ing for the fruit to drop into their mouths. I
hope that journalists, in future, when they speak
of a “dynamic personality,” will mean a person
who does what is least trouble at the moment,
without thinking of remote consequences. If I
can contribute to this result, I shall not have
written in vain.

It has been customary for people to draw
arguments from the laws of nature as to what
we ought to do. Such arguments seem to me a
mistake: to’ imitate nature may be merely
slavish. But if nature, as portrayed by Einstein,
is to be our model, it would seem that the
anarchists will have the best of the argument.


THE ABOLITION OF “FORCE 197


The physical universe is orderly, not because
there is a central government, but because every
body minds its own business. No two particles
of matter ever come into contact; when they get
too close, they both move off. If a man were


had up for knocking another man down, he
would be scientifically correct in pleading that
he had never touched him. What happened was
that there was a hill in space-time in the region
of the other man’s nose, and it fell down the hill.
The abolition of “force’”’ seems to be connected
with the substitution of sight for touch as the
source of physical ideas, as explained in Chapter
I. When an image in a looking glass moves, we
do not think that something has pushed it. In
places where there are two large mirrors oppo-
site to each other, you may see innumerable re-
flections of the same object. Suppose a gentle-
man in a top-hat is standing between the mir-
rors, there may be twenty or thirty top-hats in
the reflections. Suppose now somebody comes
and knocks off the gentleman’s hat with a stick:
all the other twenty or thirty top-hats will
tumble down at the same moment. We think
that a force is needed to knock off the “real” top-
oe hat, but we think the remaining twenty or thirty


198 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


tumble off, so to speak, of themselves, or out of
a mere passion for imitation. Let us try to
think out this matter a little more seriously.

Obviously something happens when an image
in a looking glass moves. From the point of
view of sight, the event seems just as real as if
it were not in a mirror. But nothing has hap-
pened from the point of view of touch or hearing.
When the “real” top-hat falls, it makes a noise;
the twenty or thirty reflections fall without a
sound. If it falls on your toe, you feel it; but
we believe that the twenty or thirty people in
the mirrors feel nothing, though top-hats fall on
their toes too. But all this is equally true of
the astronomical world. It makes no noise, be-
cause sound cannot travel across a vacuum. So
far as we know, it causes no “feelings,” because
there is no one on the spot to “feel” it. The
astronomical world, therefore, seems hardly more
“real” or “solid” than the world in the looking
glass, and has just as little need of “force” to
make it move.

The reader may feel that I am indulging in
idle sophistry. “After all,” he may say, “the
image in the mirror is the reflection of some-
thing solid, and the top-hat in the mirror only


THE ABOLITION OF “FORCE 199


falls off because of the force applied to the real
top-hat. The top-hat in the mirror cannot in-
dulge in behavior of its own; it has to copy the
real one. This shows how different the image
is from the sun and the planets, because they
are not obliged to be perpetually imitating a
prototype. So you had better give up pretend-
ing that an image is just as real as one of the
heavenly bodies.”

There is, of course, some truth in this; the
point is to discover exactly what truth. In the
first place, images are not “imaginary.” When
you see an image, certain perfectly real light
waves reach your eye; and if you hang a cloth
over the mirror, these light waves cease to exist.
There is, however, a purely optical difference
between an “image” and a “real” thing. The
optical difference is bound up with this question
of imitation. When you hang a cloth over the
mirror, it makes no difference to the “real” ob-
ject; but when you move the “real” object away,
the image vanishes also. This makes us say that
the light rays which make the image are only
reflected at the surface of the mirror, and do not
really come from a point behind it, but from
the “real” object. We have here an example


200 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


of a general principle of great importance.
Most of the events in the world are not isolated
occurrences, but members of groups of more or
less similar events, which are such that each
group is connected in an assignable manner with
a certain small region of space-time. This is the
case with the light rays which make us see both
the object and its reflection in the mirror: they
all emanate from the object as a center. If you
put an opaque globe round the object at a cer-
tain distance, the object and its reflection are
invisible at any point outside the globe. We
have seen that gravitation, although no longer
regarded as an action at a distance, is still con-
nected with a center: there is, so to speak, a
hill symmetrically arranged about its summit,
and the summit is the place where we conceive
the body to be which is connected with the gravi-
tational field we are considering. For simplicity,
common sense lumps together all the events
which form one group in the above sense. When
two people see the same object, two different
events occur, but they are events belonging to
one group and connected with the same center.
Just the same applies when two people (as we
say) hear the same noise. And so the reflection


THE ABOLITION OF “FORCE 201


in a mirror is less “real” than the object re-
flected, even from an optical point of view, be-
cause light rays do not spread in all directions
from the place where the image seems to be, but
only in directions in front of the mirror, and
only so long as the object reflected remains in
position. This illustrates the usefulness of
grouping connected events about a center in the
way we have been considering.

When we examine the changes in such a group
of objects, we find that they are of two kinds:
there are those which affect only some member
of the group, and those which make connected
alterations in all the members of the group. If
you put a candle in front of a mirror, and then
hang black cloth over the mirror, you alter only
the reflection of the candle as seen from various
places. If you shut your eyes, you alter its
appearance to you, but not its appearance else-
where. If you put a red globe round it at a
distance of a foot, you alter its appearance at
any distance greater than a foot, but not at any
distance less than a foot. In all these cases, you
do not regard the candle itself as having
changed; in fact, in all of them, you find that
there are groups of changes connected with a


202 THE ABC OF RELATIVITY


different center or with a number of different
centers. When you shut your eyes, for instance,
your eyes, not the candle, look different to any
other observer: the center of the changes that
occur is in your eyes. But when you blow out
the candle, its appearance everywhere is
changed; in this case you say that the change
has happened to the candle. The changes that
happen to an object are those that affect the
whole group of events which center about the
object. All this is only an interpretation of com-
mon sense, and an attempt to explain what we
mean by saying that the image of the candle in
the mirror is less “real” than the candle. There
is no connected group of events situated all
round the place where the image seems to be,
and changes in the image center about the candle,
not about a point behind the mirror. This gives
a perfectly verifiable meaning to the statement
that the image is “only” a reflection. And at
the same time it enables us to regard the heav-
enly bodies, although we can only see and not
touch them, as more “real” than an image in a
looking glass.

We can now begin to interpret the common
sense notion of one body having an “effect” upon


THE ABOLITION OF “FORCE” 2.03


another, which we must do if we are really to
understand what is meant by the abolition of
“force.” Suppose you come into a dark room
and switch on the electric light: the appearance
of everything in the room is changed. Since
everything in the room is visible because it re-
flects the electric light, this case is really
analogous to that of the image in the mirror;
the electric light is the center from which all the
changes emanate. In this case, the “effect’’ is
explained by what we have already said. The
more important case is when the effect is a move-
ment. Suppose you let loose a tiger in the mid-
dle of a Bank Holiday crowd: they would all
move, and the tiger would be the center of their
various movements. A person who could see
the people but not the tiger would infer that
there was something repulsive at that point. We
say in this case that the tiger has an effect upon
the people, and we might describe the tiger’s
action upon them as of the nature of a repulsive
force. We know, however, that they fly be-
cause of something which happens to them, not
merely because the tiger is where he is. They
fly because they can see and hear him, that is
to say, because certain waves reach their eyes


204 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


and ears. If these waves could be made to reach
them without there being any tiger, they would
fly just as fast, because the neighborhood would
seem to them just as unpleasant.

Let us now apply similar considerations to the
sun’s gravitation. The “force” exerted by the
sun only differs from that exerted by the tiger
in being attractive instead of repulsive. Instead
of acting through waves of light or sound, the
sun acquires its apparent power through the
fact that there are modifications of space-time
all round the sun. Like the noise of the tiger,
they are more intense near their source; as we
travel away they grow less and less. To say that
the sun “causes” these modifications of space-
time is to add nothing to our knowledge. What
we know is that the modifications proceed ac-
cording to a certain rule, and that they are
grouped symmetrically about the sun as center.
The language of cause and effect adds only a
number of quite irrelevant imaginings, connected
with will, muscular tension, and such matters.
What we can more or less ascertain is merely
the formula according to which space-time is
modified by the presence of gravitating matter.
More correctly: we can ascertain what kind of


THE ABOLITION OF “FORCE 205


space-time is the presence of gravitating matter.
When space-time is not accurately Euclidean in
a certain region, but has a non-Euclidean char-
acter which grows more and more marked as we
approach a certain center, and when, further,
the departure from Euclid obeys a certain law,
we describe this state of affairs briefly by saying
that there is gravitating matter at the center.
But this is only a compendious account of what
we know. What we know is about the places
where the gravitating matter is not, not about
the place where it is. The language of cause
and effect (of which “force” is a particular case)
is thus merely a convenient shorthand for cer-
tain purposes; it does not represent anything
that is genuinely to be found in the physical
world.

And how about matter? Is matter also no
more than a convenient shorthand? This ques-
tion, however, being a large one, demands a
separate chapter.


CHAPTER XIV: WHAT IS MATTER?


HE question “What is matter?” is of the kind

that is asked by metaphysicians, and an-
swered in vast books of incredible obscurity.
But I am not asking the question as_ meta-
physician: I am asking it as a person who wants
to find out what is the moral of modern physics,
and more especially of the theory of relativity.
It is obvious from what we have learned of that
theory that matter cannot be conceived quite as
it used to be. I think we can now say more or
less what the new conception must be.

There were two traditional conceptions of
matter, both of which have had advocates ever
since scientific speculation began. There were
the atomists, who thought that matter consisted
of tiny lumps which could never be divided;
these were supposed to hit each other and then
bounce off in various ways. After Newton, they
were no longer supposed actually to come into
contact with each other, but to attract and repel


each other, and move in orbits round each other.
206


WHAT IS MATTER? ZO7


Then there were those who thought that there is
matter of some kind everywhere, and that a true
vacuum is impossible. Descartes held this view,
and attributed the motions of the planets to
vortices in the ether. The Newtonian theory of
gravitation caused the view that there is matter
everywhere to fall into discredit, the more so as
light was thought by Newton and his disciples to
be due to actual particles traveling from the
source of the light. But when this view of light
was disproved, and it was shown that light con-
sisted of waves, the ether was revived so that
there should be something to undulate. The
ether became still more respectable when it was
found to play the same part in electromagnetic
phenomena as in the propagation of light. It
was even hoped that atoms might turn out to be
a mode of motion of the ether. At this stage,
the atomic view of matter was, on the whole,
getting the worst of it.

Leaving relativity aside for the moment, mod-
ern physics has provided proof of the atomic
structure of ordinary matter, while not disprov-
ing the arguments in favor of the ether, to which
no such structure is attributed. The result was
a sort of compromise between the two views, the


708°: THE AUB GORSRELATIVILY


one applying to what was called “gross” matter,
the other to the ether. There can be no doubt
about electrons and protons, though, as we shall
see shortly, they need not be conceived as atoms
were conceived traditionally. As for the ether,
its status is very curious: many physicists still
maintain that, without it, the propagation of light
and other electro-magnetic waves would be incon-
ceivable, but except in this way it is difficult to
see what purpose it serves. The truth is, I
think, that relativity demands the abandonment
of the old conception of “matter,” which is in-
fected by the metaphysics associated with “‘sub-
stance,” and represents a point of view not really
necessary in dealing with phenomena. ‘This is
what we must now investigate.

In the old view, a piece of matter was some-
thing which survived all through time, while
never being at more than one place at a given
time. This way of looking at things is obviously
connected with the complete separation of space
and time in which people formerly believed.
When we substitute space-time for space and
time, we shall naturally expect to derive the
physical world from constituents which are as
limited in time as in space. Such constituents


WHAT IS MATTER2 209


are what we call “events.” An event does not
persist and move, like the traditional piece of
matter; it merely exists for its little moment and
then ceases. A piece of matter will thus be re-
solved into a series of events. Just as, in the old
view, an extended body was composed of a num-
ber of particles, so, now, each particle, being
extended in tine, must be regarded as composed
of what we may call “event-particles.” The
whole series of these events makes up the whole
history of the particle, and the particle is re-
garded as being its history, not some metaphysi-
cal entity to which the events happen. This
view is rendered necessary by the fact that rel-
ativity compels us to place time and space more
on a level than they were in the older physics.
This abstract requirement must be brought
into relation with the known facts of the physi-
cal world. Now what are the known facts? Let
us take it as conceded that light consists of waves
traveling with the received velocity. We then
know a great deal about what goes on in the
parts of space-time where there is no matter;
we know, that is to say, that there are periodic
occurrences (light waves) obeying certain laws.
These light waves start from atoms, and the


210 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


modern theory of the structure of the atoms en-
ables us to know a great deal about the circum-
stances under which they start, and the reasons
which determine their wave lengths. We can
find out not only how one light wave travels,
but how its source moves relatively to ourselves.
But when I say this I am assuming that we can
recognise a source of light as the same at two
slightly different times. ‘This is, however, the
very thing which had to be investigated.

We saw, in the preceding chapter, how a
group of connected events can be formed, all
related to each other by a law, and all ranged
about a center in space-time. Such a group of
events will be the arrival, at various places, of
the light waves emitted by a brief flash of light.
We do not need to suppose that anything par-
ticular is happening at the center; certainly we
do not need to suppose that we know what is
happening there. What we know is that, as a
matter of geometry, the group of events in ques-
tion are ranged about a center, like widening
ripples on a pool when a fly has touched it. We
can hypothetically invent an occurrence which is
to have happened at the center, and set forth
the laws by which the consequent disturbance is


WHAT IS MATTER? 2ET


transmitted. This hypothetical occurrence will
then appear to common sense as the “cause” of
the disturbance. It will also count as one event
in the biography of the particle of matter which
is supposed to occupy the center of the
disturbance.

Now we find not only that one light wave
travels outward from a center according to a
certain law, but also that, in general, it is fol-
lowed by other closely similar light waves. The
sun, for example, does not change its appearance
suddenly; even if a cloud passes across it dur-
ing a high wind, the transition is gradual, though
swift. In this way a group of occurrences con-
nected with a center at one point of space-time
is brought into relation with other very similar
groups whose centers are at neighboring points
of space-time. For each of these other groups
common sense invents similar hypothetical occur-
rences to occupy their centers, and says that all
these hypothetical occurrences are part of one
history; that is to say, it invents a hypothetical
“particle” to which the hypothetical occurrences
are to have occurred. It is only by this double
use of hypothesis, perfectly unnecessary in each


212 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


case, that we arrive at anything that can be
called “matter” in the old sense of the word.

If we are to avoid unnecessary hypotheses, we
shall say that an electron at a given moment 7s
the various disturbances in the surrounding
medium which, in ordinary language, would be
said to be “caused” by it. But we shall not take
these disturbances at what is, for us, the moment
in question, since that would make them depend
upon the observer; we shall instead travel out-
ward from the electron with the velocity of light,
and take the disturbance we find in each place
as we reach it. The closely similar set of dis-
turbances, with very nearly the same center,
which is found existing slightly earlier or slightly
later, will be defined as being the electron at a
slightly earlier or slightly later moment. In this
way, we preserve all the laws of physics, without
having recourse to unnecessary hypotheses or in-
ferred entities, and we remain in harmony with
the general principle of economy which has en-
abled the theory of relativity to clear away so
much useless lumber.

Common sense imagines that when it sees a
table it sees a table. This is a gross delusion.
When common sense sees a table, certain light


WHAT IS MATTER? aie


waves reach its eyes, and these are of a sort
which, in its previous experience, has been asso-
ciated with certain sensations of touch, as well as
with other people’s testimony that they also saw
the table. But none of this ever brought us to
the table itself. The light waves caused occur-
rences in our eyes, and these caused occurrences
in the optic nerve, and these in turn caused
occurrences in the brain. Any one of these,
happening without the usual preliminaries,
would have caused us to have the sensations we
call “seeing the table,” even if there had been
no table. (Of course, if matter in general is to
be interpreted as a group of occurrences, this
must apply also to the eye, the optic nerve, and
the brain.) As to the sense of touch when we
press the table with our fingers, that is an elec-
tric disturbance in the electrons and protons of
our finger tips, produced, according to modern
physics, by the proximity of the electrons and
protons in the table. If the same disturbance
in our finger tips arose in any other way, we
should have the same sensations, in spite of there
being no table. The testimony of others is ob-
viously a second-hand affair. A witness in a
law court, if asked whether he had seen some


214 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


occurrence, would not be allowed to reply that
he believed so because of the testimony of others
to that effect. In any case, testimony consists
of sound waves and demands psychological as
well as physical interpretation; its connection
with the object is therefore very indirect. For
all these reasons, when we say that a man “sees a
table,” we use a highly abbreviated form of ex-
pression, concealing complicated and difficult
inferences, the validity of which may well be
open to question.

But we are in danger of becoming entangled
in psychological questions, which we must avoid
if we can. Let us therefore return to the purely
physical point of view.

What I wish to suggest may be put as follows.
Everything that occurs elsewhere, owing to the
existence of an electron, can be explored experi-
mentally, at least in theory, unless it occurs in
certain concealed ways. But what occurs within
the electron (if anything occurs there) it is abso-
lutely impossible to know: there is no conceiv-
able apparatus by which we could obtain even a
glimpse of it. An electron is known by its “ef-
fects.” But the word “effects” belongs to a
view of causation which will not fit modern


WHAT IS MATTER? 215


physics, and in particular will not fit relativity.
All that we have a right to say is that certain
groups of occurrences happen together, that is
to say, in neighboring parts of space-time. A
given observer will regard one member of the
group as earlier than the other, but another ob-
server may judge the time order differently.
And even when the time order is the same for all
observers, all that we really have is a connection
between the two events, which works equally
backwards and forwards. It is not true that
the past determines the future in some sense
other than that in which the future determines
the past: the apparent difference is only due to
our ignorance, because we know less about the
future than about the past. This is a mere
accident: there might be beings who would re-
member the future and have to infer the past.
The feelings of such beings in these matters
would be the exact opposite of our own, but no
more fallacious.

The moral of this is that, if an electron is only
known by its “effects,” there is no reason to sup-
pose that anything exists except the “effects.”
In so far as these “effects” consist of light waves
and other electromagnetic disturbances, we may


216 THE ABC OF RELATIVITY


say that what is called “empty space” consists
of regions where these disturbances are propa-
gated freely. Every such disturbance, we find,
has a center, and when we get very near the
center (though still at a finite distance from it)
we find that the law of propagation of the dis-
turbance ceases to be valid. This region within
which the law does not hold is called “matter”;
it will be an electron or proton according to cir-
cumstances. The region so defined is found to
move relatively to other such regions, and its
movements follow the known laws of dynamics.
So far, this theory provides for electromagnetic
phenomena and the motions of matter; and it
does so without assuming that “matter” is any-
thing but systems of electromagnetic phenom-
ena. In order to carry out the theory fully, it
would no doubt be necessary to introduce many
complications. But it seems fairly clear that all
the facts and laws of physics can be interpreted
without assuming that “matter” is anything more
than groups of events, each event being of the
sort which we should naturally regard as
“caused” by the matter in question. This does
not involve any change in the symbols or


WHAT IS MATTER? 217


formule of physics: it is merely a question of
interpretation of the symbols.

This latitude in interpretation is a characteris-
tic of mathematical physics. What we know is
certain very abstract logical relations, which we
express in mathematical formule; we know also
that, at certain points, we arrive at results which
are capable of being tested experimentally.
Take, for example, the eclipse observations by
which Einstein’s theory as to the bending of
light was established. The actual observation
consisted in the careful measurement of certain
distances on certain photographic plates. The
formule which were to be verified were con-
cerned with the course of light in passing near
the sun. Although the part of these formule
which gives the observed result must always be
interpreted in the same way, the other part of
them may be capable of a great variety of inter-
pretations. The formule giving the motions of
the planets are almost exactly the same in EKin-
stein’s theory as in Newton’s, but the meaning
of the formule is quite different. It may be
said generally that, in the mathematical treat-
ment of nature, we can be far more certain that
our formule are approximately correct than we


218 THE ABC OF RELATIVITY


can be as to the correctness of this or that inter-
pretation of them. And so in the case with
which this chapter is concerned: the question as
to the nature of an electron or a proton is by no
means answered when we know all that mathe-
matical physics has to say as to the laws of its
motion and the laws of its interaction with the
environment. A definite and conclusive answer
to our question is not possible just because a
variety of answers are compatible with the truth
of mathematical physics. Nevertheless some
answers are preferable to others, because some
have a greater probability in their favor. We
have been seeking, in this chapter, to define mat-
ter so that there must be such a thing if the
formule of physics are true. If we had made
our definition such as to secure that a particle
of matter should be what one thinks of as sub-
stantial, a hard, definite lump, we should not
have been sure that any such thing exists. That
is why our definition, though it may seem com-
plicated, is preferable from the point of view of
logical economy and scientific caution.


CHAPTER XV: PHILOSOPHICAL
CONSEQUENCES


HE philosophical consequences of relativity

are neither so great nor so startling as is
sometimes thought. It throws very little light
on time-honored controversies, such as that be-
tween realism and idealism. Some people think
that it supports Kant’s view that space and time
are “subjective” and are “forms of intuition.”
I think such people have been misled by the way
in which writers on relativity speak of “the ob-
server.” It is natural to suppose that the
observer is a human being, or at least a mind;
but he is just as likely to be a photographic
plate or a clock. That is to say, the odd re-
sults as to the difference between one “point of
view” and another are concerned with “point
of view” in a sense applicable to physical instru-
ments just as much as to people with percep-
tions. The “subjectivity” concerned in the
theory of relativity is a physical subjectivity,


219


220 THE ABC OF RELATIVITY


which would exist equally if there were no such
things as minds or senses in the world.

Moreover, it is a strictly limited subjectivity.
The theory does not say that everything is rel-
ative; on the contrary, it gives a technique for
distinguishing what is relative from what belongs
to a physical occurrence in its own right. If we
are going to say that the theory supports Kant
about space and time, we shall have to say that
it refutes him about space-time. In my view,
neither statement is correct. I see no reason
why, on such issues, philosophers should not all
stick to the views they previously held. ‘There
were no conclusive arguments on either side be-
fore, and there are none now;; to hold either view
shows a dogmatic rather than a scientific temper.

Nevertheless, when the ideas involved in EKin-
stein’s work have become familiar, as they will
when they are taught in schools, certain changes
in our habits of thought are likely to result, and
to have great importance in the long run.

One thing which emerges is that physics tells
us much less about the physical world than we
thought it did. Almost all the “great -prin-
ciples” of traditional physics turn out to be like
the “great law” that there are always three feet


PHILOSOPHICAL CONSEQUENCES 221


to a yard; others turn out to be downright false.
The conversation of mass may serve to illustrate
both these misfortunes to which a “law” is liable.
Mass used to be defined as “quantity of matter,”
and as far as experiment showed it was never in-
creased or diminished. But with the greater ac-
curacy of modern measurements, curious things
were found to happen. In the first place, the
mass as measured was found to increase with the
velocity; this kind of mass was found to be
really the same thing as energy. This kind of
mass is not constant for a given body, but the
total amount of it in the universe is conserved,
or at least obeys a law very closely analogous to
conservation. ‘This law itself, however, is to be
regarded as a truism, of the nature of the “law”
that there are three feet to a yard; it results from
our methods of measurement, and does not ex-
press a genuine property of matter. The other
kind of mass, which we may call “proper mass,”
is that which is found to be the mass by an ob-
server moving with the body. This is the ordi-
nary terrestrial case, where the body we are
weighing is not flying through the air. The
“proper mass” of a body is very nearly constant,
but not quite, and the total amount of “proper


2.22 "THE A BeCyOTr RELATIVITY


mass” in the world is not quite constant. One
would suppose that if you have four one-pound
weights, and you put them all together into the
scales, they will together weigh four pounds.
This is a fond delusion: they weigh rather less,
though not enough less to be discovered by even
the most careful measurements. In the case of
four hydrogen atoms, however, when they are
put together to make one helium atom, the defect
is noticeable; the helium atom weighs measurably
less than four separate hydrogen atoms.

Broadly speaking, traditional physics has col-
lapsed into two portions, truisms and geography.
There are, however, newer portions of physics,
such as the theory of quanta, which do not come
under this head, but appear to give genuine
knowledge of laws reached by experiment.

The world which the theory of relativity pre-
sents to our imagination is not so much a world
of “things” in “motion” as a world of events.
It is true that there are still electrons and pro-
tons which persist, but these (as we saw in the
preceding chapter) are really to be conceived
as strings of connected events, like the successive
notes of a song. It is events that are the stuff
of relativity physics. Between two events which


PHILOSOPHICAL CONSEQUENCES 223


are not too remote from each other there is, in
the general theory as in the special theory, a
measurable relation called “interval,” which ap-
pears to be the physical reality of which lapse of
time and distance in space are two more or less
confused representations. Between two distant
events, there is not any one definite interval.
But there is one way of moving from one event
to another which makes the sum of all the little
intervals along the route greater than by any
other route. This route is called a “geodesic,”
and it is the route which a body will choose if
left to itself.

The whole of relativity physics is a much more
step-by-step matter than the physics and geom-
etry of former days. -uclid’s straight lines
have to be replaced by light rays, which do not
quite come up to EKuclid’s standard of straight-
ness when they pass near the sun or any other
very heavy body. ‘The sum of the angles of a
triangle is still thought to be two right angles
in very remote regions of empty space, but not
where there is matter in the neighborhood. We,
who cannot leave the earth, are incapable of
reaching a place where Euclid is true. Proposi-
tions which used to be proved by reasoning have


224 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


now become either conventions, or merely ap-
proximate truths verified by observation.

It is a curious fact—of which relativity is not
the only illustration—that, as reasoning im-
proves, its claims to the power of proving facts
grow less and less. Logic used to be thought
to teach us how to draw inferences; now, it
teaches us rather how not to draw inferences.
Animals and children are terribly prone to infer-
ence: a horse is surprised beyond measure if you
take an unusual turning. When men began to
reason, they tried to justify the inferences that
they had drawn unthinkingly in earlier days. A
great deal of bad philosophy and bad science re-
sulted from this propensity. “Great principles,”
such as the “uniformity of nature,” the “law of
universal causation,” and so on, are attempts to
bolster up our belief that what has often hap-
pened before will happen again, which is no bet-
ter founded than the horse’s belief that you will
take the turning you usually take. It is not
altogether easy to see what is to replace these
pseudo-principles in the practice of science; but
perhaps the theory of relativity gives us a
glimpse of the kind of thing we may expect.
Causation, in the old sense, no longer has a place


PHILOSOPHICAL CONSEQUENCES 225


in theoretical physics. There is, of course, some-
thing else which takes its place, but the
substitute appears to have a better empirical
foundation than the old principle which it has
superseded.

The collapse of the notion of one all-embracing
time, in which all events throughout the universe
can be dated, must in the long run affect our
views as to cause and effect, evolution, and many
other matters. For instance, the question
whether, on the whole, there is progress in the
universe, may depend upon our choice of a meas-
ure of time. If we choose one out of a number
of equally good clocks, we may find that the
universe is progressing as fast as the most op-
timistic American thinks it is; if we choose
another equally good clock, we may find that the
universe is going from bad to worse as fast as the
most melancholy Slav could imagine. Thus
optimism and pessimism are neither true nor
false, but depend upon the choice of clocks.

The effect of this upon a certain type of emo-
tion is devastating. The poet speaks of


One far-off divine event
To which the whole creation moves.


2926 THE A BSGZOFORELATI Vi. Y


But if the event is sufficiently far off, and the
creation moves sufficiently quickly, some parts
will judge that the event has already happened,
while others will judge that it is still in the future.
This spoils the poetry. The second line ought to
be:


To which some parts of the creation move, while
others move away from it.


But this won’t do. I suggest that an emotion
which can be destroyed by a little mathematics
is neither very genuine nor very valuable. But
this line of argument would lead to a criticism of
the Victorian Age, which lies outside my theme.

What we know about the physical world, I
repeat, is much more abstract than was formerly
supposed. Between bodies there are occur-
rences, such as light waves; of the laws of these
occurrences, we know something—just so much
as can be expressed in mathematical formule—
but of their natwre we know nothing. Of the
bodies themselves, as we saw in the preceding
chapter, we know so little that we cannot even be
sure that they are anything: they may be merely
groups of events in other places, those events
which we should naturally regard as their ef-


PHILOSOPHICAL CONSEQUENCES 227


fects. We naturally interpret the world pic-
torially; that is to say, we imagine that what
goes on is more or less like what we see. But in
fact this likeness can only extend to certain for-
mal logical properties expressing structure, so
that all we can know is certain general character-
istics of its changes. Perhaps an illustration may
make the matter clear. Between a piece of
orchestral music as played, and the same piece of
music as printed in the score, there is a certain
resemblance, which may be described as a re-
semblance in structure. The resemblance is of
such a sort that, when you know the rules, you
can infer the music from the score or the score
from the music. But suppose you had been
stone deaf from birth, but had lived among musi-
cal people. You could understand, if you had
learned to speak and to do lip-reading, that the
musical scores represented something quite dif-
ferent from themselves in intrinsic quality,
though similar in structure. The value of music
would be completely unimaginable to you, but
you could infer all its mathematical characteris-
tics, since they are the same as those of the score.


1For the definition of “structure,” see the present author’s
Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy.


228 THEA Bs OF RELATIVITY


Now our knowledge of nature is something like
this. We can read the scores, and infer just so
much as our stone-deaf person could have in-
ferred about music. But we have not the ad-
vantages which he derived from association with
musical people. We cannot know whether the
music represented by the scores is beautiful or
hideous; perhaps, in the last analysis, we cannot
be quite sure that the scores represent anything
but themselves. But this is a doubt which the
physicist, in his professional capacity, cannot per-
mit himself to entertain.

Assuming the utmost that can be claimed for
physics, it does not tell us what it is that changes,
or what are its various states; it only tells us
such things as that changes follow each other
periodically, or spread with a certain speed.
Even now we are probably not at the end of the
process of stripping away what is merely imagi-
nation, in order to reach the core of true scien-
tific knowledge. The theory of relativity has
accomplished a very great deal in this respect,
and in doing so has taken us nearer and nearer
to bare structure, which is the mathematician’s
goal—not because it is the only thing in which
he is interested as a human being, but because


PHILOSOPHICAL CONSEQUENCES 229


it is the only thing that he can express in mathe-
matical formule. But far as we have traveled
in the direction of abstraction, it may be that we
shall have to travel further still.

In the preceding chapter, I suggested what
may be called a minimum definition of matter,
that is to say, one in which matter has, so to
speak, as little “substance” as is compatible
with the truth of physics. In adopting a defini-
tion of this kind, we are playing for safety: our
tenuous matter will exist, even if something
more beefy also exists. We tried to make our
definition of matter, like Isabella’s gruel in Jane
Austen, “thin, but not too thin.” We shall,
however, fall into error if we assert positively
that matter is nothing more than this. Leibniz
thought that a piece of matter is really a colony
of souls. There is nothing to show that he was
wrong, though there is also nothing to show that
he was right: we know no more about it either
way than we do about the flora and fauna of
Mars.

To the non-mathematical mind, the abstract
character of our physical knowledge may seem
unsatisfactory. From an artistic or imaginative
point of view, it is perhaps regrettable, but from


230 THE A BC OF RELATIVITY


a practical point of view it is of no consequence.
Abstraction, difficult as it is, is the source of
practical power. A financier, whose dealings
with the world are more abstract than those of
any other “practical” man, is also more powerful
than any other practical man. He can deal in
wheat or cotton without needing ever to have seen
either: all he needs to know is whether they will
go up or down. This is abstract mathematical
knowledge, at least as compared to the knowl-
edge of the agriculturist. Similarly the physi-
cist, who knows nothing of matter except certain
laws of its movements, nevertheless knows
enough to enable him to manipulate it. After
working through whole strings of equations, in
which the symbols stand for things whose in-
trinsic nature can never be known to us, he
arrives at last at a result which can be interpreted
in terms of our own perceptions, and utilized to
bring about desired effects in our own lives.
What we know about matter, abstract and
schematic as it is, is enough, in principle, to tell
us the rules according to which it produces per-
ceptions and feelings in ourselves; and it is upon
these rules that the practical uses of physics
depend.


PHILOSOPHICAL CONSEQUENCES 231


The final conclusion is that we know very
little, and yet it is astonishing that we know
so much, and still more astonishing that so little
knowledge can give us so much power.


THE END


mage tients


a


ste
Royton aie


pectpneiniaeie


preerhecss


Vike tye or ‘


Wenevempees


partAvyaoamevets ec untey
