Marriage and Morals (Bertrand Russell, 1929)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/marriagemorals0000bert_f0s3). Russell's controversial argument for reforming sexual morality — scandalous in 1929, prophetic later.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

re, FS 2 1 | HIGHLAN


i 0000101027225


3 | 176 R91


; ate tied AND M( Russell, Bertrand, 1872-1


Russell re


Lu
—_
an)
2
< \
a) \

as haga mio” i oe |

Pan
sa ok os as
Bee: ee te eee ie ee Cae re


TT Oe


\ '


Demco, Inc. 38-293


48558


brary


Highland Park Public L


rol’


MARRIAGE


Aoi D


MORALS


BERTRAND
RUSSELL


MCMXXIX.
HORACE LIVERIGHT:NEW YORK


COPYRIGHT, 1929, BY HORACE LIVERIGHT ING


MANUFACTURED IN THE U.S.A.


» 1929
929


ting, October, 1
| printing, December, 1


ting, Novem


Hs
Tin


First pr
Second p:
Third


NE ett


CONTENTS.


Mee eae ee ee ee ee


w


4 I. WHY A SEXUAL ETHIC IS NECESSARY 3
IL. WHERE FATHERHOOD IS UNKNOWN 14
gUL.. THE: DOMINION. OF THE- FATHER. 00S SS QR eee


_-—s« IV: PHALLIC WORSHIP, ASCETICISM AND SIN —_- 33.


: aN ETEICS Seetioer


arte


an: 2 ROMANTIC LOVE |


soe


44
| “88
vu ‘THe LIBERATION oF WOMEN ae : a ; pe ,


XIII: THE FAMILY AT THE PRESENT DAY
XIV + THE FAMILY IN INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY
XV - THE FAMILY AND THE STATE
XVI - DIVORCE
xv - POPULATION
XVIII - EUGENICS —


XIX - SEX AND INDIVIDUAL WELL-BEING


_——


XX . THE PLACE OF SEX AMONG HUMAN VALUES


_-XXI- CONCLUSION


221


E


ARRIAG


M


ee
—
sae s
a *!


CHAPTER I


WHY A SEXUAL ETHIC IS NECESSARY


N characterizing a society, whether ancient
or modern, there are two elements, rather
closely interconnected, which are of prime im-
portance: one is the economic system, the other
the family system. There are at the present
day two influential schools of thought, one of
which derives everything from an economic
source, while the other derives everything from
a family or sexual source, the former school
that of Marx, the latter that of Freud. I do not
myself adhere to either school, since the inter-
connections of economics and sex do not ap-
pear to me to show any clear primacy of the
one over the other from the point of view of
causal efficacy. For example: no doubt the in-
dustrial revolution has had and will have a
profound influence upon sexual morals, but
conversely the sexual virtue of the Puritans
was psychologically necessary as a part cause
of the industrial revolution. I am not prepared
myself to assign primacy to either the eco-


3


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


nomic or the sexual factor, nor in fact can they
be separated with any clearness. Economics is
concerned essentially with obtaining food, but
food is seldom wanted among human beings
solely for the benefit of the individual who ob-
tains it; it is wanted for the sake of the family,
and as the family system changes, economic
motives also change. It must be obvious that
not only life insurance but most forms of pri-
vate saving would nearly cease if children were
taken away from their parents and brought up
by the State as in Plato’s Republic; that is to
say, if the State were to adopt the role of the
father, the State would, ipso facto, become the
sole capitalist. Thoroughgoing Communists
have often maintained the converse, that if the
State is to be the sole capitalist, the family, as
we have known it, cannot survive; and even if
this is thought to go too far, it is impossible to
deny an intimate connection between private
property and the family, a connection which is
reciprocal, so that we cannot say that one is
cause and the other is effect.

The sexual morals of the community will be
found to consist of several layers. There are
first the positive institutions embodied in law;
such, for example, as monogamy in some coun-


4


epee!


WHY A SEXUAL ETHIC IS NECESSARY


tries and polygamy in others. Next there is a
layer where law does not intervene but public
opinion is emphatic. And lastly there is a layer
which is left to individual discretion, in practice
if not in theory. There is no country in the
world and there has been no age in the world’s
history where sexual ethics and sexual institu-
tions have been determined by rational consid-
erations, with the exception of Soviet Russia.
I do not mean to imply that the institutions
of Soviet Russia are in this respect perfect;
I mean only that they are not the outcome of
superstition and tradition, as are, at least in
part, the institutions of all other countries in
all ages. The problem of determining what
sexual morality would be best,from the point
of view of general happiness and well-being is
an extremely complicated one, and the answer
will vary according to a number of circum-
stances. It will be different in an industrially
advanced community from what it would be in
a primitive agricultural régime. It will be dif-
ferent where medical science and hygiene are
effective in producing a low death rate from
what it would be where plagues and pestilences
carry away a large proportion of the popula-
tion before it becomes adult. Perhaps when we


5


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


know more, we shall be able to say that the

best sexual ethic will be different in one climate
from what it would be in another, and different

again with one kind of diet from what it would

be with another.

The effects of a sexual ethic are of the most
diverse kinds—personal, conjugal, familial, na-
tional and international. It may well happen
that the effects are good in some of these
respects, where they are bad in others. All
must be considered before we can decide what
on the balance we are to think of a given sys-
tem. To begin with the purely personal: these
are the effects considered by psycho-analysis.
We have here to take account not only of the
adult behaviour inculcated by a code, but also
of the early education designed to produce
obedience to the code, and in this region, as
every one now knows, the effects of early
taboos may be very curious and indirect. In
this department of the subject we are at the
level of personal well-being. The next stage of
our problem arises when we consider the rela-
tions of men and women. It is clear that some
sex relations have more value than others.
Most people would agree that a sex relation is
better when it has a large psychical element


6


WHY A SEXUAL ETHIC IS NECESSARY


than when it is purely physical. Indeed the view
which has passed from the poets into the com-
mon consciousness of civilized men and women
is that love increases in value in proportion as
more of the personalities of the people con-
cerned enters into the relation. The poets also
have taught many people to value love in pro-
portion to its intensity; this, however, is a more
debatable matter. Most moderns would agree
that love should be an equal relation, and that
on this ground, if on no other, polygamy, for
example, cannot be regarded as an ideal sys-
tem. Throughout this department of the sub-
ject it is necessary to consider both marriage
and extra-marital relations, since whatever sys-
tem of marriage prevails, extra-marital rela-
tions will vary correspondingly.

We come next to the question of the family.
There have existed in various times and places
many different kinds of family groups, but the
patriarchal family has a very large prepon-
derance, and, moreover, the monogamic pa-
triarchal family has prevailed more and more
over the polygamic. The primary motive of
sexual ethics as they have existed in Western

‘civilization since pre-Christian times has been
to secure that degree of female virtue without —


7


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


which the patriarchal family becomes impos--
sible, since paternity is uncertain. What has
been added to this in the way, of insistence on
male virtue by Christianity had its psycho-
logical source in asceticism, although in quite
recent times this motive has been reinforced by
female jealousy, which became influential with
the emancipation of women. This latter motive
seems, however, to be temporary, since, if we
may judge by appearances, women will tend to
prefer a system allowing freedom to both sexes
rather than one imposing upon men the restric-
tions which hitherto have been suffered only by
women.

Within the monogamic family there are,
however, many varieties. Marriages may be de-
cided by the parties themselves or by their
parents. In some countries the bride is pur-
chased; in others, e.g., France, the bridegroom.
Then there may be all kinds of differences as
regards divorce, from the Catholic extreme,
which permits no divorce, to the law of old
China, which permitted a man to divorce his
wife for being a chatterbox. Constancy or
quasi-constancy in sex relations arises among
animals, as well as among human beings,
where, for the preservation of the species, the


8


WHY A SEXUAL ETHIC IS NECESSARY


participation of the male is necessary for the
rearing of the young. Birds, for example, have
to sit upon their eggs continuously to keep
them warm, and also have to spend a good
many hours of the day getting food. To do
both is, among many species, impossible for
one bird, and therefore male cooperation is
essential. The consequence is that most birds
are models of virtue. Among human beings the
cooperation of the father is a great biological
advantage to the offspring, especially in un-
settled times and among turbulent popula-
tions; but with the growth of modern civiliza-
tion the role of the father is being increasingly
taken over by the State, and there is reason to
think that a father may cease before long to be
biologically advantageous, at any rate in the
wage-earning class. If this should occur, we
must expect a complete breakdown of tradi-
tional morality, since there will no longer be
any reason why a mother should wish the pa-
ternity of her child to be indubitable. Plato
would have us go a step further, and put the
State not only in place of the father but in that
of the mother also. I am not myself sufficiently
an admirer of the State, or sufficiently im-
pressed with the delights of orphan asylums,


9


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


to be enthusiastic in favour of this scheme. At
the same time it is not impossible that eco-
nomic forces may cause it to be to some extent
adopted.

The law is concerned with sex in two dif-
ferent ways, on the one hand to enforce what-
ever sexual ethic is adopted by the community
in question, and on the other hand to protect
_ the ordinary rights of individuals in the sphere
of sex. The latter have two main departments:
on the one hand the protection of females and
non-adults from assault and from harmful ex-
ploitation, on the other hand the prevention
of venereal disease. Neither of these is com-
monly treated purely on its merits, and for this
reason neither is so effectively dealt with as it
might be. In regard to the former, hysterical
campaigns about the White Slave Traffic lead
to the passage of laws easily evaded by pro-
fessional malefactors, while affording oppor-
tunities of blackmail against harmless people.
In regard to the latter, the view that venereal
disease is a just punishment for sin prevents
the adoption of the measures which would be
the most effective on purely medical grounds,
while the general attitude that venereal dis-
ease is shameful causes it to be concealed, and


10


WHY A SEXUAL ETHIC IS NECESSARY


therefore not promptly or adequately treated.

‘We come finally to the question of popula-
tion. This is in itself a vast problem which must
be considered from many points of view. There
is the question of the health of mothers, the
question of the health of children, the question
of the psychological effects of large and small
families respectively upon the character of
children. These are what may be called the
hygienic aspects of the problem. Then there
are the economic aspects, both personal and
public: the question of the wealth per head of
a family or a community in relation to the size
of the family or the birth rate of the com-
munity. Closely connected with this is the
bearing of the population question upon inter-
national politics and the possibility of world
peace. And, finally, there is the eugenic ques-
tion as to the improvement or deterioration of
the stock through the different birth and death
rates of the different sections of the com-
munity. No sexual ethic can be either justified
or condemned on solid grounds until it has
been examined from all the points of view
above enumerated. Reformers and reaction-


aries alike are in the habit of considering one _


or at most two of the aspects of the problem. It
II


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


is especially rare to find any combination of
the private and the political points of view, and
yet it is quite impossible to say that either of
these is more important than the other, and we
can have no assurance @ priori that a system
which is good from a private point of view
would also be good from a political point of
view, or vice versa. My own belief is that in
most ages and in most places obscure psycho-
logical forces have led men to adopt systems
involving quite unnecessary cruelty, and that
this is still the case among the most civilized
races at the present day. I believe also that the
advances in medicine and hygiene have made
changes in sexual ethics desirable both from a
private and from a public point of view, while
the increasing role of the State in education is
gradually rendering the father less important
than he has been throughout historical times.
We have, therefore, a twofold task in criti-
cizing the current ethics: on the one hand we
have to eliminate the elements of superstition,
which are often subconscious; on the other
hand we have to take account of those entirely
new factors which make the wisdom of past
ages the folly instead of the wisdom of the
present.


12


WHY A SEXUAL ETHIC IS NECESSARY


In order to obtain a perspective upon the
existing system, I shall first consider some sys-
tems which have existed in the past or exist at
the present time among the less civilized por-
tions of mankind. I shall then proceed to char-
acterize the system now in vogue in Western
civilization, and finally to consider the respects
in which this system should be amended and
the grounds for hoping that such amendment
will take place.


13


CHAPTER II


WHERE FATHERHOOD IS UNKNOWN


ARRIAGE customs have always been a

blend of three factors, which may be
loosely called instinctive, economic, and re-
ligious respectively. I do not mean that these
can be sharply distinguished, any more than
they can in other spheres. The fact that shops
are closed on Sundays has a religious origin,
but is now an economic fact, and so it is with
many laws and customs in relation to sex. A
useful custom which has a religious origin will
often survive on account of its utility after the
religious basis has been undermined. The dis-
tinction between what is religious and what is
instinctive is also a difficult one to make. Re-
ligions which have any very strong hold over
men’s actions have generally some instinctive
basis. They are distinguished, however, by the
importance of tradition and by the fact that,
among the various kinds of actions which are
instinctively possible, they give a preference
to certain kinds; for example, love and jealousy


14


ee ere ee


WHERE FATHERHOOD IS UNKNOWN


are both instinctive emotions, but religion has
decreed that jealousy is a virtuous emotion to
which the community ought to lend support,
while love is at best excusable.

The instinctive element in sex relations is
much less than is usually supposed. It is not
my purpose in this book to go into anthropol-
ogy except in so far as may be necessary to il-
lustrate present-day problems, but there is one
respect in which that science is very necessary
for our purposes, and that is, to show how
many practices, which we should have thought
contrary to instinct, can continue for long
periods without causing any great or obvious
conflict with instinct. It has, for example, been
a common practice, not only with savages but
with some comparatively civilized races, for
virgins to be officially (and sometimes pub-
licly) deflowered by priests. In Christian coun-
tries men have held that defloration should be
the prerogative of the bridegroom, and most
Christians, at any rate until recent times,
would have regarded their repugnance to the
custom of religious defloration as an instinc-
tive one. The practice of lending one’s wife to
a guest as an act of hospitality is also one ~
which to the modern European seems instinc-


15


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


tively repugnant, and yet it has been very
widespread. Polyandry is another custom
which an unread white man would suppose
contrary to human nature. Infanticide might
seem still more so; yet the facts show that it
is resorted to with great readiness wherever it
seems economically advantageous. The fact is
that, where human beings are concerned, in-
stinct is extraordinarily vague and easily
turned aside from its natural course. This is
the case equally among savages and among
civilized communities. The word “instinct,” in
fact, is hardly the proper one to apply to any-
thing so far from rigid as human behaviour in
sexual matters. The only act in this whole
realm which can be called instinctive in the
strict psychological sense is the act of sucking
in infancy. I do not know how it may be with
savages, but civilized people have to learn to
perform the sexual act.* It is not uncommon
for doctors to be asked by married couples of
some years’ standing for advice as to how to
get children, and to find on examination that
the couples have not known how to perform
intercourse. The sexual act is not, therefore, <


* Cf. Havelock Ellis, “Studies | in , the Biochdlogy of Sex,” Vol.
VI, p. 510.


16


WHERE FATHERHOOD IS UNKNOWN


in the strictest sense, instinctive, although, of
course, there is a natural trend towards it anda
desire not easily to be satisfied without it. In-
deed, where human beings are concerned we do
not have the precise behaviour-patterns which
are to be found among other animals, and
instinct in that sense is replaced by something
rather different. What we have with human
beings is first of all a dissatisfaction leading to
activities of a more or less random and imper-
fect sort, but arriving gradually, more or less
by accident, at an activity which gives satis-
faction and which is therefore repeated. What
is instinctive is-thus_not.so much the finished ©
activity as the impulse to learn it, and often the
activity which would give satisfaction is by no
means definitely predetermined, though, as a
rule, the biologically most advantageous activ-
ity will give the most complete satisfaction,
provided it is learnt before contrary habits have
been acquired.

Seeing that all civilized modern societies are
based upon the patriarchal family, and that the
whole conception of female virtue has been
built up in order to make the patriarchal family
possible, it is important to enquire what nat-
ural impulses have gone to produce the sen-


17


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


timent of paternity. This question is by no
means so easy as unreflective persons might
suppose. The feeling of a mother towards her
child is one which it is not at all difficult to un-
derstand, since there is a close physical tie, at
any rate up to the moment of weaning. But the
relation of father to child, in that part of it
which depends upon physiological parenthood,
is indirect, hypothetical and inferential; it is
bound up with beliefs as to the virtue of the
wife, and belongs accordingly to a region too
intellectual to be regarded as properly in-
stinctive. Or at least it would seem so if one
supposed that the sentiment of paternity must
be directed essentially towards a man’s own
children. This, however, is by no means neces-
sarily the case. The Melanesians do not know
that people have fathers, yet among them
fathers are at least as fond of their children
as they are where they know them to be their
children. A flood of light has been thrown upon
the psychology of paternity by Malinowski’s
books on the Trobriand Islanders. Three books
especially—‘‘Sex and Repression in Savage
Society,” “The Father in Primitive Psychol-
ogy” and “The Sexual Life of Savages in
Northwestern Melanesia’—are quite indis-


18


a SAS I
vse ee


WHERE FATHERHOOD IS UNKNOWN


pensable to any understanding of the complex
sentiment which we call that of paternity.
There are, in fact, two entirely distinct rea-
sons which may lead a man to be interested
in a child; he may be interested in the child be-
cause he’believes it to be his child, or again he
may be interested in it because he knows it to
bé his wife’s child. The second of these mo-
tives alone operates where the part of the
father in generation is not known.

The fact that among the Trobriand Island-
ers people are not known to have fathers has
been established by Malinowski beyond ques-
tion. He observed, for example, that when a man
has been away on a voyage for a year or more
and finds on his return that his wife has a new-
born child, he is delighted, and quite unable to
understand the hints of Europeans, suggesting
doubts as to his wife’s virtue. What is perhaps
still more convincing, he found that a man who
possessed a superior breed of pigs would cas-
trate all the males and be unable to understand
that this involved a deterioration of the breed.
It is thought that spirits bring children and in-
sert them into their mothers. It is recognized
that virgins cannot conceive, but this is sup-
posed to be because the hymen presents a phys-


vv 19


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


ical barrier to the activities of the spirits. Un-
married men and girls live a life of complete
free love, but, for some unknown reason, un-
married girls very seldom conceive. Oddly
enough, it is considered disgraceful when they
do so, in spite of the fact that, according to
native philosophy, nothing they have done
is responsible for their becoming pregnant.
Sooner or later a girl grows tired of variety
and marries. She goes to live in her husband’s
village, but she and her children are still reck-
oned as belonging to the village from which
she has come. Her husband is not regarded as
having any blood relationship to the children,
and descent is traced solely through the female
line. The kind of authority over children which
is elsewhere exercised by fathers is, among the
Trobriand Islanders, vested in the maternal
uncle. Here, however, a very curious complica-
tion comes in. The brother and sister taboo is
exceedingly severe, so that after they are
grown up brother and sister can never talk
together on any subject connected with sex
however remotely. Consequently, although the
maternal uncle has authority over the children,
he seldom sees them except when they are
away from their mother and from home. This


20


WHERE FATHERHOOD IS UNKNOWN


admirable system secures for the children a
measure of affection without discipline which
is unknown elsewhere. Their father plays with
them and is nice to them but has not the right
to order them about, whereas their maternal
uncle, who has the right to order them about,
has not the right to be on the spot.

‘Strangely enough, in spite of the belief that
there is no blood tie between the child and its
mother’s husband, it is supposed that children
resemble their mother’s husbands rather than
their mothers or their brothers and sisters. In-
deed it is very bad manners to suggest a re-
semblance between a brother and sister, or be-
tween a child and its mother, and even the
most obvious resemblances are fiercely denied.
Malinowski is of opinion that the affection of
fathers for their children is stimulated by this
belief in a resemblance to the father rather than
to the mother. He found the relation of father
and son a more harmonious and affectionate
one than it often is among civilized people, and,
as might have been expected, he found no trace
of the Oedipus complex.

Malinowski found it quite impossible, in
spite of his best argumentative efforts, to per-
suade his friends on the islands that there is


21


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


such a thing as paternity. They regarded this
as a silly story invented by the missionaries.
Christianity is a patriarchal religion, and can-
not be made emotionally or intellectually intel-
ligible to people who do not recognize father-
hood. Instead of “God the Father” it would be
necessary to speak of “God the Maternal
Uncle,” but this does not give quite the right
shade of meaning, since fatherhood implies
both power and love, whereas in Melanesia the
maternal uncle has the power and the father
has the love. The idea that men are God’s chil-
dren is one which cannot be conveyed to the
Trobriand Islanders, since they do not think
that anybody is the child of any male. Conse-
quently, missionaries are compelled to tackle
first the facts of physiology before they can go
on to preach their religion. One gathers from
Malinowski that they have had no success in
this initial task, and have, therefore, been quite
unable to proceed to the teaching of the gospel.

Malinowski maintains, and in this I think he
must be right, that if a man remains with his
wife during pregnancy and child-birth he has
an instinctive tendency to be fond of the child
when it is born, and that this is the basis of the
paternal sentiment. “Human paternity,” he


22


ie wae


WHERE FATHERHOOD IS UNKNOWN


says, “which appears at first as almost com-
pletely lacking in biological foundation, can
be shown to be deeply rooted in natural endow-
ment and organic need.” He thinks, however,
that if a man is absent from his wife during
pregnancy he will not imstinctively feel affec-
tion for the child at first, although if custom
and tribal ethics lead him to associate with the
mother and child, affection will develop as it
would have done if he had been with the
mother throughout. In all the important hu-
man relations socially desirable acts, towards
which there is an instinct not strong enough to
be always compelling, are enforced by social
ethics, and so it is among these savages. Cus-
tom enjoins that the mother’s husband shall
care for the children and protect them while
they are young, and this custom is not difficult
to enforce, since it is as a rule in line with in-
stinct.

The instinct to which Malinowski appeals
to explain the attitude of a father towards his
children among the Melanesians is, I think,
somewhat more general than it appears in his
pages. There is, I think, in either a man or a
woman a tendency to feel affection for any
child whom he or she has to tend. Even if noth-


23


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


ing but custom and convention, or wages, have
in the first instance caused an adult to have the
care of a child, the mere fact of having that
care will, in the majority of cases, cause affec-
tion to grow up. No doubt this feeling is rein-
forced where the child is the child of a woman
who is loved. It is, therefore, intelligible that
these savages show considerable devotion to
their wives’ children, and it may be taken as
certain that this is a large element in the affec-
tion which civilized men give to their children.
Malinowski maintains—and it is difficult to see
how his opinion can be controverted—that all
mankind must have passed through the stage
in which the Trobriand Islanders are now,
since there must have been a period when
paternity was nowhere recognized. Animal
families, where they include a father, must
have a like basis, since they cannot have any
other. It is only among human beings, after
the fact of fatherhood has become known, that
the sentiment of paternity can assume the form
with which we are familiar.


24


ta pat.
ae? 5


|


CHAPTER III


THE DOMINION OF THE FATHER


S soon as the physiological fact of paternity

is recognized, a quite new element enters

into paternal feeling, an element which has led
almost everywhere to the creation of patri-
archal societies. As soon as a father recognizes
that the child is, as the Bible says, his “seed,”
his sentiment towards the child is reinforced
by two factors, the love of power and the desire
to survive death. The achievements of a man’s
descendants are in a sense his achievements,
and their life is a continuation of his life. Am-
bition no longer finds its termination at the
grave, but can be indefinitely extended through
the careers of descendants. Consider, for ex-
ample, the satisfaction of Abraham when he is
informed that his seed shall possess the land
of Canaan. In a matrilineal society family am-
bition would have to be confined to women,
and as women do not do the fighting, such
family ambition as they may have has less
effect than that of men. One must suppose,


25


+}


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


therefore, that the discovery of fatherhood
would make human society more competitive,
more energetic, more dynamic and hustling
than it had been in the matrilineal stage. Apart
from this effect, which is to some extent hy-
pothetical, there was a new and all-important
reason for insisting upon the virtue of wives.
‘The-purely—instinctive-element in jealousy is
not nearly so strong as most moderns imagine.
The extreme strength of jealousy in patriar-
chal societies is due to the fear of falsification
of descent. This may be seen in the fact that a
man who is tired of his wife and passionately
devoted to his mistress will nevertheless be
more jealous where his wife is concerned than
when he finds a rival to the affections of his
mistress. A legitimate child is a continuation of
a man’s ego, and his affection for the child is a
form of egoism. If, on the other hand, the child
is not legitimate, the putative father is tricked
into lavishing care upon a child with whom he
has no biological connection. Hence the dis-
covery of fatherhood led to the subjection of
women as the only means of securing their
virtue—a subjection first physical and then
mental, which reached its height in the Vic-
torian age. Owing to the subjection of women
26 <


ya


THE DOMINION OF THE FATHER


there has in most civilized communities been


no genuine companionship between husbands
and wives; their relation has been one.of con-
descension on the one side and duty on the
other. All the man’s serious thoughts and pur-
poses he has kept to himself, since robust
thought might lead his wife to betray him. In
most civilized communities women have been
denied almost all experience of the world and
of affairs. They have been kept artificially
stupid and therefore uninteresting. From
Plato’s dialogues one derives an impression
that he and his friends regarded men as the
only proper objects of serious love, This is not
to be wondered at when one considers that all
the matters in which they were interested were
completely closed to respectable Athenian
women. Exactly the same state of affairs pre-
vailed in China until recently, and in Persia in
the great days of Persian poetry, and in many
other ages and places. Love as a relation be-
tween men and women was ruined by the desire
to make sure of the legitimacy of children. And
not only love, but the whole contribution that
women can make to civilization, has been
stunted for the same reason.

The economic system naturally changed at


a


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


the same time that the method of reckoning
descent was transformed. In a matrilineal soci-
ety a man inherits from his maternal uncle; in
a patrilineal society he inherits from his father.
The relation of father and son in a patrilineal
society is a closer one than any relation be-
tween males which exists in a matrilineal soci-
ety, for, as we have seen, the functions which we
naturally attribute to the father are divided in
a matrilineal society between the father and the
maternal uncle, affection and care coming from
the father, while power and property come
from the maternal uncle. It is clear, therefore,
that the patriarchal family is a more closely
knit affair than the family of a more primitive
type.

It would seem that it is only with the intro-
duction of the patriarchal system that men
came to desire virginity in their brides. Where
the matrilineal system exists young women
sow their wild oats as freely as young men, but
this could not be tolerated when it became of
great importance to persuade women that all
intercourse outside marriage is wicked.

Fathers, having discovered the fact of their
existence, proceeded everywhere to exploit it
to the uttermost. The history of civilization is


28


THE DOMINION OF THE FATHER


mainly a record of the gradual decay of pater-
nal power, which reached its maximum, in
most civilized countries, just before the begin-
ning of historical records. Ancestor worship,
which has lasted to our own day in China and
Japan, appears to have been a universal char-
acteristic of early civilization. A father had
absolute power over his children, extending in
many cases, as in Rome, to life and death.
Daughters throughout civilization, and sons in
a great many countries, could not marry with-
out their father’s consent, and it was usual for
the father to decide whom they should marry.
A woman had in no period in her life any inde-
pendent existence, being subject first to her
father and then to her husband. At the same
time an old woman could exercise almost des-
potic power within the household; her sons and
their wives all lived under the same roof with
her, and her daughters-in-law were completely
subject to her. Down to the present day in
China it is not unknown for young married
women to be driven to suicide by the persecu-
tion of their mothers-in-law, and what can still
be seen in China is only what wag universal
throughout the civilized: ‘parts! ‘of Exrove: ‘and
Asia until “eh recent times. When Christ said —


Rae Re are
”
* »
Pe
a 9


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


that He was come to set the son against the
father and the daughter-in-law against the
mother-in-law, He was thinking of just such
households as one still finds in the Far East.
The power which the father acquired in the
first instance by his superior strength was re-
inforced by religion, which may in most of its
forms be defined as the belief that the gods are
on the side of the Government. Ancestor wor-
ship, or something analogous, prevailed very
widely. The religious ideas of Christianity, as
we have already seen, are impregnated with the
majesty of fatherhood. The monarchic and
aristocratic organization of society and the sys-
tem of inheritance were based everywhere upon
paternal power. In early days economic mo-
tives upheld this system. One sees in Genesis
how men desired a numerous progeny, and how
advantageous it was to them when they had it.
Multiplication of sons was as advantageous as
multiplication of flocks and herds. That was
why in those days Yahveh ordered men to in-
crease and multiply.

But as civilization advanced the economic
circumstances changed, so that the religious
precepts: Swhich had at ond. tiftie: béen exhorta-
tions to “self-interest began 1 to BID irksome.


307 2


ee


Jot ee


THE DOMINION OF THE FATHER


After Rome became prosperous, the aristocracy
no longer had large families. Throughout the
later centuries of Roman greatness the old
patrician stocks were continually dying out in
spite of the exhortations of moralists, which
were as ineffective then as they are now. Di-
vorce became easy and common; women in the
uppér classes achieved a position almost equal
to that of men and the patria potestas grew
less and less. This development was in many
ways very much like that of our own day, but
it was confined to the upper classes, and
shocked those who were not rich enough to
profit by it. The civilization of antiquity, in
contrast to our own, suffered through being
confined to a very small percentage of the pop-
ulation. It was this that made it precarious
while it lasted, and caused it ultimately to suc-
cumb to a great uprush of superstition from be-
low. Christianity and the barbarian invasion
destroyed the Greco-Roman system of ideas.
While the patriarchal system remained, and
was even at first strengthened as compared at
any rate to the system of aristocratic Rome, it
had nevertheless to accommodate itself to a
new element, namely the Christian view of sex
and the individualism derived from the Chris-


31


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


tian doctrine of the soul and salvation. No
Christian community can be so frankly bio-
logical as the civilizations of antiquity and of
the Far East. Moreover, the individualism of
Christian theology gradually affected the pol-
ity of Christian countries, while the promise of
personal immortality diminished the interest
which men took in the survival of their prog-
eny, which had formerly seemed to them the
nearest approach to immortality which was
possible. Modern society, although it is still
patrilineal and although the family still sur-
vives, attaches infinitely less importance to
paternity than ancient societies did. And the
strength of the family is enormously less than
it used to be. Men’s hopes and ambitions now-
adays are utterly different from those of the
patriarchs in Genesis. They wish to achieve
greatness rather through their position in the
State than through the possession of a numer-
ous progeny. This change is one of the reasons
why traditional morals and theology have less
force than they used to have. Nevertheless the
change itself is in fact a part of Christian the-
ology. To see how this has come about, the way
in which religion has affected men’s views of
marriage and the family must next be examined.


32


oh a el is
Palas i a


CHAPTER IV


PHALLIC WORSHIP,
ASCETICISM AND SIN


ROM the time that the fact of paternity
was first discovered, sex has always been

a matter of great interest to religion. This is
only what one would expect, since religion con-
cerns itself with everything that is mysterious
and important. Fruitfulness, whether of crops,
or of flocks and herds, or of women, was of
prime importance to men in the beginnings of
the agricultural and pastoral stages. Crops did
not always flourish and intercourse did not al-
ways produce pregnancy. Religion and magic
were invoked to make sure of the desired re-
sult. In accordance with the usual ideas of
sympathetic magic, it was thought that by pro-
moting human fertility the fertility of the soil
could be encouraged ; and human fertility itself,
which was desired in many primitive com-
munities, was promoted by various religious
and magical ceremonies. In ancient Egypt,
where agriculture appears to have risen before


33


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


the end of the matrilineal epoch, the sexual ele-
ment in religion was at first not phallic but con-
cerned with the female genitalia, the shape of
which was supposed to be suggested by the
cowry shell, which accordingly was held to
have magic powers and came to be used as cur-
rency. This stage, however, passed away, and
in later Egypt, as in most ancient civilizations,
the sexual element in religion took the form of
phallic worship. A very good short account of
the most salient facts in this connection will
be found in a chapter by Robert Briffault in
“Sex in Civilization.” *


“Agricultural festivals,” he says, “and more especially
those connected with the planting of seed and the gather-
ing of harvest, present in every region of the world and
in every age the most conspicuous examples of general
sexual license. . . . The agricultural populations of Al-
geria resent any restrictions being placed upon the licen-
tiousness of their women upon the ground that any attempt
to enforce sexual morality would be prejudicial to the suc-
cess of their agricultural operations. The Athenian thes-
mophoria, or sowing-feasts, preserved in an attenuated
form the original character of the magic of fertility. The
women carried phallic emblems and uttered obscenities.
The saturnalia were the Roman feasts of sowing, and have


* Edited by V. F. Calverton and S. D. Schmalhausen, with an
introduction by Havelock Ellis.


34


PHALLIC WORSHIP, ASCETICISM AND SIN


been succeeded by the carnival of southern Europe, in
which phallic symbols, differing little from those in vogue
among the Sioux and in Dahomey, were down to recent
years a conspicuous feature.” *


In many parts of the world it has been
thought that the moon (regarded as mascu-
line) is the true father of all children. ** This
view is, of course, bound up with moon wor-
ship. There has been a curious conflict, not di-
rectly relevant to our present subject, between
lunar and solar priesthoods and lunar and solar
calendars. The calendar has at all times played
an important part in religion. In England down
to the eighteenth century and in Russia down
to the Revolution of 1917, an inaccurate calen-
dar was perpetuated owing to the feeling that
the Gregorian calendar was papistical. Simi-
larly, the very inaccurate lunar calendars were
everywhere advocated by priests devoted to the
worship of the moon, and the victory of the so-
lar calendar was slow and partial. In Egypt this


* Briffault, loc. cit., p. 34.

**In the Maori State “The moon is the permanent husband or
true husband of all women. According to the knowledge of our
ancestors and elders, the marriage of man and wife is a matter of
no moment: the moon is the true husband.” Similar views have
existed in most parts of the world and obviously represent a transi-
tion from the stage where the paternity was unknown to the com- ~
plete recognition of its importance. Briffault, loc. cit., p. 37.


35


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


conflict was at one time a source of civil war.
‘One may suppose that it was connected with a
grammatical dispute as to the gender of the
word “moon,” which has remained masculine
in German down to the present day. Both sun-
worship and moon-worship have left their
traces in Christianity, since Christ’s birth oc-
curred at the winter solstice, while his res-
urrection occurred at the Paschal full moon.
Although it is rash to attribute any degree of
rationality to primitive civilization, it is never-
theless difficult to resist the conclusion that the
victory of the sun worshippers, wherever it oc-
curred, was due to the patent fact that the sun
has more influence than the moon over the
crops. Accordingly Saturnalia generally oc-
curred in the Spring.

Considerable elements of phallic worship ex-
isted in all the pagan religions of antiquity, and
supplied the Fathers with many polemical
weapons. In spite of their polemics, however,
traces of phallic worship survived throughout
the Middle Ages, and only Protestantism was
finally successful in extirpating all vestiges
of it.


“In Flanders and in France ithyphallic saints were not
uncommon, such as St. Giles in Brittany, St. René in


36


PHALLIC WORSHIP, ASCETICISM AND SIN


Anjou, St. Greluchon at Bourges, St. Regnaud, St.
Arnaud. The most popular throughout southern France,
St. Foutin, was reputed to have been the first bishop of
Lyons. When his shrine at Embrun was destroyed by
the Huguenots, the phenomenal phallus of the holy per-
sonage was rescued from the ruins, stained red from
abundant libations of wine, which his worshippers had been
in the habit of pouring over it, drinking thereafter the
potation as an infallible remedy against sterility and im-
potence.” *


Sacred prostitution is another institution
which was very widespread in antiquity. In
some places ordinary respectable women went
to a temple and had intercourse either with a
priest or with a casual stranger. In other cases,
the priestesses themselves were sacred harlots.
Probably all such customs arose out of the at-
tempt to secure the fertility of women through
the favour of the gods, or the fertility of the
crops by sympathetic magic.

So far we have been considering pro-sex-
ual elements in religion; anti-sexual elements,
however, existed side by side with the others
from a very early time, and in the end, wher-
ever Christianity or Buddhism prevailed, these
elements won a victory over their opposites.
Westermarck gives many instances of what he


* Briffault, loc. cit., p. 40.
an


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


calls “the curious notion that there is some-
thing impure and sinful in marriage, as in sex-
ual relations generally.” * In the most diverse
parts of the world, quite remote from any
Christian or Buddhist influence, there have
been orders of priests and priestesses vowed to
celibacy. Among the Jews the sect of the Es-
senes considered all sexual intercourse impure.
This view seems to have gained ground in an-
tiquity even in the circles most hostile to Chris-
tianity. There was indeed a general tendency
towards asceticism in the Roman Empire. Epi-
cureanism nearly died out and Stoicism re-
placed it among cultivated Greeks and Romans.
Many passages in the apocrypha suggest an al-
most monkish attitude towards women very
different from the robust virility of the older
books of the Old Testament. The Neoplato-
nists were almost as ascetic as the Christians.
From Persia the doctrine that matter is evil
spread to the West and brought with it the be-
lief that all sexual intercourse is impure. This
is, though not in an extreme form, the view of
the Church, but I do not wish to consider the
Church until the next chapter. What is evident
is that in certain circumstances men are led
* “History of Human Marriage,” page 151 ff.
38


PHALLIC WORSHIP, ASCETICISM AND SIN


spontaneously to a horror of sex, and this when
it arises is quite as much a natural impulse as
the more usual attraction towards sex. It is
necessary to take account of it and to under-
stand it psychologically if we are to be able to
judge what kind of sexual system is most likely
to satisfy human nature.

It should be said to begin with that it is use-
less to look to beliefs as the source of this kind
of attitude. Beliefs of this sort must be in the
first place inspired by a mood; it is true that
when once they exist they may perpetuate the
mood, or at any rate actions in accordance with
the mood, but it is hardly likely that they will
be the prime causes of an anti-sexual attitude.
The two main causes of such an attitude are, I
should say, jealousy and sexual fatigue. Wher-
ever jealousy is aroused, even if it be only
faintly, the sexual act appears to us disgusting,
and the appetite which leads to it seems loath-
some. The purely instinctive man, if he could
have his way, would have all women love him
and him only; any love which they may give
to other men inspires in him emotions which
may easily pass into moral condemnation. Es-
pecially is this the case when the woman is his
wife. One finds in Shakespeare, for example,


39


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


that his men do not desire their wives to be
passionate. The ideal woman, according to
Shakespeare, is one who submits to her hus-
band’s embraces from a sense of duty, but
would not think of having a lover, since sex in
itself is disagreeable to her and is only endured
because the moral law commands that it should
be. The instinctive husband, when he finds that
his wife has betrayed him, is filled with disgust
against both her and her lover and is apt to
conclude that all sex is beastly. Especially will
this be the case if he has become impotent
through excess or old age. Since old men have
in most societies more weight than the young,
it is natural that the official and correct opinion
on sexual matters should be not that of hot-
headed youth.

Sexual fatigue is a phenomenon introduced
by civilization; it must be quite unknown
among animals and very rare among unciv-
ilized men. In a monogamic marriage it is un-
likely to occur except in a very small degree,
since the stimulus of novelty is required with
most men to lead them to physiological excess.
It is also unlikely to occur when women are
free to refuse their favours, for, in that case, like
female animals, they will demand courtship be-


40


PHALLIC WORSHIP, ASCETICISM AND SIN


fore each act of intercourse, and will not yield
their favours until they feel that a man’s pas-
sions are sufficiently stimulated. This purely
instinctive feeling and behaviour have been ren-
dered rare by civilization. What has done most
to eliminate it is the economic factor. Married
women and prostitutes alike make their living
by-means of their sexual charms, and do not,
therefore, only yield when their own instinct
prompts them to do so. This has greatly di-
minished the part played by courtship, which
is Nature’s safeguard against sexual fatigue.
Consequently men who are not restrained by
a fairly rigid ethic are apt to indulge to excess:
this produces in the end a feeling of weariness
and disgust, which leads naturally to ascetic ~
convictions.

Where jealousy and sexual fatigue cooper-
ate, as they often do, the strength of the anti-
sexual passion may become very great. I think
this is the main reason why asceticism is apt to
grow up in very licentious societies.

Celibacy as an historical phenomenon has,
however, other sources as well. Priests and
priestesses dedicated to the service of divinities
may be regarded as married to these divinities, —
and as therefore obliged to abstain from all


4I


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


intercourse with mortals. They will naturally
be considered exceptionally holy, and thus an
association is brought about between holiness
and celibacy. Up to our own day in the Cath-
olic Church nuns are regarded as the brides of
Christ. And this is certainly one of the reasons
why it is thought wicked for them to have in-
tercourse with mortals.

I suspect that other causes more obscure
than any we have yet considered had to do with
the increasing asceticism of the ancient world
in its later days. There are epochs when life
seems cheerful, when men are vigorous, and
when the joys of this mundane existence are
sufficient to give complete satisfaction. There
are other epochs when men seem weary, when
this world and its joys do not suffice, and when
men look to spiritual consolation or a future
life to make up for the natural emptiness of this
sublunary scene. Compare the Solomon of the
“Song of Songs” with the Solomon of Eccle-
siastes: the one represents the ancient world in
its prime, the other in its decay. What is the
cause of this difference I do not profess to
know. Perhaps it is something very simple and
physiological, such as the substitution of a
sedentary urban life for an active life in the


42


Sah? AL as oe


PHALLIC WORSHIP, ASCETICISM AND SIN


open air; perhaps the Stoics had sluggish liv-
ers; perhaps the author of Ecclesiastes thought
that all is vanity because he did not take
enough exercise. However that may be, there
is no doubt that a mood such as his leads easily
to a condemnation of sex. Probably the causes
we have suggested, and various others also,
contributed to the general weariness of the
later centuries of antiquity; and of this weari-
ness asceticism was one feature. Unfortunately
it was in this decadent and morbid period that
the Christian ethic was formulated. The vigor-
ous men of later periods have had to do their
best to live up to an outlook on life belonging
to diseased, weary, and disillusioned men who
had lost all sense of biological values and of
the continuity of human life. This topic, how-
ever, belongs to our next chapter.


43


CHAPTER V


CHRISTIAN ETHICS


iB ARRIAGE,” says Westermarck, “is

rooted in family rather than family in
marriage.” This view would have been a truism
in pre-Christian times, but since the advent of
Christianity it has become an important propo-
sition needing to be stated with emphasis.
Christianity, and more particularly St. Paul,
introduced an entirely novel view of marriage,
that it existed not primarily for the procreation
of children, but to prevent the sin of fornica-
tion.

The views of St. Paul on marriage are set
forth, with a clarity that leaves nothing to be
desired, in the First Epistle to the Corinthians.
The Corinthian Christians, one gathers, had
adopted the curious practice of having illicit
relations with their stepmothers (I Cor. v. 1),
and he felt the situation needed to be dealt
with emphatically. The views which he set
forth are as follows: *

*T Cor. vii. 1-9,


44


CHRISTIAN ETHICS


1. Now concerning the things whereof ye wrote unto
me: It is gocd for a man not to touch a woman.

2. Nevertheless, to avoid fornication, let every man
have his own wife, and let every woman have her own
husband.

3. Let the husband render unto the wife due benevo-
lence: and likewise also the wife unto the husband.

4. The wife hath not power of her own body, but the
husband : and likewise also the husband hath not power of
his own body, but the wife.

5. Defraud ye not one the other, except it be with con-
sent for a time, that ye may give yourselves to fasting
and prayer ; and come together again, that Satan tempt you
not for your incontinency.

6. But I speak this by permission, and not of com-
mandment.

7. For I would that all men were even as I myself. But
every man hath his proper gift of God, one after this
manner, and another after that.

8. I say therefore to the unmarried and widows, It is
good for them if they abide even as I.

_ g. But if they cannot contain, let them marry: for it is
better to marry than to burn.


Tt will be seen that in this passage St. Paul


makes no mention whatever of children; the
biological purpose of marriage appears to him
wholly unimportant. This is quite natural,
since he imagined that the Second Coming was
imminent and that the world would soon come
to an end. At the Second Coming men were to


45


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


be divided into sheep and goats, and the only
thing of real importance was to find oneself
among the sheep on that occasion. St. Paul
holds that sexual intercourse, even in marriage,
is something of a handicap in the attempt to
win salvation (I Cor. vii. 32-34). Neverthe-
less it is possible for married people to be saved,
but fornication is deadly sin, and the unre-
pentant fornicator is sure to find himself
among the goats. I remember once being ad-
vised by a doctor to abandon the practice of
smoking, and he said that I should find it eas-
ier if, whenever the desire came upon me, I pro-
ceeded to suck an acid drop. It is in this spirit
that St. Paul recommends marriage. He does
not suggest that it is quite as pleasant as
fornication, but he thinks it may enable the
weaker brethren to withstand temptation; he
does not suggest for a moment that there may
be any positive good in marriage, or that affec-
tion between husband and wife may be a beau-
tiful and desirable thing, nor does he take the
slightest interest in the family; fornication
holds the center of the stage in his thoughts,
and the whole of his sexual ethics is arranged
with reference to it. It is just as if one were to
maintain that the sole reason for baking bread


46


So) Seana


prey, ale


CHRISTIAN ETHICS


is to prevent people from stealing cake. St. Paul
does not deign to tell us why he thinks fornica-
tion so wicked. One is inclined to suspect that,
having thrown over the Mosaic law, and being
therefore at liberty to eat pork, he wishes to
show that his morality is nevertheless quite as
severe as that of orthodox Jews. Perhaps the
long ages during which pork had been pro-
hibited had made it seem to the Jews as deli-
cious as fornication, and therefore he would
need to be emphatic as regards the ascetic ele-
ments in his creed.

Condemnation of all fornication was a nov-
elty in the Christian religion. The Old Testa-
ment, like most codes of early civilization, for-
bids adultery, but it means by adultery inter-
course with a married woman. This is evident
to any one who reads the Old Testament atten-
tively. For example, when Abraham goes to
Egypt with Sarah he tells the king that Sarah
is his sister, and the king, believing this, takes
her into his harem; when it subsequently tran-
spires that she is Abraham’s wife, the king is
shocked to find that he has unwittingly com-
mitted sin, and reproaches Abraham for not
having told him the facts. This was the usual
code of antiquity. A woman who had inter-


47


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


course outside marriage was thought ill of, but
a man was not condemned unless he had inter-
course with the wife of another, in which case
he was guilty of an offence against property.
The Christian view that all intercourse outside
marriage is immoral was, as we see in the
above passages from St. Paul, based upon the
view that all sexual intercourse, even within
marriage, is regrettable. A view of this sort,
which goes against biological facts, can only be
regarded by sane people as a morbid aberra-
tion. The fact that it is embedded in Christian
ethics has made Christianity throughout its
whole history a force tending towards mental
disorders and unwholesome views of life.

St. Paul’s views were emphasized and exag-
gerated by the early Church; celibacy was con-
sidered holy and men retired into the desert to
wrestle with Satan while he filled their imagi-
nations with lustful visions.

The Church attacked the habit of the bath on
the ground that everything which makes the
body more attractive tends towards sin. Dirt
was praised, and the odour of sanctity became
more and more penetrating. “The purity of
the body and its garments,” said St. Paula,


48


CHRISTIAN ETHICS


“means the impurity of the soul.” * Lice were
called the pearls of God, and to be covered with
them was an indispensable mark of a holy
man.


“St. Abraham, the hermit, however, who lived for fifty
years after his conversion, rigidly refused from that date
to wash either his face or his feet. He was, it is said, a
person of singular beauty, and his biographer somewhat
strangely remarks, that ‘his face reflected the purity of
his soul.’ St. Ammon had never seen himself naked. A
famous virgin, named Silvia, though she was sixty years
old, and though bodily sickness was a consequence of her
habits, resolutely refused, on religious principles, to wash
any part of her body except her fingers. St. Euphraxia
joined a convent of one hundred and thirty nuns, who
never washed their feet, and who shuddered at the men-
tion of a bath. An anchorite once imagined that he was
mocked by an illusion of the devil, as he saw gliding be-
fore him through the desert a naked creature black with
filth and years of exposure, and with white hair floating
to the wind. It was a once beautiful woman, St. Mary
of Egypt, who had thus, during forty-seven years, been
expiating her sins. The occasional decadence of the monks
into habits of decency was a subject of much reproach.
‘Our fathers,’ said the abbot Alexander, looking mourn-
fully back to the past, ‘never washed their faces, but we
frequent the public baths.’ It was related of one monastery
in the desert, that the monks suffered greatly from want


* Havelock Ellis, “Studies in the Psychology of Sex,” Vol. IV,
p. 31.


49


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


of water to drink; but at the prayer of the abbot Theodo-
sius a copious stream was produced. But soon some monks,
tempted by the abundant supply, diverged from their old
austerity, and persuaded the abbot to avail himself of the
stream for the construction of the bath. The bath was
made. Once, and once only, did the monks enjoy their
ablutions, when the stream ceased to flow. Prayers, tears,
and fastings were in vain. A whole year passed. At last
the abbot destroyed the bath, which was the object of the
Divine displeasure, and the waters flowed afresh.” *


It is evident that, where such views concern-
ing sex prevailed, sexual relations when they
occurred would tend to be brutal and harsh,
like drinking under Prohibition. The art of love
was forgotten and marriage was brutalized.


“The services rendered by the ascetics in imprinting on
the minds of men a profound and enduring conviction of
the importance of chastity, though extremely great, were
seriously counterbalanced by their noxious influence upon
marriage. Two or three beautiful descriptions of this in-
stitution have been culled out of the immense mass of the
patristic writings; but in general, it would be difficult to
conceive anything more coarse or more repulsive than the
manner in which they regarded it. The relation which na-
ture has designed for the noble purpose of repairing the
ravages of death, and which, as Linnzus has shown, ex-
tends even through the world of flowers, was invariably
treated as a consequence of the fall of Adam, and marriage
was regarded almost exclusively in its lowest aspect. The


*W. E. H. Lecky, “History of European Morals,” Vol. II. pp.
117-118,


50


CHRISTIAN ETHICS


tender love which it elicits, the holy and beautiful do-
mestic qualities that follow in its train, were almost abso-
lutely omitted from consideration. The object of the
ascetic was to attract men to a life of virginity, and as
a necessary consequence, marriage was treated as an in-
ferior state. It was regarded as being necessary, indeed,
and therefore justifiable, for the propagation of the species,
and to free men from greater evils; but still as a condition
of degradation from which all who aspired to real sanctity
could fly. To ‘cut down by the axe of Virginity the wood
of Marriage,’ was, in the energetic language of St. Jerome,
the end of the saint; and if he consented to praise mar-
triage, it was merely because it produced virgins. Even
when the bond had been formed, the ascetic passion re-
tained its sting. We have already seen how it embittered
other relations of domestic life. Into this, the holiest of
all, it infused a tenfold bitterness. Whenever any strong
religious fervour fell upon a husband or a wife, its first
effect was to make a happy union impossible. The more
religious partner immediately desired to live a life of
solitary asceticism, or at least, if no ostensible separation
took place, an unnatural life of separation in marriage.
The immense place this order of ideas occupies in the
hortatory writings of the fathers, and in the legends of
the saints, must be familiar to all who have any knowl-
edge of this department of literature. Thus—to give but a
very few examples—St. Nilus, when he had already two
children, was seized with a longing for the prevailing
asceticism, and his wife was persuaded, after many tears,
to consent to their separation. St. Ammon, on the night
of his marriage, proceeded to greet his bride with an
harangue upon the evils of the married state, and they


51


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


agreed, in consequence, at once to separate. St. Melania
laboured long and earnestly to induce her husband to allow
her to desert his bed, before he would consent. St. Abra-
ham ran away from his wife on the night of his marriage.
St. Alexis, according to a somewhat later legend, took
the same step, but many years after returned from Jeru-
salem to his father’s house, in which his wife was still
lamenting her desertion, begged and received a lodging as
an act of charity, and lived there despised, unrecognized,
and unknown till his death.” *


The Catholic Church, however, has not re-
mained so unbiological as St. Paul and the
hermits of the Thebaid. From St. Paul one
gathers that marriage is to be regarded solely
as amore or less legitimate outlet for lust. One
would not gather from his words that he would
have any objection to birth control: on the con-
trary, one would be led to suppose that he
would regard as dangerous the periods of con-
tinence involved in pregnancy and child-birth.—
The Church has taken a different view. Mar-
riage in the orthodox Christian doctrine has
two purposes: one, that recognized by St.
Paul, the other, the procreation of children.
The consequence has been to make sexual mo-
rality even more difficult than it was made by,


*W. E. H. Lecky, “History of European Morals,’ Vol. II,
PP. 339-341.


52


CHRISTIAN ETHICS


St. Paul. Not only is sexual intercourse only
legitimate within marriage, but even between
husband and wife it becomes a sin unless it is
hoped that it will lead to pregnancy. The de-
sire for legitimate offspring is, in fact, accord-
ing to the Catholic Church, the only motive
which can justify sexual intercourse. But this
motive always justifies it, no matter what
cruelty may accompany it. If the wife hates
sexual intercourse, if she is likely to die of an-
other pregnancy, if the child is likely to be
diseased or insane, if there is not enough
money to prevent the utmost extreme of mis-
ery, that does not prevent the man from being
justified in insisting on his conjugal rights, pro-
vided only that he hopes to beget a child.
Catholic teaching on this subject has a two-
fold basis; it rests, on the one hand, upon the
asceticism which we already find in St. Paul,
on the other, upon the view that it is good to
bring into the world as many souls as possible,
since every soul is capable of salvation. For
some reason which I do not understand, the
fact that souls are equally capable of damna-
tion is not taken into account, and yet it seems
quite as relevant. Catholics, for example, use _
their political influence to prevent Protestants


53


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


from practising birth control, and yet they
must hold that the great majority of Protestant
children whom their political action causes to
exist will endure eternal torment in the next
world. This makes their action seem somewhat
unkind, but doubtless these are mysteries
which the profane cannot hope to understand.

The recognition of children as one of the
purposes of marriage is very partial in Catholic
doctrine. It exhausts itself in drawing the in-
ference that intercourse not intended to lead to
children is sin. It has never gone so far as to
permit the dissolution of a marriage on the
ground of sterility. However ardently a man
may desire children, if it happens that his wife
is barren, he has no remedy in Christian ethics.
The fact is that the positive purpose of mar-
riage, namely procreation, plays a very sub-
ordinate part, and its main purpose remains, as
with St. Paul, the prevention of sin. Fornica-
tion still holds the center of the stage, and mar-
riage is still regarded essentially as a some-
what less regrettable alternative.

The Catholic Church has tried to cover up
this low view of marriage by the doctrine that
marriage is a sacrament. The practical efficacy
of this doctrine lies in the inference that mar-


54


CHRISTIAN ETHICS


riage is indissoluble. No matter what either of
the partners may do, if one of them becomes
insane or syphilitic, or an habitual drunkard, or
lives openly with another partner, the relation
of the two remains sacred, and although in cer-
tain circumstances a separation a@ mensa et toro
may be granted, the right to remarry can
never be granted. This causes, of course, in
many cases a great deal of misery, but since
this misery is God’s will it must be endured.

Along. with this extremely rigid theory,
Catholicism has always had a certain degree of
toleration for what it held to be sin. The
Church has recognized that ordinary human
nature could not be expected to live up to its
precepts, and has been prepared to give absolu-
tion for fornication provided the sinner
acknowledged his fault and did penance. This
practical toleration was a method of increas-
ing the power of the clergy, since they alone
could pronounce absolution, and but for ab-
solution fornication would entail eternal dam-
nation.

The outlook of Protestantism has been
somewhat different, in theory, less severe, but
in practice, in some ways more so. Luther was


much impressed by the text “It is better to


55


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


marry than to burn,” and was also in love with
a nun. He inferred that in spite of vows of
celibacy, he and the nun had a right to marry,
indeed one might almost say a duty to marry,
since otherwise, given the strength of his pas-
sions, he would have been led into mortal
sin. Protestantism accordingly abandoned the
praise of celibacy, which had been character-
istic of the Catholic Church, and wherever
it was vigorous it also abandoned the doctrine
that marriage is a sacrament, and tolerated
divorce in certain circumstances. But Protes-
tants were more shocked than Catholics by for-
nication, and altogether more rigid in their
moral condemnations. The Catholic Church ex-
pected a certain amount of sin, and arranged
methods for dealing with it; the Protestants, on
the contrary, abandoned the Catholic practices
of confession and absolution, and left the sin-
ner in a much more hopeless position than he
occupies in the Catholic Church. One sees this
attitude in both its aspects in modern America,
where divorce is exceedingly easy, but adultery
_is condemned with far more severity than in
most Catholic countries...
It is clear that the whole system of Christian
ethics, both in the Catholic and in the Protes-


56


CHRISTIAN ETHICS


tant form, requires to be re-examined, as far as
possible without the preconceptions to which
a Christian education predisposes most of us.
Emphatic and reiterated assertion, especially
during childhood, produces in most people a
belief so firm as to have a hold even over the
unconscious, and many of us who imagine that
our attitude towards orthodoxy is quite eman-
cipated are still, in fact, subconsciously con-
trolled by its teachings. We must ask ourselves
quite frankly what led the Church to condemn
all fornication. Do we think that it had valid
grounds for this condemnation? Or, if we do
not, are there grounds, other than those ad-
duced by the Church, which ought to lead us to
the same conclusion? The attitude of the early
Church was that there is something essentially
impure in the sexual act, although this act
must be excused when it is performed after ful-
filling certain preliminary conditions. This at-
titude in itself must be regarded as purely,
superstitious; the reasons which led to its adop-
tion were presumably those which were con-
sidered in the last chapter as liable to cause
an anti-sexual attitude, that is to say, those
who first inculcated such a view must have suf-
fered from a diseased condition of body or


57


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


mind, or both. The fact that an opinion has
been widely held is no evidence whatever that
it is not utterly absurd; indeed in view of the
silliness of the majority of mankind, a wide-
spread belief is more likely to be foolish than
sensible. The Pelew Islanders believe that the
perforation of the nose is necessary for win-
ning eternal bliss.* Europeans think that this
end is better attained by wetting the head
while pronouncing certain words. The belief of
the Pelew Islanders is a superstition; the be-
lief of Europeans one of the truths of our holy
religion.

Jeremy Bentham made a table of the springs
of action, where every human desire was
named in three parallel columns, according as
men wish to praise it, to blame it, or to treat it
neutrally. Thus we find in one column “glut-
tony,’ and opposite it, in the next column,
“love of the pleasures of the social board.” And
again, we find in the column giving eulogistic
names to impulses, “public spirit,” and oppo-
‘site to it, in the next column, we find “spite.”
I recommend anybody who wishes to think
clearly on any ethical topic to imitate Bentham
in this particular, and after accustoming him-

* Westermarck, op. cit., p. 170,


58


CHRISTIAN ETHICS


self to the fact that almost every word convey-
ing blame has a synonym conveying praise, to
acquire a habit of using words that convey
neither praise nor blame. Both “adultery” and
“fornication” are words conveying such im-
mensely strong moral reprobation that so long
as they are employed it is difficult to think
clearly. There are, however, other words used
by those lascivious writers who wish to cor-
rupt our morals; such writers will speak of

“gallantry,” of “love unfettered by the cold |
bonds of law.” Both sets of terms are designed
to arouse prejudices; if we wish to think dis-
passionately, we must eschew the one set just
as much as the other. Unfortunately this must
inevitably ruin our literary style. Both words
of praise and words of blame are colourful and
interesting. The reader can be carried along by
an invective or panegyric, and with a little skill
his emotions can be aroused by the author in
any desired direction. We, however, wish to ap-
peal to reason, and we must therefore employ
dull neutral phrases, such as “extra-marital
sexual relations.” Yet perhaps this is too aus-
tere a precept, for after all we are dealing with
a matter in which human emotions are very
strongly involved, and if we eliminate emotion


99


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


too completely from our writing, we may fail
to convey the nature of the subject matter with
which we are dealing. In regard to all sexual
matters there is a polarity according as they
are described from the point of view of the par-
ticipants or from that of jealous outsiders.
What we do ourselves is “gallantry”; what
others do is “fornication.” We must, therefore,
remember the emotionally coloured terms, and
we may employ them on occasion, but we must
do so sparingly, and, in the main, we must con-
tent ourselves with neutral and scientifically
accurate phraseology.

The Christian ethics inevitably, through the
emphasis laid upon sexual virtue, did a great |
deal to degrade the position of women. Since
the moralists were men, woman appeared as
the temptress; if they had been women, man
would have had this rdle. Since woman was the


temptress, it was desirable t to curtail her oppor-


tunities for leading men into temptation; con-
sequently respectable women were more and
more hedged about with restrictions, while the
women who were not respectable, being re-
garded as sinful, were treated with the utmost


contumely,. It is only in quite modern times
that women have regained the degree of free-


60


CHRISTIAN ETHICS


dom which they enjoyed in the Roman Em-
pire. The patriarchal system, as we saw, did
much to enslave women, but a great deal of
this was undone just before the rise of Chris-
tianity. After Constantine, women’s freedom
was again curtailed under the pretence of pro-
tecting them from sin. It is only with the decay
of the notion of sin in modern times that
women have begun to regain their freedom.

The writings of the Fathers are full of invec-
tives against Woman.


“Woman was represented as the door of hell, as the
mother of all human ills. She should be ashamed at the
very thought that she is a woman. She should live in con-
tinual penance, on account of the curses she has brought
upon the world. She should be ashamed of her dress, for
it is the memorial of her fall. She should be especially
ashamed of her beauty, for it is the most potent instru-
ment of the demon. Physical beauty was indeed per-
petually the theme of ecclesiastical denunciations, though
one singular exception seems to have been made; for it
has been observed that in the middle ages the personal
beauty of bishops was continually noticed upon their
tombs. Women were even forbidden by a provincial Coun-
cil, in the sixth century, on account of their impurity, to
receive the Eucharist into their naked hands. Their essen-
tially subordinate position was continually maintained.” *


*W. E. H. Lecky, “History of European Morals,” Vol. II., pp.


357-358.
61


MARRIAGE AND MORALS

The laws of property and inheritance were

altered in the same sense against women, and it

was only through the freethinkers of the

French Revolution that daughters recovered
their rights of inheritance.


CHAPTER VI


ROMANTIC LOVE


ITH the victory of Christianity and the
barbarians, the relations of men and
women sank to a pitch of brutality which had
been unknown in the ancient world for many
centuries. The ancient world was vicious, but
not brutal. In the Dark Ages religion and bar-
barism combined to degrade the sexual side of
life. In marriage, the wife had no rights; out-
side marriage, since all was sin, there was no
object in curbing the natural beastliness of the
uncivilized male. The immorality of the Middle
Ages was widespread and disgusting; bishops
lived in open sin with their own daughters, and
archbishops promoted their male favourites to
neighbouring sees.* There was a growing belief
in the celibacy of the clergy, but practice did
not keep pace with precept. Pope Gregory VII
made immense exertions to cause priests to put
away their concubines, yet so late as the time


*Cf. Lea, “History of the Inquisition in the Middle Ages,”
Vol. I, pp. 9, 14.


63


age


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


of Abélard we find him regarding it as possible,
though scandalous, for him to marry Héloise.
It was only towards the end of the thirteenth
century that the celibacy of the clergy was rig-
idly enforced. The clergy, of course, continued
to have illicit relations with women, though
they could not give any dignity or beauty to
these relations owing to the fact that they
themselves considered them immoral and im-
pure. Nor could the Church, in view of its as-
cetic outlook on sex, do anything whatever to
beautify the conception of love. To do this was
necessarily the work of the laity.


“Tt was not surprising that, having once broken their
vows and begun to live what they deemed a life of habitual
sin, the clergy should soon have sunk far below the level of
the laity. We may not lay much stress on such isolated
instances of depravity as that of Pope John XXIII, who
was condemned for incest, among many other crimes, and
for adultery; or the abbot-elect of St. Augustine, at Can-
terbury, who in 1171 was found, on investigation, to have
seventeen illegitimate children in a single village; or an
abbot of St. Pelayo, in Spain, who in 1130 was proved
to have kept not less than seventy concubines; or Henry
III, Bishop of Liége, who was deposed in 1274 for having
sixty-five illegitimate children; but it is impossible to
resist the evidence of a long chain of Councils and ec-
clesiastical writers, who conspire in depicting far greater
evils than simple concubinage. It was observed, that when


64


ROMANTIC LOVE


the priests actually took wives, the knowledge that these
connections were illegal was peculiarly fatal to their fidel-
ity, and bigamy and extreme mobility of attachments were
especially common among them. The writers of the middle
ages are full of accounts of nunneries that were like
brothels, of the vast multitude of infanticides within their
walls, and of that inveterate prevalence of incest among
the clergy, which rendered it necessary again and again
to issue the most stringent enactments that priests should
not be permitted to live with their mothers or sisters. Un-
natural love, which it had been one of the great services
of Christianity almost to eradicate from the world, is
more than once spoken of as lingering in the monasteries ;
and shortly before the Reformation, complaints became
loud and frequent of the employment of the confessional
for the purposes of debauchery.” *


Throughout the Middle Ages there is the
most curious division between the Greco-
Roman traditions of the Church and the Teu-
tonic traditions of the aristocracy. Each had
its contribution to make towards civilization,
but the contributions were entirely distinct.
The Church contributed learning, philosophy,
the canon law, the conception of the unity of
Christendom—all of them results of the tradi-
tion handed down from Mediterranean antiq-
uity. The laity contributed the common law,

*W. E. H. Lecky, “History of European Morals,” Vol. II., pp.
350-351.

65


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


the forms of secular government, chivalry,
poetry and romance. The contribution which
especially concerns us is romantic love.

To say that romantic love was unknown be-
fore the Middle Ages would not be correct, but
it was only in the Middle Ages that it became
a commonly recognized form of passion. The
- essential of romantic love is that it regards the
beloved object as very difficult to possess and
as very precious. It makes, therefore, great ef-
forts of many kinds to win the love of the be-
loved object, by poetry, by song, by feats of
arms, or by whatever other method may be
thought most pleasing to the lady. The belief
in the immense value of the lady is a psycho-
logical effect of the difficulty of obtaining her,
and I think it may be laid down that when a
man has no difficulty in obtaining a woman, his
feeling towards her does not take the form of
romantic love. Romantic love, as it appears in
the Middle Ages, was not directed at first to-
- wards women with whom the lover could have
either legitimate or illegitimate sexual rela-
tions; it was directed towards women of the
highest respectability, who were separated
from their romantic lovers by insuperable bar-
riers of morality and convention. So thor-


66


ROMANTIC LOVE


oughly had the Church performed its task of
making men feel sex inherently impure, that it
had become impossible to feel any poetic senti-
ment towards a lady unless she was regarded
as unattainable. Accordingly love, if it was to
have any beauty, had to be Platonic. It is very
difficult for the modern to feel in imagination
the psychology of the poet lovers in the Middle .
Ages. They profess ardent devotion without
any desire for intimacy, and this seems to a
modern so curious that he is apt to regard their
love as no more than a literary convention.
Doubtless on occasion it was no more than this,
and doubtless its literary expression was dom-
inated by conventions. But the love of Dante
for Beatrice, as expressed in the “Vita Nuova,”
is certainly not merely conventional: I should
say, on the contrary, that it is an emotion more
passionate than any known to most moderns,
The nobler spirits of the Middle Ages thought
ill of this terrestrial life; our human instincts
were to them the products of corruption and
original sin; they hated the body and its lusts;
pure joy was to them only possible in ecstatic
contemplation of a kind which seemed to them
free from all sexual alloy. In the sphere of love,
this outlook could not but produce the kind of


67


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


attitude which we find in Dante. A man who
deeply loved and respected a woman would find
it impossible to associate with her the idea of
sexual intercourse, since all sexual intercourse
would be to him more or less impure; his love
would therefore take poetic and imaginative
forms, and would naturally become filled with
symbolism. The effect of all this upon litera-
ture was admirable, as may be seen in the grad-
ual development of love poetry, from its begin-
ning in the court of the Emperor Frederick IT
to its flowering in the Renaissance.

One of the best accounts known to me of
love in the later Middle Ages is to be found in
Huizinga’s book on “The Waning of the Mid-
dle Ages” (1924).


“When in the twelfth century,” he says, “unsatisfied de-
sire was placed by the troubadours of Provence in the
centre of the poetic conception off love, an important turn
in the history of civilization was effected. Antiquity, too,
had sung the sufferings of love but it had never conceived
them save as the expectation of happiness or as its pitiful
frustration. The sentimental point of Pyramus and
Thisbe, of Cephalus and Procris, lies in their tragic end;
in the heart-rending loss of a happiness already enjoyed.
Courtly poetry, on the other hand, makes desire itself the
essential motif, and so creates a conception of love with a
negative ground-note. Without giving up all connection


68


oy ey
“wa 2, ee =


ROMANTIC LOVE


with sensual love, the new poetic ideal was capable of em-
bracing all kinds of ethical aspirations. Love now became
the field where all moral and cultural perfection flowered.
Because of his love, the courtly lover is pure and virtuous.
The spiritual element dominates more and more, till to-
wards the end of the thirteenth century, the dolce stil nuovo
of Dante and his friends ends by attributing to love the
gift of bringing about a state of piety and holy intuition.
Here an extreme had been reached. Italian poetry was
gradually to find its way back to a less exalted expression
of erotic sentiment.’ Petrarch is divided between the idea
of spiritualized love and the more natural charm of antique
models. Soon the artificial system of courtly love is
abandoned, and its subtle distinctions will not be revived,
when the Platonism of the Renaissance, latent, already, in
the courtly conception, gives rise to new forms of erotic
poetry with a spiritual tendency.”


In France and Burgundy, however, the de-
velopment was not quite the same as it had
been in Italy, since French aristocratic ideas of
love were dominated by the “Romaunt of the
Rose,” which dealt with knightly love but did
not insist upon its remaining unsatisfied. It
was, in fact, a revulsion against the teaching
of the Church and a virtual pagan assertion of
love’s rightful place in life.

“The existence of an upper class whose intellectual and


moral notions are enshrined in an ars amandi remains a
rather exceptional fact in history. In no other epoch did


69


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


the ideal of civilization amalgamate to such a degree with
that of love. Just as scholasticism represents the grand
effort of the medizval spirit to unite all philosophic thought
in a single centre, so the theory of courtly love, in a less
elevated sphere, tends to embrace all that appertains to
the noble life. The Roman de la Rose did not destroy the
system; it only modified its tendencies and enriched its
contents.” *

The age was one of extraordinary coarse-
ness, but the kind of love advocated by the
“Romaunt of the Rose,” while not virtuous in
the priestly sense, is refined, gallant, and gen-
tle. Such ideas were, of course, only for the
aristocracy; they presupposed not only leisure
but a certain emancipation from ecclesiastical
tyranny. Tournaments, in which motives of
love were prominent, were abhorred by the
Church, which, however, was powerless to sup-
press them; in like manner it could not sup-
press the system of knightly love. In our demo-
cratic age we are apt to forget what the world
has owed at various times to aristocracies,
‘Certainly in this matter of the revival of love
the Renaissance could not have been so suc-
cessful had the way not been prepared by the
romances of chivalry.

In the Renaissance, as a consequence of


* Huizinga, “The Waning of the Middle Ages,” pp. 95-96.
70


ROMANTIC LOVE


the revulsion towards Paganism, love usually
ceased to be Platonic although it remained
poetic. What the Renaissance thought of the
medizeval convention is to be seen in the ac-
count of Don Quixote and his Dulcinea. Never-
theless the medieval tradition remained not
without influence; Sydney’s “Astrophel and
Stella” is full of it, and Shakespeare’s Sonnets
to Mr. W. H. are considerably influenced by
it. On the whole, however, the characteristic
love poetry of the Renaissance is cheerful and
straightforward.


“Do not mock me in thy bed
While these cold nights freeze me dead,”


says an Elizabethan poet. This sentiment, it
must be admitted, is straightforward and un-
inhibited, and by no means Platonic. The
Renaissance had, however, learnt from the
Platonic love of the Middle Ages to employ
poetry as a means of courtship. Cloten in
“Cymbeline” is laughed at because he cannot
produce his own love poetry, but has to hire a
penny-a-liner, who turns out “Hark, hark, the
lark”—dquite a creditable effort, one would say.
It is curious that before the Middle Ages, al-


71


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


though there had been a good deal of poetry
concerned with love, there was very little that
was directly a part of courtship. There is
Chinese poetry representing the grief of a lady
because of the absence of her lord; there is
mystical Indian poetry, in which the soul is
represented as the bride longing for the ad-
vent of the bridegroom, who is God; but one
gathers that men had so little difficulty in
securing the women they desired that it hardly
ever became necessary to woo them with music
and poetry. From the point of view of the arts,
it is certainly regrettable when women are too
accessible; what is most to be desired is that
they should be difficult but not impossible of
access. This situation has existed more or less
since the Renaissance. The difficulties have
been partly external and partly internal, the
latter being derived from scruples due to con-
ventional moral teaching.

Romantic love reached its apogee in the ro-
mantic movement, and one may perhaps take
Shelley as its chief apostle. Shelley when he
fell in love was filled with exquisite emotions
and imaginative thoughts of a kind lending
themselves to expression in poetry; naturally
enough he considered that the emotion that


72


i}


ROMANTIC LOVE


produced these results was wholly good, and
he saw no reason why love should ever be
restrained. His argument, however, rested
upon bad psychology. It was the obstacles to
his desires that led him to write poetry. If the
noble and unfortunate lady Emilia Viviani had
not been carried off to a convent, he would
not have found it necessary to write “Epipsy-
chidion”; if Jane Williams had not been a
fairly virtuous wife, he would never have writ-
ten “The Recollection.” The social barriers
against which he inveighed were an essential
part of the stimulus to his best activities. Ro-
mantic love as it existed in Shelley depends
upon a state of unstable equilibrium, where the


.. conventional barriers still exist but are not


quite insuperable; if the barriers are rigid, or
if they do not exist, romantic love is not likely
to flourish. Take at the one extreme the
Chinese system: in this system a man never
meets any respectable woman except his own
wife, and when he feels her insufficient, he goes
to a brothel; his wife is chosen for him and is
probably unknown to him until the wedding
day; consequently all his sex relations are en-
tirely divorced from love in the romantic sense,
and he never has occasion for those efforts of


73


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


courtship which give rise to love poetry. Ina
state of complete freedom, on the other hand,
a man capable of great love poetry is likely to
have so much success through his charm that
he will seldom have need of his best imagina-
tive efforts in order to achieve a conquest.
Thus love poetry depends upon a certain deli-
cate balance between convention and freedom,
and is not likely to exist in its best form where
this balance is upset in either direction.

Love poetry, however, is not the only pur-
pose of love, and romantic love may flourish
even where it does not lead to artistic expres-
sion. I believe myself that romantic love is the
source of the most intense delights that life
has to offer. In the relations of a man and
woman who love each other with passion and
imagination and tenderness, there is something
of inestimable value, to be ignorant of which is
a great misfortune to any human being. I think
it important that a social system should be
such as to permit this joy, although it can only
be an ingredient in life and not its main
purpose.

In quite modern times, that is to say since
about the period of the French Revolution, an
idea has grown up that marriage should be the


74


ROMANTIC LOVE


outcome of romantic love. Most moderns, at
any rate in English-speaking countries, take
this for granted, and have no idea that not long
ago it was a revolutionary innovation. The


novels and plays of a hundred years ago/deal
largely with the struggle of the younger’ gen-
eration to establish this new basis for marriage
as opposed to the traditional marriage of
parental choice./Whether the effect has been as
good as the innovators hoped may be doubted.
There is something to be said for Mrs. Mala-
prop’s principle, that love and aversion both
wear off in matrimony so that it is better to
begin with a little aversion. Certain it is that
when people marry without previous sexual
knowledge of each other and under the in-
fluence of romantic love, each imagines the
other to be possessed of more than mortal per-
fections, and conceives that marriage is going
to be one long dream of bliss. This is especially
liable to be the case with the woman if she has
been brought up ignorant and pure, and there-
fore incapable of distinguishing sex hunger
from congeniality. a America, where the ro-
mantic view of marriage has been taken more
seriously than anywhere else, and where law
and custom alike are based upon the dreams


75


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


of spinsters, the result has been an extreme
prevalence of divorce and an extreme rarity of
happy marriages. Marriage is something more
serious than the pleasure of two people in each
other’s company; it is an institution which,
through the fact that it gives rise to children,
forms part of the intimate texture of society,
and has an importance extending far beyond
the personal feelings of the husband and wife.
Pirnt 5 A may be good—I think it is good—that ro-
mantic love should form the motive for a mar-
riage, but it should be understood that the
kind of love which will enable a marriage to
remain happy and to fulfil its social purpose
is not romantic but is something more intimate,
affectionate, and realistic. In romantic love the
beloved object is not seen accurately, but
through a glamorous mist; undoubtedly it is
possible for a certain type of woman to remain
wrapped in this mist even after marriage pro-
vided she has a husband of a certain type, but
this can only be achieved if she avoids all real
intimacy with her husband and preserves a
sphinx-like secrecy as to her inmost thoughts
, and feelings, as well as a certain degree of
bodily privacy. Such manceuvres, however, pre-
vent a marriage from realizing its best possi-


76


ca gigi tk es eee


ROMANTIC LOVE


bilities, which depend upon an affectionate in-
timacy quite unmixed with illusion. Moreover,
the view that romantic love is essential to mar-
riage is too anarchic, and, like St. Paul’s view,
though in an opposite sense, it forgets that
children are what makes marriage important.
But for children, there would be no need of any
institution concerned with sex, but as soon as
children enter in, the husband and wife, if they
have any sense of responsibility or any affec-
tion for their offspring, are compelled to realize
that their feelings towards each other are no
longer what is of most importance.


77


CHAPTER VII


THE LIBERATION OF WOMEN


HE transitional condition of sexual morals

at the present time is due in the main to

two causes, the first being the invention of

contraceptives, and the second the emancipa-

tion of women. The former of these causes I

shall consider at a later stage; the latter is the
subject of this chapter.

The emancipation of women is part of the
democratic movement; it begins with the
French Revolution, which, as we have already
seen, altered the laws of inheritance in a sense
favourable to daughters. Mary Wollstonecraft’s
“Vindication of the Rights of Women” (1792)
is a product of the ideas that caused and were
caused by the French Revolution. From her
time down to the present day the claim of
women to equality with men has been asserted
with continually increasing emphasis and
success. John Stuart Mill’s “Subjection of
Women” is a very persuasive and well-
reasoned book, which had a great influence


78


THE LIBERATION OF WOMEN


upon the more thoughtful members of the gen-
eration immediately following his own. My
father and mother were disciples of his, and
my mother used to make speeches in favour of
votes for women in the sixties. So ardent
was her feminism that she caused me to be
brought into the world by the first woman
doctor, Dr. Garrett Anderson, who was at that
time not allowed to be a qualified medical
practitioner but was only a certificated midwife.
The feminist movement in those early days
was confined to the upper and middle classes,
and had therefore not much political strength.
A bill to give votes to women came before
Parliament every year, but although intro-
duced by Mr. Faithful Begg and seconded
by Mr. Strangways Pigg, it never at that
time had any chance of passing into law. The
middle-class feminists of that day had, how-
ever, One great success in their own sphere,
namely the passage of the Married ‘Women’s
Property Act (1882). Until the passage of that
Act, whatever property a married woman
might possess was in her husband’s control,
although of course where there was a Trust
he could not spend the capital. The subsequent
history of the women’s movement on the polit-


79


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


ical side is too recent and too well known to
need recapitulating. It is, however, worth ob-
serving that the rapidity with which women
in most civilized countries have acquired their
political rights is without parallel in the past,
considering the immense magnitude of the
change in outlook that has been involved. The
abolition of slavery is more or less analogous,
but after all slavery did not exist in European
countries in modern times, and did not con-
cern anything so intimate as the relations of
men and women.

The causes of this sudden change are, I
think, twofold: on the one hand there was the
direct influence of democratic theory, which
made it impossible to find any logical answer
to the demands of women; on the other hand
there was the fact that a continually increasing
number of women were engaged in making
their own living outside the home, and did not
depend for the comfort of their daily lives upon
the favour of fathers or husbands. This situa-
tion, of course, reached its height during the
war, when a very large part of the work
usually performed by men had to be under-
taken by women. Before the war one of the ob-
jections commonly urged against votes for


80


ity ail i ha a a ead


THE LIBERATION OF WOMEN


women was that women would tend to be
pacifists. During the war they gave a large-
scale refutation of this charge, and the vote
was given to them for their share in the bloody
work. To the idealistic pioneers, who had
imagined that women were going to raise the
moral tone of politics, this issue may have been
disappointing, but it seems to be the fate of
idealists to obtain what they have struggled
for in a form which destroys their ideals. The
rights of women did not, of course, in fact de-
pend upon any belief that women were morally
or in any other way superior to men; they
depended solely upon their rights as human
beings, or rather upon the general argument in
favour of democracy. But as always happens
when an oppressed class or nation is claiming
its rights, advocates sought to strengthen the
general argument by the contention that
women had peculiar merits, and these merits
were generally represented as belonging to the
moral order.

The political emancipation of women, how-
ever, concerns our theme only indirectly; it is
their social emancipation that is important in
connection with marriage and morals. In early
days, and in the East down to our own time,


81


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


the virtue of women was secured by segregat-
ing them. No attempt was made to give them
inward self-control, but everything was done
to take away all opportunity for sin. In the
West this method was never adopted whole-
heartedly, but respectable women were edu-
cated from their earliest years so as to have
a horror of sexual intercourse outside mar-
riage. As the methods of this education became
more and more perfected, the outward barriers
were more and more removed. Those who did
most to remove the outward barriers were con-
vinced that the inward barriers would be suffi-
cient. It was thought, for example, that the
chaperon was unnecessary, since a nice girl
who had been well brought up would never
yield to the advances of young men whatever
opportunities of yielding might be allowed her.
It was generally held by respectable women
when I was young that sexual intercourse was
displeasing to the great majority of women,
and was only endured within marriage from a
sense of duty; holding this view, they were not
unwilling to risk a greater degree of freedom
for their daughters than had seemed wise in
more realistic ages. The results have perhaps
been somewhat different from what was an-


82


THE LIBERATION OF WOMEN


ticipated, and the difference has existed equally
as regards wives and as regards unmarried
women. The women of the Victorian age were,
and a great many women still are, in a mental
prison. This prison was not obvious to con-
sciousness, since it consisted of subconscious
inhibitions. The decay of inhibitions, which has
taken place among the young of our own time,
has led to the reappearance in consciousness
of instinctive desires which had been buried
beneath mountains of prudery. This is having
a very revolutionary effect upon sexual moral-
ity, not only in one country or in one class, but
in all civilized countries and in all classes.
The demand for equality between men and
women concerned itself from the first not only
with political matters but also with sexual
morality. The attitude of Mary Wollstonecraft
was thoroughly modern, but she was not imi-
tated in this respect by the subsequent pioneers
of women’s rights. They, on the contrary, were
for the most part very rigid moralists, whose
hope was to impose upon men the moral fetters
which hitherto had only been endured by
women. Ever since 1914, however, young
women, without much theorizing, have taken
a different line. The emotional excitement of


83


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


the war was no doubt the precipitating cause
of this new departure, but it would have come
before very long in any case. The motives of
female virtue in the past were chiefly the fear
of hell-fire and the fear of pregnancy; the one
was removed by the decay of theological
orthodoxy, the other by contraceptives. For
some time traditional morality managed to
hold out through the force of custom and men-
tal inertia, but the shock of the war caused
these barriers to fall. Modern feminists are no
longer so anxious as the feminists of thirty.
years ago to curtail the “vices” of men; they
ask rather that what is permitted to men shall
be permitted also to them. Their predecessors
sought equality in moral slavery, whereas they
seek equality in moral freedom.

This whole movement is as yet in a very
early phase, and it is impossible to say how
it will develop. Its adherents and practitioners
as yet are mostly quite young. They have very
few champions among persons of weight and
importance. The police, the law, the Church
and their parents are against them whenever
the facts come to the knowledge of these re-
positories of power, but in general the young
have the kindness to conceal the facts from


84


THE LIBERATION OF WOMEN


those to whom they would cause pain. Writers
who, like Judge Lindsey, proclaim the facts
are thought by the old to be libelling the young,
though the young remain unconscious of being
libelled.

A situation of this sort is, of course, very
unstable. It is a question which of two things
will happen first: either the old will become
aware of the facts and will set to work to de-
prive the young of their new-won freedom, or
the young, growing up, will themselves acquire
positions of dignity and importance, which will
make it possible to give the sanction of au-
thority tg the new morality. It is to be pre-
sumed that in some countries we shall see one
of these issues, and in others, the other. In
Italy, where immorality, like everything else, is
a prerogative of the Government, a vigorous
attempt is being made to enforce virtue. In
Russia the exact opposite is the case, since the
Government is on the side of the new morality.
In the Protestant parts of Germany freedom
may be expected to win, while in the Catholic
parts the issue is much more doubtful. France
is hardly likely to be shaken out of the time-
honoured French convention, in which immo-
rality has certain definitely tolerated forms out-


85


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


side which it must not go. What will happen in
England and America, I do not venture to
prophesy.

Let us, however, pause a moment to con-
sider the logical implications of the demand
that women should be the equals of men. Men
have from time immemorial been allowed in
practice, if not in theory, to indulge in illicit
sexual relations. It has not been expected of a
man that he should be a virgin on entering mar-
riage, and even after marriage, infidelities are
not viewed very gravely if they never come
to the knowledge of a man’s wife and neigh-
bours. The possibility of this system has de-
pended upon prostitution. This institution,
however, is one which it is difficult for a mod-
ern to defend, and few will suggest that women
should acquire the same rights as men through
the establishment of a class of male prostitutes
for the satisfaction of women who wish, like
their husbands, to seem virtuous without being
so. Yet it is quite certain that in these days of
late marriage only a small percentage of men
will remain continent until they can afford to
set up house with a woman of their own class.
And if unmarried men are not going to be
continent, unmarried women, on the ground of


86


THE LIBERATION OF WOMEN


equal rights, will claim that they also need not
be continent. To the moralists this situation
is no doubt regrettable. Every conventional
moralist who takes the trouble to think it out
will see that he is committed in practice to
what is called the double standard, that is to
say, the view that sexual virtue is more essen-
tial in a woman than in a man. It is all very
well to argue that his theoretical ethic demands
continence of men also. To this there is the
obvious retort that the demand cannot be en-
forced on the men since it is easy for them to
sin secretly. The conventional moralist is thus
committed against his will-not only to an in-
equality as between men and women, but also
to the view that it is better for a young man to
have intercourse with prostitutes than with
girls of his own class, in spite of the fact that
with the latter, though not with the former, his
relations are not mercenary and may be af-
fectionate and altogether delightful. Moralists,
of course, do not think out the consequences
of advocating a morality which they know will
not be obeyed; they think that so long as they
do not advocate prostitution they are not re-
sponsible for the fact that prostitution is the
inevitable outcome of their teaching. This,


87


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


however, is only another illustration of the
well-known fact that the professional moralist
in our day is a man of less than average in-
telligence.

In view of the above circumstances, it is evi-
dent that so long as many men for economic
reasons find early marriage impossible, while
many women cannot marry at all, equality as
between men and women demands a relaxa-
tion in the traditional standards of feminine
virtue. If men are allowed prenuptial inter-
course (as in fact they are), women must be
allowed it also. And in all countries where
there is an excess of women it is an obvious in-
justice that those women who by arithmetical
necessity must remain unmarried should be
wholly debarred from sexual experience.
Doubtless the pioneers of the women’s move-
ment had no such consequences in view, but
their modern followers perceive them clearly,
and whoever opposes these deductions must
face the fact that he or she is not in favour of
justice to the female sex.

A very clear-cut issue is raised by this ques-
tion of the new morality versus the old. If the
chastity of girls and the faithfulness of wives
is no longer to be demanded, it becomes neces-


88


THE LIBERATION OF WOMEN


sary either to have new methods of safeguard-
ing the family or else to acquiesce in the break-
up of the family. It may be suggested that the
procreation of children should only occur
within marriage, and that all extra-marital
sexual intercourse should be rendered sterile
by the use of contraceptives. In that case hus-
bands might learn to be as tolerant of lovers as
Orientals are of eunuchs. The difficulty of such
a scheme as yet is that it requires us to place
more reliance on the efficacy of contraceptives
and the truthfulness of wives than seems ra-
tional; this difficulty may, however, be dimin-
ished before long. The other alternative com-
patible with the new morality is the decay of
fatherhood as an important social institution,
and the taking over of the duties of the father
by the State. In particular cases where a man
felt sure of his paternity and fond of the child,
he might, of course, voluntarily undertake to
do what fathers now normally do in the way
of financial support for the mother and child;
but he would not be obliged to do so by law.
Indeed all children would be in the position in
which illegitimate children of unknown pa-
ternity are now, except that the State, regard-
ing this as the normal case, would take more


89


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


trouble with their nurture than it does at
present.

If, on the other hand, the old morality is to
be reestablished, certain things are essential;
some of them are already done, but experience
shows that these alone are not effective. The
first essential is that the education of girls
should be such as to make them stupid and
superstitious and ignorant; this requisite is
already fulfilled in schools over which the
churches have any control. The next requisite
is a very severe censorship upon all books giv-
ing information on sex subjects; this condition
also is coming to be fulfilled in England and
in America, since the censorship, without
change in the law, is being tightened up by the
increasing zeal of the police. These conditions,
however, since they exist already, are clearly
insufficient. The only thing that will suffice is
to remove from young women all opportunity
of being alone with men: girls must be for-
bidden to earn their living by work outside the
home; they must never be allowed an outing
unless accompanied by their mother or an
aunt; the regrettable practice of going to
dances without a chaperon must be sternly
stamped out. It must be illegal for an unmar-


go


THE LIBERATION OF WOMEN


ried woman under fifty to possess a motor-car,
and perhaps it would be wise to subject all un-
married women once a month to medical ex-
amination by police doctors, and to send to a
penitentiary all such as were found to be not
virgins. The use of contraceptives must, of
course, be eradicated, and it must be illegal in
conversation with unmarried women to throw
doubt upon the dogma of eternal damnation.
These measures, if carried out vigorously for a
hundred years or more, may perhaps do some-
thing to stem the rising tide of immorality. I
think, however, that in order to avoid the risk
of certain abuses, it would be necessary that all
policemen and all medical men should be cas-
trated. Perhaps it would be wise to carry this
policy a step further, in view of the inherent de-
pravity of the male character. I am inclined to
think that moralists would be well advised to
advocate that all men should be castrated, with
the exception of ministers of religion.*

It will be seen that there are difficulties and
objections whichever course we adopt. If we
are to allow the new morality to take its
course, it is bound to go further than it has

* Since reading ‘Elmer Gantry,” I have begun to feel that even |


this exception is perhaps not quite wise,


91,


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


done, and to raise difficulties hardly as yet ap-
preciated. If, on the other hand, we attempt in
the modern world to enforce restrictions which
were possible in a former age, we are led into
an impossible stringency of regulation, against
which human nature would soon rebel. This
is so clear that, whatever the dangers or diffi-
culties, we must be content to let the world go
forward rather than back. For this purpose we
shall need a genuinely new morality. I mean by
this that obligations and duties will still have
to be recognized, though they may be very dif-
ferent from the obligations and duties recog-
nized in the past. So long as all the moralists
content themselves with preaching a return to
a system which is as dead as the Dodo, they
can do nothing whatever to moralize the new
freedom or to point out the new duties which
it brings with it. I do not think that the new
system any more than the old should involve
an unbridled yielding to impulse, but I think
the occasions for restraining impulse and the
motives for doing so will have to be different
from what they have been in the past. In fact,
the whole problem of sexual morality needs
thinking out afresh. The following pages are
intended as a contribution, however humble,
to this task.


g2


CHAPTER VIII


THE TABOO ON SEX KNOWLEDGE


N° the attempt to build up a new sexual

morality, the first question we have to ask
ourselves is not, How should the relations of
the sexes be regulated? but, Is it good that men,
women and children should be kept in artificial
ignorance of facts relating to sexual affairs?
My reason for putting this question first is
that, as I shall try to persuade the reader in
this chapter, ignorance on such matters is ex-
traordinarily harmful to the individual, and
therefore no system whose perpetuation de-
mands such ignorance can be desirable. Sexual
morality, I should say, must be such as to com-
mend itself to well-informed persons and not
to depend upon ignorance for its appeal. This
is part of a wider doctrine which, though it has
never been held by governments or policemen,
appears indubitable in the light of reason. That
doctrine is that right conduct can never, except
by some rare accident, be promoted by ig-
norance or hindered by knowledge. It is, of


93


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


course, true that if A desires B to act in a cer-
tain manner which is in A’s interest but not in
B’s, it may be useful to A to keep B in ig-
norance of facts which would show B where
his true interest lies. This fact is well under-
stood on the Stock Exchange, but is not gen-
erally held to belong to the higher departments
of ethics. It covers a large part of govern-
mental activity in concealing facts; for ex-
ample, the desire which every Government
feels to prevent all mention of a defeat in war,
for the knowledge of a defeat may lead to the
downfall of the Government, which, though
usually in the national interest, is, of course,
not in the interest of the Government. Ret-
icence about sexual facts, though it belongs in
the main to a different department, has had its
origin, at least in part, in a similar motive. It
was at first only females who were to be kept
ignorant, and their ignorance was desired as a
help towards masculine domination. Gradually,
however, women acquiesced in the view that
ignorance is essential to virtue, and partly
through their influence it came to be thought
that children and young people, whether male
or female, should be as ignorant as possible on
sexual subjects. At this stage the motive


94


THE TABOO ON SEX KNOWLEDGE


ceased to be one of domination and passed into
the region of irrational taboo. The question
whether ignorance is desirable is never ex-
amined, and it is even illegal to bring evidence
to show that ignorance does harm. I may take,
as my text on this subject, the following ex-


tract from the Manchester Guardian of April
25, 1929:

“American Liberals are shocked by the outcome of the
court trial of Mrs. Mary Ware Dennett, who was yester-
day found guilty by a Federal jury in Brooklyn of sending
obscene literature through the mails. Mrs. Dennett is the
author of a highly praised and widely used pamphlet giv-
ing in dignified language the elementary facts of sex for
children. She is faced with a possible sentence of five years’
imprisonment or a fine of $5,000 or both.

Mrs. Dennett, a well-known social worker, is the mother
of two grown-up sons, and originally wrote the pamphlet
eleven years ago for their instruction. It was printed in a
medical magazine and reprinted in pamphlet form at the
request of the editor. It has the endorsement of scores of
leading physicians, clergymen, and sociologists, and many
thousands of copies have been distributed by the Young
Men’s and Young Women’s Christian Associations. It
has even been used in the municipal school system of
Bronxville, a fashionable suburb of New York.

The Federal judge, Warren B. Burrows, from New

_England, who presided, ruled out all the foregoing facts,
and refused to let any of the distinguished educators and
physicians who were waiting to testify take the stand


95


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


or permit the jury to hear endorsements of Mrs. Dennett's
work by prominent authors. The trial virtually consisted
of the reading of the pamphlet aloud to a jury of elderly
Brooklyn married men, all of whom had been chosen be-
cause they had never read any of the works of H. L.
Mencken or Havelock Ellis, a test applied by the prosecut-
ing attorney.

It seems clear that the New York World is correct when
it says that if Mrs. Dennett’s work is not permitted to
circulate then there is no hope of putting any plain, honest
statement of the facts of sex before young people in
America. The case will be the subject of an appeal to a
higher court, whose decision will be awaited with the
greatest interest.”


It happens that this case is American, but it
might just as well have been English, since the
law in England is practically the same as in
America. It will be seen that the law does not
allow a person who gives sex information to
the young to bring the evidence of experts to
show that sex knowledge is desirable for the
young. It will be seen also that where a prose-
cution of this sort is undertaken, it is open to
the prosecution to insist that the jury shall con-
sist entirely of ignorant men who have not
read anything that will enable them to judge
the case rationally. The law declares bluntly
that children and young people must not know
the facts of sex, and that the question whether


96


THE TABOO ON SEX KNOWLEDGE


it is good or bad for them to know these facts
is entirely irrelevant. Nevertheless, since we
are not in a law-court, and since the present
work is not addressed to children, we may be
allowed to argue the question whether the
traditional practice of keeping children offi-
cially in ignorance is desirable or undesirable.

The traditional course with children was to
keep them in as great a degree of ignorance as
parents and teachers could achieve. They never
saw their parents naked, and after a very early
age (provided housing accommodation was
sufficient) they did not see their brothers or
sisters of the opposite sex naked. They were
told never to touch their sexual organs or
speak about them; all questions concerning sex
were met by the words “Hush, hush” in a
shocked tone. They were informed that chil-
dren were brought by the stork or dug up
under a gooseberry bush. Sooner or later they
learnt the facts, usually in a more or less gar-
bled form, from other children, who related
them secretly, and, as a result of parental
teaching, regarded them as “dirty.” The chil-
dren inferred that their father and mother be-
haved to each other in a way which was nasty
and of which they themselves were ashamed,


97


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


since they took so much trouble to conceal it.
They learnt also that they had been systemati-
cally deceived by those to whom they had
looked for guidance and instruction. Their at-
titude towards their parents, towards mar-
riage, and towards the opposite sex was thus
irrevocably poisoned. Very few men or women
who have had a conventional upbringing have
learnt to feel decently about sex and marriage.
Their education has taught them that deceit-
fulness and lying are considered virtues by
parents and teachers; that sexual relations,
even within marriage, are more or less disgust-
ing, and that in propagating the species men
are yielding to their animal nature while
women are submitting to a painful duty. This
attitude has made marriage unsatisfying both
to men and to women, and the lack of instinc-
tive satisfaction has turned to cruelty mas-
querading as morality.

The view of the orthodox moralist * on the
question of sex knowledge may, I fancy, be
fairly stated as follows: |

The sexual impulse is a very powerful one,
showing itself in different forms at different


* This includes the police and the magistrates, but hardly any
modern educators.


98


THE TABOO ON SEX KNOWLEDGE


stages of development. In infancy it takes the
form of a desire to touch and play with cer-
tain parts of the body; in later childhood it
takes the form of curiosity and love of “dirty”
talk, while in adolescence it begins to take
more mature forms. There is no doubt that
sexual misconduct is promoted by sexual
thoughts, and that the best road to virtue is to
keep the young occupied in mind and body
with matters wholly unconnected with sex.
They must, therefore, be told nothing whatever
about sex; they must as far as possible be pre-
vented from talking about it with each other,
and grown-ups must pretend that there is no
such topic. It is possible by these means to
keep a girl in ignorance until the night of her
marriage, when it is to be expected that the
facts will so shock her as to produce exactly
that attitude towards sex which every sound
moralist considers desirable in women. With
boys the matter is more difficult, since we can-
not hope to keep them completely ignorant
beyond the age of 18 or 19 at latest. The proper
course with them is to tell them that masturba-
tion invariably leads to insanity, while inter-
course with prostitutes invariably leads to
venereal disease. Neither of these assertions is


99


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


true, but they are white lies, since they are
made in the interests of morality. A boy should
also be taught that in no circumstances is con-
versation on sexual subjects permissible, not
even in marriage. This increases the likelihood
that when he marries he will give his wife a
disgust of sex and thus preserve her from the
risk of adultery. Sex outside marriage is sin;
sex within marriage is not sin, since it is neces-
sary to the propagation of the human species,
but is a disagreeable duty imposed on man as
a punishment for the Fall, and to be under-
taken in the same spirit in which one submits
to a surgical operation. Unfortunately, unless
great pains are taken, the sexual act tends to
be associated with pleasure, but by sufficient
moral care this can be prevented, at any rate
in the female. It is illegal in England to state
in print that a wife can and should derive sex-
ual pleasure from intercourse. (I have myself
heard a pamphlet condemned as obscene in a
court of law on this among other grounds.) It
is on the above outlook in regard to sex that
the attitude of the law, the church, and the old-
fashioned educators of the young is based.
Before considering the effect of this attitude
in the realm of sex, I should like to say a few


I00


THE TABOO ON SEX KNOWLEDGE


words about its consequences in other direc-
tions. The first and gravest consequence, in my
opinion, is the hampering of scientific curiosity
in the young. Intelligent children wish to know
about everything in the world; they ask ques-
tions about trains and motor-cars and airplanes,
about what makes rain and about what makes
babies. All these curiosities are to the child on
exactly the same level; he is merely following
what Pavlov calls the ‘“What-is-it?” reflex,
which is the source of all scientific knowledge.
When the child in pursuit of the desire for
knowledge learns that this impulse in certain
directions is considered wicked, his whole im-
pulse of scientific curiosity is checked. He does
not at first understand what kinds of curiosity
are permissible and what kinds are not: if it is
wicked to ask how babies are made it may, for
aught the child can tell, be equally wicked to
ask how airplanes are made. In any case he is
driven to the conclusion that scientific curiosity
is a dangerous impulse, which must not be al-
lowed to remain unchecked. Before seeking to
know anything, one must anxiously enquire
whether this is a virtuous or a vicious kind of
knowledge. And since sexual curiosity is gen-
erally very strong until it has become at-


IOI


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


rophied, the child is led to the conclusion that
knowledge which he desires is wicked, while
the only virtuous knowledge is such as no
human being could possibly desire—for ex-
ample, the multiplication table. The pursuit of
knowledge, which is one of the spontaneous
impulses of all healthy children, is thus de-
stroyed, and children are rendered artificially
stupid. I do not think it can be denied that
women who have had a conventional educa-
tion are on the average stupider than men,
and I believe this to be largely due to the fact
that in youth they are more effectively choked
off from the pursuit of sex knowledge.

In addition to this intellectual damage, there
is in most cases a very grave moral damage.
As Freud first showed, and as every one in-
timate with children soon discovers, the fables
about the stork and the gooseberry bush are
usually disbelieved. The child thus comes to
the conclusion that parents are apt to lie to
him. If they lie in one matter, they may lie in
another, so that their moral and. intellectual
authority is destroyed. Moreover, since parents
lie where sex is concerned, the children con-
clude that they themselves also may lie on such
topics. They talk with each other about them,


102


THE TABOO ON SEX KNOWLEDGE


and very likely they practise masturbation in
secret. In this way they learn to acquire habits
of deceit and concealment, while owing to their
parents’ threats, their lives become clouded
with fear. The threats of parents and nurses
as to the bad consequences of masturbation
have been shown by psycho-analysis to be a
very frequent cause of nervous disorders, not
only in childhood but in adult life also.

The effects of the conventional treatment of
sex in dealing with the young are therefore to
make people stupid, deceitful and timorous,
and to drive a not inconsiderable percentage
over the border line into insanity or something
like it.

To a certain extent these facts are now
recognized by all intelligent people who have
to deal with the young; they have, however,
not yet become known to the law and those
who administer it, as is evident from the case
quoted at the beginning of this chapter. Thus
the situation is at present that every well-
informed person who has to deal with children
is compelled to choose whether he will break
the law or whether he will cause the children
under his charge irreparable moral and intel-
lectual damage. It is difficult to change the


103


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


law, since very many elderly men are so per-
verted that their pleasure in sex depends upon
the belief that sex is wicked and nasty. | am
afraid no reform can be hoped for until those
who are now old or middle-aged have died.

So far we have been considering the bad
effects of conventional methods outside the
sphere of sex; it is time to consider the more
definitely sexual aspects of the question. One
of the aims of the moralist is undoubtedly to
prevent obsession with sexual subjects; such
obsession is at present extraordinarily frequent.
A former headmaster of Eton recently asserted
that the conversation of schoolboys is almost
always either dull or obscene, yet the school-
boys of whom he had experience were those
brought up on the most conventional lines.
The fact that a mystery is made about sex
enormously increases the natural curiosity of
the young on the subject. If adults treat sex
exactly as they treat any other topic, giving
the child answers to all his questions and just.
as much information as he desires or can un-
derstand, the child never arrives at the notion
of obscenity, for this notion depends upon the
belief that certain topics should not be men-
tioned. Sexual curiosity, like every other kind,


104


THE TABOO ON SEX KNOWLEDGE


dies down when it is satisfied. Therefore far
the best way to prevent young people from
being obsessed with sex is to tell them just as
much about it as they care to know.

In saying this I am not arguing a@ priori, but
on a basis of experience. What I have observed
among the children in my school has shown
conclusively, to my mind, the correctness of
the view that nastiness in children is the result
of prudery in adults. My own two children (a
boy aged 7, and a girl aged 5) have never been
taught that there is anything peculiar either
about sex or about excretion, and have so far
been shielded to the utmost possible extent
from all knowledge of the idea of decency, with
its correlative indecency. They have shown a
natural and healthy interest in the subject of

“bie babies come from, but not so much as in
engthes and railways. Nor have they shown
aity Yendency to dwell upon such topics either
in th absence or in the presence of grown-up
vote ‘; With régard to the other children in
'sthool, we have found that if they came
us at the : ‘age of 2 or 3, or even 4, they de-
yped exactly” like our own children; those,
Wever, whtcame to us at the age of 6 or 7
‘already been taught to regard anything


105


.


=


fe


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


connected with the sexual organs as improper.
They were surprised to find that in the school
such matters were spoken of in the same tone
of voice as was employed about anything else,
and for some time they enjoyed a sense of re-
lease in conversations which they felt to be
indecent; finding, however, that the grown-ups
did nothing to check such conversations, they
gradually wearied of them, and became nearly
as clean-minded as those who had never been
taught decency. They now get merely bored
when children new to the school attempt to
start conversations which they fondly believe
to be improper. Thus by letting fresh air on to
the subject, it has become disinfected, and the
noxious germs which it breeds when kept in
darkness have been dissipated. I do not believe
that it is possible by any other method to get
a group of children whose attitude towards
subjects usually considered improper is so
wholesome and decent.

There is one aspect of this question which
has, I think, not been sufficiently realized by
those who wish to cleanse sex from the filth
with which it has been covered by Christian
moralists. The subject of sex has been asso-
ciated by nature with excretory processes, and


106


THE TABOO ON SEX KNOWLEDGE


so long as these processes are treated with dis-
gust, it is psychologically natural that some
portion of this disgust should attach to sex.
It is therefore necessary in dealing with chil-
dren to be not too fastidious as regards the
excretory processes. Certain precautions are,
of course, necessary for sanitary reasons, but
as soon as children can understand, it should
be explained that the reason for these precau-
tions is merely sanitary and not that there is
anything inherently disgusting about the nat-
ural functions concerned.

I am not discussing in this chapter what
sexual conduct ought to be, but only what
ought to be our attitude on the question of sex
knowledge. In what has been said hitherto as
to the imparting of sex knowledge to the
young, I shall, I hope and believe, have had
the sympathy of all enlightened modern edu-
cators. I come, however, now to a more de-
batable topic, in which I fear that I may have
more difficulty in securing the sympathy of
the reader. This is the topic of what is called
obscene literature.

In England and America alike the law de-
clares that literature that is deemed obscene
may in certain circumstances be destroyed by


107


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


the authorities, and the author and publisher
may be punished. In England the law under
which this can be done is Lord Campbell’s Act
of 1857. This Act states that:


“Tf upon complaint there is any reason to believe that
any obscene books, etc., are kept in any house or other
place, for the purpose of sale or distribution, and upon
proof that one or more such articles has been sold or dis-
tributed in connection with such a place, justices may, upon
being satisfied that such articles are of such a character
and description that the publication of them would be a
misdemeanour and proper to be prosecuted as such, order
by special warrant that such articles shall be seized, and
after summoning the occupier of the house, the same or
other justices may, if they are satisfied that the articles
seized are of the character stated in the warrant, and have
been kept for the purpose aforesaid, order them to be
destroyed.” *


The word “obscene” which occurs in this
Act has no precise legal definition. In practice
a publication is legally obscene if the magis-
trate considers it to be so, and he is not obliged
to listen to any evidence by experts to show
that in this particular case the publication of
matter which might otherwise be considered
obscene serves some useful purpose. This


* See Desmond MacCarthy, “Obscenity and the Law,” Life and
Letters, May, 1929.


108


THE TABOO ON SEX KNOWLEDGE


means to say that any person who writes a
novel or a sociological treatise, or a sugges-
tion for reform in the law as it relates to
sexual matters, is liable to have his work
destroyed if some ignorant elderly man hap-
pens to find it disagreeable reading. The conse-
quences of this law are extraordinarily harm-
ful. As is well known, the first volume of
Havelock Ellis’s “Studies in the Psychology
of Sex” was condemned under this law, al-
though fortunately America proved in this
instance more liberal.* I do not think anybody
could suggest that Havelock Ellis’s purpose
was an immoral one, and it seems extraordi-
narily unlikely that such a bulky and learned
and serious work would have been read by per-
sons who desired merely the thrill of indecency.
It is, of course, impossible to treat of such a
subject without discussing matters which the
ordinary magistrate would not mention before
his wife or daughters, but to prohibit the pub-
lication of such a book is to say that serious
students are not to be allowed to know the
facts in this domain. From a conventional
standpoint I imagine that one of the most ob-


* Owing to the prosecution of the first volume, the subsequent
volumes were not published in England.


109


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


jectionable features in Havelock Ellis’s work
is his collection of case histories, which
show how extraordinarily unsuccessful exist-
ing methods are in producing either virtue or
mental health. Such documents provide data
for a rational judgment upon existing methods
of sex education; the law declares that we are
not to be allowed to have such data, and that
our judgments in this domain are to continue
to be based upon ignorance.

The condemnation of the “Well of Loneli-
ness” (in England, but not in America) has
brought into prominence another aspect of the
censorship, namely, that any treatment of ho-
mosexuality in fiction is illegal. There exists a
vast mass of knowledge on homosexuality ob-
tained by students in continental countries,
where the law is less obscurantist, but this
knowledge is not allowed to be disseminated in
England either in a learned form or in the form
of imaginative fiction. Homosexuality between
men, though not between women, is illegal in
England, and it would be very difficult to pre-
sent any argument for a change of the law in
this respect which would not itself be illegal.on
the ground of obscenity. And yet every person
who has taken the trouble to study the subject


IIo


THE TABOO ON SEX KNOWLEDGE


knows that this law is the effect of a barbarous
and ignorant superstition, in favour of which
no rational argument of any sort or kind can be
advanced. Similar considerations apply to in-
cest ; not many years ago a new law was passed
making certain forms of incest criminal, but it
was and is illegal under Lord Campbell’s Act
to advance arguments either for or against this
law, unless such arguments are framed so ab-
stractly and so carefully as to lose all force.
Another interesting consequence of Lord
Campbell’s Act is that many subjects can be
discussed in long technical words known only
to highly educated people, which cannot be
mentioned in any language understanded of the
people. It is permissible with certain precau-
tions to speak in print of coitus, but it is not
permissible to employ the monosyllabic syno-
nym for this word. This has recently been de-
cided in the case of “Sleeveless Errand.” Some-
times this prohibition of simple language has
grave consequences; for example, Mrs. Sang-
er’s pamphlet on birth control, which is ad-
dressed to working women, was declared ob-
scene on the ground that working women could
understand it. Dr. Marie Stopes’s books, on
the other hand, are not illegal, because their


II!


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


language can only be understood by persons
with a certain amount of education. The conse-
quence is that, while it is permissible to teach
birth control to the well-to-do, it is criminal to
teach it to wage-earners and their wives. I com-
mend this fact to the notice of the Eugenic
Society, which is perpetually bewailing the
fact that wage-earners breed faster than
middle-class people, while carefully abstaining
from any attempt to change the state of the
law which is the cause of this fact.

Many people will agree that these conse-
quences of the law against obscene publica-
tions are regrettable, but they will neverthe-
less hold that such a law is necessary. I do not
myself believe that it is possible to frame a law
against obscenity which will not have these
undesirable consequences, and in view of this
fact, I should myself be in favour of having no
law whatever upon the subject. The argument
in favour of this thesis is twofold: on the one
hand, that no law can forbid the bad without
forbidding the good also, and on the other
hand, that publications which are undoubtedly
and frankly pornographic would do very little
harm if sex education were rational.

As regards the first ‘of these theses, it is


Ii2


THE TABOO ON SEX KNOWLEDGE


abundantly established by the history of the
use which has been made of Lord Campbell’s
Act in England. Lord Campbell’s Act, as any
one may discover by reading the debates on it,
was directed solely to the suppression of
pornography, and it was thought at the time
that it had been so drafted as to be incapable
of use against other types of literature. This
belief, however, was based upon an insufficient
appreciation of the cleverness of policemen and
the stupidity of magistrates. The whole sub-
ject of the censorship has been admirably
treated in a book by Morris Ernst and William
Seagle.* They deal with both British and
American experience, and more briefly with
what has been done elsewhere. Experience
shows, especially in the case of the dramatic
censorship in England, that frivolous plays
calculated to excite lust easily pass the censor,
who does not wish to be thought a prig, while
serious plays which raise large issues, such as
“Mrs. Warren’s Profession,” take many years
to get past the censor, while a play of tran-
scendent poetical merit like ‘““The Cenci,” al-
though there is not a word in it that could
excite lust even in St. Anthony, required one


* To the Pure,” Viking Press, 1928.
riage!


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


hundred years to overcome the disgust which
it raised in the manly bosom of the Lord
Chamberlain. In America, in spite of the non-
existence of the censor, the facts in regard to
the theatre are substantially as in England.
This was shown by the outcome of Horace
Liveright’s courageous campaign in connection
with “The Captive.” * We may therefore, bas-
ing ourselves on a mass of historical evidence,
lay it down that the censorship will be used
against works of serious artistic or scientific
merit, while persons whose purpose is purely
salacious will always find ways of slipping
through the meshes of the law.

There is, however, a further ground for ob-
jecting to censorship, and that is that even
frank pornography would do less harm if it
were open and unashamed than it does when
it is rendered interesting by secrecy and
stealth. In spite of the law, nearly every fairly
well-to-do man has in adolescence seen inde-
cent photographs, and has been proud of ob-
taining possession of them because they were
difficult to procure. Conventional men are of
opinion that such things are extraordinarily in-


*See the excellent account of this incident in “Let Freedom
Ring.”


114


THE TABOO ON SEX KNOWLEDGE


jurious to others, although hardly one of them
will admit that they have been injurious to
himself. Undoubtedly they stir a transient feel-
ing of lust, but in any sexually vigorous male
such feelings will be stirred in one way if not
in another. The frequency with which a man
experiences lust depends upon his own physical
condition, whereas the occasions which rouse
such feelings in him depend upon the social
conventions to which he is accustomed. To an
early Victorian man a woman’s ankles were
sufficient stimulus, whereas a modern man re-
mains unmoved by anything up to the thigh.
This is merely a question of fashion in clothing.
If nakedness were the fashion, it would cease
to excite us, and women would be forced, as
they are in certain savage tribes, to adopt
clothing as a means of making themselves
sexually attractive. Exactly similar considera-
tions apply to literature and pictures: what
was exciting in the Victorian Age would leave
the men of a franker epoch quite unmoved.
The more prudes restrict the permissible de-
gree of sexual appeal, the less is required to
make such an appeal effective. Nine-tenths of
the appeal of pornography is due to the in-
decent feelings concerning sex which moralists


115


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


inculcate in the young; the other tenth is
physiological, and will occur in one way or
another whatever the state of the law may be.
On these grounds, although I fear that few
will agree with me, I am firmly persuaded that
there ought to be no law whatsoever on the
subject of obscene publications.

The taboo against nakedness is an obstacle
to a decent attitude on the subject of sex.
Where young children are concerned, this is
now recognized by many people. It is good for
children to see each other and their parents
naked whenever it so happens naturally. There
will be a short period, probably at about three
years old, when the child is interested in the
differences between his father and his mother,
and compares them with the differences be-
tween himself and his sister, but this period is
soon over, and after this he takes no more in-
terest in nudity than in clothes. So long as
parents are unwilling to be seen naked by their
children, the children will necessarily have a
sense that there is a mystery, and having that
sense they will become prurient and indecent.
There is only one way to avoid indecency, and
that is to avoid mystery.

There are also many important grounds of


116


THE TABOO ON SEX KNOWLEDGE


health in favour of nudity in suitable circum-
stances, such as out-of-doors in sunny weather.
Sunshine on the bare skin has an exceedingly
health-giving effect. Moreover any one who
has watched children running about in the
open-air without their clothes must have been
struck by the fact that they hold themselves
much better and move more freely and more
gracefully than when they are dressed. The
same thing is true of grown-up people. The
proper place for nudity is out-of-doors in the
sunshine and in the water. If our conventions
allowed of this, it would soon cease to make -
any sexual appeal; we should all hold ourselves
better, we should be healthier from the contact
of air and sun with the skin, and our‘standards
of beauty would more nearly coincide with
standards of health, since they would concern
themselves with the body and its carriage, not
only with the face. In this respect the practice
of the Greeks was to be commended.


117


CHAPTER IX


THE PLACE OF LOVE
IN HUMAN LIFE


HE prevailing attitude of most communi-
ties towards love is curiously twofold: on
the one hand it is the chief theme of poetry,
novels and plays; on the other hand it is com-
pletely ignored by most serious sociologists,
and is not considered as one of the desiderata
in schemes of economic or political reform. I
do not think this attitude justifiable. I regard
love as one of the most important things in
human life, and I regard any system as bad
which interferes unnecessarily with its free de-
velopment.

Love, when the word is properly used, does
not denote any and every relation between the
sexes, but only one involving considerable emo-
tion, and a relation which is psychological as
well as physical. It may reach any degree of
intensity. Such emotions as are expressed in
“Tristan und Isolde” are in accordance with
the experience of countless men and women.


118


THE PLACE OF LOVE IN HUMAN LIFE


The power of giving artistic expression to the
emotion of love is rare, but the emotion itself,
at least in Europe, is not. It is much commoner
in some societies than in others, and this de-
pends, I think, not upon the nature of the peo-
ple concerned but upon their conventions and
institutions. In China it is rare, and appears in
history as a characteristic of bad emperors who
are misled by wicked concubines; traditional
Chinese culture objected to all strong emotions
and considered that a man should in all cir-
cumstances preserve the empire of reason. In
this it resembled the early eighteenth century.
We, who have behind us the romantic move-
ment, the French Revolution, and the Great
War, are conscious that the part of reason in
human life is not so dominant as was hoped in
the reign of Queen Anne. And reason itself
has turned traitor in creating the doctrine of
psycho-analysis. The three main extra-rational
activities in modern life are religion, war and
love; all these are extra-rational, but love is
not anti-rational, that is to say, a reasonable
man may reasonably rejoice in its existence.
For the reasons that we have considered in
earlier chapters, there is in the modern world
a certain antagonism between religion and


119


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


love. I do not think this antagonism is un-
avoidable; it is due only to the fact that the
Christian religion, unlike some others, is rooted
in asceticism.

In the modern world, however, love has
another enemy more dangerous than religion,
and that is the gospel of work and economic
success. It is generally held, especially in
America, that a man should not allow love to
interfere with his career, and that if he does,
he is silly. But in this as in all human matters
a balance is necessary. It would be foolish,
though in some cases it might be tragically
heroic, to sacrifice career completely for love,
but it is equally foolish and in no degree heroic
to sacrifice love completely for career. Never-
theless this happens, and happens inevitably,
in a society organized on the basis of a uni-
versal scramble for money. Consider the life
of a typical business man of the present day,
especially in America: from the time when he
is first grown-up he devotes all his best
thoughts and all his best energies to financial
success; everything else is merely unimportant
recreation. In his youth he satisfies his physical
needs from time to time with prostitutes; pres-
ently he marries, but his interests are totally


I20


THE PLACE OF LOVE IN HUMAN LIFE


different from his wife’s, and he never becomes
really intimate with her. He comes home late
and tired from the office; he gets up in the
morning before his wife is awake; he spends
Sunday playing golf, because exercise is neces-
sary to keep him fit for the money-making
struggle. His wife’s interests appear to him es-
sentially feminine, and while he approves of
them, he makes no attempt to share them. He
has no time for illicit love any more than for
love in marriage, though he may, of course,
occasionally visit a prostitute when he is away
from home on business. His wife probably re-
mains sexually cold towards him, which is not
to be wondered at, since he never has time to
woo her. Subconsciously he is dissatisfied, but
he does not know why. He drowns his dissatis-
faction mainly in work, but also in other less
desirable ways, for example, by the sadistic
pleasure to be derived from watching prize-
fights or persecuting radicals. His wife, who
is equally unsatisfied, finds an outlet in second-
rate culture, and in upholding virtue by harry-
ing all those whose lives are generous and free.
In this way the lack of sexual satisfaction in
both husband and wife turns to hatred of
mankind disguised as public spirit and a high


I21I


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


moral standard. This unfortunate state of af-
fairs is largely due to a wrong conception of
our sexual needs. St. Paul apparently thought
that the only thing needed in a marriage was
opportunity for sexual intercourse, and this
view has been on the whole encouraged by the
teaching of Christian moralists. Their dislike of
sex has blinded them to all the finer aspects of
the sexual life, with the result that those who
have suffered their teaching in youth go about
the world blind to their own best potentialities.
Love is something far more than desire for
sexual intercourse; it is the principal means of
escape from the loneliness which afflicts most
men and women throughout the greater part
of their lives. There is a deep-seated fear, in
most people, of the cold world and the possible
cruelty of the herd; there is a longing for af-
fection, which is often concealed by roughness,
boorishness or a bullying manner in men, and
by nagging and scolding in women. Passionate
mutual love while it lasts puts an end to this
feeling; it breaks down the hard walls of the
ego, producing a new being composed of two
in one. Nature did not construct human beings
to stand alone, since they cannot fulfil her
biological purpose except with the help of


122


THE PLACE OF LOVE IN HUMAN LIFE


another; and civilized people cannot fully
satisfy their sexual instinct without love. The
instinct is not completely satisfied unless a
man’s whole being, mental quite as much as
physical, enters into the relation. Those who
have never known the deep intimacy and the
intense companionship of happy mutual love
have missed the best thing that life has to give;
unconsciously, if not consciously, they feel this,
and the resulting disappointment inclines them
towards envy, oppression and cruelty. To give
due place to passionate love should be there-
fore a matter which concerns the sociologist,
since if they miss this experience men and
women cannot attain their full stature, and
cannot feel towards the rest of the world that
kind of generous warmth without which their
social activities are pretty sure to be harmful.

Most men and women, given suitable condi-
tions, will feel passionate love at some period
of their lives. For the inexperienced, however,
it is very difficult to distinguish passionate love
from mere sex hunger; especially is this the
case with well-brought-up girls, who have been
taught that they could not possibly like to kiss
a man unless they loved him. If a girl is ex-
pected to be a virgin when she marries, it will


123


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


very often happen that she is trapped by a
transient and trivial sex attraction, which a
woman with sexual experience could easily dis-
tinguish from love. This has undoubtedly been
a frequent cause of unhappy marriages. Even
where mutual love exists, it may be poisoned
by the belief of one or both that it is sinful.
This belief may, of course, be well founded.
Parnell, for example, undoubtedly sinned in
committing adultery, since he thereby post-
poned the fulfilment of the hopes of Ireland
for many years. But even where the sense of
sin is unfounded, it will poison love just as
much. If love is to bring all the good of which
it is capable, it must be free, generous, un-
restrained and wholehearted.

The sense of sin which a conventional edu-
cation attaches to love, even to love within
marriage, operates often subconsciously in men
as well as in women, and in those whose con-
scious Opinions are emancipated as well as in
those who adhere to old traditions. The effects
of this attitude are various; it often renders
men brutal, clumsy, and unsympathetic in their
love-making, since they cannot bring them-
selves to speak about it so as to ascertain the
woman’s feelings, nor can they adequately


124


THE PLACE OF LOVE IN HUMAN LIFE


value the gradual approaches to the final act
which are essential to most women’s enjoy-
ment. Indeed they often fail to realize that a
woman should experience enjoyment, and that
if she does not, her lover is at fault. In women
who have been conventionally educated there
is often a certain pride in coldness, there is
great physical reserve, and an unwillingness
to allow easy physical intimacy. A skilful
wooer can probably overcome these timidities,
but a man who respects and admires them as
the mark of a virtuous woman is not likely to
overcome them, with the result that even after
many years of marriage the relations of hus-
band and wife remain constrained and more or
less formal. In the days of our grandfathers
husbands never expected to see their wives
naked, and their wives would have been hor-
rified at such a suggestion. This attitude is still
commoner than might be thought, and even
among those who have advanced beyond this
point, a good deal of the old restraint often
remains.

There is another more psychological obstacle
to the full development of love in the modern
world, and that is the fear that many people
feel of not preserving their individuality in-


125


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


tact. This is a foolish and rather modern terror.
Individuality is not an end in itself; it is some-
thing that must enter into fructifying contact
with the world, and in so doing must lose its
separateness. An individuality which is kept in
a glass case withers, whereas one that is freely
expended in human contacts becomes enriched.
Love, children, and work are the great sources
of fertilizing contact between the individual
and the rest of the world. Of these love is
usually chronologically the first. Moreover, it
is essential to the best development of parental
affection, since a child is apt to reproduce the
characteristics of both parents, and if they do
not love each other, each will only enjoy his
own characteristics when they appear in the
children, and will be pained by the characteris-
tics of the other parent. Work is by no means
always capable of bringing a man into fruitful
contact with the outer world. Whether it does
so or not depends upon the spirit in which it
is undertaken. Work of which the motive is
solely pecuniary cannot have this value, but
only work which embodies some kind of de-
votion, whether to persons, to things, or
merely to a vision. And love itself is worthless
when it is merely possessive; it is then on a


126


THE PLACE OF LOVE IN HUMAN LIFE


level with work which is merely pecuniary. In
order to have the kind of value of which we
are speaking, love must feel the ego of the
beloved person as important as one’s own ego,
and must realize the other’s feelings and wishes
as though they were one’s own. That is to say,
there must be an instinctive and not merely
conscious extension of egoistic feeling so as to
embrace the other person as well. All this has
been rendered difficult by our pugnacious com-
petitive society, and by the foolish cult of per-
sonality derived partly from Protestantism and
partly from the romantic movement.

Among modern emancipated people, love in
the serious sense with which we are concerned
is suffering a new danger. When people no
longer feel any moral barrier against sexual
intercourse on every occasion when even a
trivial impulse inclines to it, they get into the
habit of dissociating sex from serious emotion
and from feelings of affection; they may even
come to associate it with feelings of hatred.
Of this sort of thing Aldous Huxley’s novels
afford the best illustration. His characters, like
St. Paul, view sex intercourse merely as a
physiological outlet; the higher values with.
which. it is capable of being associated appear


127


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


to be unknown to them. From such an attitude
it is only a step to the revival of asceticism.
Love has its own proper ideals and its own in-
trinsic moral standards. These are obscured
both in Christian teaching and in the indis-
criminate revolt against all sexual morality
which has sprung up among considerable sec-
tions of the younger generation. Sex inter-
course divorced from love is incapable of bring-
ing any profound satisfaction to instinct. I am
not saying that it should never occur, for to
ensure this we should have to set up such rigid
barriers that love also would become very dif-
ficult.‘ What I am saying is that sex intercourse
apart from love has little value, and is to be
regarded primarily as experimentation with a
view to love.

The claims of love to a recognized place in
human life are, as we have seen, very great.
But love is an anarchic force which, if it is left
free, will not remain within any bounds set by
law or custom. So long as children are not in-
volved, this may not greatly matter. But as
soon as children appear we are in a different
region, where love is no longer autonomous but
serves the biological purposes of the race.
There has to be a social ethic connected with


128


eee et ms


"7


THE PLACE OF LOVE IN HUMAN LIFE


children, which may, where there is conflict,
override the claims of passionate love. A wise
ethic will, however, minimize this conflict to
the uttermost, not only because love is good in
itself. but also because it is good for children
when their parents love each other. To secure
as little interference with love as is compatible
with the interests of children should be one of
the main purposes of a wise sexual ethic. This
topic, however, cannot be discussed until we
have considered the family.


129


CHAPTER X


MARRIAGE


N this chapter I propose to discuss marriage
without reference to children, merely as a
relation between men and women. Marriage
differs, of course, from other sex relations by
the fact that it is a legal institution. It is also
in most communities a religious institution,
but it is the legal aspect which is essential. The
legal institution merely embodies a practice
which exists not only among primitive men but
among apes and various other animals. Ani-
mals practise what is virtually marriage,
wherever the cooperation of the male is neces-
sary to the rearing of the young. As a rule,
animal marriages are monogamic, and accord-
ing to some authorities this is the case in par-
ticular amongst the anthropoid apes. It seems,
if these authorities are to be believed, that
these fortunate animals are not faced with the
problems that beset human communities, since
the male, once married, ceases to be attracted
to any other female, and the female, once mar-


130


MARRIAGE


ried, ceases to be attractive to any other male.
Among the anthropoid apes, therefore, al-
though they do not have the assistance of re-
ligion, sin is unknown, since instinct suffices
to produce virtue. There is some evidence that
among the lowest races of savages a similar
state of affairs exists. Bushmen are said to be
strictly monogamous, and I understand that
the Tasmanians (now extinct) were invariably
faithful to their wives. Even in civilized man-
kind faint traces of a monogamic instinct can
sometimes be perceived. Considering the in-
fluence of habit over behaviour, it is perhaps
surprising that the hold of monogamy on in-
stinct is not stronger than it is. This, however,
is an example of the mental peculiarity of hu-
man beings, from which spring both their vices
and their intelligence, namely the power of
imagination to break up habits and initiate
new lines of conduct.

It seems probable that what first broke up
primitive monogamy was the intrusion of the
economic motive. This motive, wherever it has
any influence upon sexual behaviour, is invari-
ably disastrous, since it substitutes relations of
slavery or purchase for relations based upon in-
stinct. In early agricultural and pastoral com-


131


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


munities both wives and children were an eco-
nomic asset to a man. The wives worked for
him, and the children, after the age of five or
six, began to be useful in the fields or in tending
beasts. Consequently the most powerful men
aimed at having as many wives as possible.
Polygamy can seldom be the general practice
of a community, since there is not as a rule a
great excess of females; it is the prerogative of
chiefs and rich men. Numerous wives and chil-
dren form a valuable property, and will there-
fore enhance the already privileged position of
their owners. Thus the primary function of a
wife comes to be that of a lucrative domestic
animal, and her sexual function becomes subor-
dinated. At this level of civilization it is as a
rule easy for a man to divorce his wife, though
he must in that case restore to her family any
dowry that she may have brought. It is, how-
ever, in general impossible for a wife to divorce
her husband.

The attitude of most semi-civilized com-
munities towards adultery is of a piece with
this outlook. At a very low level of civilization
adultery is sometimes tolerated. The Samoans,
we are told, when they have to go upon a
journey, fully expect their wives to console


132


MARRIAGE


themselves for their absence.* At a slightly
higher level, however, adultery in women is
punished with death or at best with very severe
penalties. Mungo Park’s account of Mumbo
Jumbo used to be well known when I was
young, but I have been pained in recent
years to find highbrow Americans alluding to
Mumbo Jumbo as a god of the Congo. He was
in fact neither a god nor connected with the
Congo. He was a pretence demon invented by
the men of the upper Niger to terrify women
who had sinned. Mungo Park’s account of him
so inevitably suggests a Voltairean view as to
the origins of religion that it has tended to be
discreetly suppressed by modern anthropolo-
gists, who cannot bear the intrusion of rational
scoundrelism into the doings of savages. A
man who had intercourse with another man’s
wife was, of course, also a criminal, but a man
who had intercourse with an unmarried woman
did not incur any blame unless he diminished
her value in the marriage market.

With the coming of Christianity this out-
look was changed. The part of religion in mar-
riage was very greatly augmented, and infrac-
tions of the marriage law came to be blamed


* Margaret Mead, “Coming of Age in Samoa,” 1928, p. 104 ff.
133


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


on grounds of taboo rather than of property.
To have intercourse with another man’s wife
remained, of course, an offence against that
man, but to have any intercourse outside mar-
riage was an offence against God, and this, in
the view of the Church, was a far graver mat-
ter. For the same reason divorce, which had
previously been grantea to men on easy terms,
was declared inadmissible. Marriage became
a sacrament and therefore lifelong.

Was this a gain or a loss to human happi-
ness? Itis very hard tosay. Among peasants the
life of married women has always been a very
hard one, and on the whole it has been hardest
among the least civilized peasants. Among
most barbarous peoples a woman is old at
twenty-five, and cannot hope at that-age to
retain any traces of beauty. The view of woman
as a domestic animal was no doubt very pleas-
ant for men, but for women it meant a life
of nothing but toil and hardship. Christianity,
while in some ways it made the position of
women worse, especially in the well-to-do
classes, did at least recognize their theological
equality with men, and refused to regard them
as absolutely the property of their husbands.
A married woman had not, of course, the right


134


ne en
isk ~ ah ela hae .


MARRIAGE


to leave her husband for another man, but she
could leave him for a life of religion. And on
the whole progress towards a better status for
women was easier, in the great bulk of the
population, from the Christian than from the
pre-Christian standpoint.

-When we look round the world at the pres-
ent day and ask ourselves what conditions seem
on the whole to make for happiness in mar-
riage and what for unhappiness, we are driven
to a somewhat curious conclusion, that the
more civilized people become the less capable
they seem of lifelong happiness with one part-
ner. Irish peasants, although until recent times
marriages were decided by the parents, were
said by those who ought to know them to be
on the whole happy and virtuous in their
conjugal life. In general, marriage is easiest
where people are least differentiated. When a
man differs little from other men, and a woman
differs little from other women, there is no
particular reason to regret not having married
some one else. But people with multifarious
tastes and pursuits and interests will tend to
desire congeniality in their partners, and to
feel dissatisfied when they find that they have
secured less of it than they might have ob-


135


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


tained. The Church, which tends to view mar-
riage solely from the point of view of sex,
sees no reason why one partner should not do
just as well as another, and can therefore up-
hold the indissolubility of marriage without
realizing the hardship that this often involves.

Another condition which makes for happi-
ness in marriage is paucity of unowned women
and absence of social occasions when husbands
meet other women. If there is no possibility of
sexual relations with any woman other than
one’s wife, most men will make the best of the
situation and, except in abnormally bad cases,
will find it quite tolerable. The same thing ap-
plies to wives, especially if they never imagine
that marriage should bring much happiness.
That is to say, a marriage is likely to be what
is called happy if neither party ever expected
to get much happiness out of it.

Fixity of social custom, for the same reason,
tends to prevent what are called unhappy mar-
riages. If the bonds of marriage are recognized
as final and irrevocable, there is no stimulus to
the imagination to wander outside and con-
sider that a more ecstatic happiness might
have been possible. In order to secure domestic
peace where this state of mind exists, it is only


136


MARRIAGE


necessary that neither the husband nor the
wife should fall outrageously below the com-
monly recognized standard of decent behav-
iour, whatever this may be.

Among civilized people in the modern world
none of these conditions for what is called hap-
Ppiness exist, and accordingly one finds that
very few marriages after the first few years are
happy. Some of the causes of unhappiness are
bound up with civilization, but others would
disappear if men and women were more civ-
ilized than they are. Let us begin with the
latter. Of these the most important is bad
sexual education, which is a far commoner
thing among the well-to-do than it can ever
be among peasants. Peasant children early be-
come accustomed to what are called the facts
of life, which they can observe not only among
human beings but among animals. They are
thus saved from both ignorance and fastidious-
ness. The carefully educated children of the
well-to-do, on the contrary, are shielded from
all practical knowledge of sexual matters, and
even the most modern parents, who teach chil-
dren out of books, do not give them that sense
of practical familiarity which the peasant child
early acquires. The triumph of Christian teach-


137


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


ing is when a man and woman marry without
either having had previous sexual experience.
In nine cases out of ten where this occurs,
the results are unfortunate. Sexual behaviour
among human beings is not instinctive, so that
the inexperienced bride and bridegroom, who
are probably quite unaware of this fact, find
themselves overwhelmed with shame and dis-
comfort. It is little better when the woman
alone is innocent but the man has acquired his
knowledge from prostitutes. Most men do not
realize that a process of wooing is necessary
after marriage, and many well-brought-up
women do not realize what harm they do to
marriage by remaining reserved and physically
aloof. All this could be put right by better
sexual education, and is in fact very much bet-
ter with the generation now young than it
was with their parents and grandparents.
There used to be a widespread belief among
women that they were morally superior to men
on the ground that they had less pleasure in
sex. This attitude made frank companionship
between husbands and wives impossible. It
was, of course, in itself quite unjustifiable, since
failure to enjoy sex, so far from being virtuous,
is a mere physiological or psychological de-
138


MARRIAGE


ficiency, like a failure to enjoy food, which also
a hundred years ago was expected of elegant
females.

Other modern causes of unhappiness in mar-
riage are, however, not so easily disposed of. I
think that uninhibited civilized people, whether
men or women, are generally polygamous in
their instincts. They may fall deeply in love
and be for some years entirely absorbed in one
person, but sooner or later sexual familiarity
dulls the edge of passion, and then they begin
to look elsewhere for a revival of the old thrill.
It is, of course, possible to control this impulse
in the interests of morality, but it is very diffi-
cult to prevent the impulse from existing. With
the growth of women’s freedom there has come
a much greater opportunity for conjugal in-
fidelity than existed in former times. The op-
portunity gives rise to the thought, the
thought gives rise to the desire, and in the
absence of religious scruples the desire gives
rise to the act.

Women’s emancipation has in various ways
made marriage more difficult. In old days the


_wife had to adapt herself to the husband, but


the husband did not have to adapt himself to
the wife. Nowadays many wives, on grounds of


139


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


woman’s right to her own individuality and
her own career, are unwilling to adapt them-
selves to their husbands beyond a point, while
men who still hanker after the old tradition of
masculine domination see no reason why they
should do all the adapting. This trouble arises
especially in connection with infidelity. In old
days the husband was occasionally unfaithful,
but as a rule his wife did not know of it. If she
did, he confessed that he had sinned and made
her believe that he was penitent. She, on the
other hand, was usually virtuous. If she was
not, and the fact came to her husband’s knowl-
edge, the marriage broke up. Where, as hap-
pens in many modern marriages, mutual faith-
fulness is not demanded, the instinct of jeal-
ousy nevertheless survives, and often proves
fatal to the persistence of any deeply rooted
intimacy even where no overt quarrels occur.

There is another difficulty in the way of
modern marriage, which is felt especially by
those who are most conscious of the value of
love. Love can flourish only as long as it is
free and spontaneous; it tends to be killed by
the thought that it is a duty. To say that it is
your duty to love so-and-so is the surest way
to cause you to hate him or her, Marriage as


140


MARRIAGE


a combination of love with legal bonds thus
falls between two stools. Shelley says:
“TI never was attached to that great sect
Whose doctrine is, that each one should select
Out of the crowd a mistress or a friend,
And all the rest, though fair and wise, commend
To cold oblivion, though it is in the code
-Of modern morals, and the beaten road
Which those poor slaves with weary footsteps tread,
Who travel to their home among the dead
By the broad highway of the world, and so
With one chained friend, perhaps a jealous foe,
The dreariest and the longest journey go.”


There can be no doubt that to close one’s
mind on marriage against all the approaches of
love from elsewhere is to diminish receptivity
and sympathy and the opportunities of valu-
able human contacts. It is to do violence to
something which, from the most idealistic
standpoint, is in itself desirable. And like every
kind of restrictive morality it tends to promote
what one may call a policeman’s outlook upon
the whole of human life—the outlook, that is to
say, which is always looking for an opportunity
to forbid something.

For all these reasons, many of which are
bound up with things undoubtedly good, mar-
riage has become difficult, and if it is not to be


I4I


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


a barrier to happiness it must be conceived
in a somewhat new way. One solution often
suggested, and actually tried on a large scale
in America, is easy divorce. I hold, of course,
as every humane person must, that divorce
should be granted on more grounds than are
admitted in the English law, but I do not
recognize in easy divorce a solution of the
troubles of marriage. Where a marriage is
childless, divorce may be often the right solu-
tion, even when both parties are doing their
best to behave decently; but where there are
children the stability of marriage is to my mind
a matter of considerable importance. (This
is a subject to which I shall return in connec-
tion with the family.) I think that where a
marriage is fruitful and both parties to it are
reasonable and decent the expectation ought
to be that it will be lifelong, but not that it
will exclude other sex relations. A marriage
which begins with passionate love and leads to
children who are desired and loved ought to
produce so deep a tie between a man and
woman that they will feel something infinitely
precious in their companionship, even after
sexual passion has decayed, and even if either
or both feels sexual passion for some one else.


142


MARRIAGE


This mellowing of marriage has been prevented
by jealousy, but jealousy, though it is an in-
stinctive emotion, is one which can be con-
trolled if it is recognized as bad, and not
supposed to be the expression of a just moral
indignation. A companionship which has lasted
for many years and through many deeply felt
events has a richness of content which cannot
belong to the first days of love, however de-
lightful these may be. And any person who
appreciates what time can do to enhance values
will not lightly throw away such companion-
ship for the sake of new love.

It is therefore possible for a civilized man
and woman to be happy in marriage, although
if this is to be the case a number of conditions
must be fulfilled. There must be a feeling of
complete equality on both sides; there must be
no interference with mutual freedom; there
must be the most complete physical and men-
tal intimacy; and there must be a certain
similarity in regard to standards of values. (It
is fatal, for example, if one values only money
while the other values only good work.) Given
all these conditions, I believe marriage to be
the best and most important relation that can
exist between two human beings. If it has not


143


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


often been realized hitherto, that is chiefly be-
cause husband and wife have regarded them-
selves as each other’s policeman. If marriage is
to achieve its possibilities, husbands and wives
must learn to understand that whatever the
law may say, in their private lives they must
be free.


CHAPTER XI


PROSTITUTION


.O long as the virtue of respectable women

is regarded as a matter of great im-
portance, the institution of marriage has to be
supplemented by another institution which
may really be regarded as a part of it—I mean
the institution of prostitution. Everybody is
familiar with the famous passage in which
Lecky speaks of prostitutes as safeguards of
the sanctity of the home, and of the innocence
of our wives and daughters. The sentiment is
Victorian, and the manner of expression is old-
fashioned, but the fact is undeniable. Moralists
have denounced Lecky because his remark
made them feel furious and they did not quite
know why, but they have not succeeded in
showing that what he said was untrue. The
moralist asserts, of course quite truly, that if
men followed his teaching there would be no
prostitution, but he knows quite well that they
will not follow it, so that the consideration of -
what would happen if they did is irrelevant.


145


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


The need for prostitution arises from the
fact that many men are either unmarried or
away from their wives on journeys, that such
men are not content to remain continent, and
that in a conventionally virtuous community
they do not find respectable women available.
Society therefore sets apart a certain class of
women for the satisfaction of those masculine
needs which it is ashamed to acknowledge yet
afraid to leave wholly unsatisfied. The prosti-
tute has the advantage, not only that she is
available at a moment’s notice, but that, having
no life outside her profession, she can remain
hidden without difficulty, and the man who has
been with her can return to his wife, his family,
and his church with unimpaired dignity. She,
however, poor woman, in spite of the un-
doubted service she performs, in spite of
the fact that she safeguards the virtues of
wives and daughters and the apparent virtue
of churchwardens, is universally despised,
thought to be an outcast, and not allowed to
associate with ordinary people except in the
way of business. This blazing injustice began
with the victory of the Christian religion, and
has been continued ever since. The real of-
fence of the prostitute is that she shows up the


146


PROSTITUTION


hollowness of moralistic professions. Like the
thoughts repressed by the Freudian censor, she
must be banished into the unconscious. Thence,
however, as such exiles will, she wreaks an un-
intended vengeance.
“But most, through midnight streets I hear
How the youthful harlot’s curse
Blasts the new-born infant’s tear
And blights with plagues the marriage-hearse.”
Prostitution was not always the despised and
hidden thing that it has become. Its origin, in-
deed, is as lofty as could be. Originally the
prostitute was a priestess dedicated to a god
or a goddess, and in serving the passing
stranger she was performing an act of worship.
In those days she was treated with respect, and
while men used her they honoured her. The
Christian Fathers filled many pages with in-
vectives against this system, which, they said,
showed the lasciviousness of the Pagan wor-
ship, and its origin in the wiles of Satan. The
temples were closed, and prostitution became
everywhere what it had already become in
many places, a commercialized institution run
for profit—not, of course, for the profit of the
prostitutes, but of those whose virtual slaves
they were, for until fairly recent times the in-


147


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


dividual prostitute, who is now the rule, was
a rare exception, and the great majority were
in brothels or baths or other institutions of ill-
fame. In India the transition from religious to
commercial prostitution is not yet quite com-
plete. Katherine Mayo, the author of “Mother
India,”’ adduces the survival of religious prosti-
tution as one of the counts of her indictment
against that country.

Prostitution, except in South America,* ap-
pears to be on the decline, partly, no doubt,
owing to the fact that other means of livelihood
are more available to women than they used to
be, and partly also to the fact that many more
women than used to be the case are now will-
ing to have extra-marital relations with men,
from inclination and not from commercial
motives. Nevertheless I do not think that
prostitution can be abolished wholly. Take, for
example, sailors when they come ashore after
a long voyage. They cannot be expected to
have the patience to woo women who will only
come to them out of affection. Or take again
the fairly large class of men who are unhappy
in marriage and afraid of their wives. Such
men will seek ease and release when they are


*See Albert Londres, “The Road to Buenos Ayres,” 1929.
148


Ay, Hee Aes
y Si es


PROSTITUTION


away from home, and will desire it in a form
as free from psychological obligations as pos-
sible. There are, nevertheless, serious reasons
for wishing to reduce prostitution to a mini-
mum. It is open to three grave objections.
First, the danger to the health of the com-
munity; second, the psychological damage to
women; and third, the psychological damage
to men.

The danger to health is the most important
of these three. It is, of course, mainly through
prostitutes that venereal disease is spread. The
attempts to cope with this problem by registra-
tion of prostitutes and State inspection have
not been found very successful from a purely
medical point of view, and are liable to un-
pleasant abuses because of the hold which they
give to the police over prostitutes, and even on
occasion over women who had no intention
of becoming professional prostitutes but have
found themselves wnintentionally included
within the legal definition. Venereal disease
could, of course, be coped with much more
effectively than it is, if it were not regarded
as a just punishment for sin. It is possible to
take precautions in advance which much di-
minish the likelihood of it, but it is thought


149


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


undesirable to make the nature of these pre-
cautions widely known, on the ground that
such knowledge might promote sin. And those
who acquire a venereal disease often postpone
treatment because they are ashamed, any dis-
ease of this sort being considered disgraceful.
The attitude of the community in these re-
spects is undoubtedly better than it used to be,
and if it improves still further, the result may
be a very considerable diminution of venereal
disease. Nevertheless it is obvious that prosti-
tution, so long as it exists, will afford a means
of spreading disease more dangerous than any
other.

Prostitution as it exists at present is ob-
viously an undesirable kind of life. The risk
of disease in itself renders prostitution a dan-
gerous trade, like working in white lead, but
apart from that the life is a demoralizing one.
It is idle, and tends to excessive drinking. It
has the grave drawback that the prostitute is
generally despised, and is probably thought ill
of even by her clients. It is a life against in-
stinct—quite as much against instinct as the
life of a nun. For all these reasons prostitution,
as it exists in Christian countries, is an ex-
traordinarily undesirable career.


. 150


PROSTITUTION


In Japan, apparently, the matter is quite
otherwise. Prostitution is recognized and re-
spected as a career, and is even adopted at the
instance of parents. It is often a not uncommon
method of earning a marriage dowry. Accord-
ing to some authorities, the Japanese have a
partial immunity from syphilis. Accordingly
the career of a prostitute in Japan has not the
sordidness that it has where morality is more
stern. Clearly, if prostitution must survive, it
is better that it should exist in the Japanese
form than in that to which we are accustomed
in Europe. It is obvious that the more strict
the standard of morality in any country, the
more degradation will attach to the life of a
prostitute.

Association with prostitutes, if it becomes at
all habitual, is likely to have a bad psycho-
logical effect upon a man. He will get into the
habit of feeling that it is not necessary to please
in order to have sexual intercourse. He will
also, if he respects the usual moral code, tend
to feel contempt for any woman with whom he
has intercourse. The reaction of this state of
mind upon marriage may be extraordinarily
unfortunate, both where it takes the form of
assimilating marriage to prostitution, and


151


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


where it takes the opposite form of differentiat-
ing it as widely as possible. Some men are in-
capable of desiring sexual intercourse with a
woman whom they deeply love and respect.
This is attributed by Freudians to the Oedipus
complex, but is, I think, quite as often due to
the desire to place as wide a gulf as possible
between such women and prostitutes. Without
going to such extreme lengths, many men,
especially old-fashioned men, treat their wives
with an exaggerated respect, which leaves
them psychologically virginal, and prevents
them from experiencing sexual pleasure. Ex-
actly the opposite evils result when a man in
imagination assimilates his wife to a prosti-
tute: This leads him to forget that sexual in-
tercourse should occur only when both desire
it, and that it should be approached invariably
by a period of courtship. He is accordingly
rough and brutal with his wife, and produces
in her a disgust which it is very difficult to
eradicate.

The intrusion of the economic motive into
sex is always in a greater or less degree dis-
astrous. Sexual relations should be a mutual
delight, entered into solely from the spon-
taneous impulse of both parties. Where this is


152


PROSTITUTION


not the case, everything that is valuable is
absent. To use another person in so intimate a
manner is to be lacking in that respect for
the human being as such, out of which all true
morality must spring. To a sensitive person,
such an act cannot be in any serious way at-
tractive. If, nevertheless, it is performed from
the sheer strength of the physical urge, it is
likely to lead to remorse, and in remorse a
man’s judgments of value are disordered. This
applies, of course, not only to prostitution, but
almost as much to marriage. Marriage is for
women the commonest mode of livelihood, and
the total amount of undesired sex endured by
women is probably greater in marriage than in
prostitution. Morality in sexual relations, when
it is free from superstition, consists essentially
of respect for the other person, and unwilling-
ness to use that person solely as a means of
personal gratification, without regard to his
or her desires. It is because prostitution sins
against this principle that it would remain un-
desirable even if prostitutes were respected and
the risk of venereal disease were eliminated.
Havelock Ellis, in his very interesting study
of prostitution, advances an argument in its
favour which I do not believe to be valid. He


153


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


begins by a consideration of the orgy, which
exists in most early civilizations, and affords
an outlet for anarchic impulses which at other
times have to be controlled. According to him,
prostitution developed out of the orgy, and
serves in some degree the purpose which the
orgy formerly served. Many men, he says, can-
not find complete satisfaction within the
restraints, the decorum, and the decent limita-
tions of a conventional marriage, and such
men, he thinks, find in an occasional visit to a
prostitute an outlet less anti-social than any
other that is open to them. At bottom, how-
ever, this argument is the same as Lecky’s,
although its form is more modern. Women
whose sexual life is uninhibited are as liable as
men to the impulses which Havelock Ellis is
considering, and if the sexual life of women is
liberated, men will be able to find satisfaction
for the impulses concerned, without having to
seek the company of professionals whose
motive is purely pecuniary. This is indeed one
of the great advantages to be hoped from the
sexual liberation of women. As far as I have
been able to observe, women whose opinions
and feelings about sex are not subject to the
old taboos are able to find and give much fuller


154


PROSTITUTION


satisfaction in marriage than was possible in
Victorian days. Wherever the older morality
has decayed, prostitution also has decayed.
The young man who would formerly have been
driven to occasional visits to prostitutes is now
able to enter upon relations with girls of his
own kind, relations which are on both sides
free, which have a psychological element quite
as important as the purely physical, and which
involve often a considerable degree of passion-
ate love on both sides. From the point of view
of any genuine morality, this is an immense ad-
vance upon the older system. Moralists regret
it because it is less easy to conceal, but it is
after all not the first principle of morality that
lapses from it should not come to the ears of
the moralist. The new freedom between young
people is, to my mind, wholly a matter of re-
joicing, and is producing a generation of men
without brutality and women without finicky
fastidiousness. Those who oppose the new free-
dom should face frankly the fact that they are
in effect advocating the continuance of prosti-
tution as the sole safety valve against the
pressure of an impossibly rigid code.


155


CHAPTER XII


TRIAL MARRIAGE


N arational ethic, marriage would not count

as such in the absence of children. A sterile
marriage should be easily dissoluble, for it is
through children alone that sexual relations
become of importance to society, and worthy
to be taken cognizance of by a legal institu-
tion. This, of course, is not the view of the
Church, which, under the influence of St. Paul,
still views marriage rather as the alternative
to fornication than as the means to the pro-
creation of children. In recent years, however,
even clergymen have become aware that
neither men nor women invariably wait for
marriage before experiencing sexual inter-
course. In the case of men, provided their lapses
were with prostitutes and decently concealed,
they were comparatively easy to condone, but
in the case of women other than professional
prostitutes, the conventional moralists find
what they call immorality much harder to put
up with. Nevertheless, in America, in England,


156


TRIAL MARRIAGE


in Germany, in Scandinavia, a great change
has taken place since the war. Very many girls
of respectable families have ceased to think it
worth while to preserve their “virtue,” and
young men, instead of finding an outlet with
prostitutes, have had affairs with girls of the
kind whom, if they were richer, they would
wish to marry. It seems that this process has
gone further in the United States than it has
- in England, owing, I think, to Prohibition and
automobiles. Owing to Prohibition it has be-
come de rigueur at any cheerful party for every-
body to get more or less tipsy. Owing to the
fact that a very large percentage of girls pos-
sess cars of their own, it has become easy for
them to escape with a lover from the eyes of
parents and neighbours. The resulting state of
affairs is described in Judge Lindsey’s books.*
The old accuse him of exaggeration, but the
young do not. As far as a casual traveller can,
I took pains to test his assertions by question-
ing young men. I did not find them inclined
to deny anything that he said as to the facts.
It seems to be the case throughout America
that a very large percentage of girls who sub-


*“The Revolt of Modern Youth,” 1925. “Companionate Mar- -
riage,” 1927.


157


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


sequently marry and become of the highest
respectability have sex experience, often with
several lovers. And even where complete rela-
tions do not occur, there is so much “petting”
and “necking” that the absence of complete
intercourse can only be viewed as a perversion.

I cannot say myself that I view the present
state of affairs as satisfactory. It has certain
undesirable features imposed upon it by con-
ventional moralists, and until conventional
morality is changed, I do not see how these un-
desirable features are to disappear. Bootlegged
sex is in fact as inferior to what it might be as
bootlegged alcohol. I do not think anybody
can deny that there is enormously more drunk-
enness among young men, and still more
among young women, in well-to-do America,
than there was before the introduction of Pro-
hibition. In circumventing the law there is, of
course, a certain spice and a certain pride of
cleverness, and while the law about drink is
being circumvented it is natural to circumvent
the conventions about sex. Here, also, the sense
of daring acts as an aphrodisiac. The conse-—
quence is that sex relations between young
people tend to take the silliest possible form,
being entered into not from affection but from


158


TRIAL MARRIAGE


bravado, and at times of intoxication. Sex, like
liquor, usually has to be taken in forms which
are concentrated and rather unpalatable, since
these forms alone can escape the vigilance of
the authorities. Sex relations as a dignified, ra-
tional, wholehearted activity in which the
complete personality cooperates, do not often,
I think, occur in America outside marriage. To
this extent the moralists have been successful.
They have not prevented fornication; on the
contrary, if anything, their opposition, by mak-
ing it spicy, has made it more common. But
they have succeeded in making it almost as
undesirable as they say it is, just as they have
succeeded in making much of the alcohol con-
sumed as poisonous as they assert all alcohol
to be. They have compelled young people to
take sex neat, divorced from daily companion-
ship, from a common work, and from all psy-
chological intimacy. The more timid of the
young do not go so far as complete sexual re-
lations, but content themselves with producing
prolonged states of sexual excitement without
satisfaction, which are nervously debilitating,
and calculated to make the full enjoyment of
sex at a later date difficult or impossible.
Another drawback to the type of sexual ex-


159


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


citement which prevails among the young in
America is that it involves either failure to
work or loss of sleep, since it is necessarily
connected with parties which continue into the
small hours.

A graver matter, while official morality re-
mains what it is, is the risk of occasional dis-
aster. By ill luck it may happen that some one
young person’s doings come to the ears of some
guardian of morality, who will proceed with a
good conscience to a sadistic orgy of scandal.
And since it is almost impossible for young
people in America to acquire a sound knowl-
edge of birth-control methods, unintended
pregnancies are not infrequent. These are gen-
erally dealt with by procuring abortion, which
is dangerous, painful, illegal, and by no means
easy to keep secret. The complete gulf between
the morals of the young and the morals of the
old, which exists very commonly in present-
day America, has another unfortunate result,
namely, that there can be no real intimacy or
friendship between parents and children, and
that the parents are incapable of helping their
children with advice or sympathy. When
young people get into a difficulty, they cannot
speak of it to their parents without producing


160


TRIAL MARRIAGE


an explosion—possibly scandal, certainly a
hysterical upheaval. The relation of parent and
child has thus ceased to be one performing any
useful function after the child has reached
adolescence. How much more civilized are
the Trobriand Islands, where a father will say
to his daughter’s lover: “You sleep with my
child; very well, marry her.” *

In spite of the drawbacks we have been con-
sidering, there are great advantages in the
emancipation, however partial, of young people
in America, as compared with their elders.
They are freer from priggery, less inhibited,
less enslaved to authority devoid of rational
foundation. I think also that they are likely to
prove less cruel, less brutal, and less violent
than their seniors. For it has been characteris-
tic of American life to take out in violence the
anarchic impulses which could not find an out-
let in sex. It may also be hoped that when the
generation now young reaches middle age, it
will not wholly forget its behaviour in youth,
and will be tolerant of sexual experiments
which at present are scarcely possible because
of the need of secrecy.

The state of affairs in England is more or

*“The Sexual Life of Savages,” p. 73.


161


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


less similar to that in America, though not so
developed, owing to the absence of Prohibition
and the paucity of motor-cars. There is also, I
think, in England, and certainly on the Conti-
nent, very much less of the practice of sexual
excitement without ultimate satisfaction, and
respectable people in England, with some hon-
ourable exceptions, are on the whole less filled
with persecuting zeal than corresponding peo-
ple in America. Nevertheless, the difference be-
tween the two countries is only one of degree.

Judge Ben B. Lindsey, who was for many
years in charge of the juvenile court at Denver,
and in that position had unrivalled opportuni-
ties for ascertaining the facts, proposed a new
institution which he calls “companionate mar-
riage.” Unfortunately he has lost his official
position, for when it became known that he
used it rather to promote the happiness of the
young than to give them a consciousness of
sin, the Ku Klux Klan and the Catholics com-
bined to oust him. Companionate marriage is
the proposal of a wise conservative. It is an at-
tempt to introduce some stability into the
sexual relations of the young, in place of the
present promiscuity. He points out the obvious
fact that what prevents the young from marry-


162


TRIAL MARRIAGE


ing is lack of money, and that money is re-
quired in marriage partly on account of chil-
dren, but partly also because it is not the thing
for the wife to earn her own living. His view is
that young people should be able to enter upon
a new kind of marriage, distinguished from
ordinary marriage by three characteristics.
First, that there should be for the time being
no intention of having children, and that ac-
cordingly the best available birth control in-
formation should be given to the young couple.
Second, that so long as there are no children
and the wife is not pregnant, divorce should be
possible by mutual consent. And third, that
in the event of divorce, the wife should not be
entitled to alimony. He holds, and I think
rightly, that if such an institution were estab-
lished by law, a very great many young people,
for example, students at universities, would
enter upon comparatively permanent partner-
ships, involving a common life, and free from
the Dionysiac characteristics of their present
sex relations. He brings evidence to bear that
young students who are married do better
work than such as are unmarried. It is indeed
obvious that work and sex are more easily com-
bined in a quasi-permanent relation than in


163


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


the scramble and excitement of parties and
drunken orgies. There is no reason under the
sun why it should be more expensive for two
young people to live together than to live
separately, and therefore the economic reasons
which at present lead to postponement of mar-
riage would no longer operate. I have not the
faintest doubt that Judge Lindsey’s proposal,
if embodied in the law, would have a very
beneficent influence, and that this influence
would be such as all might agree to be a gain
from a moral point of view.

Nevertheless, Judge Lindsey’s proposals
were received with a howl! of horror by all
middle-aged persons and most of the news-
papers throughout the length and breadth of
America. It was said that he was attacking
the sanctity of the home; it was said that in
tolerating marriages not intended to lead at
once to children he was opening the floodgates
to legalized lust; it was said that he enor-
mously exaggerated the prevalence of extra-
marital sexual relations, that he was slandering
pure American womanhood, and that most
business men remained cheerfully continent up
to the age of thirty or thirty-five. All these
things were said, and I try to think that among


164


TRIAL MARRIAGE


those who said them there were some who be-
lieved them. I listened to many invectives
against Judge Lindsey, but I came away with
the impression that the arguments which were
regarded as decisive were two. First, that
Judge Lindsey’s proposals would not have been
approved by Christ; and, second, that they
were not approved by eminent divines in the
present day. The second of these arguments ap-
peared to be considered the more weighty, and
indeed rightly, since the other is purely hypo-
thetical, and incapable of being substantiated.
I never heard any person advance any argu-
ment even pretending to show that Judge
Lindsey’s proposals would diminish human
happiness. This consideration, indeed, I was
forced to conclude, is thought wholly unim-
portant by those who uphold traditional
morality.

For my part, while I am quite convinced that
companionate marriage would be a step in the
right direction, and would do a great deal of
good, I do not think that it goes far enough.
I think that all sex relations which do not in-
volve children should be regarded as a purely
private affair, and that if a man and a woman
choose to live together without having chil-


165


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


dren, that should be no one’s business but their
own. I should not hold it desirable that either
a man or a woman should enter upon the
serious business of a marriage intended to lead
to children without having had previous sexual
experience. There is a great mass of evidence
to show that the first experience of sex should
be with a person who has previous knowledge.
The sexual act in human beings is not instinc-
tive, and apparently never has been since it
ceased to be performed a tergo. And apart from
this argument, it seems absurd to ask people
to enter upon a relation intended to be lifelong,
without any previous knowledge as to their
sexual compatibility. It is just as absurd as it
would be if a man intending to buy a house
were not allowed to view it until he had com-
pleted the purchase. The proper course, if the
biological function of marriage were ade-
quately recognized, would be to say that no
marriage should be legally binding until the
wife’s first pregnancy. At present a marriage
is null if sexual intercourse is impossible, but
children, rather than sexual intercourse, are
the true purpose of marriage, which should
therefore be not regarded as consummated
until such time as there is a prospect of chil-


166


TRIAL MARRIAGE


dren. This view depends, at least in part, upon
that separation between procreation and mere
sex which has been brought about by contra-
ceptives. Contraceptives have altered the whole
aspect of sex and marriage, and have made dis-
tinctions necessary which could formerly have
been ignored. People may come together for
sex alone, as occurs in prostitution, or for com-
panionship involving a sexual element, as in
Judge Lindsey’s companionate marriage, or
finally, for the purpose of rearing a family.
These are all different, and no morality can be
adequate to modern circumstances which con-
founds them in one indiscriminate total.


167


CHAPTER XIII


THE FAMILY
AT THE PRESENT DAY


HE reader may by this time have forgot-

ten that in Chapters II and III we con-
sidered matrilineal and patriarchal families,
and their bearing upon primitive views of
sexual ethics. It is now time to resume the
consideration of the family, which affords the
only rational basis for limitations of sexual
freedom. We have come to the end of a long
parenthesis on Sex and Sin, a connection not
invented by the early Christians, but exploited
by them to the uttermost, and embodied now
in the spontaneous moral judgments of most
of us. I shall not trouble further with the theo-
logical view that in sex as such there is some-
thing wicked which can only be eliminated by
the combination of marriage with the desire
for offspring. The subject we have now to con-
sider is the degree of stability in sex relations
demanded by the interests of children. That is


to say, we have to consider the family as a
168


THE FAMILY AT THE PRESENT DAY


reason for stable marriage. This question is
far from simple. It is clear that the gain which
a child derives from being a member of a
family depends upon what the alternative is:
there might be institutions for foundlings so
admirable that they would be preferable to the
great majority of families. We have also to
consider whether any essential part in family
life is played by the father, since it is only on
his account that feminine virtue has been
thought essential to the family. We have to
examine the effect of the family upon the in-
dividual psychology of the child—a subject
dealt with in a somewhat sinister spirit by
Freud. We have to consider the effect of eco-
nomic systems in increasing or diminishing the
importance of the father. We have to ask our-
selves whether we should wish to see the State
taking the place of the father, or possibly even,
as Plato suggested, of both father and mother.
And even supposing that we decide in favour of
both father and mother as affording the best
environment for the child in normal cases, we
still have to consider the very numerous in-
stances in which one or other is unfit for the
responsibility of parenthood, or the two are so


169


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


incompatible that separation is desirable in
the interests of the child.

Among those who are opposed to sexual
freedom on theological grounds, it is cus-
tomary to argue against divorce as being con-
trary to the interests of the children. This
argument, however, when used by the theo-
logically minded, is not a genuine one, as may
be seen from the fact that such persons will
not tolerate either divorce or contraceptives,
even when one parent is syphilitic and the
children are likely to be so also. Cases of this
sort show that the appeal with a sob in the
voice to the interests of little children, when
pushed to an extreme, is only an excuse for
cruelty. The whole question of the connection
of marriage with the interests of children needs
to be considered without prejudice, and with
the realization that the answer is not obvious
from the start. At this point, a few words of
recapitulation are desirable.

The family is a prehuman institution, whose
biological justification is that the help of the
father during pregnancy and lactation tends
to the survival of the young. But as we saw
in the case of the Trobriand Islanders, and as
we may Safely infer in the case of the anthro-


170


THE FAMILY AT THE PRESENT DAY


poid apes, this help, under primitive conditions,
is not given for quite the same reasons which
actuate a father in a civilized community. The
primitive father does not know that the child
has any biological connection with himself; the
child is the offspring of the female whom he
loves. This fact he knows, since he has seen the
child born, and it is this fact that produces the
instinctive tie between him and the child. At
this stage, he sees no biological importance in
safeguarding his wife’s virtue, although no
doubt he will feel instinctive jealousy if her in-
fidelity is thrust upon his notice. At this stage,
also, he has no sense of property in the child.
The child is the property of his wife and his
wife’s brother, but his own relation with the
child is merely one of affection.

‘With the development of intelligence, how-
ever, man is bound sooner or later to eat of the
tree of the knowledge of good and evil. He be-
comes aware that the child springs from his
seed, and he must therefore make sure of his
wife’s virtue. The wife and the child become
his property, and at a certain level of economic
development they may be very valuable prop-
erty. He brings religion to bear, to cause his
wife and children to have a sense of duty


171


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


towards him. With children this is especially
important, for although he is stronger than
they are when they are young, the time will
come when he will be decrepit, while they
will be in the vigour of manhood. At this stage,
it is vitally necessary to his happiness that
they should reverence him. The Commandment
on the subject is deceitfully phrased. It should
run: “Honour thy father and thy mother that
their days may be long in the land.” The horror
of parricide which one finds in early civilization
shows how great was the temptation to be
overcome; for a crime which we cannot
imagine ourselves committing, such as can-
nibalism for example, fails to inspire us with
any genuine horror.

It was the economic conditions of early
pastoral and agricultural communities that
brought the family to its fullest fruition. Slave
labour was, for most people, unavailable, and
therefore the easiest way to acquire labourers
was to breed them. In order to make sure that
they should work for their father, it was neces-
sary that the institution of the family should
be sanctified by the whole weight of religion
and morals. Gradually primogeniture extended
family unity to collateral branches, and en-


172


THE FAMILY AT THE PRESENT DAY


hanced the power of the head of the family.
Kingship and aristocracy depend essentially
upon this order of ideas, and even divinity,
since Zeus was the father of gods and men.
Up to this point, the growth of civilization
had increased the strength of the family.
From this point onward, however, an opposite
movement has taken place, until the family in
the Western World has become a mere shadow
of what it was. The causes which brought
about the decay of the family were partly eco-
nomic and partly cultural. In its fullest de-
velopment, it was never very suitable either to
urban populations or to seafaring people. Com-
merce has been in all ages except ours the
chief cause of culture, since it has brought men
into relations with customs other than their
own, and has thus emancipated them from
tribal prejudice. Accordingly we find, among
seafaring Greeks, much less slavery to the
family than among their contemporaries.
Other examples of the emancipating influence
of the sea are to be found in Venice, in Hol-
land, and in Elizabethan England. This, how-
ever, is beside the point. The only point which
concerns us is that when one member of a
family went on a long voyage while the rest


173


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


stayed at home, he was inevitably emancipated
from family control, and the family was pro-
portionately weakened. The influx of rural
populations into the towns, which is char-
acteristic of all periods of rising civilization,
had the same kind of effect as marine com-
merce in weakening the family. Another in-
fluence, perhaps even more important where
the lower strata of society were concerned, was
slavery. The master had little respect for the
family relations of his slaves. He could part
husbands and wives whenever he felt so dis-
posed, and he could, of course, himself have
intercourse with any female slave who pleased
him. These influences, it is true, did not weaken
the aristocratic family, which was kept co-
herent by the desire for prestige, and success
in the Montague-and-Capulet brawls which
characterized ancient city life as much as the
city life of Italy in the latter Middle Ages and
the Renaissance. Aristocracy, however, lost its
importance during the first century of the
Roman Empire, and Christianity, which ulti-
mately conquered, had been at first a religion
of slaves and proletarians. The previous weak-
ening of the family in those social classes no
doubt accounts for the fact that early Chris-


174


THE FAMILY AT THE PRESENT DAY


tianity was somewhat hostile to it, and formu-
lated an ethic in which the place of the family
was much less than in any previous ethic, ex-
cept that of Buddhism. In the ethic of Chris-
tianity, it is the relation of the soul to God
that is important, not the relation of man to
his. fellow men.

The case of Buddhism, however, should
warn us against an undue emphasis upon the
purely economic causation of religions. I do
not know enough of the condition of India at
the time when Buddhism spread to be able to
assign economic causes for its emphasis upon
the individual soul, and I am rather doubtful
whether such causes existed. Throughout the
time when Buddhism flourished in India, it
appears to have been primarily a religion for
princes, and it might have been expected that
ideas connected with the family would have
had a stronger hold upon them than upon any
other class. Nevertheless, contempt of this
world and the search for salvation became
common, with the result that in Buddhist
ethics the family holds a very subordinate
place. Great religious leaders, with the excep-
tion of Mahomet—and Confucius, if he can be
called religious—have in general been very in-


175


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


different to social and political considerations,
and have sought rather to perfect the soul by
meditation, discipline and self-denial. The re-
ligions which have arisen in historical times,
as opposed to those which one finds already in
existence when historical records begin, have
been, on the whole, individualistic, and have
tended to suppose that a man could do his
whole duty in solitude. They have, of course,
insisted that if a man has social relations he
must perform such recognized duties as belong
to those relations, but they have not, as a rule,
regarded the formation of those relations as
in itself a duty. This is especially true of
Christianity, which has always had an am-
bivalent attitude towards the family. “Whoso
loveth father or mother more than me is not
worthy of me,” we read in the gospels, and
this means, in effect, that a man should do
what he thinks right, even if his parents think
it wrong—a view to which an ancient Roman
or an old-fashioned Chinese would not sub-
scribe. This leaven of individualism in Chris-
tianity has worked slowly, but has tended grad-
ually to weaken all social relations, especially
among those who were most in earnest. This
effect is less seen in Catholicism than in Prot-


176


THE FAMILY AT THE PRESENT DAY


estantism, for in Protestantism the anarchic
element contained in the principle that we
ought to obey God rather than man came to
the fore. To obey God means, in practice, to
obey one’s conscience, and men’s consciences
may differ. There must, therefore, be occa-
sional conflicts between conscience and law,
in which the true Christian will feel bound to
honour the man who follows his own conscience
rather than the dictates of the law.* In early
civilization the father was God; in Christianity
God is the Father, with the result that the
authority of the merely human parent is
weakened.

The decay of the family in quite recent times
is undoubtedly to be attributed in the main to
the industrial revolution, but it had already
begun before that event, and its beginnings
were inspired by individualistic theory. Young
people asserted the right to marry according
to their own wishes, not according to the com-
mands of their parents. The habit of married
sons living in their father’s house died out. It
became customary for sons to leave home to
earn their living as soon as their education was


* As an example of this, we may note the leniency of Lord Hugh
Cecil to conscientious objectors during the war.


177


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


ended. So long as small children could work
in factories, they remained a source of liveli-
hood to their parents until they died of over-
work, but the Factory Acts put an end to this
form of exploitation, in spite of the protests
of those who lived on it. From being a means
of livelihood, children came to be a financial
burden. At this stage, contraceptives became
known, and the fall in the birth rate began.
There is much to be said for the view that the
average man in all ages has had as many chil-
dren as it paid him to have, no more and no
less. At any rate, this seems to be true of Aus-
tralian aborigines, Lancashire cotton opera-
tives, and British peers. I do not pretend that
this view can be maintained with theoretical
exactness, but it is not so far from the truth as
one might be inclined to suppose.

The position of the family in modern times
has been weakened even in its last stronghold
by the action of the State. In its great days,
the family consisted of an elderly patriarch, a
large number of grown-up sons, their wives
and their children—perhaps their children’s
children—all living together in one house, all
cooperating as one economic unit, all combined
against the outer world as strictly as the citi-


178


THE FAMILY AT THE PRESENT DAY


zens of a militaristic modern nation. Nowadays
the family is reduced to the father and mother
and their younger children, but even young
children, by the decree of the State, spend most
of their time at school, and learn there what
the State thinks good for them, not what their
parents desire. (To this, however, religion is a
partial exception.) So far from having power
of life and death over his children, as the
Roman father had, the British father is liable
to be prosecuted for cruelty if he treats his
child as most fathers a hundred years ago
would have thought essential for a moral up-
bringing. The State provides medical and
dental care, and feeds the child if the
parents are destitute. The functions of the
father are thus reduced to a minimum, since
most of them have been taken over by the
State. With advancing civilization, this is in-
evitable. In a primitive state of affairs, the
father was necessary, as he is among birds
and anthropoid apes, for economic reasons, and
also to protect the young and their mother
from violence. The latter function was long
ago taken over by the State. A child whose
father is dead is no more likely to be murdered
than one whose father is living. The economic |


179


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


function of the father can be performed, in the
well-to-do classes, more efficiently if he is dead
than if he is living, since he can leave his money
to his children, without having to use up part
of it on his own maintenance. Among those
who depend upon earned money, the father is
still economically useful, but so far as wage-
earners are concerned, this utility is being con-
tinually diminished by the humanitarian senti-
ment of the community, which insists that the
child should receive a certain minimum of care,
even if he has no father to pay for it. It is in
the middle classes that the father is at present
of most importance, for so long as he lives and
earns a good income, he can give his children
those advantages in the way of an expensive
education which will enable them in their turn
to preserve their social and economic status,
whereas if he dies while the children are still
young, there is a considerable chance that they
may sink in the social scale. The precarious-
ness of this state of affairs is, however, much
diminished by the custom of life insurance, by
means of which, even in the professional
classes, a prudent father can do much to di-
minish his own utility.

In the modern world, the great majority of


180


THE FAMILY AT THE PRESENT DAY


fathers are too hard-worked to see much of
their own children. In the morning they are
too busy getting off to work to have time for
conversation; in the evening, when they get
home, the children are (or ought to be) in bed.
One hears stories of children who only know of
their father as “that man who comes for the
week-end.” In the serious business of caring
for the child, fathers can seldom participate; in
fact, this duty is shared between mothers and
education authorities. It is true that the father
often has a strong affection for his children,
in spite of the small amount of time that he can
spend with them. On any Sunday, in any of the
poorer quarters of London, large numbers of
fathers may be seen with their young children,
evidently rejoicing in the brief opportunity of
getting to know them. But whatever may be
the case from the father’s point of view, from
that of the child this is a play relation, with-
out serious importance.

In the upper and professional classes, the
custom is to leave children to nurses while they
are young, and then send them to boarding-
school. The mother chooses the nurse, and the
father chooses the school, so that they pre-
serve intact their sense of power over their off-


181


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


spring, which working-class parents are not
allowed to do. But so far as intimate contact is
concerned, there is less, as a rule, between
mother and child among the well-to-do than
among wage-earners. The father has a play
relation with his children in holidays, but has
no more part in their real education than a
working-class father. He has, of course, eco-
nomic responsibility and the power of deciding
where they shall be educated, but his personal
contact with them is not usually of a very
serious kind.

When a child reaches adolescence, there is
very apt to be a conflict between parents and
child, since the latter considers himself to be
by now quite capable of managing his own
affairs, while the former are filled with parental
solicitude, which is often a disguise for love
of power. Parents consider, usually, that the
various moral problems which arise in adoles-
cence are peculiarly their province. The opin-
ions they express, however, are so dogmatic
that the young seldom confide in them, and
usually go their own way in secret. It cannot
be said, therefore, that at its stage most
parents are much use.

So far we have been considering only the


182


THE FAMILY AT THE PRESENT DAY


weakness of the modern family. We must now
consider in what respects it is still strong.
The family is important at the present day
more through the emotions with which it pro-
vides parents than for any other reason. Pa-
rental emotions in men as well as in women are
perhaps more important than any others, in
their power of influencing action. Both men
and women who have children as a rule regu-
late their lives largely with reference to them,
and children cause perfectly ordinary men and
women to act unselfishly in certain ways, of
which perhaps life insurance is the most defi-
nite and measurable. The economic man of
a hundred years ago was never provided in the
text-books with children, though undoubtedly
he had them in the imagination of the econo-
mists, who, however, took it for granted that
the general competition which they postulated
did not exist between fathers and sons. Clearly,
the psychology of life insurance lies wholly
outside the cycle of motives dealt with in the
classical political economy. Yet that political
economy was not psychologically autonomous,
since the desire for property is very intimately
bound up with parental feelings. Rivers went
so far as to suggest that all private property


183


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


is derivative from family feeling. He mentions
certain birds which have private property in
land during the breeding season, but at no
other time. I think most men can testify that
they become far more acquisitive when they
have children than they were before. This ef-
fect is one which is, in the popular sense, in-
stinctive, that is to say, it is spontaneous, and
springs from subconscious sources. I think
that in this respect the family has been of in-
calculable importance to the economic develop-
ment of mankind, and is still a dominating
factor among those who are sufficiently pros-
perous to have a chance to save money.

There is apt to be on this point a curious
misunderstanding between fathers and chil-
dren. A man who works hard in business will
tell his idle son that he has slaved all his life
solely for the benefit of his children. The son,
on the contrary, would much rather have a
small cheque and a little kindness now, than a
fortune when his father dies. The son notices,
moreover, quite correctly, that his father goes
to the city from force of habit and not the least
from parental affection. The son is therefore as
sure that his father is a humbug as the father is
that his son is a wastrel. The son, however, is


184


THE FAMILY AT THE PRESENT DAY


unjust. He sees his father in middle age, when
all his habits are formed, and he does not real-
ize the obscure, unconscious forces which led to
the formation of those habits. The father, per-
haps, may have suffered from poverty in his
youth, and when his first child was born his
instinct may have made him swear that no
child of his should endure what he had had to
suffer. Such a resolution is important and vital,
and therefore need never be repeated in con-
sciousness, since without the need of repeti-
tion it dominates conduct ever after. This is
one way in which the family is still a very pow-
erful force.

From the point of view of the young child,
the important thing about parents is that from
them the child gets an affection not given to
any one else except his brothers and sisters.
This is partly good and partly bad. I propose to
consider the psychological effects of the family
upon children in the next chapter. I shall there-
fore say no more about it at the present
moment than that it is clearly a very important
element in character formation, and that chil-
dren brought up away from parents may be
expected to differ considerably, whether for
better or for worse, from normal children.


185


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


In an aristocratic society, or indeed in any
society permitting of personal eminence, the
family is, in regard to certain important in-
dividuals, a mark connected with historical
continuity. Observation seems to show that
people whose name is Darwin do better work
in science than they would do if their name
had been changed to Snooks in infancy. I con-
ceive that if surnames descended through the
female instead of the male, effects of this kind
would be exactly as strong as they are now. It
is quite impossible to apportion the shares of
heredity and environment respectively in such
cases, but I am quite convinced that family
tradition plays a very considerable part in the
phenomena which Galton and his disciples at-
tribute to heredity. One might give as an exam-
ple of the influence of family tradition the rea-
son said to have caused Samuel Butler to invent
his doctrine of unconscious memory and to ad-
vocate a neo-Lamarckian theory of heredity.
The reason was that for family reasons he felt
it necessary to disagree with Charles Darwin.
His grandfather (it seems) quarrelled with
Darwin’s grandfather, his father with his
father, so he must quarrel with him. Thus
Shaw’s “Methuselah” is what it is, owing to


186


THE FAMILY AT THE PRESENT DAY


the fact that Darwin and Butler had ill-tem-
pered grandfathers.

Perhaps the greatest importance of the fam-
ily, in these days of contraceptives, is that it
preserves the habit of having children. If a
man were going to have no property in his
child, and no opportunity of affectionate rela-
tions with it, he would see little point in beget-
ting it. It would, of course, with a slight
change in our economic institutions, be possible
to have families consisting of mothers only, but
it is not such families that I am considering at
the present time, since they afford no motives
for sexual virtue, and it is the family as a
reason for stable marriage that concerns us in
the present work. It may be—and indeed I
think it far from improbable—that the father
will be completely eliminated before long, ex-
cept among the rich (supposing the rich to be
not abolished by socialism). In that case,
women will share their children with the State,
not with an individual father. They will have
such number of children as they desire, and
the fathers will have no responsibility. Indeed,
if the mothers are at all of a promiscuous dis-
position, fatherhood may be impossible to de-
termine, But if this comes about, it will make


187


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


a profound change in the psychology and ac-
tivities of men, far more profound, I believe,
than most people would suppose. Whether the
effect upon men would be good or bad, I do
not venture to say. It would eliminate from
their lives the only emotion equal in im-
portance to sex love. It would make sex love
itself more trivial. It would make it far more
difficult to take an interest in anything after
one’s own death. It would make men less active
and probably cause them to retire earlier from
work. It would diminish their interest in his-
tory and their sense of the continuity of his-
torical tradition. At the same time it would
eliminate the most fierce and savage passion
to which civilized men are liable, namely, the
fury which is felt in defending wives and chil-
dren from attacks by coloured populations. I
think it would make men less prone to war,
and probably less acquisitive. To strike a bal-
ance between good and bad effects is scarcely
possible, but it is evident that the effects would
be profound and far-reaching. The patriarchal
family, therefore, is still important, although it
is doubtful how long it will remain so.


188


CHAPTER XIV


THE FAMILY IN
INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


WISH to consider in this chapter how the

character of the individual is affected by
family relations. This subject is threefold:
there is the effect upon children, the effect upon
the mother, and the effect upon the father. It
is, of course, difficult to disentangle these three,
since the family is a closely knit unit, and any-
thing that affects the parents affects also their
influence upon the children. Nevertheless, I
shall attempt to divide the discussion into these
three heads, and it is natural to begin with the
children, since everybody is a child in the fam-
ily before being a parent.

If we are to believe Freud, the emotions of
a young child towards the other members of
his family have a somewhat desperate char-
acter. A boy hates his father, whom he regards
as a sexual rival. He feels, in regard to his
mother, emotions which are viewed with the
utmost abhorrence by traditional morality. He


189


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


hates his brothers and sisters because they
absorb some part of the parental attention, of
which he would like the whole to be concen-
trated upon himself. In later life, the effects of
these turbulent passions are of the most diverse
and terrible kinds, varying from homosexuality
at best to mania at worst.

This Freudian doctrine has caused less hor-
ror than.one might have expected. It is true
that professors have been dismissed from their
posts for believing it, and that the British
police deported one of the best men of his gen-
eration * for acting upon it. But such is the
influence of Christian asceticism that people
have been more shocked by Freud’s insistence
upon sex than by his picture of infantile
hatreds. We, however, must try to make up our
minds without prejudice as to the truth or
falsehood of Freud’s opinions concerning the
passions of children. I will confess to begin
with that a considerable experience of young
children during recent years has led me to the
view that there is much more truth in Freud’s
theories than I had formerly supposed. Never-
theless, I still think that they represent only
one side of the truth, and a side which can

* Homer Lane.


190


THE FAMILY IN INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


easily, with a little good sense on the part of
parents, be rendered very unimportant.

Let us begin with the Oedipus complex. In-
fantile sexuality is undoubtedly stronger than
anybody thought before Freud. I think, even,
that heterosexuality is stronger in early child-
hood than one would gather from Freud’s writ-
ings. It is not difficult for an unwise mother
quite unintentionally to centre the hetero-
sexual feelings of a young son upon herself,
and it is true that, if this is done, the evil con-
sequences pointed out by Freud will probably
ensue. This is, however, much less likely to
occur if the mother’s sexual life is satisfying
to her, for in that case she will not look to her
child for a type of emotional satisfaction which
ought to be sought only from adults. The pa-
rental impulse in its purity is an impulse to
care for the young, not to demand affection
from them, and if a woman is happy in her
sexual life she will abstain spontaneously from
all improper demands for emotional response
from her child. For this reason, a happy woman
is likely to be a better mother than an unhappy
one. No woman, however, can make sure of
being always happy, and at times of unhappi-
ness a certain amount of self-control may be


191


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


necessary to avoid demanding too much of
children. This degree of self-control is not very
difficult to practise, but in former times the
need for it was not realized, and a mother was
thought to be behaving quite properly in lav-
ishing continual caresses upon her children.
The heterosexual emotions of young children
can find a natural, wholesome and innocent
outlet with other children; in this form they
are a part of play, and like all play, they afford
a preparation for adult activities. After the age
of three or four, a child needs, for his or her
emotional development, the company of other
children of both sexes, not only brothers and
sisters, who are necessarily older or younger,
but contemporaries. The modern small family,
unadulterated, is too stuffy and confined for
healthy development during the early years,
but that does not mean that it is undesirable
as an ingredient in the childish environment.

It is not only mothers who are liable to
arouse in the young child undesirable kinds of
affection. Servant girls and nurses and, in later
years, school teachers, are quite as dangerous,
indeed even more so, since they are, as a rule,
sexually starved. Education authorities are of
opinion that those who have to deal with the


192


THE FAMILY IN INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


young ought always to be unhappy spinsters.
This view shows gross psychological ig-
norance, and could not be entertained by any
one who had watched closely the emotional
development of young children.

Jealousy of brothers and sisters is very com-
mon in families, and is sometimes a cause, in
later life, of homicidal mania as well as of less
serious nervous disorders. Except in mild
forms, it is not at all difficult to prevent, pro-
vided parents and others who have charge of
the young take a little trouble to control their
own behaviour. There must, of course, be no
favouritism—the most meticulous justice must
be observed in regard to toys and treats and
attention. At the birth of a new brother or sis-
ter, pains must be taken to prevent the others
from imagining that they have become less im-
portant to their parents than they were. Wher-
ever serious cases of jealousy occur, it will be
found, I think, that these simple precepts have
been disregarded.

‘We arrive, therefore, at certain conditions
which must be fulfilled if the psychological ef-
fect of family life upon children is to be good.
The parents, and especially the mother, must
if possible not be unhappy in their sexual life.


193


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


Both parents must avoid that kind of emo-
tional relation with their children that calls
for a response not suitable in infancy. There
must be no kind of preference as between
brothers and sisters, but all must be treated
with a completely impartial justice. And after
the age of three or four the home should not
be the sole environment of the child, but a
considerable part of its day should be spent
in the society of contemporaries. Given these
conditions, the bad effects feared by Freud are,
I think, very unlikely to occur.

On the other hand, parental affection, when
it is of the right sort, undoubtedly furthers a
child’s development. Children whose mothers
do not feel a warm affection for them are apt
to be thin and nervous, and not infrequently
they become kleptomaniacs. The affection of
parents makes infants feel safe in this dan-
gerous world, and gives them boldness in ex-
perimentation and in exploration of their en-
vironment. It is necessary to a child’s mental
life to feel himself the object of warm affection,
for he is instinctively aware of his helplessness,
and of his need of a protection which only af-
fection can ensure. If a child is to grow up
happy, expansive, and fearless, he needs a cer-


194


THE FAMILY IN INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


tain warmth in his environment which it is
difficult to get except through parental af-
fection.

There is another service which a wise father
and mother can perform for their children,
although until quite recent times they hardly
ever did so. This is, that they can introduce
them to the facts of sex and parenthood in the
best possible way. If children learn of sex as a
relation between their parents to which they
owe their own existence, they learn of it in its
best form and in connection with its biological
purpose. In old days, they practically always
learned of it first as the subject-of ribald jokes
and as a source of pleasures considered dis-
graceful. This first initiation, by means of
secret indecent talk, usually made an indelible
impression, so that it was ever after impossible
to have a decent attitude on any subject con-
nected with sex.

To decide whether family life is on the whole
desirable or undesirable, we must, of course,
consider what are the only practical alterna-
tives. They seem to be two: first, the matri-
archal family, and second, public institutions
such as orphan asylums. To cause either of
these to become the rule would require con-


195


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


siderable economic changes. We may suppose
them carried out, and consider the effect upon
the psychology of children.

To begin with the matriarchal family. Here
one supposes that the children will know only
one parent, that a woman will have a child
when she feels that she wants one, but without
expecting the father to take any particular in-
terest in it, and not necessarily choosing the
same father for different children. Assuming
the economic arrangements to be satisfactory,
would children suffer much by such a system?
What, in effect, is the psychological use of a
father to his children? I think perhaps the most
important use lies in the point last mentioned,
namely, the connecting of sex with married
love and procreation. There is also, after the
first years of infancy, a very definite gain in
being brought into contact with a masculine |
as well as a feminine outlook on life. To boys
especially, this is intellectually important. At
the same time, I cannot see that the gain is
very profound. Children whose fathers have
died while they were infants do not, so far as
I know, turn out on the average any worse
than other children. No doubt the ideal father
is better than none, but many fathers are so


196


THE FAMILY IN INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


far from ideal that their non-existence might
be a positive advantage to children.

What has just been said depends upon the
supposition of a convention quite different
from that obtaining at present. Where a con-
vention exists, children suffer through its be-
ing infringed, since there is hardly anything
so painful to a child as the feeling of being in
any way odd. This consideration applies to di-
vorce in our present society. A child who has
been used to two parents and has become at-
tached to them both, finds a divorce between
them destructive of his whole sense of security.
Indeed, he is likely in these circumstances to
develop phobias and other nervous disorders.
When once a child has become attached to both
his parents, they take a very grave responsibil-
ity if they separate. I think, therefore, that a so-
ciety in which fathers have no place would be
better for children than one in which divorce
is frequent though still regarded as excep-
tional.

I do not see much to be said for Plato’s pro-
posal to separate children from their mothers
as well as from their fathers. For the reasons
already mentioned, I think that parental af-
fection is essential to a child’s development,


197


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


and that while it might suffice to receive this
affection only from one parent, it would cer-
tainly be very regrettable if it were not re-
ceived from either. From the point of view of
sexual morals, which is that with which we
are primarily concerned, the important ques-
tion is the utility of the father. As to this,
while it is very difficult to say anything posi-
tively, the conclusion seems to be that in for-
tunate cases he has a certain limited useful-
ness, while in unfortunate cases he may easily,
by tyranny and ill-temper and a quarrelsome
disposition, do far more harm than good. The
case for fathers, from the point of view of
children’s psychology, is not therefore a very
strong one.

The importance of the family, as it exists
at present, in the psychology of mothers is
very difficult to estimate. I think that during
pregnancy and lactation a woman has, as a
rule, a certain instinctive tendency to desire a
man’s protection—a feeling, no doubt, in-
herited from the anthropoid apes. Probably a
woman who, in our present rather harsh world,
has to dispense with this protection tends to
become somewhat unduly combative and self-
assertive. These feelings, however, are only in


198


THE FAMILY IN INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


part instinctive. They would be greatly weak-
ened, and in some cases wholly abolished, if
the State gave adequate care to expectant and
nursing mothers and to young children. I think
perhaps the chief harm that would be done to
women by abolition of the father’s place in the
home would be the diminution in the intimacy
and seriousness of their relations with the male
sex. Human beings are so constructed that
each sex has much to learn from the other,
but mere sex relations, even when they are
passionate, do not suffice for these lessons. Co-
operation in the serious business of rearing
children, and companionship through the long
years involved, bring about a relation more
important and more enriching to both parties
than any that would exist if men had no re-
sponsibility for their children. And I do not
think that mothers who live in a purely femi-
nine atmosphere, or whose contacts with men
are trivial, will, except in a minority of cases,
be quite so good for their children from the
point of view of emotional education as those
who are happily married and cooperating at
each stage with their husbands. One must,
however, in a great many cases set other con-
siderations over against these. If a woman is


199


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


actively unhappy in her marriage—and this,
after all, is by no means an uncommon occur-
rence—her unhappiness makes it very difficult
for her to have the right kind of emotional
poise in dealing with her children. In such
cases she could undoubtedly be a better mother
if she were quit of the father. We are thus
led to the entirely trivial conclusion that happy
marriages are good, while unhappy ones are
bad.

Much the most important question in rela-
tion to the family in individual psychology is
the effect upon the father. We have already re-
peatedly had occasion to point out the sig-
nificance of paternity and its attendant pas-
sions. We have seen what part it played in
early history in connection with the growth of
the patriarchal family and the subjection of
women, and we can judge from this what a
powerful passion paternal feeling must be. For
reasons not easy to fathom, it is not nearly so
strong in highly civilized communities as it is
elsewhere. Upper-class Romans in the time of
the Empire apparently ceased to feel it, and
many intellectualized men in our own day are
nearly or quite destitute of it. Nevertheless, it
is still felt by the great majority of men, even


200


THE FAMILY IN INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


in the most civilized communities. It is for this
reason, rather than for the sake of sex, that
men marry, for it is not difficult to obtain sex-
ual satisfaction without marriage. There is a
theory that the desire for children is com-
moner among women than among men, but
my own impression, for what it is worth, is ex-
actly the contrary. In a very large number of
modern marriages, the children are a conces-
sion on the part of the woman to the man’s
desires. A woman, after all, has to face labour
and pain and possible loss of beauty in order
to bring a child into the world, whereas a man
has no such grounds for anxiety. A man’s
reasons for wishing to limit his family are
generally economic; these reasons operate
equally with the woman, but she has her own
special reasons as well. The strength of the
desire men feel for children is evident when one
considers the loss of material comfort that
professional men deliberately incur when they
undertake to educate a family in the expensive
manner that their class considers necessary.
Would men beget children if they were not
going to enjoy the rights which paternity con-
fers at present? Some people would say that
if they were not going to have responsibilities


201


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


they would beget them recklessly. I do not be-
lieve this. A man who desires a child desires the
responsibilities which it entails. And in these
days of contraceptives a man will not often
have a child as a mere incident in his pursuit
of pleasure. Of course, whatever the state of
the law might be, it would always be open to
a man and woman to live in a permanent union
in which the man could enjoy something of
what now comes through fatherhood; but if
law and custom were adapted to the view that
children belong to the mother alone, women
would feel that anything approximating to
marriage as we know it now was an infraction
of their independence, and involved a needless
loss of that complete ownership over their
children which they would otherwise enjoy.
We must therefore expect that men would
not often succeed in persuading women to
concede rights legally guaranteed to them.
Something was said in the last chapter as to
the effect of such a system upon male psy-
chology. It would, I believe, immensely di-
minish the seriousness of men’s relations to
women, making them more and more a matter
of mere pleasure, not an intimate union of heart
and mind and body. It would tend towards a


202


THE FAMILY IN INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


certain triviality in all personal relations, so
that a man’s serious emotions would be con-
cerned with his career, his country, or some
quite impersonal subject. All this, however, is
expressed somewhat too generally, for men dif-
fer profoundly one from another, and what to
one might be a grave deprivation might to an-
other be entirely satisfactory. My belief is,
though I put it forward with some hesitation,
that the elimination of paternity as a recog-
nized social relation would tend to make men’s
emotional life trivial and thin, causing in the
end a slowly: growing boredom and despair, in
which procreation would gradually die out,
leaving the human race to be replenished by
stocks that had preserved the older convention.
The boredom and triviality would, I think, be
unavoidable. The diminution of population
could, of course, be guarded against by paying
women a sufficient sum for taking up the pro-
fession of motherhood. This will presumably
be done before long, if militarism remains as
strong as it is at present. But this line of
thought belongs with the consideration of the
population question, which will be dealt with
in a later chapter. I shall not therefore at pres-
ent pursue it further.


203


CHAPTER XV


THE FAMILY
AND THE STATE


HE family, though it has a biological ori-

gin, is in civilized communities a product

of legal enactment. Marriage is regulated by
law, and the rights of parents over their chil-
dren are minutely determined. Where there is
no marriage the father has no rights, and the
child belongs exclusively to the mother. But
although the law means to uphold the family, it
has in modern times increasingly intervened
between parents and children, and is gradually
becoming, against the wish and intention of
law-makers, one of the chief engines for the
break-up of the family system. This has hap-
pened through the fact that bad parents cannot
be relied upon to take as much care of their
children as the general feeling of the com-
munity considers necessary. And not only bad
parents, but such as are very poor, require the
intervention of the State to secure their chil-
dren from disaster. In the early nineteenth cen-


204


THE FAMILY AND THE STATE


tury, the proposal to interfere with the labour
of children in factories was fiercely resisted on
the ground that it would weaken parental re-
sponsibility. Although the English law did not,
like that of ancient Rome, allow parents to kill
their children quickly and painlessly, it did per-
mit.them to drain their children of life by a
slow agony of toil. This sacred right was de-
fended by parents, employers, and economists.
Nevertheless, the moral sense of the com-
munity was revolted by such abstract pedantry,
and the Factory Acts were passed. The next
step was a more important one, namely, the
inauguration of compulsory education. This is
a really serious interference with the rights of
parents. For a large number of hours on all
days except holidays, the children have to be
away from home, learning things that the
State considers necessary for them to know,
and what the parents think about the matter
is legally irrelevant. Through the schools, the
control of the State over the lives of children
is being gradually extended. Their health is
cared for, even if their parents are Christian
Scientists. If they are mentally deficient, they
are sent to special schools. If they are neces-


205


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


sitous, they may be fed. Boots may be supplied
if the parents cannot afford them. If the chil-
dren arrive at school showing signs of parental
ill treatment, the parents are likely to suffer
penal consequences. In old days, parents had a
right to the earnings of their children as long
as their children were under age; now, al-
though it may be difficult in practice for chil-
dren to withhold their earnings, they have the
right to do so, and this right can be enforced
when circumstances arise which make it im-
portant. One of the few rights remaining to
parents in the wage-earning class is that of
having their children taught any brand of su-
perstition that may be shared by a large num-
ber of parents in the same neighbourhood. And
even this right has been taken away from
parents in many countries.

To this process of substituting the State for
the father no clear limit can be set. It is the
functions of the father rather than of the
mother that the State has taken over, since it
performs for the child such services as the
father would otherwise have to pay for. In the
upper and middle classes this process has
hardly taken place at all, and consequently the
father remains more important, and the family


206


THE FAMILY AND THE STATE


more stable, among the well-to-do than among
wage-earners. Where socialism is taken seri-
ously, as in Soviet Russia, the abolition or com-
plete transformation of educational institutions
previously intended for the children of the
rich is recognized as an important and vitally
necessary undertaking. It is difficult to imagine
this taking place in England. I have seen
prominent English Socialists foam at the
mouth at the suggestion that all children
ought to go to elementary schools. “What?
My children associate with the children of the
slums? Never!” they exclaim. Oddly enough,
they fail to realize how profoundly the divi-
sion between classes is bound up with the edu-
cational system.

The present tendency in all European coun-
tries is towards a continually increasing inter-
ference of the State with the power and func-
tions of the father in the wage-earning class,
without any corresponding interference (except
in Russia) in other classes. The effect of this is
to produce two rather different kinds of out-
look among the rich and the poor respectively,
with a weakening of the family where the poor
are concerned, and no corresponding change as


207


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


regards the rich. It may, I think, be assumed
that humanitarian sentiment towards children,
which has caused past interventions of the
State, will continue, and will cause more and
more interventions. The fact that an immense
percentage of children in the poor parts of
London and still more in the industrial cities
of the north suffer from rickets, for example,
is one which calls for public action. The parents
cannot deal with the evil, however much they
may wish to do so, since it requires conditions
of diet and fresh air and light which they are
not in a position to provide. It is wasteful as
well as cruel to allow children to be physically
ruined during the first years of their lives, and
as hygiene and diet come to be better under-
stood, there will be an increasing demand that
children should not be made to suffer unneces-
sary damage. It is true, of course, that there
is a vehement political resistance to all such
suggestions. The well-to-do in every London
borough band themselves together to keep
down the rates, that is to say, to ensure that as
little as possible shall be done to alleviate ill-
ness and misery among the poor. When local
authorities, as in Poplar, take really effective
measures to diminish infant mortality, they are


208


THE FAMILY AND THE STATE


put in prison.* Nevertheless, this resistance of
the rich is continually being overcome, and
the health of the poor is continually being im-
proved. We may, therefore, confidently expect
that the functions of the State in regard to the
care of wage-earners’ children will be extended
rather than curtailed in the near future, with a
corresponding diminution in the functions of
- fathers. The biological purpose of the father
is to protect children during their years of help-
lessness, and when this biological function is
taken over by the State, the father loses his
raison d’étre. We must, therefore, in capitalistic
communities expect an increasing division of |
society into two castes, the rich preserving the
family in its old form, and the poor looking
more and more to the State to perform the
economic functions traditionally belonging to
the father.

More radical transformations of the family
have been envisaged in Soviet Russia, but in
view of the fact that eighty per cent of the pop-
ulation consists of peasants, among whom the
family is still as strong as it was in Western


*In 1923 the infant death rate was 60 in Poplar and 70 in Ken-
sington; in 1926, after the restoration of legality in Poplar had
done its beneficent work, it was 71 in Poplar and 61 in Kensington.


209


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


Europe in the Middle Ages, the theories of
Communists are likely to affect only a com-
paratively small urban section. We may, there-
fore, get in Russia the exact antithesis to the
situation we have been considering in capital-
istic countries, namely an upper class which
dispenses with the family, and a lower class
which retains it.

There is another powerful force which is
working in the direction of the elimination of
the father, and this is the desire of women for
economic independence. The women who have
been most politically vocal hitherto have been
unmarried women, but this state of affairs is
likely to be temporary. The wrongs of married
women in England are at the moment much
more serious than those of unmarried women.
The teacher who marries is treated in just the
same way as the teacher who lives in open sin.
Even public maternity doctors, if they are
women, have to be unmarried. The motive for
all this is not that married women are supposed
to be unfit for the work, nor is it that there is
any legal barrier to their employment; on the
contrary, a law was passed not many years ago
explicitly laying it down that no woman should
suffer any disability through marriage. The

210


THE FAMILY AND THE STATE


whole motive for the non-employment of mar-
ried women is a masculine desire to preserve
economic power over them. It is not to be sup-
posed that women will submit indefinitely to
such tyranny. It is, of course, a little difficult
to find a party to take up their cause, since the
Conservatives love the home, and the Labour
Party loves the working man. Nevertheless,
now that women are a majority of the electo-
rate, it is not to be supposed that they will sub-
mit for ever to being kept in the background.
Their claims, if recognized, are likely to have
a profound effect upon the family. There are
two different ways in which married women
might acquire economic independence. One is
that of remaining employed in the kind of work
that they were engaged upon before marriage.
This involves giving their children over to the
care of others, and would lead to a very great
extension of créches and nursery schools, the
logical consequence of which would be the
elimination of the mother as well as of the
father from all importance in the child’s psy-
chology. The other method would be that
women with young children should receive a
wage from the State on condition of devoting
themselves to the care of their children. This


air


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


method, alone, would, of course, not be ade-
quate, and would need to be supplemented by
provisions enabling women to return to or-
dinary work when their children ceased to be
quite young. But it would have the advantage
of enabling women to care for their children
themselves without degrading dependence
upon an individual man. And it would recog-
nize, what in these days is more and more the
case, that having a child, which was formerly
a mere consequence of sexual gratification,
is now a task deliberately undertaken, which,
since it redounds to the advantage of the State
rather than of the parents, should be paid for
by the State, instead of entailing a grave bur-
den upon the father and mother. This last point
is being recognized in the advocacy of family
allowances, but it is not yet recognized that
the payment for children should be made to the
mother alone. I think we may assume, how-
ever, that working-class feminism will grow to
the point where this is recognized, and em-
bodied in the law.

Assuming such a law to have been passed, its
effects upon family morals will depend upon
how it has been drafted. The law may be so
drafted that a woman receives no payment if


212


THE FAMILY AND THE STATE

her child is illegitimate; or again, it might be
decreed that if she can be proved even once
guilty of adultery, the payment should be made
to her husband instead of to her. If such is the
law, it will become the duty of the local police
to visit every married woman and make an in-
quisition into her moral status. The effect
might be most elevating, but I doubt whether
those who were being elevated would alto-
gether enjoy it. I think there would presently
come to be a demand that police interference
should cease, with the corollary that even the
mothers of illegitimate children should receive
the allowance. If that were done, the economic
power of the father in the wage-earning class
would be completely at an end, and the family
would probably cease after a time to be bi-
parental, the father being of no more impor-
tance than among cats and dogs.

There is, however, in these days, on the part
of the individual woman such a horror of the
home that I think most women would very
much prefer to be enabled to continue the work
they were doing before marriage, rather than
to be paid for taking care of their own chil-
dren. There would be a sufficient number of
women willing to leave their own homes in


213


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


order to look after young children in a créche,
because that would be professional work; but
I do not think that most working women, if
the choice were offered them, would be as
happy being paid to look after their own chil-
dren in the home as going out to work to earn
wages at the job on which they were engaged
before marriage. This, however, is purely a
matter of opinion, and I cannot pretend that
I have any conclusive grounds. However that
may be, it seems, if there is any truth in what
we have been saying, that the development of
feminism among married women is likely, in the
not distant future, even within the framework
of capitalist society, to lead to the elimination
of one if not both parents from the care of the
young in the wage-earning class.

The revolt of women against the domina-
tion of men is a movement which. in its purely
political sense, is practically completed, but in
its wider aspects is still in its infancy. Gradu-
ally its remoter effects will work themselves
out. The emotions which women are supposed
to feel are still, as yet, a reflection of the inter-
ests and sentiments of men. You will read in
the works of male novelists that women find
physical pleasure in suckling their young; you


214


THE FAMILY AND THE STATE


can learn by asking any mother of your ac-
quaintance that this is not the case, but until
women had votes no man ever thought of doing
so. Maternal emotions altogether have been so
long slobbered over by men who saw in them
subconsciously the means to their own domina-
tion that a considerable effort is required to
arrive at what women sincerely feel in this re-
spect. Until very recently, all decent women
were supposed to desire children, but to hate
sex. Even now, many men are shocked by
women who frankly state that they do not de-
sire children. Indeed, it is not uncommon for
men to take it upon themselves to deliver hom-
ilies to such women. So long as women were
in subjection, they did not dare to be honest
about their own emotions, but professed those
which were pleasing to the male. We cannot,
therefore, argue from what has been hitherto
supposed to be women’s normal attitude to-
wards children, for we may find that as women
become fully emancipated their emotions turn
out to be, in general, quite different from what
has hitherto been thought. I think that civiliza-
tion, at any rate as it has hitherto existed, tends
greatly to diminish women’s maternal feelings.
It is probable that a high civilization will not


215


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


in future be possible to maintain unless women
are paid such sums for the production of chil-
dren as to make them feel it worth while as
a money-making career. If that were done,
it would, of course, be unnecessary that all
women, or even a majority, should adopt this
profession. It would be one profession among
others, and would have to be undertaken with
professional thoroughness. These, however,
are speculations. The only point in them that
seems fairly certain is that feminism in its later
developments is likely to have a profound in-
fluence in breaking up the patriarchal family,
which represents man’s triumph over woman
in prehistoric times.

The substitution of the State for the father,
so far as it has yet gone in the West, is in the
main a great advance. It has immensely im-
proved the health of the community, and the
general level of education. It has: diminished
cruelty to children, and has made impossible
such sufferings as those of David Copperfield.
It may be expected to continue to raise the gen-
eral level of physical health and intellectual at- |
tainment, especially by preventing the worst
evils resulting from the family system where
it goes wrong. There are, however, very grave


216


THE FAMILY AND THE STATE


dangers in the substitution of the State for the
family. Parents, as a rule, are fond of their
children, and do not regard them merely as
material for political schemes. The State can-
not be expected to have this attitude. The ac-
tual individuals who come in contact with chil-
dren in institutions, for example school teach-
ers, may, if they are not too overworked and
underpaid, retain something of the personal
feeling that parents have. But teachers have
little power; the power belongs to administra-
tors. The administrators never see the children
whose lives they control, and being of an ad-
ministrative type (since otherwise they would
not have obtained the posts they occupy), they
are probably peculiarly apt to regard human
beings, not as ends in themselves, but as ma-
terial for some kind of construction. Moreover,
the administrator invariably likes uniformity.
It is convenient for statistics and pigeonholing,
and if it is the “right” sort of uniformity it
means the existence of a large number of
human beings of the sort that he considers de-
sirable. Children handed over to the mercy of
institutions will therefore tend to be all alike,
while the few who cannot conform to the rec-
ognized pattern will suffer persecution, not


217


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


only from their fellows, but from the authori-
ties. This means that many of those who have
the greatest potentialities will be harried and
tortured until their spirit is broken. It means
that the vast majority who succeed in con-
forming will become very sure of themselves,
very prone to persecution, and very incapable
of listening patiently to any new idea. Above
all, so long as the world remains divided into
competing militaristic states, the substitution
of public bodies for parents in education means
an intensification of what is called patriotism,
i.é., a willingness to indulge in mutual exter-


mination | without : a moment’s hesitation, when-
ever the governments feel so_ inclined. Un-
doubtedly patriotism, so called, is the 1e gravest
danger to which civilization is at present ex-
posed, and anything that increases its virulence
is more to be dreaded than plague, pestilence
and famine. At present young people have a
divided loyalty, on the one hand to their par-
ents, on the other to the State. If it should hap-
pen that their sole loyalty was to the State,
there is grave reason to fear that the world
would become even more bloodthirsty than it
is at present. I think, therefore, that so long as


the problem of internationalism remains un-
218


THE FAMILY AND THE STATE


solved, the increasing share of the State in the
education and care of children has dangers so
grave as to outweigh its undoubted advantages.

If, on the other hand, an international gov-
ernment were established, capable of substi-
tuting law for force in disputes between na-
tions, the situation would be entirely different.
Such a government could decree that national-
ism in its more insane forms should be no part
of the educational curriculum in any country.
It could insist that loyalty to the international
super-State should everywhere be taught, and
that internationalism should be inculcated as
a sentiment in place of the present devotion to
the national flag. In that case, although the
danger of too great uniformity and too severe
a persecution of freaks would still exist, the
danger of promoting war would be eliminated.
Indeed, the control of the super-State over edu-
cation would be a positive safeguard against
war. The conclusion seems to be that the sub-
stitution of the State for the father would be a
gain to civilization if the State were interna-
tional, but that so long as the State is national
and militaristic it represents an increase of the
risk to civilization from war. The family is de-
caying fast, and internationalism is growing


219


slowly. The situation, therefore, is one which |
justifies grave apprehensions. Nevertheless, it
is not hopeless, since internationalism may
grow more quickly in the future than it ha
done in the past. Fortunately, perhaps, we can-
not foretell the future, and we have therefore
the right to hope, if not to expect, that it may
be an improvement upon the present.


CHAPTER XVI


DIVORCE


IVORCE as an institution has been per-

mitted in most ages and countries for cer-
tain causes. It has never been intended to pro-
duce an alternative to the monogamic family,
but merely to mitigate hardships where, for
special reasons, the continuance of a marriage
was felt to be intolerable. The law on the sub-
ject has been extraordinarily different in differ-
ent ages and places, and varies at the present
day even within the United States from the
extreme of no divorce in South Carolina to the
opposite extreme in Nevada.* In many non-
Christian civilizations, divorce has been very
easy for a husband to obtain, and in some it
has also been easy for a wife. The Mosaic law
allows a husband to give a bill of divorcement;


*In Nevada, the grounds are wilful desertion, conviction of fel-
ony or infamous crime, habitual gross drunkenness, impotency at
the time of marriage continuing to the time of the divorce, extreme
cruelty, neglect to provide for one year, insanity for two years. See
“Sex in Civilization,” ed. by V. F. Calverton and S, D. Schmal-
hausen, 1920, p. 224. ‘


221


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


Chinese law allowed divorce provided the
property which the wife had brought into the
marriage was restored. The Catholic Church,
on the ground that marriage is a sacrament,
does not allow divorce for any purpose what-
soever, but in practice this severity is some-
what mitigated—especially where the great
ones of the earth are concerned—by the fact
that there are many grounds for nullity.*

In Christian countries the leniency towards
divorce has been proportional to the degree of
Protestantism. Milton, as every one knows,
wrote in favour of it because he was very Prot-
estant. The English Church, in the days when
it considered itself Protestant, recognized di-
vorce for adultery, though for no other cause.
Nowadays the great majority of clergymen in
the Church of England are opposed to all di-
vorce. Scandinavia has easy divorce laws. So
have the most Protestant parts of America.
Scotland is more favourable to divorce than
England. In France, anti-clericalism produces
easy divorce. In the Soviet Union divorce is

* It will be remembered that in the case of the Duke and Duch-
ess of Marlborough it was held that the marriage was null because
she had been forced into it, and this ground was considered valid


in spite of the fact that they had lived together for years and had
children.


222


DIVORCE


permitted at the request of either party, but as
neither social nor legal penalties attach to
either adultery or illegitimacy in Russia, mar-
riage has there lost the importance which it
has elsewhere, at any rate so far as the govern-
ing classes are concerned.

One of the most curious things about di-
vorce is the difference which has often existed
between law and custom. The easiest divorce
laws by no means always produce the greatest
number of divorces. In China, before the re-
cent upheavals, divorce was almost unknown,
for, in spite of the example of Confucius, it
was not considered quite respectable. Sweden
allows divorce by mutual consent, which is a
ground not recognized in any state of Amer-
ica; yet I find that in 1922, the latest year for
which I have comparable figures, the number
of divorces per hundred thousand of the popu-
lation was 24 in Sweden and 136 in the United
States.* I think this distinction between law
and custom is important, for while I favour a
somewhat lenient law on the subject, there are
to my mind, so long as the biparental family

* Since then the total number of divorces and nullities in Sweden


increased from 1531 in 1923 to 1966 in 1927, while the rate per
joo marriages increased in U. S. A. from 13.4 to 15.


223


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


persists as the norm, strong reasons why cus-
tom should be against divorce, except in some-
what extreme cases. I take this view because I
regard marriage not primarily as a sexual part-
nership, but above all as an undertaking to co-
operate in the procreation and rearing of chil-
dren. It is possible, and even probable, as we
have seen in earlier chapters, that marriage so
understood may break down under the opera-
tion of various forces of which the economic
are the chief; but if this should occur, divorce
also would break down, since it is an institu-
tion dependent upon the existence of marriage,
within which it affords a kind of safety valve.
Our present discussion, therefore, will move
entirely within the framework of the bipa-
rental family considered as the rule.

Both Protestants and Catholics have, in gen-
eral, viewed divorce not from the point of view
of the biological purpose of the family, but
from the point of view of the theological con-
ception of sin. Catholics, since they hold that
marriage is indissoluble in the sight of God,
necessarily maintain that when two persons
have once married, neither of them can, during
the lifetime of the other, have sinless inter-
course with any other person, no matter what


224


DIVORCE


may happen in the marriage. Protestants, in so
far as they have favoured divorce, have done so
partly out of opposition to Catholic doctrine
on the sacraments, partly also because they
perceived that the indissolubility of marriage
is a cause of adultery, and they believed that
easier divorce would make the diminution of
adultery less difficult. One finds accordingly
that in those Protestant countries where mar-
riages are easily dissolved, adultery is viewed
with extreme disfavour, while in countries
which do not recognize divorce, adultery,
though regarded as sinful, is winked at, at
any rate where men are concerned. In Tsarist
Russia, where divorce was exceedingly diffi-
cult, people did not think the worse of Gorki
for his private life, whatever they may have
thought of his politics. In America, on the con-
trary, where no one objected to his politics,
he was hounded out on moral grounds, and no
hotel would give him a night’s lodging.
Neither the Protestant nor the Catholic
point of view in this matter can be upheld on
rational grounds. Let us take the Catholic
point of view first. Suppose that the husband
or wife becomes insane after marriage; it is
in this case not desirable that further children


225


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


should spring from an insane stock, nor yet
that any children who may already be born
should be brought into contact with insanity.
Complete separation of the parents, even sup-
posing that the one who is insane has longer
or shorter lucid intervals, is therefore desirable
in the interests of the children. To decree that
in this case the sane partner shall never be per-
mitted any legally recognized sex relations is a
wanton cruelty which serves no public purpose
whatever. The sane partner is left with a very
painful choice. He or she may decide in favour
of continence, which is what the law and pub-
lic morals expect; or in favour of surreptitious
relations, presumably childless; or in favour of
what is called open sin, with or without chil-
dren. To each of these courses there are grave
objections. Complete abstinence from sex,
especially for one already accustomed to it in
marriage, is very painful. It leads either a man
or a woman, very often, to become prematurely
old. It is not unlikely to produce nervois dis-
orders, and in any case the effort involved
tends to produce a disagreeable, grudging and
ill-tempered type of character. In a man, there
is always a grave danger that his self-control
will suddenly give way, leading him to acts of


226


DIVORCE


brutality, for if he is genuinely persuaded that
all intercourse outside marriage is wicked, he
is likely, if he does seek such intercourse, to
feel that he might as well be hanged for a sheep
as for a lamb, and therefore to throw off all
moral restraints.

The second alternative, namely, that of hav-
ing surreptitious childless relations, is the one
most commonly adopted in practice, in such a
situation as we are considering. To this, also,
there are grave objections. Everything sur-
reptitious is undesirable, and sex relations
which are serious cannot develop their best
possibilities without children and a common
life. Moreover, if a man or woman is young
and vigorous, it is not in the public interest to
say: “You shall have no more children.” Still
less is it to the public interest to say what the
law does in fact say, namely, “You shall have
no more children unless you choose a lunatic
for their other parent.”

The third alternative, namely, that of living
in “open sin,” is the one which is least harmful,
both to the individual and to the community,
where it is feasible, but for economic reasons it
is impossible in most cases. A doctor or a law-
yer who attempted to live in open sin would


227


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


lose all his patients or clients. A man engaged
in any branch of the scholastic profession
would lose his post at once.* Even if economic
circumstances do not make open sin impos-
sible, most people will be deterred by the social
penalties. Men like to belong to clubs, and
women like to be respected and called on by
other women. To be deprived of these pleasures
is apparently considered a great hardship. Con-
sequently open sin is difficult except for the
rich, and for artists and writers and others
whose profession makes it easy to live in a
more or less Bohemian society.

It follows that in any country which refuses
divorce for insanity, as England does, the man
or woman whose wife or husband becomes in-
sane is placed in an intolerable position, in fa-
vour of which there is no argument whatever
except theological superstition. And what is
true of insanity is true also of venereal disease,
habitual crime and habitual drunkenness. All
these are things which destroy a marriage from
every point of view. They make companion-
ship impossible, procreation undesirable, and
association of the guilty parent with the child


* Unless he happens to teach at one of the older universities
and to be closely related to a peer who has been a Cabinet minister.


228


a fF


eee *


DIVORCE
a thing to be avoided. In such cases, therefore,


divorce can only be opposed on the ground that


marriage is a trap by which the ‘unwary are


tricked into purification through sorrow.
Desertion, when it is genuine, should, of
course, be a ground for divorce, for in that case
the decree merely recognizes in law what is
already the fact, namely, that the marriage is
at an end. From a legal point of view, how-
ever, there is the awkwardness that desertion,
if it is a ground for divorce, will be resorted to
for that reason, and will be therefore far more
frequent than it would be if it were not sucha
ground. The same kind of difficulty arises in
regard to various causes which are in them-
selves perfectly valid. Many married couples
have such a passionate desire to part that they
will resort to almost any expedient allowed by
the law. When, as was the case in England
formerly, a man had to be guilty of cruelty as
well as adultery in order to be divorced, it not
infrequently happened that a husband would
atrange with his wife to hit her before the
servants, in order that evidence of cruelty
might be forthcoming. Whether it is alto-
gether desirable that two people who pas-
sionately desire to part should be forced


229


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


to endure each other’s companionship by
the pressure of the law is another question.
But we must in all fairness recognize that
whatever grounds of divorce are allowed will
be stretched to the uttermost, and that many
people will purposely behave in such a manner
as to make these grounds available. Let us,
however, neglecting legal difficulties, continue
our enquiry into the circumstances which in
fact make the persistence of the marriage un-
desirable.

Adultery in itself should not, to my mind,
be a ground of divorce. Unless people are re-
strained by inhibitions or strong moral
scruples, it is very unlikely that they will go
through life without occasionally having
strong impulses to adultery. But such impulses
do not by any means necessarily imply that
the marriage no longer serves its purpose.
There may still be ardent affection between
husband and wife, and every desire that the
marriage should continue. Suppose, for ex-
ample, that a man has to be away from home
on business for a number of months on end.
If he is physically vigorous, he will find it diffi-
cult to remain continent throughout this time,
however fond he may be of his wife. The same


230


DIVORCE

will apply to his wife, if she is not entirely con-
vinced of the correctness of conventional mo-
rality. Infidelity in such circumstances ought to
form no barrier whatever to subsequent happi-
ness, and in fact it does not, where the husband
and wife do not consider it necessary to in-
dulge in melodramatic orgies of jealousy. We
may go further, and say that each party should
be able to put up with such temporary fancies
as are always liable to occur, provided the un-
derlying affection remains intact. The psy-
chology of adultery has been falsified by con-
ventional morals, which assume, in monoga-
mous countries, that attraction to one person
cannot coexist with a serious affection for an-
other. Everybody knows that this is untrue,
yet everybody is liable, under the influence of
jealousy, to fall back upon this untrue theory,
and make mountains out of molehills. Adul-
tery, therefore, is no good ground for divorce,
except when it involves a deliberate preference
for another person, on the whole, to the hus-
band or the wife as the case may be.

In saying this I am, of course, assuming that
the adulterous intercourse will not be such as
to lead to children. Where illegitimate children
come in, the issue is much more complicated.


231


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


This is especially the case if the children are
those of the wife, for in that case, if the mar-
riage persists, the husband is faced with the
necessity of having another man’s child
brought up with his own, and (if scandal is
to be avoided) even as his own. This goes
against the biological basis of marriage, and
will also involve an almost intolerable instinc-
tive strain. On this ground, in the days before
contraceptives, adultery perhaps deserved the
importance which was attached to it, but con-
traceptives have made it far more possible than
it formerly was to distinguish sexual inter-
course as such from marriage as a procreative
partnership. On this ground it is now possible
to attach much less importance to adultery
than is attached to it in the conventional code.

The grounds which may make divorce de-
sirable are of two kinds. There are those due
to the defects of one partner, such as insanity,
dipsomania and crime; and there are those
based upon the relations of the husband and
wife. It may happen that, without blame to
either party, it is impossible for a married
couple to live together amicably, or without
some very grave sacrifice. It may happen that
each has important work to do, and that the


232


DIVORCE


work requires that they should live in different
places. It may happen that one of them, with-
out disliking the other, becomes deeply at-
tached to some other person, so deeply as to
feel the marriage an intolerable tie. In that
case, if there is no legal redress, hatred is sure
to spring up. Indeed, such cases, as every one
knows, are quite capable of leading to murder.
Where a marriage breaks down owing to in-
compatibility or to an overwhelming passion
on the part of one partner for some other per-
son, there should not be, as there is at present,
a determination to attach blame. For this rea-
son, much the best ground of divorce in all
such cases is mutual consent. Grounds other
than mutual consent ought only to be required
where the marriage has failed through some
definite defect in one partner.

There is very great difficulty in framing laws
as regards divorce, because whatever the laws
may be, judges and juries will be governed by
their passions, while husbands and wives will
do whatever may be necessary to circumvent
the intentions of the legislators. Although in
English law a divorce cannot be obtained
where there is any agreement between hus-
band and wife, yet everybody knows that in


233


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


practice there often is such an agreement. In
New York State it is not uncommon to go fur-
ther and hire perjured testimony to prove the
statutory adultery. Cruelty is in theory a per-
fectly adequate ground for divorce, but it may
be interpreted so as to become absurd. When
the most eminent of all film stars was divorced
by his wife for cruelty, one of the counts in the
proof of cruelty was that he used to bring
home friends who talked about Kant. I can
hardly suppose that it was the intention of the
California legislators to enable any woman to
divorce her husband on the ground that he
was sometimes guilty of intelligent conversa-
tion in her presence. The only way out of these
confusions, subterfuges, and absurdities is to
have divorce by mutual consent in all cases
where there is not some very definite and
demonstrable reason, such as insanity, to
justify a one-sided desire for divorce. The par-
ties would then have to settle all monetary
adjustments out of court, and it would not be
necessary for either party to hire clever men to
prove the other a monster of iniquity. I should
add that nullity, which is now decreed where
sexual intercourse is impossible, should instead
be granted on application whenever the mar-


234


DIVORCE


riage is childless. That is to say, if a husband
and wife who have no children wish to part,
they should be able to do so on production. of
a medical certificate to the effect that the wife
is not pregnant. Children are the purpose of
marriage, and to hold people to a childless
marriage is a cruel cheat.

“So much for the law of divorce; the custom
is another matter. As we have already seen,
it is possible for the law to make divorce easy
while, nevertheless, custom makes it rare. The
great frequency of divorce in America comes,
I think, partly from the fact that what people
seek in marriage is not what should be sought,
and this in turn is due partly to the fact that
adultery is not tolerated. Marriage should be
a partnership intended by both parties to last
at least as long as the youth of their children,
and not regarded by either as at the mercy of
temporary amours. If such temporary amours
are not tolerated by public opinion or by the
consciences of those concerned, each in its turn
has to blossom into a marriage. This may
easily go so far as completely to destroy the
biparental family, for if a woman has a fresh
husband every two years, and a fresh child by
each, the children in effect are deprived of


235


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


their fathers, and marriage therefore loses its
raison d’étre. We come back again to St. Paul:
marriage in America, as in the First Epistle to
the Corinthians, is conceived as an alternative
to fornication; therefore whenever a man
would fornicate if he could not get a divorce,
he must have a divorce.

When marriage is conceived in relation to
children, a quite different ethic comes into
play. The husband and wife, if they have any
love for their children, will so regulate their
conduct as to give their children the best
chance of a happy and healthy development.
This may involve, at times, very considerable
self-repression. And it certainly requires that
both should realize the superiority of the claims
of children to the claims of their own romantic
emotions. But all this will happen of itself, and
quite naturally, where parental affection is
genuine and a false ethic does not inflame jeal-
ousy. There are some who say that if a hus-
band and wife no longer love each other pas-
sionately, and do not prevent each other from
sexual experiences outside marriage, it is im-
possible for them to co-operate adequately in
the education of their children. Thus Mr. Wal-
ter Lippmann says: “Mates who are not lovers


236


DIVORCE


will not really cooperate, as Mr. Bertrand Rus-
sell thinks they should, in bearing children;
they will be distracted, insufficient, and, worst
of all, they will be merely dutiful.” * There is
here, first of all, a minor, possibly uninten-
tional, misstatement. Of course mates who are
not lovers will not cooperate in bearing chil-
dren; but children are not done with when
they are born, as Mr. Walter Lippmann seems
to imply. And to cooperate in rearing children,
even after passionate love has decayed, is by
no means a superhuman task for sensible peo-
ple who are capable of the natural affections.
To this I can testify from_a large number of
cases personally known to me. To say that
such parents will be “merely dutiful” is to
ignore the emotion of parental affection—an
emotion which, where it is genuine and strong,
preserves an unbreakable tie between husband
and wife long after physical passion has de-
cayed. One must suppose that Mr. Lippmann
has never heard of France, where the family is
strong, and parents very dutiful, in spite of an
exceptional freedom in the matter of adultery.
Family feeling is extremely weak in America,
and the frequency of divorce is a consequence
* “Preface to Morals,” 1929, p. 308.


237


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


of this fact. Where family feeling is strong,
divorce will be comparatively rare, even if it is
legally easy. Easy divorce, as it exists in Amer-
ica, must be regarded as a transitional stage
on the way from the bi-parental to the purely
maternal family. It is, however, a stage in-
volving considerable hardship for children,
since, in the world as it is, children expect
to have two parents, and may become attached
to their father before divorce takes place. So
long as the bi-parental family continues to be
the recognized rule, parents who divorce each
other, except for grave cause, appear to me to
be failing in their parental duty. I do not think
that a legal compulsion to go on being married
is likely to mend matters. What seems to me
to be wanted is, first, a degree of mutual liberty
which will make marriage more endurable, and,
secondly, a realization of the importance of
children which has been overlaid by the em-
phasis on sex which we owe to St. Paul and
the romantic movement.

The conclusion seems to be that, while di-
vorce is too difficult in many countries, of
which England is one, easy divorce does not af-
ford a genuine solution of the marriage prob-
lem. If marriage is to continue, stability in


238


DIVORCE


marriage is important in the interests of the
children, but this stability will be best sought
by distinguishing between marriage and
merely sexual relations, and by emphasizing
the biological as opposed to the romantic
aspect of married love. I do not pretend that
marriage can be freed from onerous duties.
In the system that I commend, men are freed,
it is true, from the duty of sexual conjugal
fidelity, but they have in exchange the duty
of controlling jealousy. The good life cannot
be lived without self-control, but it is better
to control a restrictive and hostile emotion
such as jealousy, rather than a generous and
expansive emotion such as love. Conventional
morality has erred, not in demanding self-
control, but in demanding it in the wrong
place.


239


CHAPTER XVII


POPULATION


HE main purpose of marriage is to re-

plenish the human population of the
globe. Some marriage systems perform this
task inadequately, some too adequately. It is
from this point of view that I wish to consider
sexual morality in the present chapter.

In a state of nature, the larger mammals
require a considerable area per head to keep
themselves alive. Consequently, the total
population of any species of large wild
mammal is small. The population of sheep
and cows is considerable, but that is due to
human agency. The population of human be-
ings is quite out of proportion to that of any
other large mammal. This, of course, is due
to our skill. The invention of bows and arrows,
the domestication of ruminants, the begin-
nings of agriculture, and the industrial revolu-
tion, all of them increased the number of per-
sons who could subsist on a square mile. The
last of these economic advances, as we know


240


a ad
e:


POPULATION


from statistics, was utilized for this purpose;
in all likelihood the others were also. Man’s
intelligence has been employed more to in-
crease his numbers than for any other single
purpose.

It is true that, as Mr. Carr Saunders has
pointed out, the usual rule has been for popu-
lation to be practically stationary, and an in-
crease such as has occurred in the nineteenth
century is a most exceptional phenomenon.
We may suppose that something similar oc-
curred in Egypt and Babylonia when they
took to irrigation and careful agriculture. But
in historical times there seems to have been
nothing of the sort. All estimates of population
before the nineteenth century are very con-
jectural, but in this matter they all concur. A
rapidly increasing population is, therefore, a
rare and exceptional phenomenon. If, as seems
to be the case, the population is now again
tending to become stationary in the most
civilized countries, that only means that they
have worked through an abnormal condition
and reverted to the usual practice of mankind.

The great merit of Mr. Carr Saunders’s
book on population consists in its pointing out
that voluntary restriction has been practised


241


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


in almost all ages and places, and has been
more effective in preserving a stationary popu-
lation than elimination through a high mor-
tality. Possibly he somewhat overstates his
case. In India and China, for example, it seems
to be mainly the high death rate which pre-
vents the population from increasing very
rapidly. In China statistics are lacking, but in
India they exist. The birth rate there is
enormous, yet the population, as Mr. Carr
Saunders himself points out, increases slightly
more slowly than that of England. This is due
mainly to infant mortality and plague and
other grave diseases. I believe that China
would show a similar state of affairs if statis-
tics were available. In spite of these important
exceptions, however, Mr. Carr Saunders’s
thesis is undoubtedly true in the main. Various
methods of limiting population have been
practised. The simplest of these is infanticide,
which has existed on a very large scale
wherever religion has permitted it. Sometimes
the practice has had such a firm hold that in
accepting Christianity men have stipulated
that it should not interfere with infanticide.®


* This happened, for example, in Iceland. Carr Saunders, “Popu-
lation,” 1925, p. 19.


242


POPULATION


The Doukhobors, who got into trouble with
the Tsarist government for their refusal of
military service on the ground that human life
is sacred, subsequently got into trouble with
the Canadian government for their tendency
to the practice of infanticide. Other methods
have, however, also been common. Among
many races, a woman abstains from sexual
intercourse not only during pregnancy, but
during lactation, which is often prolonged for
two or three years. This necessarily limits her
fertility very considerably, especially among
savages, who grow old much sooner than civi-
lized races. The Australian aborigines practise
an exceedingly painful operation which very
much diminishes male potency and restricts
fertility in a marked degree. As we know from
Genesis,* at least one definite birth control
method was known and practised in antiquity,
although it was disapproved of by the Jews,
whose religion was always very anti-Mal-
thusian. By the use of these various devices,
men escaped the wholesale deaths from starva-
tion which would have occurred if they had
used their fecundity to the utmost.

Starvation has, nevertheless, played a con-

* Genesis xxxvili, 9, 10.


243


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


siderable part in keeping population down; not
so much, perhaps, under quite primitive con-
ditions as among agricultural peasant com-
munities of a not very advanced type. The
famine in Ireland in 1846-7 was so severe that
the population has never since attained any-
thing like the level that it had reached before.
Famines in Russia have been frequent, and
that of 1921 is still fresh in the memory of
every one. When I was in China in 1920, con-
siderable portions of that country were suffer-
ing a famine quite as severe as the Russian
famine of the following year, but the victims
secured less sympathy than those of the Volga,
because their misfortunes could not be at-
tributed to Communism. Such facts show that
population does sometimes increase up to and
even beyond the limit of subsistence. This
happens, however, especially where fluctua-
tions are liable to diminish the amount of food
suddenly and drastically.

Christianity, wherever it was believed, put
an end to all checks upon the growth of popu-
lation except continence. Infanticide was, of
course, forbidden; so was abortion; and so
were all contraceptive measures. It is true that
the clergy and the monks and nuns were celi-


244


POPULATION


bate, but I do not suppose that in medizval
Europe they formed so large a percentage of
the population as unmarried women do in
England at the present day. They did not,
therefore, represent any statistically very im-
portant check upon fertility. Accordingly in
the Middle Ages, as compared with ancient
times, there was probably a larger number of
deaths caused by destitution and pestilence.
The population increased very slowly. A
slightly higher rate of increase marked the
eighteenth century, but with the nineteenth
century a quite extraordinary change took
place, and the rate of growth reached_a height
which it had probably never attained before. It
is estimated that in 1066 England and Wales
contained 26 persons per square mile. In 18or,
this figure had risen to 153; in 1901 it had risen
to 561. The increase during the nineteenth cen-
tury is thus nearly four times as great as the
increase from the Norman Conquest to the be-
ginning of the nineteenth century. Nor does the
increase of the population of England and
‘Wales give an adequate picture of the facts, for
during that period the British stock was peo-
pling large parts of the world previously inhab-
ited by a few savages.


245


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


There is very little reason to attribute this
increase of population to an increase in the
birth rate. It is attributable rather to a decline
in the death rate, due partly to the advance
of medical science, but much more, I think,
to the rising level of prosperity brought about
by the industrial revolution. From the year
1841, when the birth rate began to be recorded
in England, down to the years 1871-5, the
birth rate was nearly constant, reaching, in the
latter period, a maximum of 35.5. At this stage
two events occurred. The first was the Educa-
tion Act of 1870; the second, the prosecution
of Bradlaugh for neo-Malthusian propa-
ganda in 1878. One finds, accordingly, that the
birth rate declined from that moment onward,
at first slowly and then catastrophically. The
Education Act began to afford the motive,
since children were no longer such a lucra-
tive investment; and Bradlaugh afforded the
means. In the quinquennial period 1911-15, the
birth rate had fallen to 23.6. In the first quar-
ter of 1920, it had fallen to 16.5. The popula-
tion of England is still slowly increasing
owing to improvements in medicine and hy-
giene, but it is rapidly approaching a stationary

246


POPULATION


figure.* France, as every one knows, has had
a virtually stationary population for a consid-
erable time.

The fall in the birth rate has been very rapid
and nearly universal throughout western
Europe. The only exceptions have been back~
ward countries such as Portugal. It has been
more marked in urban than in rural communi-
ties. It began among the well-to-do, but has
now penetrated to all classes in towns and
industrial areas. The birth rate is still higher
among the poor than among the well-to-do,
but it is lower now in the poorest boroughs
of London than it was ten years ago in the
richest. This fall, as every one knows (al-
though some will not admit it), is due to abor-
tion and the use of contraceptives. There is no
particular reason why it should stop at the
point where it produces a stationary popula-
tion. It may easily go on until the population
begins to diminish, and the ultimate result may,
for aught we can tell, be a virtual extinction
of the most civilized races.

Before we can profitably discuss this prob

*In the first quarter of 1929 it diminished, but this is to be at-


tributed to the influenza epidemic. See (London) Times, May 27,
1920.


247


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


lem, it is necessary to be clear as to what we
desire. There is in any given state of economic
technique what Carr Saunders calls an opti-
mum density of population, that is to say, a
density which gives the maximum income per
head. If the population falls below this level
or rises above it, the general level of economic
well-being is diminished. Broadly speaking,
every advance in economic technique increases
the optimum density of population. In the
hunting stage, one person per square mile is
about right, whereas in an advanced industrial
country a population of several hundred per
square mile is likely to be not excessive. There
is reason to think that England, since the war,
is overpopulated. One cannot say the same of
France, still less of America. But it is not likely
that France, or indeed any country of western
Europe, would gain in average wealth by an
increase of population. That being so, we have
no reason, from an economic point of view, to
desire that population should increase. Those
who feel this desire are usually inspired by
motives of nationalistic militarism, and the in-
crease of population that they desire is not to
be a permanent one, since it is to be wiped out
as soon as they can get the war at which they


248


POPULATION


are aiming. In fact, therefore, the position of
these people is that it is better to restrict popu-
lation by deaths on the battlefield than by con-
traceptives. This view is not one which can be
entertained by any one who has thought it
out, and those who seem to hold it do so only
from muddle-headedness. Apart from argu-
ments concerned with war, we have every rea-
son to rejoice that the knowledge of birth-
control methods is causing the population of
civilized countries to become stationary.

The matter would, however, be quite other-
wise if the population were actually to
diminish, for a diminution, if it continues un-
checked, means ultimate extinction, and we
cannot desire to see the most civilized races
of the world disappear. The use of contracep-
tives, therefore, is only to be welcomed if steps
can be taken to confine it within such limits as
will preserve the population at about its
present level. I do not think there is any diffi-
culty in this. The motives to family limitation
are mainly, though not wholly, economic, and
the birth rate could be increased by diminish-
ing the expense of children, or, if this should
prove necessary, by making them an actual
source of income to their parents. Any such


( 249


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


measure, however, in the present nationalistic
world, would be very dangerous, since it
would be used as a method of securing military
preponderance. One can imagine all the lead-
ing military nations adding to the race of
armaments a race of propagation, under the
slogan: “The cannon must have their fodder.”
Here, again, we are faced with the absolute
necessity of an international government if
civilization is to survive. Such a government,
if it is to be effective in preserving the peace
of the world, must pass decrees limiting the
rate at which any military nation may increase
its population. The hostility between Australia
and Japan illustrates the gravity of this prob-
lem. The population of Japan increases very
fast and that of Australia (apart from immi-
gration) rather slowly. This causes a hostility
which is exceedingly difficult to deal with,
since apparently just principles can be ap-
pealed to by both sides in the dispute. It may,
I think, be assumed that before very long
throughout western Europe and America the
birth rate will be such as to involve no increase
in population, unless definite steps are taken
by governments with that end in view. But it
cannot be expected that the most powerful


ago


POPULATION


military nations will sit still while other
nations reverse the balance of power by the
mere process of breeding. Any international
authority which is to do its work properly will
therefore be obliged to take the population
question into consideration, and to insist upon
birth-control propaganda in any recalcitrant
nation. Unless this is done the peace of the
world cannot be secured.

The population question is thus twofold.
We have to guard against too rapid an in-
crease of population, and we have also to
guard against a decrease. The former danger
is old, and exists still in many countries, such
as Portugal, Spain, Russia and Japan. The lat-
ter danger is new, and exists as yet only in
Western Europe. It would also exist in America
if America depended for its population upon
breeding alone, but hitherto immigration has
caused the population of America to increase
at least as fast as is desirable, in spite of a very
low birth rate among native-born Americans.
The new danger, that of a dwindling popula-
tion, is one to which our ancestral habits of
thought are not adapted. It has been met by
moral homilies and by laws against birth-con-
trol propaganda. Such methods, as the statis-


251


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


tics show, are quite unavailing. The use of
contraceptives has become part of the common
practice of all civilized nations, and cannot now
’ be eradicated. The habit of not facing facts
where sex is concerned is so deeply rooted in
governments and important persons that it
cannot be expected to cease suddenly. It is,
however, a very undesirable habit, and I think
it may be hoped that, when those who are now
young acquire positions of importance, they
will be better in this respect than their fathers
and grandfathers. One may hope that they
will frankly recognize the inevitability of con-
traceptive practices, and their desirability so
long as they do not cause an actual diminution
of population. The proper course in any nation
which is threatened with an actual decrease is
obviously an experimental diminution of the
financial burden of children until the point is
reached where the birth rate is such as to main-
tain the existing population.

In this connection there is one respect in
which our existing moral code might be altered
with advantage. There are in England some
two million more women than men, and these
are condemned by law and custom to remain
childless, which is undoubtedly to many of


252


POPULATION


them a great deprivation. If custom tolerated
the unmarried mother, and made her economic
situation tolerable, it cannot be doubted that a
great many of the women at present con-
demned to celibacy would have children. Strict
monogamy is based upon the assumption that
the. numbers of the sexes will be approxi-
mately equal. Where this is not the case, it
involves considerable cruelty to those whom
arithmetic compels to remain single. And
where there is reason to desire an increase in
the birth rate, this cruelty may be publicly as
well as privately undesirable.

As knowledge increases, it becomes more ~
and more possible to control, by deliberate
governmental action, forces which hitherto
have seemed like forces of nature. Increase of
population is one of these. Since the introduc-
tion of Christianity, it has been left to the
blind operation of instinct. But the time is
rapidly approaching when it will have to be
deliberately controlled. In this matter, how-
ever, as before in regard to the State control
of childhood, we have found that State inter-
ference, if it is to be beneficial, will have to be
the interference of an international State, not
of the competing militaristic States of the
present day.


253


CHAPTER XVIII


EUGENICS


UGENICS is the attempt to improve the

biological character of a breed by de-
liberate methods adopted to that end. The
ideas upon which it is based are Darwinian,
and appropriately enough, the President of
the Eugenics Society is a son of Charles Dar-
win; but the more immediate progenitor of
eugenic ideas was Francis Galton, who
strongly emphasized the hereditary factor in
human achievement. In our day, especially in
America, heredity has become a party ques-
tion. American conservatives maintain that
the finished character of a grown man is
mainly due to congenital characteristics, while
American radicals maintain, on the contrary,
that education is everything and heredity
nothing. I cannot agree with either of these
two extreme positions, nor with the prem-
ise which they share and which gives rise to
their opposite prejudices, namely that Italians,
South Slavs and such are inferior, as finished


254


EUGENICS


products, to the native-born Americans of the
Ku Klux Klan. No data exist as yet for de-
termining, in regard to human mental capacity,
what part is due to heredity and what to edu-
cation. If the matter were to be scientifically
determined, it would be necessary to take
thousands of pairs of identical twins, separate
them at birth, and educate them in ways as
widely divergent as possible. At present, how-
ever, this experiment is not practicable. My
own belief, which I confess to be unscientific
and based merely upon impressions, is that,
while anybody can be ruined by a bad educa-
tion, and in fact almost everybody is, only
people with certain native aptitudes can
achieve great excellence in various directions.
I do not believe that any degree of education
would turn the average boy into a first-rate
pianist; I do not believe that the best school
in the world could turn us all into Einsteins;
I do not believe that Napoleon was not su-
perior in native endowment to his school-
fellows at Brienne, and had merely learned
strategy through watching his mother manage
her brood of unruly sons. I am convinced that
in such cases, and to a lesser degree in all
cases, there is a native aptitude which causes


255


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


education to produce better results than it
does with average material. There are, indeed,
obvious facts which point to this conclusion,
such as that one can generally tell whether a
man is a clever man or a fool by the shape of
his head, which can hardly be regarded as a
characteristic conferred by education. Then,
again, consider the opposite extreme, that of
idiocy, imbecility and feeble-mindedness. Not
even the most fanatical opponent of eugenics
denies that idiocy is, at any rate in most cases,
congenital, and to any person with a feeling
for statistical symmetry, this implies that at
the opposite end also there will be a corre-
sponding percentage of persons with abnor-
mally great capacity. I shall therefore assume
without more ado that human beings differ in
regard to congenital mental capacity. I shall
assume also, what is perhaps more dubious,
that clever people are preferable to their op-
posite. These two points being conceded, the
foundations are laid for the eugenists’ case.
We must not, therefore, pooh-pooh the whole
position, whatever we may think of some of
the details in certain of its advocates.

There has been a quite exceptional lot of
nonsense written on the subject of eugenics.


256


EUGENICS


Most of its advocates add to their sound bio-
logical foundation certain sociological proposi-
tions of a less indubitable nature. Such are:
that virtue is proportional to income; that the
inheritance of poverty (alas, too common!) is
a biological, not a legal phenomenon; and that,
therefore, if we can induce the rich to breed
instead of the poor, everybody will be rich.
A great deal of fuss is made about the fact that
the poor breed more than the rich. I cannot
bring myself to regard this fact as very regret-
table, since I see no evidence whatever that the
rich are in any way superior to the poor. Even
if it were regrettable, it would not be matter
for very serious regret, since there is, in fact,
only a lag of a few years. The birth rate
diminishes among the poor, and is quite as
small now among them as it was nine years
ago among the rich.* There are certain factors,
it is true, which make for a differential birth
rate of an undesirable kind. For example, when
governments and police authorities place difh-
culties in the way of the acquisition of birth-
control information, the result is that persons
whose intelligence falls below a certain level


*See Julius Wolf, “Die neue Sexualmoral und das Geburten-
problem unserer Tage,” 1928, pp. 165-167.


257


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


fail to acquire this information, while with
others the attempts of the authorities are un-
successful. Consequently all opposition to the
dissemination of knowledge concerning con-
traceptives leads to stupid people having larger
families than intelligent ones. It seems prob-
able, however, that this is a very temporary
factor, since before long even the stupidest will
have either acquired birth-control information,
or—what I fear is a tolerably common result
of the obscurantism of the authorities—will
have discovered persons willing to procure
abortion.*

Eugenics is of two sorts, positive and nega-
tive. The former is concerned with the en-
couragement of good stocks, the latter with the
discouragement of bad ones. The latter is at
present more practicable. It has, indeed, made
great strides in certain states in America, and
the sterilization of the unfit is within the scope
of immediate practical politics in England. The


* According to Julius Wolf (op. ctt., p. 6 and ff.) abortion plays
a larger part than contraceptives in accounting for the fall of the
death rate in Germany. He estimates that there are 600,000
artificial abortions annually in Germany at the present day. It is
more difficult to arrive at an estimate for Great Britain, owing to
the fact that miscarriages are not registered; but there is reason
to think that the facts are not so very different from those in
Germany.


258


EUGENICS


objections to such a measure which one natu-
rally feels are, I believe, not justified. Feeble-
minded women, as every one knows, are apt
to have enormous numbers of illegitimate chil-
dred, all, as a rule, wholly worthless to the
community. These women would themselves
be happier if they were sterilized, since it is not
from any philoprogenitive impulse that they
become pregnant. The same thing, of course,
applies to feeble-minded men. There are, it is
true, grave dangers in the system, since the
authorities may easily come to consider any
unusual opinion or any opposition to them-
selves as a mark of feeble-mindedness. These
dangers, however, are probably worth incur-
ring, since it is quite clear that the number of
idiots, imbeciles, and feeble-minded could, by
such measures, be enormously diminished.
Measures of sterilization should, in my
opinion, be very definitely confined to persons
who are mentally defective. I cannot favour
laws such as that of Idaho, which allows
sterilization of “mental defectives, epileptics,
habitual criminals, moral degenerates, and sex
perverts.” The last two categories here are
very vague, and will be determined differently
in different communities. The law of Idaho


259


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


would have justified the sterilization of Soc-
rates, Plato, Julius Cesar, and St. Paul.
Moreover, the habitual criminal may very pos-
sibly be the victim of some functional nervous
disorder which could, at least theoretically, be
cured by psycho-analysis, and which might
well be not hereditary. Both in England and
in America the laws on such subjects are
framed in ignorance of the work of psycho-
analysts, and they therefore lump together en-
tirely different types of disorder, merely on the
ground that they display somewhat similar
symptoms. They are, that is to say, some thirty
years behind the best knowledge of the time.
This illustrates the fact that in all such mat-
ters it is very dangerous to legislate until
science has arrived at stable conclusions which
have remained unchallenged for several dec-
ades at least, since, otherwise, false ideas
become embodied in statutes, and therefore
endeared to magistrates, with the result that
the practical application of better ideas is
greatly retarded. Mental deficiency is, to my
mind, the only thing at present sufficiently
definite to be safely made the subject of legal
enactment in this region. It can be decided in
an objective manner, concerning which authori-


260


EUGENICS


ties would not disagree, whereas moral de-
generacy, for example, is a matter of opinion.
The same person whom one man might con-
sider a moral degenerate will be considered by
another to be a prophet. I do not say that the
law ought not, at some future time, to be
extended more widely—I say only that our
scientific knowledge at present is not adequate
for this purpose, and that it is very dangerous
for a community to allow its moral reproba-
tions to masquerade in the guise of science, as
has undoubtedly happened in various American
states.

I come now to positive eugenics, which has
more interesting possibilities, though as yet
they belong to the future. Positive eugenics
consists in the attempt to encourage desirable
parents to have a large number of children.
At present the exact contrary is general. An
abnormally clever boy in an elementary school,
for example, will rise into the professional
classes, and will probably, therefore, marry at
the age of thirty or thirty-five, whereas those
in his original environment who are not un-
usually clever will marry at about twenty-five.
The expense of education is a grave burden in
the professional classes, and therefore causes


261


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


them to limit their families very severely.
Probably their intellectual average is some-
what higher than that of most other classes,
so that this limitation is regrettable. The
simplest measure for dealing with their case
would be to grant free education up to and in-
cluding the university to their children. That
is to say, broadly speaking, that scholarships
should be awarded on the merits of the parents
rather than of the children. This would have
the incidental advantage of doing away with
cramming and overwork, which at present
causes most of the cleverest young people in
Europe to be intellectually and physically dam-
aged by too much strain before they reach the
age of twenty-one. It would probably, however,
be impossible, either in England or in America,
for the State to adopt any measure really ade-
quate to cause professional men to breed large
families. What stands in the way is democracy.
The ideas of eugenics are based on the assump-
tion that men are unequal, while democracy is
based on the assumption that they are equal. It
is, therefore, politically very difficult to carry
out eugenic ideas in a democratic community
when those ideas take the form, not of suggest-
ing that there is a minority of inferior people


262


EUGENICS


such as imbeciles, but of admitting that there
is a minority of superior people. The former is
pleasing to the majority, the latter unpleasing.
Measures embodying the former fact can there-
fore obtain the support of a majority, while
measures embodying the latter cannot.
Nevertheless, every person who has given
any thought to the subject knows that, al-
though at present it may be difficult to deter-
mine who constitutes the best stocks, yet
undoubtedly there are differences in this re-
spect which science may hope to be able to
measure before long. Imagine the feelings of a
farmer who was told that he must give all his
bull calves an equal opportunity! As a matter
of fact, the bull which is to be the progenitor
of the next generation is very carefully se-
lected for the milk-giving qualities of his fe-
male ancestors. (We may note in passing that
since science, art and war are unknown to this
species, prominent merit attaches only to the
female sex, and the male is at best a trans-
mitter of feminine excellences,) All domestic
animals have been improved enormously by
scientific breeding, and it is not open to ques-
tion that human beings could, by similar
methods, be changed in any desired direction.


263


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


It is, of course, much more difficult to deter-
mine what we desire in human beings. It may
be that if we bred people for physical strength
we should diminish their brains. It may be
that if we bred them for mental capacity we
should render them more liable to various dis-
eases. It may be that if we sought to produce
emotional balance we should destroy art. On
all these matters the necessary knowledge does
not exist. It is not, therefore, desirable to do
much in the way of positive eugenics at the
present time. But it may easily be that within
the next hundred years the sciences of heredity
and bio-chemistry will have made such strides
as to make possible the breeding of a race
which everybody would admit to be superior
to that now existing.

To apply scientific knowledge of this sort,
however, would demand a more radical up-
heaval as regards the family than anything
hitherto contemplated in these pages. If scien-
tific breeding is to be carried out thoroughly,
it will be necessary to set apart in each gen-
eration some two or three per cent of the males
and some twenty-five per cent of the females
for the purpose of propagation. There will be,
presumably at puberty, an examination, as a


264


EUGENICS


result of which all the unsuccessful candidates
will be sterilized. The father will have no more
connection with his offspring than a bull or
stallion has at present, and the mother will be
a specialized professional, distinguished from
other women by her manner of life. I do not
say that this state of affairs is going to come
about, still less do I say that I desire it, for I
confess that I find it exceedingly repugnant.
Nevertheless, when the matter is examined
objectively, it is seen that such a plan might
produce remarkable results. Let us suppose, for
the sake of argument, that it is adopted in
Japan, and that at the end of three genera-
tions, most Japanese men are as clever as Edi-
son and as strong as a prize-fighter. If,
meanwhile, the other nations of the world had
continued to leave matters to nature, they
would be quite unable to stand up against
Japan in warfare. Doubtless the Japanese, hav-
ing reached such a pitch of ability, would find
ways of employing the men of some other
nation as soldiers, and would rely upon their
scientific technique for victory, which they
would be pretty sure to achieve. In such a sys-
tem, blind devotion to the State would be very
easy to instil in youth, Can any one say that a


265


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


development of this sort in the future is im-
possible?

There is a kind of eugenics, very popular
with certain types of politicians and publicists,
which may be called race eugenics. This con-
sists in the contention that one race or nation
(of course that to which the writer belongs)
is very superior to all others, and ought to use
its military power to increase its numbers at
the expense of inferior stocks. The most
noteworthy example of this is the Nordic
propaganda in the United States, which has
succeeded in winning legislative recognition
in the immigration laws. This kind of eugenics
can appeal to the Darwinian principle of sur-
vival of the fittest; yet, oddly enough, its most
ardent advocates are those who consider that
the teaching of Darwinism should be illegal.
The political propaganda bound up with racial
eugenics is mostly of an undesirable sort; but
let us forget this, and examine the question on
its merits.

In extreme cases there can be little doubt
of the superiority of one race to another.
North America, Australia and New Zealand
certainly contribute more to the civilization of
the world than they would do if they were still


266


EUGENICS


peopled by aborigines. It seems on the whole
fair to regard negroes as on the average in-
ferior to white men, although for work in the
tropics they are indispensable, so that their
extermination (apart from questions of hu-
manity) would be highly undesirable. But
when it comes to discriminating among the
races of Europe, a mass of bad science has to
be brought in to support political prejudice.
Nor do I see any valid ground for regarding
the yellow races as in any degree inferior to
our noble selves. In all such cases, racial
eugenics is merely an excuse for chauvinism.

Julius Wolf * gives a table of the excess of
births over deaths per 1000 of the population
in all the principal countries for which statis-
tics exist. France is lowest (1.3), United States
next (4.0), then Sweden (5.8), British India
(5.9), Switzerland (6.2), England (6.2). Ger-
many has 7.8, Italy 10.9, Japan 14.6, Russia
19.5, and Ecuador, which leads the world, 23.1.
China does not appear in the list, since the facts
are unknown. Wolf draws the conclusion that
the Western World will be overwhelmed by the
East, i.e. by Russia, China and Japan. I shall
not attempt to rebut his argument by pinning

* Op. cit., pp. 143-4.

3 267


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


my faith on Ecuador. Rather I shall point to
his figures (already referred to) for the
relative birth rates among rich and poor in
London, showing that the latter are now lower
than the former were a few years ago. The
same thing applies to the East: as it becomes
occidentalized, its birth rate will inevitably
fall. A country cannot become formidable in a
military sense except by becoming industrial-
ized, and industrialism brings with it the type
of mentality that leads to family limitation.
We are therefore forced to conclude, not only
that the domination of the East, which Western
chauvinists (following the ex-Kaiser) profess
to dread, would be no great misfortune if it
occurred, but also that there is no valid ground
for expecting that it will come about. Never-
theless, war-mongers will probably continue to
use this bogey among others, until such time
as an international authority can assign the
permissible quotas of increase for the popula-
tions of the various States.

Here again, as on two former occasions, we
are confronted by the dangers facing mankind
if science advances while international anarchy
continues. Science enables us to realize our
purposes, and if our purposes are evil, the re-


268


EUGENICS


sult is disaster. If the world remains filled with
malevolence and hate, the more scientific it be-
comes the more horrible it will be. To diminish
the virulence of these passions is, therefore, an
essential of human progress. To a very great
extent their existence has been brought about
by a wrorig sexual ethic and a bad sexual edu-
cation. For the future of civilization a new and
better sexual ethic is indispensable. It is this
fact that makes the reform of sexual morality
one of the vital needs of our time.

From the standpoint of private morals,
sexual ethics, if scientific and unsuperstitious,
would accord the first place to eugenic consid-
erations. That is to say, that however the ex-
isting restraints upon sexual intercourse might
be relaxed, a conscientious man and woman
would not enter upon procreation without the
most serious consideration as to the probable
value of their progeny. Contraceptives have
made parenthood voluntary and no longer an
automatic result of sexual intercourse. For
various economic reasons which we have con-
sidered in earlier chapters, it seems likely that
the father will have less importance in regard
to the education and maintenance of children
in the future than he has had in the past.


269


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


There will, therefore, be no very cogent reason
why a woman should choose as the father of
her child the man whom she prefers as a lover
or a companion. It may become quite easily
possible for women in the future, without any
serious sacrifice of happiness, to select the
fathers of their children by eugenic considera-
tions, while allowing their private feelings
free sway as regards ordinary sexual com-
panionship. For men it would be still easier to
select the mothers of their children for their
desirability as parents. Those who hold, as I
do, that sexual behaviour concerns the com-
munity solely in so far as children are involved,
must draw from this premise a twofold con-
clusion as regards the morality of the future:
on the one hand, that love apart from children
should be free, but on the other hand that the
procreation of children should be a matter far
more carefully regulated by moral considera-
tions than it is at present. The considerations
involved will, however, be somewhat different
from those hitherto recognized. In order that
procreation in a given case may be regarded
as virtuous, it will no longer be necessary that
certain words should have been pronounced by
a priest, or a certain document drawn up by a


270


EUGENICS


registrar, for there is no evidence that such
acts affect the health or intelligence of the off-
spring. What will be considered necessary is
that the given man and woman, in themselves
and in the heredity which they transmit,
should be such as are likely to have desirable
children. When science becomes able to pro-
nounce on this question with more certainty
than is possible at present, the moral sense of
the community may come to be more exacting
from a eugenic point of view. The men with
the best heredity may come to be eagerly
sought after as fathers, while other men,
though they may be acceptable as lovers, may
find themselves rejected when they aim at
paternity. The institution of marriage, as it
has existed hitherto, has made any such
schemes contrary to human nature, so that the
practical possibilities of eugenics have been
thought to be very restricted. But there is no
reason to suppose that human nature will in
future interpose a similar barrier, since con-
traceptives are separating procreation from.
childless sexual relations, and fathers are
likely in future to have no such personal re-
lation with their children as they have had in
the past. The seriousness and the high social


271


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


purpose which moralists in the past have at-
tached to marriage will, if the world becomes
more scientific in its ethics, attach only to pro-
creation.

This eugenic outlook, although it must begin
as the private ethic of certain unusually scien-
tific people, is likely to grow more and more
widespread until at last it comes to be em-
bodied in the law, presumably in the form of
pecuniary rewards to desirable parents, and
pecuniary penalties to such as are undesirable.

The idea of allowing science to interfere with
our intimate personal impulses is undoubt-
edly repugnant. But the interference involved
would be much less than that which has been
tolerated for ages on the part of religion.
Science is new in the world, and has not yet
that authority due to tradition and early in-
fluences that religion has over most of us, but
it is perfectly capable of acquiring the same
authority and of being submitted to with the
same degree of acquiescence that has char-
acterized men’s attitude toward religious pre-
cepts. The welfare of posterity is, it is true, a
motive by no means sufficient to control the
average man in his passionate moments, but if
it became a part of recognized positive moral-


272


EUGENICS


ity, with the sanction not only of praise and
blame but of economic rewards and penalties,
it would soon come to be accepted as a con-
sideration which no well-conducted person
could afford to ignore. Religion has existed
since before the dawn of history, while science
has existed for at most four centuries; but
when science has become old and venerable it
will control our lives as much as religion has
ever done. I foresee the time when all who care
for the freedom of the human spirit will have
to rebel against a scientific tyranny. Never-
theless, if there is to be a tyranny, it is better
that it should be scientific.


273


CHAPTER XIX


SEX AND INDIVIDUAL
WELL-BEING


N the present chapter I propose to recapitu-

late things said in earlier chapters as re-
gards the effects of sex and sexual morals upon
individual happiness and well-being. In this
matter we are not concerned only with the ac-
tively sexual period of life, nor with actual sex
relations. Sexual morality affects childhood,
adolescence, and even old age, in all kinds of
ways, good or bad according to circumstances.

Conventional morality begins its operations
by the imposition of taboos in childhood. A
child is taught, at a very early age, not to
touch certain parts of the body while grown-up
people are looking. It is taught to speak in a
whisper when expressing an excretory desire,
and to preserve privacy in performing the re-
sultant action. Certain parts of the body and
certain acts have some peculiar quality not
readily intelligible to the child, which invests
them with mystery and a special interest. Cer-


274


SEX AND INDIVIDUAL WELL-BEING


tain intellectual problems, such as where babies
come from, must be thought over in silence,
since the answers given by grown-ups are
either evasive or obviously untrue. I know men,
by no means old, who, when in infancy they
were seen touching a certain portion of their
body, were told with the utmost solemnity: “TI
would rather see you dead than doing that.” I
regret to say that the effect in producing virtue
in later life has not always been all that con-
ventional moralists might desire. Not infre-
quently threats are used. It is perhaps not so
common as it used to be to threaten a child
with castration, but it is still thought quite
proper to threaten him with insanity. Indeed,
it is illegal in the State of New York to let him
know that he does not run the risk unless he
thinks he does. The result of this teaching is
that most children in their earliest years havea
profound sense of guilt and terror which is as-
sociated with sexual matters. This association
of sex with guilt and fear goes so deep as to be-
come almost or wholly unconscious. I wish it
were possible to institute a statistical enquiry,
among men who believe themselves emanci-
pated from such nursery tales, as to whether
they would be as ready to commit adultery dur-


275


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


ing a thunder storm as at any other time. I be-
lieve that ninety per cent of them, in their heart
of hearts, would think that if they did so they
would be struck by lightning.

Both sadism and masochism, although in
their milder forms they are normal, are con-
nected, in their pernicious manifestations, with
the sense of sexual guilt. A masochist is a man
acutely conscious of his own guilt in connec-
tion with sex. A sadist is a man more conscious
of the guilt of the woman as temptress. These
effects, in later life, show how profound has
been the early impression produced by unduly
severe moral teaching in childhood. On this
matter, persons connected with the teaching
of children, and especially with the care of the
very young, are becoming more enlightened.
But unfortunately enlightenment has not yet
reached the law-courts.

Childhood and youth form a period in life
when pranks and naughtiness and performance
of forbidden acts are natural, spontaneous and
not regrettable except when carried too far.
But infraction of sex prohibitions is treated by
grown-up people quite differently from any
other breach of rules, and is therefore felt by
the child to belong to a quite different category.


276


SEX AND INDIVIDUAL WELL-BEING


If a child steals fruit from the larder you may
be annoyed, you may rate the child soundly,
but you feel no moral horror, and you do not
convey to the child the sense that something
appalling has occurred. If, on the other hand,
you are an old-fashioned person and you find
him masturbating, there will be a tone in your
voice which he will never hear in any other
connection. This tone produces an abject ter-
ror, all the greater since the child probably finds
it impossible to abstain from the behaviour
that has called forth your denunciation. The
child, impressed by your earnestness, pro-
foundly believes that masturbation is as wicked
as you say it is. Nevertheless, he persists in it.
Thus the foundations are laid for a morbid-
ness which probably continues through life.
From his earliest youth onward, he regards
himself as a sinner. He soon learns to sin in
secret, and to find a half-hearted consolation
in the fact that no one knows of his sin. Being
profoundly unhappy, he seeks to avenge him-
self on the world by punishing those who have
been less successful than himself in concealing
a similar guilt. Being accustomed to deceit as
a child, he finds no difficulty in practising it in
later life. Thus he becomes a morbidly intro-


277


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


verted hypocrite and persecutor as a result of
his parents’ ill-judged attempt to make him
what they consider virtuous.

It is not guilt and shame and fear that should
dominate the lives of children. Children should
be happy and gay and spontaneous; they
should not dread their own impulses; they
should not shrink from the exploration of nat-
ural facts. They should not hide away in the
darkness all their instinctive life. They should
not bury in the depths of the unconscious im-
pulses which, even with their utmost endeay-
ours, they cannot kill. If they are to grow into
upright men and women, intellectually honest,
socially fearless, vigorous in action and toler-
ant in thought, we must begin from the very
beginning to train them so that these results
may be possible. Education has been conceived
too much on the analogy of the training of
dancing bears. Every one knows how dancing
bears are trained. They are put on a hot floor,
which compels them to dance because their
toes are burnt if they remain in contact with
it. While this is done, a certain tune is played
to them. After a time the tune suffices to make
them dance, without the hot floor. So it is with
children. While a child is conscious of his sex-


278


SEX AND INDIVIDUAL WELL-BEING


ual organ, grown-ups scold him. In the end,
such consciousness brings up a thought of
their scolding and makes him dance to their
tune, to the complete destruction of all pos-
sibility of a healthy or happy sexual life.

In the next stage, that of adolescence, the
misery caused by the conventional handling of
sex is even greater than in childhood. Many
boys do not know at all accurately what is hap-
pening to them, and are terrified when they
first experience nocturnal emissions. They find
themselves filled with impulses which they
have been taught to consider extremely wicked.
These impulses are so strong as to be an obses-
sion, day and night. In the better sort of boy,
there are at the same time impulses of the most
extreme idealism towards beauty and poetry,
and towards ideal love, which is thought of as
wholly divorced from sex. Owing to the Man-
ichaean elements in Christian teaching, the
idealistic and the carnal impulses of adoles-
cence are apt, among ourselves, to remain
wholly dissociated, and even at war one with
the other. On this point I may quote the con-
fession of an intellectual friend, who says: “My
own adolescence was, I believe, not untypical,
and it exhibited this dissociation in a very


279


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


marked form. For hours in the day I would
read Shelley and sentimentalize over:


‘The desire of the moth for the star,
Of the night for the morrow.’


Then suddenly I would leave these heights and
try to catch a surreptitious glimpse of the
housemaid undressing. The latter impulse
caused me profound shame; the former had,
of course, an element of silliness, since its ideal-
ism was the obverse of a foolish fear of sex.”
Adolescence, as every one knows, is a time
when nervous disorders are very frequent, and
when persons who at all other times are well-
balanced may easily be quite the reverse. Miss
Mead, in her book called “Coming of Age in
Samoa,” asserts that adolescent disorders are
unknown in that island, and she attributes this
fact to the prevalent sexual freedom. This
sexual freedom, it is true, is being somewhat
curtailed by missionary activity. Some of the
girls whom she questioned lived in the mission-
ary’s house, and these, during adolescence,
practised only masturbation and homosexual-
ity, whilst those who lived elsewhere engaged
also in heterosexual practices. Our most fa-
mous boys’ schools are not altogether so very


280


SEX AND INDIVIDUAL WELL-BEING


different in this respect from the house of the
Samoan missionary, but the psychological ef-
fect of behaviour which, in Samoa, is harmless,
may in an English schoolboy be disastrous, be-
cause he probably respects in his heart the
conventional teaching, whereas the Samoan
regards the missionary merely as a white
man with peculiar tastes that have to be hu-
moured.

Most young men, in their early adult years,
go through troubles and difficulties of a quite
unnecessary kind in regard to sex. If a young
man remains chaste, the difficulty of control
probably causes him to become timid and in-
hibited, so that when he finally marries he can-
not break down the self-control of past years,
except perhaps in a brutal and sudden manner,
which leads him to fail his wife in the capacity
of a lover. If he goes with prostitutes, the dis-
sociation between the physical and the idealistic
aspects of love which has begun in adolescence
is perpetuated, with the result that his rela-
tions with women ever after have to be either
Platonic or, in his belief, degrading. Moreover,
he runs a grave risk of venereal disease. If he
has affairs with girls of his own class, much
less harm is done, but even then the need of


asi


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


secrecy is harmful, and interferes with the de-
velopment of stable relations. Owing partly to
snobbery and partly to the belief that marriage
ought immediately to lead to children, it is
difficult for a man to marry young. Moreover,
where divorce is very difficult, early marriage
has great dangers, since two people who suit
each other at twenty are quite likely not to suit
each other at thirty. Stable relations with one
partner are difficult for many people until they
have had some experience of variety. If our
outlook on sex were sane, we should expect
university students to be temporarily married,
though childless. They would in this way be
freed from the obsession of sex which at pres-
ent greatly interferes with work. They would
acquire that experience of the other sex which
is desirable as a prelude to the serious partner-
ship of a marriage with children. And they
would be free to experience love without the
concomitants of subterfuge, concealment, and
dread of disease, which at present poison
youthful adventures.

For the large class of women who, as things
are, must remain permanently unmarried, con-
ventional morality is painful and, in most cases,
harmful. I have known, as we all have, unmar-


282 ”


re Reg Ag


SEX AND INDIVIDUAL WELL-BEING


ried women of strict conventional virtue who
deserve the highest admiration from every pos-
sible point of view. But I think the general rule
is otherwise. A woman who has had no experi-
ence of sex and has considered it important to
preserve her virtue has been engaged in a nega-
tive reaction, tinged with fear, and has there-
fore, as a rule, become timid, while at the same
time instinctive, unconscious jealousy has
filled her with disapproval of normal people,
and with a desire to punish those who have en-
joyed what she has forgone. Intellectual timid-
ity is an especially common concomitant of
prolonged virginity. Indeed, I am inclined to
think that the intellectual inferiority of women,
in so far as it exists, is mainly due to the re-
straint upon curiosity which the fear of sex
leads them to impose. There is no good reason
for the unhappiness and waste involved in the
lifelong virginity of those women who cannot
find an exclusive husband. The present situa-
tion, in which this necessarily occurs very fre-
quently, was not contemplated in the earlier
days of the institution of marriage, since in
those days the numbers of the sexes were ap-
proximately equal. Undoubtedly, the existence
of a great excess of women in many countries


283


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


affords a very serious argument in favour of
modifications of the conventional moral code.

Marriage, the one conventionally tolerated
outlet for sex, itself suffers from the rigidity of
the code. The complexes acquired in childhood,
the experiences of men with prostitutes, and the
attitude of aversion from sex instilled into
young ladies in order to preserve their virtue,
all militate against happiness in marriage. A
well-brought-up girl, if her sexual impulses are
strong, will be unable to distinguish, when she
is courted, between a serious congeniality with
a man and a mere sex attraction. She may
easily marry the first man who awakens her
sexually, and find out too late that when her
sexual hunger is satisfied she has no longer
anything in common with him. Everything has
been done in the education of the two to make
her unduly timid and him unduly sudden in the
sexual approach. Neither has the knowledge on
sexual matters that each ought to have, and
very often initial failures, due to this ignorance,
make the marriage ever after sexually unsatis-
fying to both. Moreover, mental as well as
physical companionship ‘is rendered difficult.
A woman is not accustomed to free speech on


284


SEX AND INDIVIDUAL WELL-BEING


sexual matters. A man is not accustomed to it,
except with men and prostitutes. In the most
intimate and vital concern of their mutual life,
they are shy, awkward, even wholly silent. The
wife, perhaps, lies awake unsatisfied and hardly
knowing what it is she wants. The man per-
haps has the thought, at first fleeting and in-
stantly banished, but gradually becoming more
and more insistent, that even prostitutes are
more generous in giving than his lawful wife.
He is offended by her coldness, at the very
moment, perhaps, that she is suffering because
he does not know how to rouse her. All this
misery results from our policy of silence and
decency.

In all these ways, from childhood through
adolescence and youth, and on into marriage,
the older morality has been allowed to poison
love, filling it with gloom, fear, mutual mis-
understanding, remorse, and nervous strain,
separating into two regions the bodily impulse
of sex and the spiritual impulse of ideal love,
making the one beastly and the other sterile.
It is not so that life should be lived. The ani-
mal and the spiritual natures should not be at
war. There is nothing in either that is incom-


285


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


patible with the other, and neither can reach its
full fruition except in union with the other. The
love of man and woman at its best is free and
fearless, compounded of body and mind in
equal proportions; not dreading to idealize be-
cause there is a physical basis, not dreading the
physical basis lest it should interfere with the
idealization. Love should be a tree whose roots
are deep in the earth, but whose branches ex-
tend.into heaven. But love cannot grow and
flourish while it is hedged about with taboos
and superstitious terrors, with words of repro-
bation and silences of horror. The love of man
and woman and the love of parents and chil-
dren are the two central facts in the emotional
life of man. While degrading the one, conven-
tional morality has pretended to exalt the
other, but in fact the love of parents for chil-
dren has suffered through the degradation of
the love of parents for each other. Children who
are the fruit of joy and mutual fulfilment can be
loved in a way more healthy and robust, more
in accordance with the ways of nature, more
simple, direct, and animal, and yet more un-
selfish and fruitful, than is possible to parents
starved, hungry, and eager, reaching out to the


286


re


SEX AND INDIVIDUAL WELL-BEING


helpless young for some fragment of the
nutriment that has been denied them in mar-
riage, and in so doing, warping infant minds
and laying the foundation of the same troubles
for the next generation. To fear love is to fear
life, and those who fear life are already three
parts dead.


287


CHAPTER XX


THE PLACE OF SEX
AMONG HUMAN VALUES


HE writer who deals with a sexual theme

is always in danger of being accused, by
those who think that such themes should not
be mentioned, of an undue obsession with his
subject. It is thought that he would not risk the
censure of prudish and prurient persons unless
his interest in the subject were out of all pro-
portion to its importance. This view, however,
is only taken in the case of those who advocate
changes in the conventional ethic. Those who
stimulate the appeals to harry prostitutes and
those who secure legislation, nominally against
the White Slave Traffic, but really against vol-
untary and decent extra-marital relations;
those who denounce women for short skirts
and lipsticks; and those who spy upon sea
beaches in the hope of discovering inadequate
bathing costumes, are none of them supposed
to be the victims of a sexual obsession. Yet in
fact they probably suffer much more in this


288


THE PLACE OF SEX AMONG HUMAN VALUES


way than do writers who advocate greater sex-
ual freedom. Fierce morality is generally a re-
action against lustful emotions, and the man
who gives expression to it is generally filled
with indecent thoughts—thoughts which are
rendered indecent, not by the mere fact that
they have a sexual content, but that morality
has incapacitated the thinker from thinking
cleanly and wholesomely on this topic. I am
quite in agreement with the Church in think-
ing that obsession with sexual topics is an evil,
but I am not in agreement with the Church as
to the best methods of avoiding this evil. It is
notorious that St. Anthony was more obsessed
by sex than the most extreme voluptuary who
ever lived; I will not adduce more recent ex-
amples for fear of giving offence. Sex is a nat-
ural need, like food and drink. We blame the
gormandiser and the dipsomaniac because in
the case of each an interest which has a certain
legitimate place in life has usurped too large a
share of his thoughts and emotions. But we do
not blame a man for a normal and healthy
enjoyment of a reasonable quantity of food.
Ascetics, it is true, have done so, and have con-
sidered that a man should cut down his nutri-
ment to the lowest point compatible with sur-


289


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


vival, but this view is not now common, and
may be ignored. The Puritans, in their deter-
mination to avoid the pleasures of sex, became
somewhat more conscious than people had been
before of the pleasures of the table. As a seven-
teenth-century critic of Puritanism says:


“Would you enjoy gay nights and pleasant dinners?
Then must you board with saints and bed with sinners.”


It would seem, therefore, that the Puritans did
not succeed in subduing the purely corporeal
part of our human nature, since what they took
away from sex they added to gluttony. Glut-
tony is regarded by the Catholic Church as one
of the seven deadly sins, and those who prac-
tise it are placed by Dante in one of the deeper
circles of hell, but it is a somewhat vague sin,
since it is hard to say where a legitimate inter-
est in food ceases, and guilt begins to be in-
curred. Is it wicked to eat anything that is not
nourishing? If so, with every salted almond we
risk damnation. Such views, however, are out
of date. Weall knowa glutton when we see one,
and although he may be somewhat despised, he
is not severely reprobated. In spite of this fact,
undue obsession with food is rare among those
who have never suffered want. Most people eat


290


7 A Z .
is De


THE PLACE OF SEX AMONG HUMAN VALUES


their meals and then think about other things
until the next meal. Those, on the other hand,
who, having adopted an ascetic philosophy,
have deprived themselves of all but the min-
imum of food, become obsessed by visions of
banquets and dreams of demons bearing lus-
cious fruits. And marooned Antarctic explor-
ers, reduced to a diet of whale’s blubber, spend
their days planning the dinner they will have
at the Carlton when they get home.

Such facts suggest that, if sex is not to be an
obsession, it should be regarded by the moral-
ists as food has come to be regarded, and not
as food was regarded by the hermits of the
Thebaid. Sex is a natural human need like
food and drink. It is true that men can survive
without it, whereas they cannot survive with-
out food and drink, but from a psychological
standpoint the desire for sex is precisely anal-
ogous to the desire for food and drink. It is
enormously enhanced by abstinence, and tem-
porarily allayed by satisfaction. While it is
urgent, it shuts out the rest of the world from
the mental purview. All other interests fade
for the moment, and actions may be performed
which will subsequently appear insane to the
man who has been guilty of them. Moreover,


291


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


as in the case of food and drink, the desire is
enormously stimulated by prohibition. I have
known children refuse apples at breakfast and
go straight out into the orchard and steal them,
although the breakfast apples were ripe and
the stolen apples unripe. I do not think it can
be denied that the desire for alcohol among
well-to-do Americans is much stronger than it
was twenty years ago. In like manner, Chris-
tian teaching and Christian authority have im-
mensely stimulated interest in sex. The genera-
tion which first ceases to believe in the conven-
tional teaching is bound, therefore, to indulge
in sexual freedom to a degree far beyond what
is to be expected of those whose views on
sex are unaffected by superstitious teaching,
whether positively or negatively. Nothing but
freedom will prevent undue obsession with sex,
but even freedom will not have this effect un-
less it has become habitual and has been associ-
ated with a wise education as regards sexual
matters. I wish to repeat, however, as em-
phatically as I can, that I regard an undue pre-
occupation with this topic as an evil, and that
I think this evil widespread at the present day,
especially in America, where I find it particu-
larly pronounced among the sterner moralists,


292


THE PLACE OF SEX AMONG HUMAN VALUES


who display it markedly by their readiness to
believe falsehoods concerning those whom they
regard as their opponents. The glutton, the
voluptuary, and the ascetic are all self-absorbed
persons whose horizon is limited by their own
desires, either by way of satisfaction or by way
of renunciation. A man who is healthy in mind
and body will not have his interests thus con-
centrated upon himself. He will look out upon
the world and find in it objects that seem to
him worthy of his attention. Absorption in self
is not, as some have supposed, the natural con-
dition of unregenerate man. It is a disease
brought on, almost always, by some thwarting
of natural impulses. The voluptuary who gloats
over thoughts of sexual gratification is in gen-
eral the result of some kind of deprivation, just
as the man who hoards food is usually a man
who has lived through a famine or a period of
destitution. Healthy, outward-looking men and
women are not to be produced by the thwart-
ing of natural impulse, but by the equal and
balanced development of all the impulses es-
sential to a happy life.

I am not suggesting that there should be no
morality and no self-restraint in regard to sex,
any more than in regard to food. In regard to


293


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


food we have restraints of three kinds, those
of law, those of manners, and those of health.
We regard it as wrong to steal food, to take
more than our share at a common meal, and to
eat in ways that are likely to make us ill. Re-
straints of a similar kind are essential where
sex is concerned, but in this case they are much
more complex and involve much more self-con-
trol. Moreover, since one human being ought
not to have property in another, the analogy of
stealing is not adultery but rape, which obvi-
ously must be forbidden by law. The questions
that arise in regard to health are concerned al-
most entirely with venereal disease, a subject
which we have already touched upon in con-
nection with prostitution. Clearly, the diminu-
tion of professional prostitution is the best
way, apart from medicine, of dealing with this
evil, and diminution of professional prostitu-
tion can be best effected by that greater free-
dom among young people which has been
growing up in recent years.

A comprehensive sexual ethic cannot regard
sex merely as a natural hunger and a possible
source of danger. Both these points of view
are important, but it is even more important to
remember that sex is connected with some of


204


THE PLACE OF SEX AMONG HUMAN VALUES


the greatest goods in human life. The three
that seem paramount are lyric love, happiness
in marriage, and art. Of lyric love and marriage
we have already spoken. Art is thought by
some to be independent of sex, but this view
has fewer adherents now than it had in former
times. It is fairly clear that the impulse to every
kind of esthetic creation is psychologically
connected with courtship, not necessarily in
any direct or obvious way, but none the less
profoundly. In order that the sexual impulse
may lead to artistic expression, a number of
conditions are necessary. There must be artistic
capacity; but artistic capacity, even within a
given race, appears as though it were common
at one time and uncommon at another, from
which it is safe to conclude that environment,
as opposed to native capacity, has an impor-
tant part to play in the development of the ar-
tistic impulse. There must be a certain kind of
freedom, not the sort that consists in reward-
ing the artist, but the sort that consists in not
compelling him or inducing him to form habits
which turn him into a philistine. When Julius
II imprisoned Michelangelo, he did not in any
way interfere with that kind of freedom which
the artist needs. He imprisoned him because he


295


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


considered him an important man, and would
not tolerate the slightest offence to him from
anybody whose rank was less than papal.
When, however, an artist is compelled to kow-
tow to.rich patrons or town councillors, and to
adapt his work to their zsthetic canons, his
artistic freedom is lost. And when he is com-
pelled by fear of social and economic persecu-
tion to go on living in a marriage which has
become intolerable, he is deprived of the energy
which artistic creation requires. Societies that
have been conventionally virtuous have not
produced great art. Those which have, have
been composed of men such as Idaho would
sterilize. America at present imports most of
its artistic talent from Europe, where, as yet,
freedom lingers, but already the Americaniza-
tion of Europe is making it necessary to turn
to the negroes. The last home of art, it seems,
is to be somewhere on the Upper Congo, if not
in the uplands of Tibet. But its final extinction
cannot be long delayed, since the rewards
which America is prepared to lavish upon for-
eign artists are such as must inevitably bring
about their artistic death. Art in the past has
had a popular basis, and this has depended
upon joy of life. Joy of life, in its turn, depends


296


THE PLACE OF SEX AMONG HUMAN VALUES


upon a certain spontaneity in regard to sex.
Where sex is repressed, only work remains,
and a gospel of work for work’s sake never pro-
duced any work worth doing. Let me not be
told that some one has collected statistics of the
number of sexual acts per diem (or shall we say
per noctem?) performed in the United States,
and that it is at least as great per head as in
any other country. I do not know whether this
is the case or not, and I am not in any way con-
cerned to deny it. One of the most dangerous
fallacies of the conventional moralists is the
reduction of sex to the sexual act, in order to
be the better able to belabour it. No civilized
man, and no savage that I have ever heard of,
is satisfied in his instinct by the bare sexual act.
If the impulse which leads to the act is to be
satisfied, there must be courtship, there must
be love, there must be companionship. With-
out these, while the physical hunger may be
appeased for the moment, the mental hunger
remains unabated, and no profound satisfac-
tion can be obtained. The sexual freedom that
the artist needs is freedom to love, not the
gross freedom to relieve the bodily need with
some unknown woman; and freedom to love is
what, above all, the conventional moralists will


297


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


not concede. If art is to revive after the world
has been Americanized, it will be necessary that
America should change, that its moralists
should become less moral and its immoralists
less immoral, that both, in a word, should rec-
ognize the higher values involved in sex, and
the possibility that joy may be of more value
than a bank-account. Nothing in America is so
painful to the traveller as the lack of joy. Pleas-
ure is frantic and bacchanalian, a matter of
momentary oblivion, not of delighted self-ex-
pression. Men whose grandfathers danced to
the music of the pipe in Balkan or Polish vil-
lages sit throughout the day glued to their
desks, amid typewriters and telephones, seri-
ous, important and worthless. Escaping in the
evening to drink and a new kind of noise, they
imagine that they are finding happiness, where-
as they are finding only a frenzied and incom-
plete oblivion of the hopeless routine of money
that breeds money, using for the purpose the
bodies of human beings whose souls have been
sold into slavery.

It is not my intention to suggest, what I by
no means believe, that all that is best in human
life is connected with sex. I do not myself re-
gard science, either practical or theoretical, as


298


THE.PLACE OF SEX AMONG HUMAN VALUES


connected with it, nor yet certain kinds of im-
portant social and political activities. The im-
pulses that lead to the complex desires of adult
life can be arranged under a few simple heads.
Power, sex, and parenthood appear to me to be
the source of most of the things that human
beings do, apart from what is necessary for self-
preservation. Of these three, power begins first
and ends last. The child, since he has very
little power, is dominated by the desire to have
more. Indeed, a large proportion of his activi-
‘ties spring from this desire. His other dom-
inant desire is vanity—the wish to be praised
and the fear of being blamed or left out. It is
vanity that makes him a social being and gives
him the virtues necessary for life in a com-
munity. Vanity is a motive closely intertwined
with sex, though in theory separable from it.
But power has, so far as I can see, very little
connection with sex, and it is love of power,
at least as much as vanity, that makes a child
work at his lessons and develop his muscles.
Curiosity and the pursuit of knowledge should,
I think, be regarded as a branch of the love of
power. If knowledge is power, then the love of
knowledge is the love of power. Science, there-
fore, except for certain branches of biology and


sd


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


physiology, must be regarded as lying outside
the province of sexual emotions. As the Em-
peror Frederick II is no longer alive, this opin-
ion must remain more or less hypothetical. If
he were still alive, he would no doubt decide it
by castrating an eminent mathematician and
an eminent composer and observing the effects
upon their respective labours. I should expect
the former to be nil and the latter to be con-
siderable. Seeing that the pursuit of knowledge
is one of the most valuable elements in human
nature, a very important sphere of activity is,
if we are right, exempted from the domination
of sex.

Power is also the motive to most political
activity, understanding this word in its widest
sense. I do not mean to suggest that a great
statesman is indifferent to the public welfare;
on the contrary, I believe him to be a man in
whom parental feeling has become widely dif-
fused. But unless he has also a considerable
love of power he will fail to sustain the labours
necessary for success in a political enterprise.
I have known many highminded men in public
affairs, but unless they had a considerable dose
of personal ambition they seldom had the en-
ergy to accomplish the good at which they


300


THE PLACE OF SEX AMONG HUMAN VALUES


aimed. On a certain crucial occasion, Abraham
Lincoln made a speech to two recalcitrant sen-
ators, beginning and ending with the words:
“Tt am the President of the United States,
clothed with great power.” It can hardly be
questioned that he found some pleasure in as-
serting this fact. Throughout all politics, both
for good and for evil, the two chief forces are
the economic motive and the love of power; an
attempt to interpret politics on Freudian lines
is, to my mind, a mistake.

If we are right in what we have been saying,
most of the greatest men, other than artists,
have been actuated in their important activities
by motives unconnected with sex. If such ac-
tivities are to persist and are, in their humbler
forms, to become common, it is necessary that
sex should not overshadow the remainder of a
man’s emotional and passionate nature. The
desire to understand the world and the desire
to reform it are the two great engines of prog-
ress, without which human society would stand
still or retrogress. It may be that too complete
a happiness would cause the impulses to knowl-
edge and reform to fade. When Cobden wished
to enlist John Bright in the free trade cam-
paign, he based a personal appeal upon the sor-


301


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


row that Bright was experiencing owing to his
wife’s recent death. It may be that without this
sorrow Bright would have had less sympathy
with the sorrows of others. And many a man
has been driven to abstract pursuits by despair
of the actual world. To a man of sufficient
energy, pain may be a valuable stimulus, and
I do not deny that if we were all perfectly
happy we should not exert ourselves to become
happier. But I cannot admit that it is any part
of the duty of human beings to provide others
with pain on the off chance that it may prove
fruitful. In ninety-nine cases out of a hundred
pain proves merely crushing. In the hundredth
case it is better to trust to the natural shocks
that flesh is heir to. So long as there is death
there will be sorrow, and so long as there is
sorrow it can be no part of the duty of human
beings to increase its amount, in spite of the
fact that a few rare spirits know how to trans-
mute it.


302


CHAPTER XXI


CONCLUSION


N the course of our discussion we have been

: led to certain conclusions, some historical,
some ethical. Historically, we found that sex-
ual morality, as it exists in civilized societies,
has been derived from two quite different
sources, on the one hand desire for certainty as
to fatherhood, on the other an ascetic belief
that sex is wicked, except in so far as it is
necessary for propagation. Morality in pre-
Christian times, and in the Far East down to
the present day, had only the former source,
except in India and Persia, which are the cen-
tres from which asceticism appears to have
spread. The desire to make sure of paternity
does not, of course, exist in those backward
races which are ignorant of the fact that the
male has any part in generation. Among them,
although masculine jealousy places certain
limitations upon female licence, women are on
the whole much freer than in early patriarchal
societies. It is clear that in the transition there


303


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


must have been considerable friction, and the
restraints upon women’s freedom were doubt-
less considered necessary by men who took an
interest in being the fathers of their own chil-
dren. At this stage, sexual morality existed
only for women. A man might not commit
adultery with a married woman, but otherwise
he was free.

With Christianity, the new motive of avoid-
ance of sin enters in, and the moral standard
becomes in theory the same for men as for
women, though in practice the difficulty of en-
forcing it upon men has always led to a greater
toleration of their failings than of those of
women. Early sexual morality had a plain bio-
logical purpose, namely to ensure that the
young should have the protection of two par-
ents during their early years and not only of
one. The purpose was lost sight of in Christian
theory, though not in Christian practice.

In quite modern times there have been signs
that both the Christian and the pre-Christian
parts of sexual morality are undergoing modi-
fication. The Christian part has not the hold
that it formerly had, because of the decay of
religious orthodoxy and the diminishing in-
tensity of belief even among those who still be-


304


CONCLUSION


lieve. Men and women born during the present
century, although their unconscious is apt to
retain the old attitudes, do not, for the most
part, consciously believe that fornication as
such is sin. As for the pre-Christian elements in
sexual ethics, these have been modified by one
factor, and are in process of being modified by
yet another. The first of these factors is the
use of contraceptives, which are making it in-
creasingly possible to prevent sexual inter-
course from leading to pregnancy, and are
therefore enabling women, if unmarried, to
avoid children altogether, and if married, to
have children only by their husbands, without
in either case finding it necessary to be chaste.
This process is not yet complete, because con-
traceptives are not yet wholly reliable, but one
may, I think, assume that before very long
they will become so. In that case, assurance of
paternity will become possible without the in-
sistence that women shall have no sexual inter-
course outside marriage. It may be said that
women could deceive their husbands on the
point, but after all it has been possible from
the earliest times for women to deceive their
husbands, and the motive for deception is
much less strong when the question is merely


305


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


who shall be the father than when it is whether
there shall be intercourse with a person who
may be passionately loved. One may, therefore,
assume that deceit as to paternity, though it
may occasionally occur, will be less frequent
than deceit as to adultery has been in the past.
It is also by no means impossible that the jeal-
ousy of husbands should, by a new convention,
adapt itself to the new situation, and arise only
when wives propose to choose some other man
as the father of their children. In the East, men
have always tolerated liberties on the part of
eunuchs which most European husbands would
resent. They have tolerated them because they
introduce no doubt as to paternity. The same
kind of toleration might easily be extended to
liberties accompanied by the use of contracep-
tives.

The bi-parental family may, therefore, sur-
vive in the future without making such great
demands upon the continence of women as it
had to make in the past. A second factor, how-
ever, in the change which is coming over sex-
ual morals, is liable to have more far-reaching
effects. This is the increasing participation of
the State in the maintenance and education of
children. This factor, so far, operates in Europe


306


CONCLUSION


more than in America, and affects mainly the
wage-earning classes, but they, after all, are a
majority of the population, and it is quite likely
that the substitution of the State for the father,
which is gradually taking place where they are
concerned, will ultimately extend to the whole
population. The part of the father, in animal
families as with the human family, has been to
provide protection and maintenance, but in
civilized communities protection is provided by
the police, and maintenance may come to be
provided wholly by the State, so far, at any
rate, as the poorer sections of the population
are concerned. If that were so, the father would
cease to serve any obvious purpose. With re-
gard to the mother, there are two possibilities.
She may continue her ordinary work and have
her children cared for in institutions, or she
may, if the law so decides, be paid by the State
to care for her children while they are young.
If the latter course is adopted, it may be used
for a while to bolster up traditional morality,
since a woman who is not virtuous may be de-
prived of payment. But if she is deprived of
payment she will be unable to support her chil-
dren unless she goes to work, and it will, there-
fore, be necessary to put her children in some


307


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


institution. It would seem probable, therefore,
that the operation of economic forces may lead
to the elimination of the father, and even to a
great extent of the mother, in the care of chil-
dren whose parents are not rich. If so, all the
traditional reasons for traditional morality
will have disappeared, and new reasons will
have to be found for a new morality.

The break-up of the family, if it comes about,
will not be, to my mind, a matter for rejoicing.
The affection of parents is important to chil-
dren, and institutions, if they exist on a large
scale, are sure to become very official and
rather harsh. There will be a terrible degree of
uniformity when the differentiating influence
of different home environments is removed.
And unless an international government is
previously established, the children of different
countries will be taught a virulent form of
patriotism which will make it nearly certain
that they will exterminate each other when
grown up. The necessity for an international
government arises also in regard to popula-
tion, since in its absence nationalists have a
motive for encouraging a greater increase of
numbers than is desirable, and, with the prog-
ress of medicine and hygiene, the only remain- —


308


CONCLUSION


ing method of disposing of excessive numbers
will be war.

While the sociological questions are often
difficult and complicated, the personal ques-
tions are, to my mind, quite simple. The doc-
trine that there is something sinful about sex
is one which has done untold harm to indi-
vidual character—a harm beginning in early
childhood and continuing throughout life. By
keeping sex love in a prison, conventional
morality has done much to imprison all other
forms of friendly feeling, and to make men less
generous, less kindly, more self-assertive and
more cruel. Whatever sexual ethic may come
to be ultimately accepted must be free from
superstition and must have recognizable and
demonstrable grounds in its favour. Sex cannot
dispense with an ethic, any more than business
or sport or scientific research or any other
branch of human activity. But it can dispense
with an ethic based solely upon ancient pro-
hibitions propounded by uneducated people in
a society wholly unlike our own. In sex, as in
economics and in politics, our ethic is still
dominated by fears which modern discoveries
have made irrational, and the benefit to be de-
rived from those discoveries is largely lost


309


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


through failure of psychological adaptation to
them.

It is true that the transition from the old
system to the new has its own difficulties, as
all transitions have. These who advocate any
ethical innovation are invariably accused, like
Socrates, of being corrupters of youth; nor is
this accusation always wholly unfounded, even
when in fact the new ethic which they preach
would, if accepted in its entirety, lead to a bet-
ter life than the old ethic which they seek to
amend. Every one who knows the Mahom-
etan East asserts that those who have ceased
to think it necessary to pray five times a day
have also ceased to respect other moral rules
which we consider more important. The man
who proposes any change in sexual morality
is especially liable to be misinterpreted in this
way, and I am conscious myself of having said
things which some readers may have misinter-
preted.

The general principle upon which the newer
morality differs from the traditional morality
of puritanism is this: we believe that instinct
should be trained rather than thwarted. Put in
these general terms, the view is one which
would win very wide acceptance among mod-


310


CONCLUSION


ern men and women, but it is one which is fully
valid only when accepted with its full implica-
tions and applied from the earliest years. If in
childhood instinct is thwarted rather than
trained, the result may be that it has to be to
some extent thwarted throughout later life,
because it will have taken on highly undesir-
able forms as a result of thwarting in early
years. The morality which I should advocate
does not consist simply of saying to grown-up
people or to adolescents: “Follow your im-
pulses and do as you like.” There has to be
consistency in life; there has to be continuous
effort directed to ends that are not immediately
beneficial and not at every moment attractive;
there has to be consideration for others; and
there should be certain standards of rectitude.
I should not, however, regard self-control as
an end in itself, and I should wish our institu-
tions and our moral conventions to be such as
to make the need for self-control a minimum
rather than a maximum. The use of self-
control is like the use of brakes on a train. It
is useful when you find yourself going in the
wrong direction, but merely harmful when the
direction is right. No one would maintain that
a train ought always to be run with the brakes


311


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


on, yet the habit of difficult self-control has a
very similar injurious effect upon the energies
available for useful activity. Self-control causes
these energies to be largely wasted on internal
friction instead of external activity; and on
this account it is always regrettable, though
sometimes necessary.

The degree to which self-control is necessary
in lifé depends upon the early treatment of in-
stinct. Instincts, as they exist in children, may
lead to useful activities or harmful ones, just
as the steam in a locomotive may take it
toward its destination or into a siding where
it is smashed by an accident. The function of
education is to guide instinct into the direc-
tions in which it will develop useful rather than
harmful activities. If this task has been ade-
quately performed in early years, a man or
woman will, as a rule, be able to live a useful
life without the need of severe self-control,
except, perhaps, at a few rare crises. If on the
other hand early education has consisted in a
mere thwarting of instinct, the acts to which
instinct prompts in later life will be partly
harmful, and will therefore have to be con-
tinually restrained by self-control.

These general considerations apply with


312


CONCLUSION


peculiar force to sexual impulses, both because
of their great strength and because of the fact
that traditional morality has made them its
peculiar concern. Most traditional moralists
appear to think that, if our sexual impulses
were not severely checked, they would become
trivial, anarchic and gross. I believe this view
to be derived from observation of those who
have acquired the usual inhibitions from their
early years and have subsequently attempted
to ignore them. But in such men the early
prohibitions are still operative even when they
do not succeed in prohibiting. What is called
conscience, that is to say the unreasoning and
more or less unconscious acceptance of pre-
cepts learnt in early youth, causes men still
to feel that whatever the conventions prohibit
is wrong, and this feeling may persist in spite
of intellectual convictions to the contrary. It
thus produces a personality divided against it-
self, one in which instinct and reason no longer
go hand in hand, but instinct has become
trivial and reason has become anaemic. One
finds in the modern world various different de-
grees of revolt against conventional teaching.
The commonest of all is the revolt of the man
who intellectually acknowledges the ethical


313


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


truth of the morality he was taught in youth,
but confesses, with a more or less unreal re-
gret, that he is not sufficiently heroic to live
up to it. For such a man there is little to be
said. It would be better that he should alter
either his practice or his beliefs in such a way
as to bring harmony between them. Next
comes the man whose conscious reason has re-
jected much that he learnt in the nursery, but
whose unconscious still accepts it in its en-
tirety. Such a man will suddenly change his
line of conduct under the stress of any strong
emotion, especially fear. A serious illness or an
earthquake may cause him to repent and to
abandon his intellectual convictions as the re-
sult of an uprush of infantile beliefs. Even
at ordinary times his behaviour will be inhib-
ited, and the inhibitions may take an unde-
sirable form. They will not prevent him from
acting in ways that are condemned by tradi-
tional morals, but they will prevent him from
doing so in a whole-hearted way, and will thus
eliminate from his actions some of the ele-
ments that would have given them value. The
substitution of a new moral code for the old
one can never be completely satisfactory un-
less the new one is accepted with the whole


314


CONCLUSION


personality, not only with that top layer which
constitutes our conscious thought. To most
people this is very difficult if throughout their
early years they have been exposed to the old
morality. It is therefore impossible to judge a
new morality fairly until it has been applied
in early education.

-Sex morality has to be derived from certain
general principles, as to which there is perhaps
a fairly wide measure of agreement, in spite of
the wide disagreement as to the consequences
to be drawn from them. The first thing to be
secured is that there should be as much as
possible of that deep, serious love between man
and woman which embraces the whole person-
ality of both and leads to a fusion by which
each is enriched and enhanced. The second
thing of importance is that there should be
adequate care of children, physical and psy-
chological. Neither of these principles in itself
can be considered in any way shocking, yet it
is as a consequence of these two principles that
I should advocate certain modifications of the
conventional code. Most men and women, as
things stand, are incapable of being as whole-
hearted and as generous in the love that they
bring to marriage as they would be if their


319


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


early years had been less hedged about with
taboos. They either lack the necessary experi-
ence, or they have gained it in furtive and un-
desirable ways. Moreover, since jealousy has
the sanction of moralists, they feel justified in
keeping each other in a mutual prison. It is,
of course, a very good thing when a husband
and wife love each other so completely that
neither is ever tempted to unfaithfulness; it is
not, however, a good thing that unfaithfulness,
if it does occur, should be treated as something
terrible, nor is it desirable to go so far as to
make all friendship with persons of the other
sex impossible. A good life cannot be founded
upon fear, prohibition, and mutual interference
with freedom. Where faithfulness is achieved
without these, it is good, but where all this is
necessary it may well be that too high a price
has been paid, and that a little mutual tolera-
tion of occasional lapses would be better. There
can be no doubt that mutual jealousy, even
where there is physical faithfulness, often
causes more unhappiness in a marriage than
would be caused if there were more confidence
in the ultimate strength of a deep and per-
manent affection.

The obligations of parents toward children


316


CONCLUSION


are treated far more lightly than seems to me
right by many persons who consider them-
selves virtuous. Given the present system of
the biparental family, as soon as there are
children it is the duty of both parties to a
marriage to do everything that they can to
preserve harmonious relations, even if this re-
quires considerable self-control. But the con-
trol required is not merely, as conventional
moralists pretend, that involved in restraining
every impulse to unfaithfulness; it is just as
important to control impulses to jealousy, ill-
temper, masterfulness, and so on. There can
be no doubt that serious quarrels between
parents are a very frequent cause of nervous
disorders in children; therefore whatever can
be done to prevent such quarrels should be
done. At the same time, where one or both
parties have not sufficient self-control to pre-
vent disagreements from coming to the knowl-
edge of the children, it may well be better that
the marriage should be dissolved. It is by no
means the case that the dissolution of a mar-
riage is invariably the worst thing possible
from the point of view of the children; indeed
it is not nearly so bad as the spectacle of raised
voices, furious accusations, perhaps even vio-


317


MARRIAGE AND MORALS
lence, to which many children are exposed in
bad homes.

It must not be supposed that the sort of
thing which a sane advocate of greater free-
dom desires is to be achieved at once by leav-
ing adults, or even adolescents, who have been
brought up under the old severe restrictive
maxims, to the unaided promptings of the
damaged impulses which are all the moralists
have left to them. This is a necessary stage,
since otherwise they will bring up their chil-
dren as badly as they were brought up; but it
is no more than a stage. Sane freedom must
be learnt from the earliest years, since other-
wise the only freedom possible will be a frivo-
lous, superficial freedom, not freedom of the
whole personality. Trivial impulses will lead to
physical excesses, while the spirit remains in
fetters. Instinct rightly trained from the first
can produce something much better than what
results from an education inspired by a Cal-
vinistic belief in original sin, but when such an
education has been allowed to do its evil work,
it is exceedingly difficult to undo the effect in
later years. One of the most important benefits
which psycho-analysis has conferred upon the
world is its discovery of the bad effects of pro-

318


CONCLUSION


hibitions and threats in early childhood; to
undo this effect may require all the time and
technique of a psycho-analytic treatment. This
is true not only of those obvious neurotics who
have suffered damage visible to every one; it is
true also of most apparently normal people. I
believe that nine out of ten of those who have
had a conventional upbringing in their early
years have become in some degree incapable
of a decent and sane attitude toward marriage
and sex generally. The kind of attitude and
behaviour that I should regard as the best has
been rendered impossible for such people; the
best that can be done is to make them aware
of the damage that they have sustained and to
persuade them to abstain from maiming their
children in the same way in which they have
been maimed.

The doctrine that I wish to preach is not
one of licence; it involves exactly as much self-
control as is involved in the conventional doc-
trine. But self-control will be applied more to
abstaining from interference with the freedom
of others than to restraining one’s own free-
dom. It may, I think, be hoped that with the
right education from the start this respect for
the personality and freedom of others may be-


319


MARRIAGE AND MORALS


come comparatively easy; but for those of us
who have been brought up to believe that we
have a right to place a veto upon the actions of
others in the name of virtue, it is undoubtedly
difficult to forgo the exercise of this agreeable
form of persecution. It may even be impossible.
But it is not to be inferred that it would be
impossible to those who had been taught from
the first a less restrictive morality. The essence
of a good marriage is respect for each other’s
personality combined with that deep intimacy,
physical, mental, and spiritual, which makes a
serious love between man and woman the most
fructifying of all human experiences. Such
love, like everything that is great and precious,
demands its own morality, and frequently en-
tails a sacrifice of the less to the greater; but
such sacrifice must be voluntary, for, where it
is not, it will destroy the very basis of the love
for the sake of which it is made.


THE END


320


Seed eOtotooooy


+ @
