A Critical Exposition of the Philosophy of Leibniz (Bertrand Russell, 1900)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/dli.bengal.10689.14713). Russell's landmark study of Leibniz, reading him through the new logic — a founding text of analytic history of philosophy.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

A CRITICAL EXPOSITION

OF THE

PHILOSOPHY OF LEIBNIZ.


UonUon: c. j. clay and sons,

<JAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE,

AVE MARIA LANE.

©laaBoto: .TO, WELLINGTON STllEKT.


Ifipyis: F. A. BROCEHAUS.

?|ork: THE MACMILLAN COMPANY.
MombaQ: E. SEYMOUR HALE.


PKINTKO


tETiinilirt&gt:

BY J. ANU C. P.


CLAY,


AT THR UNIVEllHITV I'UESS


PllEFACE.

The history of philosophy IkS a study which proposes to
itself two s«)rnowhat different objects, of whicli the first is
mainly historical, while the second is mainly philosophical.
J?rom this cause it is apt to result that., wht're we look for
history of philosophy, wo fiud rather history and philosophy.
Questions concerning the iiifluenco of the times or of other
philosophers, concerning the growth of a philosopher’s
system, and (be causes which suggested his leading ideas—
all these are truly historical: they require for their answer
a considerable knowledge of the prevailing education, of the
public to whom it was necessary to appeal, and of the scientific
and political events of the period in question. But it may
be doubted how fixr the topics dealt with in works where these
elements predominate can be called properly philosophical.
There is a tendericy—which the so-called historical spirit has
greatly increased—to pay so much attention to the relations
of philo-sophies that the philosophies themselves are neglected.
Successive philosophies may be compiired, we compare

t •

.successive forms of a pattern or design, with little or no
regal'd to their meaning: an influence may he established by
(jl^mentary evidence, or by identity of phrase, without apy
comprehension of the systems whose cfiusal relations are under
discussion. But there remains always a purely philosophical
attitude towards previous philosophers—an attitude in which,

h 2


VI


PREFACE.


without regard to dates or influences, we 'sketi simply to dis¬
cover what are the great types of possible philosophies, and
guide ourselves in the search by investigating the systems t
advocated by the great philosophers of the past. iTifere is-*:'
still, ill this inquiry—what is, after all, perhaps the most im¬
portant of the historical questions—the problem as to the
actual views of the philosopher W'ho is to be investigated. But
these views are now examined in a dilferent spirit. Whe/'e we
are inquiring into the opinions of a truly eminent philosopher,
it is probable that these opinions will form, in the main, a
closely connccteil system, and that, by learning to understand
them, we shall ourselves ac([uire knowledge of important philo¬
sophic truths. And since the jihilosophies of the past belong
to one or other of a few great types—types which in our owp
day are perpetually recurring—wc may learn, from examining
the greatest representative of any typo, what are the grounds
for such a philosophy. We may even learn, by observing the
contradictions and inconsistencies from which no .sy.stein hitherto
propounded is free, what are the fundamental objections to
the type in question, and how those objections are to be
avoided. But in such inquiries the philosopher is no longer
explained psychologically: he is examined as the advocate of
what ho holds to be a body of philosophic truth. By what
process of development he came to this opinion, though in
itself an important and interesting question, is logically irrele¬
vant to the inquiry how far the opinion itself is correct; and
among his opinions, when these have been ascertained, it
becomes desirable to prune away such as setm inconsistent
with bis main doctrines, before those doctrines themselves are,
subjected to a critical scrutiny. Philosophic truth and false¬
hood, in short, rather than historical fact, are what prima^^
demand our attention in this imiuiry.

It is this latter task, and not the more strictly historical
one, that I have endeavoured to perform towards Leibniz. The


PREFACE.


Vll


historical task lia^ Been admirably performed by others, notably
Professor Stein, in works to which I have nothing to add; but
• the more philosopliical task appears to be still unperformed.
•ErdmarSi’s excellent account of Leibniz in his larger history
(1842), from which I have learnt more than from any other
commentary, was written in ignorance of the letters to Arnauld,
and of much other imi)<)rtant material which has been pnb-
lishetl since the date of Erdmann’s edition of Leibniz (1840).
And siftce hi.s» day, the traditional view of our philosopher’s
system appears to have been st) deejdy rooted in tlie minds of
commentators that the importance of new manuscripts has
not, I think, been duly recogniz«5d. Dillmarm, it is true, has
written a book whose object is similar to that of the present
i<vork, and has emphasized—rightly as it seems to me—the
danger of obtaining our opinions of Leibniz from the Monad-
ology. But it may be doubted whether Dillmarm has suc¬
ceeded as ivell in understanding the moaning of Leibniz as in
ina.stering the text of his writings.

A few personal remarks may serve to explain why I believe
a book on Leibniz to be not wdiollv uncalled for. In the Lent

V

Term of 1899 I delivered a course of lectures on the Phi¬
losophy of Leibniz at Trinity College, Cambridge. In pre¬
paring these lect\ircs, I found myself, after reading most of the
standard commentators and most of Leibniz’s connected trea¬
tises, still completely in the <lark Jis to the grounds which
had led him to many of his opinions. Why he thought that
monads cannot interact; how he became persuatled of the
Identity of Indiscernibles; what he meant by the law of Suf-
^ficient Beason—these and many other questions seemed to
demand an answer, but to find none. I felt—as many others
felt—that the Monadology was a kind of fantastic fairy
tale, coherent perhaps, but wholly arbitrary. At this point
. I read the Discours de Metaphysique and the letters to Arnauld.
Suddenly a flood of light was thrown on all the inmost recesses


Vlll


PREFACE.


of Leibniz’s philosophical edifice. I saw hbw its foundations
were laid, and how its superstructure rose out of them. It
appeared that this seemingly fantastic system could be do-
duced from a few simple premisses, which, but for Che coD*<'
elusions which Leibuiz had drawn from them, many, if not
most, philosophers would have been willing to admit. It seemed
not unreasonable to hope that the passages which had seemed
illuminating to mo would seem so also to others. 1 have .there¬
fore, in what follows, begun with the doctrines contAiued in
those pasH.agc8, and endeavoured as far as possible to exhibit
the theory of monads as a rigid deduction from a small number
of premisses. The monad thus appears, not at the beginning
of the exposition, but after a long preliminary chain of
reasoning. And it must, I think, be allowed that, if thw"''
account be correct, Leibniz’s value as a philo.sophcr is very
much greater than that which would result from the customary
expositions.

I have added an Appendix of classified extracts, in which
it has been my object to include at least one definite pro¬
nouncement, wherever one could be found, on every point in
Leibniz’s philosophy. On moot points, or points on which he
is inconsistent, I have in general given several quotations.

1 have given the date of a passage whenever it is not later
than 1686, or seems important for some other reason. Passages
referred to in the text are generally quoted in the corresponding
paragraph of the Appendix, except when they have been already
referred to and (juoted in an earlier paragraph; but passages
quoted in the text are in general not repeated in the Appendix.
Fof convenience of reference, I have made an index of the^
Appendix, so that any passage contained in it can be found
at once by the reference. I have translated all passages quotN^,
and have nowhere assumed any knowledge of a foreign lan¬
guage. I have also endeavoured to assume no previous ac¬
quaintance with Leibniz beyond what can be obtained from


^0


PREFACE.


IX


I • ••

Mr. Latta’s excellent translations. In (luoting passages trans¬
lated by hijji I have in general followed his translation; but

• the translations of Mr. Duncan and Mr. Langley I have usually

* found* il necessary to correct. In quoting from the papers
against Clarke, I have followed Clarke's translation wh«‘rever
this is not seriously inaccurate.

I have to thank Mr. G. E. Moore, of Trinity (Jollego,
Cambridge, for reading the proofs and for many valuable
suggesCions, afj also for the serious labour of revising all trans¬
lations from the Latin, both in the text and in the appendix.
1 have also to thank Profes.sor James Ward for reading a
portion of the work in manii.script and for several important
criticisms.


Sej/tember, 1900.


TABLE OF CONTENTS.


CHAPTER I.

LEIUNI/i\S PREMISSES.

FAGK


1. Rcaaonu why Leihniz iiovor wToto a ma<jnum opus . . 1

2. Functions of the commentator on Leibniz .... 2

3. Two types of inconsistency in his philo.s >phy ... 3

4 . His pi*cmisses.4

5. Course of the prtssent work.4

6. Influences which formed Leibniz’s oi)inion8 .... 5


CHAPTER II.

NECESSARY PROPOSITIONS AND THE LAW OF CONTRADICTION.

7. Leibniz’s jfliilosophy Inigins with an analysis of propositions 8

8. Outline of Leibniz’s logical argument.9

9. Questions raised by this argument.11

10. Are all prt>position8 reducible to the subjcct-pi'edicate fonn ? 12

11. Analytic and synthetic pn)positions.16

12. Necessity and contingency.23


CHAPTER HI.

CONTINGENT PROPOSITIONS AND THE LAW OF SUFFICIENT

REASON.

13. The range of contingent judgments in Leibniz

14. Meaning of the principle of sufficient reason

15. Its relation to the law of contradiction.35


8 ^


XU


CONTENTS.


CHAPTER TV.

THE CONCEPnON OF SUUSTANCE. *

16. Cai’tPMijin and Spinozistic views on snbsUnce ... 40

17. The meaning of .siilisUnce in Leibniz.42

18. Tl)e meaning uf activity.44

19. (’onnection between activity and suliieient reason . . ^ 46

20.. The btate.s of oiio substance form one causal scries . . 47

21. How does a snbsbincu diftbr from the sum of its predicates'/ • 48

22. Kel.ntion of time to Jjeibniz’s notion of substance . . 60


CHAPTER V.

THE [JJENTITY OF INDISt'KltNlHLES AND THE LAW OF
(JONTINUITV. POSSIBILITY AND COM POSSIBILITY.

23. Meaniiig of the Identity of Indiscernibh's .... 54

24. The principle necessary, but not a premias of Leibniz’s

philosophy.55

20. Is lAMbniz’s proof of the principle valid ? .... 58

26 . Eve .17 sulwtcince h.is an inhnite numl)er or predicates. Con¬

nection of this with contingency and with the identity of
iudiscerniblc.s.60

27 . The Law of Continuity: thi'co forms of continuity maintained

by Leibniz.63

28. (Trounds of the Law of Continuity.65

29. Possibility and comi)os.sibility.66

30. Common proiierties of all possible worlds .... 67

31. The three kinds of necessity.69


CHAPTER VI.

WHY DID LEIBNIZ BELIEVE IN AN EXTERNAL WORLD?

32. ' Leibniz accepted matter tvs a datum.70

33. The existence of the external world has only “ moral

certainty ”.7S


CONTENTS.


Xlll


CHAPTER VII.


» THE Philosophy op matper: (a) as the outcome of the

PRINCIPLES OF DYNAMICS.


.34. The general trust worth! nens of [Kirception is a i)remiss of
Ijeibniz’s i)lulo8ophy.

35. ^Various me.Miii)ga of matter and hwhj .

36. ^eliitioii of Lcibnizian and (Cartesian Dynamics

37. The essence of matter is not e.'cten.sion .

38. Meaning of materia prima in Loihniu’s Dynamics

39. Materia socunda .

40. The couc.e[)tion of force and the law of inertia

41. Force and absolute motion ....

42. Metaphysicjxl grounds for Jiasumiug force

43. Dynamical argument for plurality of cjutsal series

44. Three tyi»e8 of dynamical theory confused by Leibniz

45. His gi'ounds against extended atoms

46. Against the vacuum

47. And against action at a distance

48. Force as confen’ing individuality

49. Primitive and derivative force

50. Antinomy of dynamical causfition


PAGU


75

75

77

77

78
80
81
84
87

89

90
92

92

93

94

95
98


CHAPTER VIII.

the philosophy of MATOOR (continued), {h) AS EXPLAINING
CONTINUITY AND EXTENSION.


61. There must be simple sul«t,ancc.s, since there ai’e comiwunds 100

62. Extension, as distinguished from sj.)iiu'-, is Leibniz’s starting-

point .101

53. Extension means reijetition.102

54 . Hence the essence of a substance cannot be extension, since

a substance must be a true unity ..... 103

^65, The three kinds of point. Substances not material . . 104

' 66, Motion is phenomenal, though force is real .... 106


XIV


CONTENTS.


CHAPTER IX.

t

THE LABYRINTH OF THE CONTINUUM.

^

67. Difficulties about points.108

58. Assertion of the actual infinite and denial of infinite number 109

59. Continuity in one sense denied by Leibniz . . . .Ill

60. In number, space, and time, the whole is prior to the part 112

61. Sjvacc and time, for Leibniz, purely relational . . . 112

62. tSununary of the argument from the continuum to monads . « 114

63. Since aggregates are phenomenal, there is not really a

number of momuis.116

64. Difficulties of this view.116

CHAPTER X.

THE THEORY OF SPACE AND TIME AND ITS RELATION TO

MONADISM.

65. Roiisons w'hy a philosophy of substance must deny the

reality of spime.118

66 . Leibniz’s arguments against the reality of space . . .119

67. Leibniz’s theory of position ..120

68 . The relation of monads to space a fumlamcntal difiiculty of

monadism.122

69. Leibniz’s Ciirly views on this subject.122

70. His middle views.123

71. His later views.124

72. Time and change. .127

73. Monadisms take an un.symraetrical view of the relations of

space and of time to things.128

74. Leibniz held corifuseflly to an objective counterjiart of space

and time.129

CHAPTER XI.

, THE NATURE OF MONADS IN GENERAL.

76. Perception.131

76. Appetition.133 .

77. Perception not due to action of the perceived on the per- ^

cipient.133

78. Lotze’s criticism of this view.136

79. The pre-established harmony.136


CONTENTS.


XV


CHAPTER XII.

SOUL AND BODY.

80. Relations of monads to >)e henceforth oonsidoi’cd

81. Cartesian and Spino/istio views of th«i rolaiions of Soul and

Body.

82. Outline of Leibnw’s view.

83. ^The three classes of monjuls.

84. Activity and i)assivity.

85. Perfection and clearness <*f perception.

86. Mdt&ria prima as an element in c«xch luotwid . . ' .

87. Materia prima the source of finitudo, plurality, and matter

88. And of the interconnection of monads.

89. Two tlieorie^j of sold and body in Leibniis . . . .

90. Finst theory.

91. Soi'ond theory.

92 n’lie vinculum subslantkde .

93. Tlie second theory to be riijccted.

94. Preformation.


CHAPTER XIII.

CONFIISEI) AND UNCONSCIOUS PERCEPTION.

95. Two kinds of difteronces lietwocn monads .

96. Unconscious inonbil states.

97. Confused and minute perceptions.


CHAPTER XIV.

Leibniz’s theory of knowledge.

98. What theory of knowledge means ....

99. Innate ideas and tniths.

100. The New Essays inconsi.stent with Leibni/i’a metaphysics

Difficulties as to innate ideas.

102. Distinction of sense and intellect.

103. The quality of idcM.

104. Definition.

105. Tlie Characteidstica Univermlis .


FAQB

139

139

140

141

141

142

144

145
116
147
147
149

151

152
154


155

156

157


160

161

163

165

166

167

168
169


XVI


CONTENTS.


CHAPTER XV.

PROOFS OP THE EXISTENCE OF GOD.

106. Four proofs allowed by Leibniz.172

107. The ontological argument. .172

108. Pi*oof that the idea of God is possible .... 174

109. The cosmological argument.176

110. Objections to this argument.* 176

111. The argument from the ctenial truths . . . T 177

112. Its weakness.178

113. Relation of knowledge to truth.181

114. Argument from the pre-established harmony ... 183

115. Objections to this argument.185

116. Inconsistencies resulting fi-om Leibniz’s belief in God . 186

117. God’s goodness.189


CHAPTER XVI.

Leibniz’s ethics.

118. Freedom and determinism ..191

119. Psychology of volition and pleasure.194

120. Sin.196

121. Meaning of go(xl and evil: three kinds of each . . .197

122. Metaphysical evil the source of the other two kinds . . 198

123. Connection with the doctrine of analytic judgments . . 201

124. The kingdoms of nature and of grace.201

Appendix .205


ABBREVIATIONS.

G. Die phUosophischen Srhri/tm von G. W. Leibniz^ heraus-

gegeben von C. J. (bn’lianlt. 1875—90.

G. M. Leibnizeiis ma/Jummtisrfic Uchri/lfn, Leraiisgegeben von
C. J. Gevhurdt. Hallo, 1850 -03.

F. do C. Refutation inedite de Spinoza 'par Leibniz, proccdoe d’un
niemoire par A. Foiicbcr dc Oarcil. Paris, 1854.

D. The Rhilosojihical Wm'k)i of Leibnitz, with notes by

George Martin Diiiican. New Haven, 1890.

L. Leibniz: The Monadoloijy mid other philosophiad writingn,

translated, with introduction and note.**, by llobert
Latta. Oxford, 1898.

N. E. New Essays eoncerimnj human understanding by GotU
fried Wilhehn Leibnitz, together udth an Ap 2 >endix
comisti'ng of some of his shorter pieces, tran.sl.ated by
Alfred Gideon Langley. New York and London,
1896.


CHAPTER I.


LEIBNIZ’S PREMISSES.

't i (

1 . The philosophy of Leibniz, though never presented to
tlic world as a systematic whole, wa.s nevc'rtheless, as a careful
examination shows, an unusually complete and coherent system.
As the method of studying his views must be largely dei)endent
upon his method of presenting them, it seems essential to say
something, howevtjr brief, as to his character and circumstances,
and as to the ways of estimating how far any given work repre¬
sents his true opinions.

The reasons why Leibniz did not embody his system in one
great work are not to be found in the nature of that system.
On the contrary, it would have lent itself far better than
Spinoza’s philosophy to geometrical deduction from definitions
and axioms. It is in the character and circumstances of the
man, not of his theories, that the explanation of his way of
writing is to be found. For everything that he wrote he seems
to have required some immediate stimulus, some near and
pressing incentive. To please a prince, to refute a rival philo¬
sopher, or to escape the censures of a theologian, he would
take any pain&> It is to such motives that we owe the Thiodicee,
the Principles of Nature and of Grace^, the Neio Essays, and
the Letters to Arnauld. But for the sole purposes of exposition
he seems to have cared little. Few of his works are free from
refwence to some particular person, and almost all are more
coiicerned to persuade readers than to provide the most va^d^

* Accepting Oerhardt’a opinion that tliis work, and not the Monadoloffg, -
was written for Prince Eugene (G. vi. 483).

B. L.


1


2


LEIBNIZ’S PREMISSES.


arguments. This desire for persuasiventf^ •must always l&e
borne in mind in reading Leibniz’s works, as it led him to give
prominence to popular and pictorial arguments atf the expense
of the more solid reasons which he buried in obscurer^writingsr
And for this reason wc often find the best statement of hlsP
view on some point in sliort papers discovered among his
manuvscripts, and publishcii for the first time by modem
students, such am Erdmann or Gerhardt. In these papers we
find, as a rule, far less^ rhetoric and far more logic than in his
public manifestoes, which give a very inadequate conception
of his philosophic depth and acurnen.

Another cause which contributed to the dissipation of his
immense energies was the necessity for giving satisfaction to
his princely employers. At an early age, he refused a profes¬
sorship at the University of Altdorf S and deliberately preferred
a courtly to an academic career. Although this choice, by
leading to his travels in France and England, and making him
acquainted with the great men and the great ideas of his age,
had certainly a most useful result, it yet led, in the end, to an
undue deference for princes and a lamentable waste of time in
the endeavour to please them. He seems to have held himself
amply compensated for laborious researches into the genealogy
of the illustrious House of Hanover by the opportunities which
such researches.afforded for the society of the great. But the
labours and the compensations alike absoj^bed time, and robbed
him of the leisure which might have been devoted to the com¬
position of a magnum opus. Thus ambition, versatility, and
the desire to influence particular men and woihen,tall combined
to prevent Leibniz from doing himself justiee in a connected
exposition of his sj stem.

2. By this neglect, the functions of the commentator are
rendered at once more arduous and more important than in
the case of most philosophers. What is first of all required in
a commentator is to attempt a reconstruction of the system
which Leibniz should have written—to discover what is the
...beginning, and what the end, of his chains of reasoning^ to
>exhibit the interconnections of his various opinions, and to fill
in frdm his other writings* the bare outlines of such works as
’ Oahraner, Leilmitz: Eine Biographies Vol. i. p. 44.


LEIBNIZ’S PREMISSES. 3

the Monadology o# the Discours de Metaphysique. This un¬
avoidable but somewhat ambitious attempt forms one part—
perhaps tbe*chief part—of my purpose in the present work.
To fulfiW it satisfactorily would be scarcely possible, and its
Necessity is my only excuse for the attempt. As I wish to
exhibit a coherent whole, I have confined myself, as far as
possible, to Leibniz’s mature views—to the views, that is,
which he held, with but slight modifications, from January
1686 Jill his death in 1716. His earlier views, and the
influence of other philosophers, have been considered only in
so far as they seemed essential to the coin))rehen.sion of his
final system.

But, in addition to the purely historical purpose, the present
work is designed also, if possible, to throw light on the truth or
falsity of Leibniz’s opinions. Having set forth the opinions
.which wei'e actually held, we can hardly avoid considering how
far they are mutually consistent, and hence—since philosophic
error chiefly appears in the shape of inconsistency—how far the
views held were true. Indeed, where there is inconsistency, a
mere exposition must point it out, since, in general, pat?sages
itjay be found in the author supporting each of two opposing
views. Thus unless the inconsistency is pointed out, any view
of the philosopher’s meaning may bo refuted out of his own
mouth. Exposition and criticism, therefore, are almost insepa¬
rable, and each, I believe, suffers greatly from the attempt at
separation.

3. The philosophy of Leibniz, I shall contend, contains
inconsistencies of two kinds. One of these kinds is esisily
removed, while the other is essential to any philosophy re¬
sembling that of the Monadology. The first kind .arises solely
through the fear of admitting consequences shocking to the
prevailing opinions of Leibniz’s time—such are the main¬
tenance of sin and of the ontological argument for God’s
existence. Where such inconsistencies are found, we, who do
not depend upon the smiles of princes, may simply draw the
con^joquences which Leibniz shunned. And when we have
done this, we shall find that Leibniz’s philosophy follows
^ almost entirely firom a small number of premisses. The
proof that his system docs follow, correctly and necessarily,

1—2


4


LEIBNIZ'S PREMISSES.


from these premisses, is the evidence of Leibniz’s philosophical
excellence, and the permanent contribution which he made
to philosophy. But it is in the course of this deduction that
we become aware of the second and greater class of inconsist¬
encies. The premisses themselves, though at first sight com¬
patible, will be found, in the course of argument, to lead to
contradictory results. We are therefore forced to hold that
one or more of the premisses are false. I shall attempt to
prove this from Leibniz’s own words, and to give grounds for
deciding, in part at least, which of his premisses are erroneous.
In this way we may hope, by examining a system so careful
and so thorough as his, to establish independent philosophical
conclusions which, but for his skill in drawing deductions,
might have been very difficult to discover.

4 The principal premisses of Leibniz’s philosophy appear
to me to be five. Of these some were by him definitely laid
down, while others were so fundamental that he was scarcely
conscious of them. I shall now enumerate these premisses,
and shall endeavour to show, in subsequent chapters, how the
rest of Leibniz follows from them. The premisses in question
are as follows:

I. Every proposition has a subject and a predicate.

II. A subject may have predicates which are qualities

existing at various times. (Such a subject is called
a substance.)

in. True propositions not asserting existence at particular
times are necessary and analytic, but such as assert
existence at particular times are contingent and
synthetic. The latter depend upon final causes.

IV. The Ego is a substance.

V. Perception yields knowledge of an external world, i.e.

of existents other than myself and my states.

The fundamental objection to Leibniz’s philosophy will be
found to be the inconsistency of the first premiss with the
fourth and fifth; and in this inconsistency we shall find a
general objection to Monadism.

6. The course of the present work will be as follows:
Chapters II.—V. will discuss the consequences of the first four
of the above premisses, and will show that they lead to the


LEIBNIZ’S PREMISSES. b

wlhole, or nearly th«*\vholo, of the necessary propositions of the
system. Chapters VI.—XI. will be concerned with the proof
^nd description of Leibniz’s Monadism, in so far as it is inde-
pendentipf final causes and the idea of the good. The remain-
•ing chapters will take account of these, and will discuss Soul
and Body, the doctrine of God, and Ethics. In these last
chapters we shall find that Leibniz no longer shows great
originality, but tends, with slight alterations of phraseology, to
adopt ^(without acknowledgment) the views of the decried
Spinoz.*^ We shall find also many more minor inconsistencies
than in the earlier part of the system, these being due chiefly
to the desire to avoid the impieties of the Jewish Atheist, and
the still greater impieties to which Leibniz’s own logic should
have led him. Hence, although the subjects dealt with in the
last five chapters occupy a large part of Leibniz’s writings, they
are less interesting, and will be treated more briefly, than the
earlier and more original portions of his reasoning. For this
there is the additional reason that the subjects are less funda¬
mental and less difficult than the subjects of the earlier
chapters.

6. The influences which helped to form Leibniz’s philo¬
sophy are not directly relevant to the purpose of the present
work, and have, besides, been far better treated by commen¬
tators^ than the actual exposition of his final system. Never¬
theless, a few words on this subject may not be amiss. Four
successive schools of philosophy seem to have contributed to
his education; in all he found something good, and from each,
without being at any time a mere disciple, he derived a part of
his views. To this extent, he was an eclectic; but he differed
from the usual type of eclectic by his power of transmuting
what he borrowed, and of forming, in the end, a singularly
harmonious whole. The four successive influences were : Scho¬
lasticism, Materialism, Cartesiauism, and Spiuozism. To these
*we ought to add a careful study, at a critical period, of some of
Plato's Dialogues.

* See especially Guhrauer, Leibnitz : Eine Biographic, Bveslan, 1846 ; Stein,
Leibniz und Spinoza, Berlin, 1880 j Selver, Entwickliingsgang der Lfibnizschen
Monadenlehre, Leipzig, 188.5; Tonnies, Leibniz und Hobbes, PhU. Monatshefte,
Vol. xxui.; Trendelenburg, IlistorUche Beitriige, Vol. xi., Berlin, 1855.


0


LEIIINIZ’S PREMISSES^.


Leibniz was educated in the scholastic'traditioii, then still
unbroken at most of the German universities. He obtained a
competent knowledge of the schoolmen, and of the scholastic*
Aristotlewhile still a boy; and in his graduation thesis, De
Principio Individid, written in 1663, he still employs the*^
diction and methods of scholasticism. But he had already, two
years before this time (if his later reminiscences are to be
trusted), emancipated himself from what he calls the “ trivial
schools®,” and thrown himself into the mathematical material¬
ism of the day. Gasser»di and Hobbes began to attr%pt him,
and continued (it would seem) greatly to influence his specula¬
tions until his all-important journey to Paris. In Paris (with
two brief visits to England) ho lived from 1672 to 1676, and
here he became acquainted, more intimately than he could in
Germany, with Cartesianisni both in mathematics and philo¬
sophy—with Malebranche, with Ariiauld the Janseiiist theolo¬
gian, with Huygens, with Robert Boyle, and with Oldenburg,
the Secretary of the Royal Society. With these men he carried
on correspondence, and through Oldenburg some letters (the
source of 150 years of controveray®) passed between him and
Newton. It was during his stay in Paris that he invented
the Infinitesimal Calculus, and acquired that breadth of learn¬
ing, and that acquaintance with the whole republic of letters,
which afterwards characterized him. But it was only on his
way back from Paris that he learnt to know the greatest man
of the older generation. He spent about a month of the year
1676 at the Hague, apparently in constant intercourse with
Spinoza; he discussed with him the laws of motion and the
proof of the existence of God, and he obtained a sight of part
(at any rate) of the Ethics in manuscripts When the Ethics
soon afterwards was posthumously published, Leibniz made
notes of it, and undoubtedly bestowed very careful thought

^ Leibniz appears, in spite of the great influence which Aristotle exerted
upon him, to have never studied him carefully in the original. See Stein, op.
cit. p. 163 ff.

3 Quhrauer, Leibnitz, Vol. i. pp. 25, 26; O. lu. 606.

3 These letters were said, by Newton's friends, to have given Leibniz the
opportunity fur plagiarizing the Calculus—a charge now known to be abso¬
lutely groundless.

♦ See Stein, Leibniz nnd Spinoza, Chapter iv.


liKIIlNlz’s PREMISSES. 1

€ 0

upon its (iemoiistr^ions. Of lus thoughts during the years
which followed, down to 1684 or even 1686 (since the Thoughts
pH Knowledge, Truth and Ideas deal only with one special
subject)}konly slight traces remain, and it seems probable that,
*like Kant in the years from 1770 to 1781, he was in too much
doubt to be able to write much. He certainly read Plato^ and
he certainly desired to refute Spinoza. At any rate, by the
beginning of 1686 he had framed his notion of an individual
substaiice, and had sufficiently perfected his philosophy to send
Arnauld what is perhaps the best account he ever wrote of
it—I mean the Discours de Metaphgsiqiie (G. iv. 427—468).
With this and the letters to Arnaukl his mature philosophy
begins; and not only the temporal, but the logical beginning
also is, in my opinion, to be sought here. The argument
which forms the logical beginning, and gives the definition of
substance, will be found in the four following chapters.

^ Cf. Steiu, op. cit. p. 119.


CHAPTER II.

NECKSSARY PROPOSITIONS AND THE LAW OF CONTRADICTION.

7 . That all sound philosophy should begin with an analysis
of propositions, is a truth too evident, perhaps, to demand a
proof. That Leibniz’s philosophy began with such an analysis,
is less evident, but seems to bo no less true. The system,
which he afterwards uniformly maintained, wjis completed, in
all essentials, by the beginning of the year 1686. In his
writings during this year, when the grounds of his new opinions
were still freshly present to his mind, there occurs an argument
of great importance, derived, as he himself says (G. II. 73), from
the general nature of propositions, and capable, in his opinion,
if the plurality of substances be admitted, of alone establishing
the remainder of his system. This argument is to be found in
the letters to Amauld, in the Discours de Mdtaphysique, written
for Arnauld in January, 1686 (G. iv. 427—463) S and in a
short undated paper, entitled Specimen Inventorum de Admi-
randis naturae generalis arcanis (G. vii. 309—318). Although
the same reasoning does not, so far as I am aware, occur
explicitly in any other passages, it is often suggested®, and is
alone capable of explaining why Leibniz held that substances
do not interact. I’hat Leibniz did not repejit, in his published
works, this purely logical argument, is explained, in view of his
invariable habit of choosing the reasons most likely to convince
his readers, by a passage in one of his letters to Arnauld (G. II.
73, 74). “I expected,” he writes, “that the argument drawn

^ See G. IT. 11 ff; also iv. 409, 410.

a f.if. L. .326; G. iv. 496.


THE LAW OF CONTRADICTION.


9


* •

from the general nature of propositions would make some
impression on your mind; but I confess also that few people
are capable of appreciating such abstract truths, and that
j)crhaj1l3 no one but you would have so easily perceived its
force.” We know, however, that Leibniz often expressed an
intention of publishing his correspondence with Arnaukl (G. ii.
10), and must, consequently, have regarded this correspondence
as adequately expressing his philosophical opinions. There is
thusdiio reason to suppose that, after the date of these letters,
his views on fundamental points underwent any serious
alteration.

The argument in question, whose, examination will occupy
the present and the three following chapters, yields the whole,
or nearly the whole, of the necessary part of Leibniz’s philo¬
sophy—of the propositions, that is to say, which arc true of all
possible world.s. In order to obtain further the propositions
describing the actual world, we need the premiss that per¬
ception gives knowledge of an external world, whence follow
space and matter and the plurality of substances. This
premiss is derived, apparently, from no better basis than
common sense, and Avith its introduction, in Chapter VI., we
shall pass to a new division of Leibniz’s philosophy. But
since the meaning of substance is logically prior to the dis¬
cussion of the plurality or the perceptions of substances, it is
plain that the present argument, from which the meaning of
substance is derived, must first be expounded and examined.
I shall first state the argument quite briefly, and then proceed
to set forth its various parts in detail.

8. Every proposition is ultimately reducible to one which
attributes a predicate to a subject. In any such proposition,
unless existence be the predicate in question, the predicate is
somehow contained in the subject. The subject is defined by
its predicates, and would be a different subject if these were
different. Thus every true judgment of subject and predicate
is analytic— i.e. the predicate forms part of the notion of the
subject—unless actual existence is asserted. Existence, alone
among predicates, is not contained in the notions of subjects
which exist. Thus existential propositions, except in the case
of God’s existence, are synthetic, i.e. there would be no contra-


10


THK LAW OF CONTKADICTION.


diction if the subjects which actually do exist did not exist.
Necessary propositions are such as are analytic, and synthetic
propositions are always contingent. *

When many predicates can be attributed to one adid the
same subject, while this subject cannot be made the predicate
of any other subject, then the subject in (picstiou is called an
individual subsUince. Such subjects involve, sub ratione possi-
hilitatis, a reference to existence and time; they are possible
existents, and they have predicates expressing their stat|?8 at
different times. Such predicates are called contingent or
concrete predicates, and they have the peculiarity that no one
of them follows analytically from any others, as rational follows
from human. Thus when a subject is defined by means of a
certain number of such predicates, there is no contradiction in
supposing it to be without the remainder. Nevertheless, in
the subject which has these predicates, they are all contained,
so that a perfect knowledge of the subject would enable us to
deduce all its predicates. Moreover there is a connection,
though not a necessary one, between the various concrete
predicates; sequences have reasons, though these incline
without necessitating. The need of such reasons is the prin¬
ciple of sufficient reason. Subjects whoso notion involves a
reference to time arc required by the idea of persistence.
Thus in order to say that I am the same person as I was, we
require, not merely internal experience, but some d prioH
reason. This reason can only be that I am the same subject,
that my present and past attributes all belong to one and the
same substance. Hence attributes which exist in different
parts of time must be conceived, in such a case, as attributes of
the same subject, and must therefore be contained, somehow,
in the notion of the subject. Hence the notion of me, which
is timeless, involves eternally all my states and their connec¬
tions. Thus to say, all my states are involved in the notion of
me, is merely to say, the predicate is in the subject. Every
predicate, necessary or contingent, past, present or future, is
comprised in the notion of the subject. From this proposition
it follows, says Leibniz, that every soul is a world apart; for
every soul, as a subject, has eternally, as predicates, all the
states which time will bring it; and thus these states follow


THE LAW OF CONTRADICTION.


11


from its notion al<me, without any need of action from without.
The principle, according to which the stat(;s of a substance
chan^, is called its activity; and since a substance is essentially
the subject of predicates which have a reference to time,
activity is essential to every substance. The notion of an
individual substance differs from a mere collection of general
notions by being complete, as Leibniz puts it, i,e. by being
capable of wholly distinguishing its subject, and involving
circu®istances of time and place. The nature of an individual
substaaicc, he says, is to have so complete a notion as to suffice
for comprehending and deducing all its predicates. Hence he
concludes that no two substances can be perfectly alike. From
this stage, by the help of the empirical premiss mentioned
above, the doctrine of monads follows easily.

9. Such is, in outline, the logical argument by which
Leibniz obtains his definition of an individual substance. In
the above brief account, I have made no endeavour to conceal
the gaps and assumptions involved. We must now enquire
whether the gaps can be filled and the assumptions justified.
For this purpose the following seem to be the most important
questions.

(1) Are all propositions reducible to the subject-predicate

form ?

(2) Are there any analytic propositions, and if so, are these

fundamental and alone necessary ?

(3) What is the true principle of Leibniz’s distinction

between necessary and contingent propositions ?

(4) What is the meaning of the principle of sufficient

reason, and in what sense do contingent propositions

depend upon it ?

(5) What is the relation of this principle to the Law of

Contradiction ?

(6) Does the activity of substance unduly presuppose

time ?

(7) Is there any validity in Leibniz’s deduction of the

Identity of Indisccrnibles ?

It is only by a critical discussion of these points that
Leibniz’s meaning can be grasped; for unless we have clear
ideas about philosophy, we cannot hope to have clear ideas


12


THli LAW Ol? CONTRADICTION.


about Leibniz’s philosophy. When all th&?o questions have
been discussed, we may proceed to enquire why Leibniz be¬
lieved in a plurality of substances, and why ho held that each
mirrored the universe. But until we are clear as to hif.^ logic,
wo cjinnot hope to understand its applications.

10 . The questior» whether all propositions are reducible to
the subject-predicate form is one of fundamental importance to
all philosophy, and especially to a philosophy which uses the
notion of substance. For this notion, as we shall sge, is
derivative from the logical notion of subject and pre,plicate.
The view that a subject and a predicate are to be found in
every proposition is a very ancient and respectable doctrine; it
has, moreover, by no means lost its hold on philosophy, since
Mr Bradley’s logic consists almost wholly of the contention
that every proposition ascribes a predicate to Reality, as the
only ultimate subjects The question, therefore, whether this
form is universal, demands close attention, not only in con¬
nection with Leibniz, but also in connection with the most
modem philosophy. I cannot here, however, do more than
indicate the grounds for rejecting the traditional view.

The plainest instances of propositions not so reducible are
the propositions which employ mathematical ideas. All asser¬
tions of numbers, as e.g. “There are three men,” essentially
assert plurality of subjects, though they may also give a
predicate to each of the subjects. Such propositions cannot be
regai-ded as a mere sum of subject-predicate propositions, since
the number only results from the singleness of the proposition,
and would be absent if three propositions, asserting each the
presence of one man, were juxtaposed. Again, we must admit,
in some cases, relations between subjects— e.g. relations of
position, of greater and less, of whole and part. To prove that
these are irrcilucible would reqtiire a long argument, but may
be illustrated by the following passage from Leibniz himself
(D. pp. 266—7; G. vii. 401): '

“ The ratio or proportion between two lines L and M may
be conceived three several ways} as a ratio of the greater L to
the lesser M; as a ratio of the lesser M to the greater L; and
lastly, as something abstracted from both, that is, as the ratio
* Cf. Logic, Book 1. Chap, ii., especially pp. 49, 50, 66.


THE LAW OF CONTRADICITON.


13


between L anS JM, without considering which is the ante¬
cedent, or which the consequent; which the subject, and which
the object.*... In the first way of considering them, L the
great^ is the subject, in the second M the lesser is the subject
of that accident which philosophers call relation or ratio. But
which of them will be the subject, in the thiixl way of consider¬
ing them ? It cannot be said that both of them, L and M
together, are the subject of such an accident; for if so, we
shoujjd have an accident in two subjects, with one leg in one,
and tlje other in the other; which is contrary to the notion of
accidents. Therefore we must say that this relation, in this
third way of considering it, is indo<'d out of the subjects; but
being neither a substance, nor an accident, it must be a mere
ideal thing, the consideration of which is nevertheless useful.”

This passage is of capital importance for a comprehension
of Leibniz’s philosophy. After he has seemed, for a moment, to
realize that relation is something distinct from and independent
of subject and accident, he thrusts aside the awkward discovery,
by condemning the third of the above meanings as “a mere
ideal thing.” If he were pushed as to this “ ideal thing,” I am
afraid he would dcclfire it to be an accident of the mind which
contemplates the ratio. It appears plainly from his discussion
that he is unable to admit, as ultimately valid, any form of
judgment other than the subject-predicate form, although, in
the case he is discussing, the necessity of relational judgments
is peculiarly evident.

It must not bo supposed that Leibniz neglected relational
propositions. On the contrary, he dealt with all the main
types of such propositions, and endeavoured to reduce them to
the subject-predicate form. This endeavour, as we shall see,
was one of the main sources of most of his doctrines. Mathe¬
matician as he was, he could hardly neglect space, time and
number. As regards propositions asserting numbers, he held
• aggregates to be mere phenomena: they are what he calls
" semi-mental entities.” Their unity, which is essential to the
assertion of any number, is, he says, added by perception alone,
by the very fact of their being perceived at one time (G. ir.
517). All that is true, then, in such judgments, is the indi¬
vidual assertions of subject and predicate, and the psychological


14


THE LAW OF CONTflADICTION.


assertion of simultaneous perception as aV predicate of the
percipient. Again, we are told that numbers have the nature
of relations, and hence are in some manner beings (G. ii. 304).
But relations, though founded in things, derive their #^eality
from the supreme reason (N. E. p. 235; G. v. 210); God secs
not only individual monads and their various states, but their
relations also, and in this consists the reality of relations (G. II.
438). And as regards space and time, Leibniz always en»
deavoured to reduce them to attributes of the substancjes in
them. Position, he says, like priority or posteriority, is npthing
but a mode of a thing (G. il. 347). The whole doctrine is
collected in the New Essays (N. E. p. 148; G. v. 132). “ Units
are separate, and the underatanding gathers them together,
however dispersed they may be. Yet, although relations are
from the understanding, they are not groundless or unreal.
For the primitive understanding is the origin of things; and
indeed the reality of all things, simple substances excepted,
consists only in the foundation of the perceptions of phenomena
in sirople substances.” Thus relations and aggregates have
only a mental truth; the true proposition is one ascribing
a predicate to God and to all others who perceive the re¬
lation ^

Thus Leibniz is forced, in order to maintain the subject-
predicate doctrine, to the Kantian theory that relations, though
veritable, are the work of the mind. As applied to various
special relations—as e.g. those of space, time, and number—I
shall criticize special forms of this doctrine in their proper
places. The view, implied in this theory, and constituting a
large part of Kant’s Copernican revolution, that propositiotis
may acquire truth by being believed®, will be criticized in
connection with the deduction of God’s, existence from the
eternal truths. But as applied to relations, the view has, in
Leibniz’s case, a special absurdity, namely, that the relational
propositions, which God is supposed to know, must be strictly
meaningless. The only ground for denying the independent

1 Cf. Lotze, MetOrphyaie, beginning of § 109.

3 I am aivaxe that this is not an orthodox statement of the Kantian theory.
The kind of grounds which lead me to think it correct, will be found indicated
in Chaps. XIV. and XV., especially § 113.


THE LAW OF CONTllADICTION.


15


reality of relatiSn^is, that propositions must have a subject and
a predicate. If this be so, a proposition without a subject and
a predicate*must be no proposition, and must be destitute of
mean^^. But it is just such a proposition which, in the case
•of numbers, or of relations between monads, God is supposed
to see and believe. God, therefore, believes in the truth of
what is meaningless. If the proposition which he believes, on
the other hand, bo truly a proposition, then there are proposi¬
tions which do not have a subject and a predicate. Thus the
attempt to reduce relations to predicates of the percipient
suffers from one or other of two defects. Either the percipient
is deceived into seeing truth in a meaningless form of wonls, or
there is no reason to suppose the truth dependent upon his
perception of it.

A thorough discussion of the present question would, at
this point, proceed to show that judgments of subject and
prediciiie are themselves relational, and include, moreover, as
usually understood, two fundamentally different types of rela¬
tion. These two typi‘s are illustrated by the two propositions:
“This is red,” and “red is a colour.” In showing that these
two propositions express relations, it would be shown that
relation is more fundamental than the two .special types of
relation involved. But such a discus.sion is beset with diffi¬
culties, and would lead us too far from the philosophy of
Leibniz.

In the belief that propositions must, in the last analysis,
have a subject and a predicate, Leibniz does not differ either
from his predecessors or from his successors. Any philosophy
which uses either substance or the Absolute will be found, on
inspection, to depend upon this belief. Kant’s belief in an
unknowable thing-in-itself was largely due to the same theory.
It cannot be denied, therefore, that the doctrine is impoi'tant.
Philosophers have differed, not so much in respect of belief in
4t8 truth, as in respect of their consistency in carrying it out.
In this latter respect, Leibniz deserves credit. But his assump¬
tion of a plurality of substances made the denial of relations
peculiarly difficult, and involved him in all the paradoxes of the
pre-established harmony*.

* Cf. Bradley, Appearance and ReaHtij, 1st ed. pp. 29—30.


16


THE LAW OF CONTRADICTION.


11. I pass now to a question which is n© Idss fundamental*
and moi-e difficult, than that which we have just discussed.
This is the question—as it has been called since Elant—of
analytic and synthetic judgments and their relation^ ne-
ces.sity. Leibniz’s position on this question determined, nolf
only his departure from his predecessors, but also, by its
obvious untenability, Kant’s great departure from him. On
this point it will be necessary to begin with an account of
Leibniz’s views.

Two questions must be carefully distinguished in this
connection. The first concerns the meaning and range of
.analytic judgments, the second concerns their claim to exclusive
necessity. On the second question, Leibniz agreed wholly with
his predecessors; on the first, by the discovery that all causal
laws are synthetic, he made an imp<^rtant change, which pre¬
pared the way for Kant’s discovery that all the propositions of
Mathematics are synthetic.

Ill discussing the first of these questions, I shall use the
terms analytic and synthetic, though they are not used by
Leibniz in this sense. He uses the terras necessary and con¬
tingent ; but this use prejudges, in his own favour, the second
question, which forms one of the principal issues between him
and Kant It is therefore unavoidable to depart from Leibniz’s
usage, since we need two pairs of terms, whore he required only
one pair.

As regards the range of analytic judgments, Leibniz held
that all the propositions of Logic, Arithmetic and Geometry
are of this nature, while all existential propositions, except
the existence of God, arc synthetic. The discovery which
determined his views on this point wae, that the laws o|
motion, and indeed all causal laws (though not, as I shall
show in the next chapter, the law of Causality itself), are
synthetic,-imd therefore^, in his system, also cemtingent (cf.
G. III. 646).

As regairds the meaning hf analytic judgments, it will assist
us |o have in our minds some of the instances which Leibniz
suggests. We. shall find that these instances suffer from one
or other of two defects. Either the instances can be easily
seen to be not truly analytic—this is the case, for example, in


THE LAW OF CONTRADICTION.


17


Arithmfttic and “Rejmetry—or they arc tautologous, and so not
properly propositions at all. Thus Leibniz says, on one occa¬
sion (N. E. p 404 ; G. v. 343), that primitive truths of reason
*are i<^^|ltical, because they appear only to repeat the same
.thing, without giving any information. One wondt'rs, in this
case, of what use they can be, and the wonder is only increased
by the instances which he proceeds to give. Among these are
“A is A,” “I shall be what I shall be,” “The equilateral
rectangle is a rectangle,” or negatively, “ A B cannot be non-A ”
Most of these instances assort nothing; the remainder can
hanlly he considered the foundations of any important truth.
Moreover those which are true presuppose, as 1 shall now show,
more fundamental propositions which are synthetic To prove
this, we must examiim the meaning of analytic judgments, and
of the definitions which they presuppose.

The notion that all d pno/-i truths ai’c analytic is essentially
coiniectcd with the doctrine of subject and predicate. An
analytic judgment is one in which the predicate i.s contained in
the subject. The subject is supposed defined by a number of
predicates, one or more of which are singled out for predication
in an analytic judgment, Thus Leibniz, as wo have just seen,
gives as an instance the proposition: “The equilateral rectangle
is a rectangle ” (N. E. p. 405; G. V. 343). In the extreme
case, the subject is merely rea.sserted of itself, as in the propo¬
sitions: “A is A,” “I shall be what I shall be” (ib.). Now two
points seem important in this doctrine. In the first place, the
proposition must be of what 1 distinguished above as the
second type of subject-predicate proposition, i.e. of the typo
“ red is a colour,” “ man is rational,” not of the type ** this is
red," or “ Socrates is human.” That is to say, the proposition
is concerned with the relation of genus and species, not of
species and individual. This is the reason why every proposi¬
tion about actual individuals is, in Leibniz’s opinion, contingent.
I ^io not wish at present to discuss whether the distinction of
the.se two types is ultimately tenable—this question will be
better discussed when we come to the Identity of Indiscemibles.
For the present, I only wish to point out, what Leibniz
frequently asserts, that analytic propositions are necessarily
contjemtHl with essences and species, not with assortitms a.s to


a. L.


18


THE LAW OF CONTRA DIC3TION.


individuals The second point concerniHjg "analytic propo^
sitions is, that the subject, except in such pure tautologies as
“ A is A,” must always be complex. The subject* is a collec¬
tion of attributes, and the predicate is a part of this coyilSotion. *
If, however, the reference to individuals be deemed essential t« ^
the distinction of subject from predicate, we shall have to say
that the subject is any individual having a certain collection of
predicates. In this way, we might attempt to reduce the
second type to the first. But now the proposition becomes
hypothetical: “ If a thing is red, it is coloured.” This Ceibniz
admits. The eternal truths, he says, are all hypothetical,
and do not assert the existence of their subjects (N. E.
p. 515; G. V. 428). But this makes it evident that our reduc¬
tion to the first type has failed. The above hypothetical
proposition evidently presupposes the proposition “red is a
colour”; and thus Leibniz goes on to say that the truth of
hypothetical propositions lies in the connection of ideas (N. E.
p. 516; G. V. 429). Thus in analytic judgments, when they
are not expressed in the derivative hypothetical form, the
subject is a complex idea, i.e. a collection of attributes, while
the predicate is some part of this collection.

The collection, however,—and this is the weak point of the
doctrine of analytic judgments—must not bo any haphazard
collection, but a collection of compatible or jointly predicable
predicates (predicability being here of the first typo). Now
this compatibility, since it is presupposed by the analytic
judgment, cannot itself be analytic. This brings us to the
doctrine of definition, in which we shall find that Leibniz, like
all who have held analytic propositions to be fundamental, was
guilty of much confusion.

Definition, as is evident, is only possible in respect of
complex ideas. It consists, broadly speaking, in the analysis
of complex ideas into their simple constituents. Since one idea
can only be defined by another, we should incur a vicious circle
if we did not admit some indefinable ideas. This obvious truth

^ Foucher de Careil, Rifntation in^dite de Rpinoza par Leibniz, Paris, 1854,
p. 24 (D. 175); O. v. 268 (N. E. 309); G. u. 49. In this latter passage, it is
speciallj instructive to observe Leibniz’s corrections, as indicated in Gerhardt’s
notes.


THE LAW OP CONTRADICTION.


19


IS fully recognizedT by Leibniz, and the search for the simple
ideas, which form the presuppositions of all definition, consti-
jjtutesHhe chief part of his studies for the Universal Charac¬
teristics Thus Leibniz says {Monadology, ^ 33, 35): “ When a
• friith is necessary, its reason can be found by analysis, resolving
it into more simple ideas and truths, until we come to those
which are primary....In short, there are simple ideas, of
which no definition can be given; there are also axioms and
postulates, in a word, primary principles, which cannot be
proved,^ and indeed have no need of proof; and these are
identical propositions, whose opposite involves an express
contradiction” (L. 236—7; D. 223; 0. vr. 612). The same
view is expressed whenever Leibniz treats of this question.
What I wish to show is, that Leibniz’s theory of definition, as
consisting of analysis into indefinable simple ideas, is inconsis¬
tent with the doctrine that the “ primary principles ” are
identical or analytic; and that the former is correct, while the
latter is erroneous.

Leibniz often urges that the objects of definitions must be
shown to be possible. It is thus that he distinguishes what he
calls real definitions from such as are only nominal {e.y. B.
p. 30; G. IV. 424). And thus he says that Arithmetic is
analytic, because the number 3, for e.vample, is defined as 2 -f I,
but he confesses that 3, so defined, must be seen to be possible
(N. E. p. 410; G. v. 347). In one passage (G. i. p. 385), he even
confesses that ideas in general involve a judgment, namely the
judgment that they are possible. This confession, one might
suppose, would be inconsistent with the doctrine of analytic
judgments; it is rendei'ed consistent, however, by Leibniz’s
definition of possibility, A possible idea, for him, is one which
is not self-contradictory. But if this were all that is meant,
any collection of simple ideas would be compatible, and there¬
fore every complex idea would be possible. In an early proof
of the existence of God (G. vil. 261) submitted by Leibniz to
Spinoza at the Hague, this argument is actually used to show
that God is possible*. He here defines God as the subject

* We BhfUl find, when we come to deal with the proofs of God’s existence,
that this paper, in npite of its early date (1676), contains no views which
Leibniz did not hold in his maturity.


0 •>


20


THE LAW OF CONTRADICTION.


c


which has all positive predicates. He take^two simple predi¬
cates, A and B, and shows, what is sufficiently evident, that
they cannot be mutually contradictory. Hence he concludes ^
that God, so defined, is possible. But since all ideas^when *
correctly analyzed, must, for Leibniz, be ultimately predicates’ «
or collections of predicates, it follows that all ideas will be
possible. And indeed, as Leibniz himself urges in this proof,
any relation between simple ideas is necessarily synthetic.
For the analytic relation, as we saw, can only hold between
ideas of which one at least is complex. Hence if there were no
synthetic relations of compatibility and incompatibility, all
complex ideas would be equally possible. Thus there is always
involved, in definition, the synthetic proposition that the simple
constituents are compatible. If this be not the case, the
constituents are incompatible— e.g. good and bad, or two
different magnitudes of the same kind—and this is also a
synthetic relation, and the source of negative propo8itions\

This conclusion may be enforced by examining some idea
which is self-contradictory, such as a round square. In order
that an idea may be self-contradictory, it is evidently necessary
that it should involve two judgments which are mutually
contradictory, i.e. the truth and falsehood of some judgment.
For the Law of Contradiction applies, not to ideas, but to
judgments: it asserts that every proposition is true or false
(N, E. p. 405; G. v. 343). Hence a mere idea, as such, cannot
be self-contradictory. Only a complex idea which involves
at least two propositions can be self-contradictory. Thus the
idea “round square” involves the proposition “round and
square are compatible," and this involves the compatibility of
having no angles, and of having four angles. But the contra¬
diction is only possible because round and square are both
complex, and round and square involve synthetic propositions
asserting the compatibility of their constituents, while round


I Leibniz seems to have sometimes realized the difficulty involved in the
compatibility of all single predicates. Thus ho says: “It is yet unknown to
men what is the reason of the inoompossibility of different things, or how it is
that different essences can be opposed to each other, seeing that all purely
positive terms seem to be compatible'* inter «e (G. vn. 195; quoted by Caird,
Critical PhiJosnphy of Kant, i. pp. 93—4). (The date is before 1686.)


21


THE LAW OF CONTBADICTION.

• • •

involves the incoftipatibility of its constituents with the pos¬
session of angles. But for this synthetic relation of incom-
s patibijity, no negative proposition would occur, and therefore
jihore could be no proposition involved which would be directly
contradictory to the definition of a scpiarc. This is almost
admitted by Leibniz, when he urges that truths arc not
arbitrary, as Hobbes supposed, because “ notions are not always
reconcilable among themselves" (D. 30; G. iv. 425). Since
the p#8sibility of God, as defined by Leibniz, depends upon the
fact that all simple ideas are " reconcilable among themselves,”
and since all notions are composed of simple ideas, it is difficult
to see how the two views arc to be combined. Thus Leibniz’s
criterion of possible and impossible ideas can never apply to
simple ideas, and moreover always presupposes those simple
ideas and their relations—relations which can oidy be expressed
in synthetic propositions. Two simple ideas can never be
mutually contradictory in Leibniz's sense, since mere analysis
will not reveal any further predicate possessed by the one and
denied by the other. Thus a self-contradictory idea, if it be
not a mere negative, such as a non-existent existent, must
ahvay.s involve a synthetic relation of incompatibility between
two simple notions. The impossible idea, in Leibniz’s sense,
presupposes the idea which is impossible on account of some
synthetic proposition; and conversely, the possible complex
idea is possible on account of a synthetic proposition asserting
the compatibility of its simple constituents. Thus to return to
Arithmetic, even if 2 +1 be indeed the meaniny of 3, still the
proposition that 2 +1 is possible is necessarily synthetic. A
possible idea cannot, in the last analysis, be merely an idea
which is not contradictory; for the contradiction itself must
always be deduced from synthetic propositions. And hence the
propositions of Arithmetic, as Kant discovered, are one and all
synthetic.

In the case of Geometry, which Leibniz also regards as
analytic, the opposite view is even more evidently correct.
The triple number of dimensions, he says, follows analytically
from the fact that only three mutually perpendicular lines can
be drawn through one point (G. vi. 323). No instance, he
says, could be more proper for illustrating a blind necessity


22


THE LAW OF CONTBADICTION.

independent of God's will. It is amazing that he did not
perceive, in this instance, that the proposition froin which the
three dimensions are supposed to be deduced is in fact p^^iisely •
the same as the three dimensions, and that, so far fh>in being
proved, it is wholly incapable of deduction from any other
proposition, and about as synthetic as any proposition in tlie
whole range of knowledge. This is so obvious as to need no
further argument; and it is an interesting fact that Kant, in
his first published work’, points out the circularity of Leibniz’s
deduction in the above passage of the Tldodicie^ and proceeds,
being still a Leibnizian, to infer that the number of dimensions
is synthetic and contingent, and might be different in other
possible worlds (ed. Hartenstein, 1867, i. p. 21 ff.).

We may argue generally, from the mere statement of the
Law of Contradiction, that no proposition can follow from
it alone, except the proposition that there is truth, or that
some proposition is true. For the law states simply that any
proposition must be true or false, but cannot be both. It gives
no indication as to the alternative to be chosen, and cannot of
itself decide that any proposition is true. It cannot even, of
itself, yield the conclusion that such and such a proposition is
true or false, for this involves the premiss “ such and such is a
proposition,” which does not follow from the law of contra¬
diction. Thus the doctrine of analytic propositions seems
wholly mistaken.

It may be worth pointing out that even those propositions
which, at the beginning of the enquiry, we took as the type of
analytic propositions, such as “the equilateral rectangle is a
rectangle,” are not wholly analytic. We have already seen
that they are logically subsequent to synthetic propositions
asserting that the constituents of the subject are compatible.
They cannot, therefore, in any case, give the premisses of any
science^ sis Leibniz supposed (cf. N. E. p. 99; G. V. 92). But
further, in so far as they are significant, they are judgments of
whole and part; the constituents, in the subject, have a certain
kind of unity—the kind always involved in numeration, or in
assertions of a whole—which is taken away by analysis. Thus
even here, in so far as the subject is ons, the judgment does not
’ Gedanhen von der wahren ScMtzung der hhendigen Kr&fte, 1747.


23


THE LAAV OF CONTRADICTION.

• • •

follow from the L£i^v of Contradiction alone. And in the closely

allied judgipents, such as “red is a colour,” “2 is a number,”
“ niiiftber is a concept,” the subject is not even complex, and
the proposition is therefore in no sense analytic. But this last
assertion is one which I cannot here undertake to prove.

12. As regards the second point which was to be discussed,
namely the connection of the necessary and the analytic, it is
evident, from what has been said already, that if there are to
be any necessary propositions at all there must be necessary
synthetic propositions. It remains to enquire what we mean
by necessity, and what distinction, if any, can be made between
the necessary and the contingent.

Necessity itself is never discussed by Leibniz. He dis¬
tinguishes kinds of necessity—metaphysical, hypothetical, and
moral—but ho nowhere explains metaphysical necessity, which
is here in question, otherwise than as the property of analytic
propositions. Nevertheless, necessity must mean something
other than connection with the Law of Contradiction; the
statement that analytic propositions arc necessary is significant,
and the opposite statement—that synthetic propositions are
contingent—is certainly so regarded by Leibniz. It would
seem that necessity is ultimate and indefinable. We may say,
if wo choose, that a necessary proposition is one who.S(3 contra¬
dictory is impossible; but the impossible can only be defined
by means of the nece.ssary, so that this account would give no
information as to necessity. In holding necessary propositions
to be analytic, Leibniz agreed with all his predecessors, and
with those of his successors who preceded Kant. But by the
discovery that the laws of motion are synthetic, and by his
strict determinism, he rendered the denial of necessary syn¬
thetic ■propositions highly paradoxical in its consequences, and
prepared the way for Kant's opposite assertion. (For Leibniz,
by the way, the necessary is not, as for Kant, the same as the
^ priori \ we shall find that contingent propositions also have
d priori proofs. The d ‘priori is, as in Kant, what is indepen¬
dent of particular experience, but the necessary is not co¬
extensive with this.) Leibniz and Kant both held that there
is a fundamental distinction between propositions that are
necessary, and those that arc contingent, or, in Kant’s language.


34 THE LAW OF CJONTRAHICTION.

LMnpirical. Thus the propositions of mathcntatics are necessary,
while those asserting particular existence are contingent.' It
may be questioned whether this distinction is tenable, whfcther,?
in fact, there is any sense in saying, of a true proposition, tha^t
it might have been false. As long as the distinction of analytic
and synthetic propositions subsisted, there was some plausibility
in maintaining a corresponding distinction in respect of ne¬
cessity. But Kant, by pointing out that mathematical judg¬
ments arc both necessary and synthetic, prepared the way for
the view that this is true of all judgments. The distinction of
the empirical and the d prion seems to depend upon con¬
founding sources of knowledge with grounds of truth. There
is no doubt a great difference between knowledge gained by
perception, and knowledge gained by reasoning; but that does
not show a corresponding difference as to what is known. The
further discussion of this point, however, must be postponed
till we come to Leibniz’s theory of perception. And it must be
confessed that, if all propositions are necessary, the notion of
necessity is shorn of most of its importance.

Whatever view we adopt, however, as regards the necessity
of existential propositions, it must be admitted that arith¬
metical propositions are both necessary and synthetic, and this
is enough to destroy the supposed connection of the necessary
and the analytic.

In the next Chapter we shall have a less destructive task.
We shall have to $how the true principle and the true import¬
ance of Leibniz’s division of propositions into two kinds, and
the meaning of the Law of Sufficient Reason, which he invoked
as the source of his contingent propositions.


ClIAPTEll in.

CONTINGENT PllOPOSITIONS AND THE LAW OF SUFFICIENT

llEASON.

13. We have now seen that Leibniz’s division of propositions
into two classes, in the form in which he gave it, is untenable.
Necessary propositions are not to be do lined as those that
follow from the Law of Contradiction; and as regards proposi¬
tions which are not necessary, it may be questioned whether
any such are to be found. Nevertheless, there is a most
important principle by which propo.sitions may be divided into
two classes. This principle, we shall find, leads to the same
division of propositions as that to which Leibniz was led, and
may, by examination of his words, be shown to be the true
principle upon which his division proceeded. His division
does, therefore, correspond to what is perhaps the most im¬
portant classification of which propositions are capable. I
shall first explain this classification, and then examine the
Law of Sufficient Reason, which Leibniz held to be the
supreme principle of contingent propositions.

Contingent propositions, in Leibniz’s system, are, speaking
generally, such as assert actual existence. The exception
which this statement requires, in the case of the necessary
existence of God, may be provided for by saying that contin¬
gent propositions are such as involve a reference to parts of
time. This seems to be Leilbniz’s meaning when he says
(G. III. 588): *' The notion of eternity in God is quite different
from that of time, for it consists in necessity, and that of time


26 THE LAW OF SUFFICIENT REASON.

• • *

in contingency.” Thus necessary propositioiIS are such as have
no reference to actual time, or such as—except in^ the cas/of
God—do not assert the existence of their subjects. “As for*
the eternal truths,” Leibniz says, “wc must observe that aj)
bottom they are all conditional, and say in fact: Such a
thing posited, such another thing is” (N. E. p. 515; G. v.
428). And again: “ Philosophers, who distinguish so often
between what belongs to essence and what to eocistence, refer
to existence all that is accidental or contingent ” (N. E. p. 498;
G. V. p. 414). He points out also that the truth of a necessary
proposition does not depend upon the existence of its subject
(N. E. p. 51G; G. V. 429). The designation as eternal truths,
which he always adopts, must be meant to indicate that no
special time is referred to in the proposition; for the proposi¬
tion itself, of whatever nature, must of course be eternally
true or eternally false.

But propositions about contingency itself, and all that can
be said generally about the nature of possible contingents, are
not contingent; on the contrary, if the contingent be what
actually exists, any proposition about what might exist must
be necessary. Thus Leibniz says (G. i[. 39): “ The notion of a
species involves only eternal or necessary truths, but the notion
of an individual involves, suh ratione possibilitatis, what is of
fact, or related to the existence of things and to time.” He
proceeds to explain that the notion of the sphere which Archi¬
medes caused to be placed on his tomb involves, besides its
form, the matter of which it was made, as well as the place and
time. This passage is very important, for it involves the dis¬
tinction, afterwards urged by Kant again.st the ontological
argument, between the notion of an existent and the assertion
of actual existence. The notion of an individual, as Leibniz
puts it, involves reference to existence and time sub ratione
possibilitatis, i.e. the notion is exactly what it would be if the
individual existed, but the existence is merely possible, and is
not, in the mere notion, judged to be actual. “ Possibles are
possible,” he says, “before all actual decrees of God, but not
without sometimes supposing the same decrees taken as possi¬
ble. For the possibilities of individuals or of contingent truths
contain in their notion the possibility of their causes, to wit,


27


THE LAW OF SUFFICIENT REASON.

• • •

the free decrees of God; in which they are different from the
p()lbibilitie8,of species or eternal truths, which depend only
upon'the understanding of God, without involving his will ”
4G. II. &1). That is to say, possible cxistents involve possible
causes, and the connection between a possible cause and a
possible effect is similar to that between an actual cause and
an actual effect. But so long as we do not assert actual exist¬
ence, we are still in the region of eternal truths, and although,
as wo shall sec, the law of sufficient reason docs apply to
possibles, still it is not, in such applications, coordinate with
the principle of contradiction, but only a consequence of that
principle. It is in taking the further stop, in judging the
actual existence of the individual whose notion is in quo.stion,
that the law of sufficient reason becomes indispensable, and
gives results to which the law of contradiction is, by itself,
inadequate. The individual once posited, all its properties
follow: “ every predicate, necessary or contingent, past, present,
or future, is comprised in the notion of the subject” (G. 11. 46).
But it docs not follow that this notion represents a subject
which exists: it is merely the idea of a subject having the
general qualities distinguishing existeuts. Existence is thus
unique among predicates. All other predicates are contained
in the notion of the subject, and may be a.sserted of it in a
purely analytic judgment. The assertion of existence, alone
among predicates, is synthetic, and therefore, in Leibniz s view,
contingent. Thus existence has, for him, just as peculiar a
position as it has in Kant’s criticism of the ontological proof,
and it must be regarded as a sheer inconsequence, in Leibniz,
that he failed to apply his doctrine also to God. But for the
fact that Leibniz definitely asserts the contrary (N. E. 401 ;
G. V. 339)*, one would be tempted to state his position as
tantamount to a denial that existence is a predicate at all.

But further, not only the existence of such and such a
subject is contingent, but also the connection of any two predi¬
cates expressing the states of that subject at different times.
Thus Leibniz says, in discussing the supposition that he is

^ “When we say that a thing exists, or has real existence, this existence
itself is the predicate, i.e, it has a notion joined to the idea in question, and
there is connection between these two notions."


28 THE I.AW OF SUFFICIENT REASON.

« *

going, at some future time, to make a journfiy, “ the connection
of events, though certain, is not necessary, and it i^ open to^me
to make or not to make this journey, for though it is inAuded*
in my notion that 1 shall make it, it is also included in it thsit
I shall make it freely. And there is nothing in me, of all that*
can be conceived generally, or by essence, or by a specific or
incomplete notion, whence it can be concluded that I shall
do so necessarily, whereas from my being a man it can be
concluded that I am capable of thinking; and consequently,
if I do not make this journey, that will not combat any* eternal
or necessary truth. Nevertheless, since it is certain that I
shall do so, there must be some connection between me, who
am the subject, and the execution of the journey, which is the
predicate; for, in a true proposition, the notion of the predicate
is always in the subject. Consequently, if I did not do so,
there would be a falsity, which would destroy my individual or
complete notion " (G. II. 52). Thus those predicates which are
concretes, i.e. those expressing states of a substance at par¬
ticular parts of time, are in a difterent position from such
abstract predicates as human and rational. Concrete predi¬
cates, though they are connected with each other, are not
necessarily connected; the connections, as well as the predi¬
cates, are contingent. All the predicates are necessarily con¬
nected with the subject, but no concrete predicates are neces¬
sarily connected with each other. And hence Leibniz often
speaks of them as contingent predicates. If the series of
predicates were different, the subject would bo different; hence
the necessary connection of predicates and subject amounts to
little more than the law of identity*. A subject is defined by
its predicates, and therefore, if the predicates were different,
the subject could not be the same. Thus it follows, from a
subject’s being the subject it is, that it will have all the predi¬
cates that it will have; but from one or more of its predicates,
this does not follow necessarily. The existence of each separate
predicate at each separate instant is a contingent truth, for
each is presupposed in the assertion that just such a subject
exists. There is a difficulty, on this view, in distinguishing

^ “It would not have boon onr Adam, but another, if he had had other
events” (G. u. 42).


THE LAW OF SUFFICIENT REASON.


29


fP subject from tfte^um of its predicates—a difficulty to which
I s^all return when I come to the doctrine of substance. For
the present,•! am content to point out that, in asserting the
existence of an individual substance, i.e. of a subject whose
ilotion is complete, there are involved just as many separate
contingent propositions as there are momenta through- which
the substance persists. For the state of the substance at each
moment exists, and its existence is a contingent proposition.
It is thus existential propositions that are contingent, and pro¬
positions not asserting existence that are necessary. Leibniz’s
division of propositions into two kinds docs, therefore, corre¬
spond to a very important division- -porliaps the most im¬
portant—of which propositions are susceptible.

Some explanation seems, however, to be called for by the
connections of contingent predicates. These connections can
hardly be said to eieist, and yet they are always contingent, not
only iii free substances, but also in such as have no freedom.
In substances which are not free, the connections of successive
states are given by the laws of motion, and these laws are most
emphatically contingent. Leibniz oven goes so far as to say
that it is in Dynamics that we learn the distinction of necessary
and contingent propositions (G. III. 645). Besides these, there
is the general law, equally contingent, but equally without
exception, “ that man will alwaj'S do, though freely, what seems
the best” (G. IV. 438). The fact seems to be, that the.se
general but not necessary laws arc regarded by Leibniz as
essentially referring to every part of actual time. That is to
say, they do not hold of the sequences in other possible time-
orders, but only of actual sequences. Moreover they are
deduced from elements in the actual preceding state, which
elements lead to the sequence, and are logically prior to it—
this is, as we shall see, c.ssential to the doctrine of activity.
Thus these laws, though they have an a priori proof by means
(vf final causes, are yet of the nature of empirical generalisations.
They have held, they hold now, and they will hold hereafter.
They apply to every moment of actual time, but they cannot
be stated without such reference. This is a conception which
I shall have to criticize when we come to deal with Leibniz’s
philosophy of Dynamics. For the present, I only wish to point


30


THE LAW OF SUFFICIENT REASON.


out that, in his system, the laws of motion and the law of
volition are existential, and do have an essential referenc^^to
the parts of actual time. They are peculiar only in referring,
to all parts of time. They may be contrasted, in this respect,
with the properties of time itself, which are metaphysicallj^ c
necessary, and the same in all possible worlds; whereas the
existence of time is contingent, since it depends upon God’s free
resolve to create a world.

Leibniz’s dichotomy of propositions amounts, therefore, to
the following assertions. All true propositions not involving
actual existence, but referring only to essences or possibles, are
necessary; but propositions asserting existence—except in the
case of God—are never necessary, and do not follow necessarily
from any other existential proposition, nor yet from the fact
that the subject has all the qualities distinguishing existents*.
If, then, existential propositions are to have any interrelations,
and are to be in any way systematized, there must be some
principle by which their merely particular and contingent
chaiacter is mitigated.

14 . This brings me to the principle of sufficient reason.
This principle is usually supposed to be, by itself, adeejuate
to the deduction of what actually exists. To this supposi¬
tion, it must be confessed, Leibniz’s words often lend colour.
But we shall find that there are really two principles included
under the same name, the one general, and applying to all
possible worlds, the other special, and applying only to the
actual world. Both differ from the law of contradiction, by
the fact that they apply specially—the former, however, not
exclusively—to existents, possible or actual. The former, as we
shall see, is a form of the law of causality, asserting all possible
causes to be desires or appetites; the latter, on the other hand,
is the assertion that all actual causation is determined by
desire for the good. The former we shall find to be meta¬
physically necessaiy, while the latter is contingent, and applies
only to contingents. The former is a principle of possible
contingents, the latter a principle of actual contingents only.
The importance of this distinction will appear as soon as we

^ On the eonneotion of oontingenoy with infinite complexity (which many
commentators regard as defining contingency) see Chap. Y. § 26.


THE LAW OF SUFFICIENT REASON.


31


Begin to examine*Leibniz’s accounts of what he means by
su^cient reason*.

T^ie law*of suflficieiit reason is variously stated by Leibniz
at various times. I shall begin with his later statements,
'frhich are better known, and more in accordance with the
traditional view* of its import; I shall then refer to the earlier
statements, especi.ally those of 168C, and examine whether
these can be reconciled with the later forms of the principle.

The statement in the Monadology is as follows (§§ 31, 32,
33, 36): “ Our reasonings are founded upon two great princi¬
ples, tRat of contradiction,.and that of sufficient reason,

in virtue of which we judge that no fact can be found true or
existent, no statement veritable, unless there is a sufficient re^ison
why it should be so and not otherwise, although these reasons
usually cannot be known to us. Thei-c arc also two kinds of
truths, those of reasoning, and those of fact. lYuths of reason¬
ing arc necessary, and their opposite is impossible; truths of
fact are contingent, and their opposite is possible. When a
truth is necessary, the reason of it can be found by analysis....
But there must also be a sufficient reason for contingent truths
or truths of fact, i.e. for the sequence of things which are
dispersed throughout the universe of created beings, in which
the resolution into particular reasons might go on into endless
detail” (D. 222—3; L. 235—7; G. vi, 612). This leaves us
entirely uninformed as to what is meant by a sufficient reason.
The same vagueness appears in the Principles of Nature and
of Grace (§7): “Thus far we have spoken only as mere physi¬
cists : now we must rise to metaphysics, by making use of the
great principle, little employed in general, which affirms that
nothing happens without a sufficient reason; i.e. that nothing
happens without its being possible for one who should know
things sufficiently to give a reason sufficient to determine why
things are so and not otherwise. This principle being laid
down, the first question we are entitled to put will be, why
is there something rather than nothing ? For nothing is simpler
and easier than something. Further, supposing that things

^ l do not maintain that Leibniz himself was perfectly clear as to these two
principles of sufficient reason, but that he did, as a matter of fact, designate
two distinct principles (perhaps not distinguished by him) by this same name.


.32


THE LAW OF SUFFICIENT REASON.


must exist, we must be able to give a reas^in why they must
exist thus and not otherwise” (D. 212—3; L. 414—5; G. Fi.
602). This statement, though it brings out veryv* clearly the
connection of contingency and existence, gives us no further
information as to the meaning of sufficient reason. In the ,
paper “ On the Ultimate Origination of Things ” (1697) Leibniz
is a little more definite. He says: “ In eternal things, even
though there be no cause, there must be a reason, which, for
permanent things, is necessity itself, or essence; but for the
scries of changing things, if it be supposed that they succeed
one another from all eternity, this reason is, as we shall
presently see, the prevailing of inclinations, which consist not
in necessitating reasons, i.e. reasons of an absolute and meta¬
physical necessity, the opposite of which involves a contra¬
diction, but in inclining reasons” (L. 338 ; D. 100; G. Vll. 302).
What is meant by these inclining reasons cannot be properly
explained until we come to deal with the activity of substance.
In dealing with actual existents, the inclining reason is the
perception of the good, either by the substance itself, if it be
free, or by God, if the substance be not free. But the law as
above stated, even in the form which applies only to the series
of changing things, is true, as we shall soon see, not only of the
actual world, but of all possible worldr% It is, therefore, itself
metaphysically necessary, and unable to distinguish the actual
fi:om the possible. Even in the form which applies only to the
series of changing things, the law is still a law of all possible
contingents; and any true proposition about possible contin¬
gents must itself be not contingent, but necessary.

Before developing this topic, let us examine Leibniz’s earlier
statements of the law. In the year 1686, when he was more
inclined than in later years to go to the bottom of his principles,
he gives a .statement at first sight very different from those
which he usually gives, and refers to his usual formula as a
" vulgar axiom ” which follows as a corollary. He says : “ There,
must always be some foundation of the connection of terms in a
proposition, which must be found in their notions. This is my
great principle, with which I believe all philosophers must
agree, and of which one of the corollaries is this vulgar axiom,
that nothing happens without a reason...though often this


THE LAW OF SUFFICIENT REASON.


33


reason inclines witjiout necessitating” (G. it. 50). And again
hc^ays that in Metaphysics he presupposes hardly anything
,biit grelkt principles, namely (1) the law of contradiction,
and (2) “that nothing is without a reason, or that every truth
• lias its (\ priori proof, drawn from th(5 notion of the terms,
although it is not always in our power to make this analysis”
(G. II. C2).

There is another passage, in an undated paper, which how¬
ever, on internal evidence, would seem to belong to the same
period, in which Leibniz is even more dcHnito on the d pHoH
proof of contingent propositions. “ Generally, evciy true propo¬
sition,” he says, “(which is not identieai or true per se) can be
proved d pHoH by the help of axioms, or propositions true per
se, and by the help of definitions or ideas. ITor as often as a
predicate is truly affirmed of a subject, some real connection is
always judged to hold between the predicate and the subject,
and thus in any proposition: A is B (or, B is truly predicated
of A), B is always in A itself, or its notion is in some way con¬
tained in the notion of A itself; ami this either with absolute
neces.sity, in propositions of etermd triith, or with a kind of
certainty, depending upon a supposed decree of a free substance,
in contingent things; and this decree is never wholly arbitrary
and destit\ite of foundation, but always some reason for it
(which however inclines, and does not necessitate), can be given,
which could itself be deduced 1‘rom analysis of the notions (if
this were alwaj^s within human power), and certainly does not
escape the omniscient substance, which sees everything d priori
by means of ideas themselves and its own decrees. It is certain,
therefore, that all truths, even the iriost contingent, have an
d priori proof, or son»e reason wh}' they arc rather than arc not.
And this is itself what people commonly say, that nothing
happens without a cause, or that nothing is without a reason.”
(G. VII. 300, 301)’.

• ^ The principle of sulHcicnt reason, in so far as it is iiidopendcnt of final
causes, occurs in Spitioza {Hthics, i. 11, 2nd deni.): “ For the existence or non¬
existence of anything, it must be possible to assign a cause or reason.” Leibniz
was aware of this agreement, as appears from the followixig comment on
Schuller’s account ot Spinoza: ” This is rightly observed, and agrees with what
I am wont to say, that nothing exists unless a sufficient reason of its existence
can be given, which is easily shown not to lie in the series of causes,” [G. 1 .138.]

3


B. L.


34 THE LAW OF SUFFICIENT REASON.

These statements, as they stand, seJm different from
Leibniz’s later statements of the law of sufficient reason. ^But
it would seem that he intends, in contingent raattdr, to include,,
in “ the notion of the terms,” the pursuit of the apparently best.
This appears quite plainly in a passage also written in 1686,»
where he says that the actions of Caesar, though contained in
his notion, depend upon God’s free choice to create men, and to
make them such that they would always choose, though freely,
what seemed best to them. It is only thus, he says, that such
prcdicsites can be shown tl priori to belong to Caesar (G. IV.
438).

Thus the law of sufficient reason, as applied to actual
cxistents, reduces itself definitely to the assertion of final
causes, in the sense that actual desires are always directed
towards what appears the best. In all actual changes, the con¬
sequent can only be deduced from the antecedent by using the
notion of the good. Where the change depends only upon God,
it really is for the best; where it depends upon a free creature,
it is such as seems best to the creature, but is often, owing to
confused perception, not really the be.st possible change. Such
a connection can only be regarded as contingent by admitting,
as Leibniz does, that a law may be genei’al, i.e. may apply to
every part of time, without being necessary, i.e. without being
capable of a statement in which no actual part of time is
referred to. To pursue this topic is impossible until we come
to the doctrine of substance. A.t present I will only point
out that this principle confei's upon the good a relation to
existence such as no other concept possesses. In order to infer
actual existence, whethtT from another existent, or from mere
notions, the notion of the good must always be employed. It
is in this sense that contingent propositions have d priori
proofs^ “As possibility is the principle of essence,” Leibniz
says, “so perfection, or a degree of essence (by which the
greatest number of things are compossible), is the principle

* The « priori, in Leibniz, is opposed to the empirical, not to the contingent.
A proof employing the notion of the good may show, without appealing to
experience, that something exists, but does not thereby render this proposition
necessary. Thus the & priori is not, as in Kant, synonymous With the
necessary.


35


THE LAW OF SUFFICIENT REASON.

of existence ” (D. *103; L. 342—3; G. vri. 304)\ This con-
n^ion of existence with the good, the principle that all actual
causation is‘determined by desire for what appears best, is a
most important proposition, which wo shall have to consider
again at a later stage. It gives the essence of the law of
sufficient reason as applied to actual existents. At the same
time we shall see that the law has also a wider meaning, in
which it applies to possible existents as well. The confusion
of these two has rendered the connection of the law with the
principle of contradiction very difficult to un<lorstand. The
distinction will, I think, enable us to clear up the connection
of Leibniz’s two principles.

16. When we eiupiire into the relation of th<; law of suffi¬
cient reason to the law of contradiction, wo find that Leibniz
makes very few remarks on the subject, and that those few
give a meaning to the law of sulficient reason, in which it
applies ecpially to all possible worlds. Wo then recpiirc a
further principle, applicable only to the actual world, from
which actual existence may he inferred. This is to be found in
final causes. But let us see what Leibniz says.

“I certainly maintain,” he writes to Bos Bosses, “that a
power of determining oneself witliout any cause, or without any
source of determination, implies contradiction, as does a relation
without foundation ; but from this the metaphysical necessity
of all effects does not follow. For it suffices that the cause or
reason be not one that metaphysically necessitates, though it is
metaphysically necessary that there should be .some such cause ”
(G. II. 420). In this passage he is evidently thinking of the
volitions of free creatures; in a letter to the Princess of Wales,
accompanying the fourth paper against Clarke, he makes the
same statement concerning God. “ God himself,” ho says,
“could not choose without having a reason of his choice”
(G. VII. 379). But we know that God, being free, might have
chosen otherwise, and therefore, since he must have a reason
for his choice, there must have been possible reasons for possible

^ Perfection hero has its metaphysical sense, as the "amount of positive
reality” {Monadology, § 41, D. 224), but Lcibulz certainly thought metaphysical
perfection good. In the sentence preceding the one quoted in the text, he speaks
of “ imperfection or moral absurdity ” as synonymous, and means by imper¬
fection the opposite of metaphysical perfection. See Chap. xvx.


3—2


36 THE LAW OF SUFFICIENT REASON.

%

* •

choices, as well as actual reasons for actual ehoiccs. The same
consequence follows as regards free creatures. And this
quence, as appears from a passage quoted above (G. II, 51 13)/

was actually drawn by Leibniz. In order that a notion may bp
the notion of a possible existent, there must be another notion *
which, if it existed, would be a sufficient reason for such an
imagined existent. “There were,” Leibniz continues, “an
infinity of possible ways of creating the world, according to
the different designs which God might form, and each possible
world depends upon certain pi'incipal designs or ends .of God
proper to itself” (G. ii. 51).

But if the principle applies to possible as well as actual
existents, how is it to help in determining what does actually
exist ? It gives merely, on this view, a general quality of what
might exist, not a source of actual existents*. This Leibniz
would admit. And wo may now clearly state the distinction
between actual and possible sufficient rca.sons. The part of the
principle which is metaphysically necessary, which applies
equally to possible and to actual existents, is the part which
asserts all events to bo due to design. From the passage at
the end of the preceding paragraph, it appears that, whichever
of the possible worlds God had created, ho would always
necessarily have had some design in doing so, though his
design might not have been the best jxissihle. And similarly
volition, in free creatures, mvM have a motive, i.e, must be


determined by some prevision of the effect. The relation of
cause and effect can never bo a purely external one; the cause
must be always, in part, a desire fijr the effect. This form of
causality is the essence of activity, which Leibniz, as we shall
see, declares to bo metaphysically neccsssary to substance. And
in this fomi, the law of sufficient reason is necessary and
analytic, not a principle coordinate with that of contradiction,
but a mere consequence of it.

The principle which applies only to actuals, which is realty
coordinate with the law of contradiction, and gives the source


* Cf. G. II. 225: De Voider objeotH to Leibniz that to conceive the existence
of a substance we require a cause, but not to conceive its essence. “I retort,”
Leibniz replies, ” to conceive its essence we require the conception of a possible
cause, to conceive its existence we require the oouception of an actual cause."


37


THE LAW OF SUFFICIENT REASON.

. ; .

of^the world which*does exist, is the principle that designs are
alwiiys detennined by the idea of the good or the best. God
migh% have desired any of the possible worlds, and his desire
Vould have been a sufficient reason for its creation. But it is
a contingent fact that he desired the best, that the. actual
sufficient reason of creation was the desire for the maximum of
good, and not for anything that the other possible worlds Avould
have realised. So Leibniz sjxys: “ It is reasonable and assured
that God will always do the best, though what is less perfect
does n»t imply contradiction” (G. iv. 43<S)‘. The samq holds
of free creatures, with the limitation that. th('y arc often mis¬
taken about the good. It would be possible to desire what
does not appear best, but it is a contingent fact that actual
desires, which are actual sufficient reas<jns, are always directed
to what the free spirit holds to be the best p'^ssible*. It might
be supno«aed that, if God is Ticces.sarily good, his acts also must
necesHcirily be determined by the motive of the best. But this
Leibniz evades by the common notion that freedom i.s (*ssontial
to goodness, that God is good otdy because the evil which he
rejects is possible—a notion which this is not the place to discuss.

We may now sum up the results of our discussion of con¬
tingency and sufficient reason. Leibniz, holding fast to the
doctrine that a necessary proposition must be analytic, dis¬
covered that existential propositions arc synthetic, and also, like
Hume and Kant, that all causal connections among oxistents
differing in temporal position are synthetic. He infeiTed,
Jiccordingly, that the actual world does not exist necessarily,
and that, within this world, causes do not pujduce their effects

^ Gf, G. VII. 30'.), text and note. Al.<to the following passages in the fifth paper
against Clarke [G. vii.] : No. 0 : “But to say, that God can only choose what is
best; and to infer from thence, that what he docs not choose, is impossible;
this, 1 say, is confounding of terms: 'tis blending power and will, metaphysical
necessity and moral necessity, essences and existences. For what is necessary,
is^so by its essence, since the opposite implies a contradiction; but a contingent
which exists, owes its existence to the principle of what is best, which is a
Builioient reason of things.” No. 73: “God can do everything that is possible,
but he will do only what is best.” Cf. also No. Tfi.

^ This appears also from a passage [G. n. 40] where Leibniz explains that
the present state of the world follows from the first state only in virtue of
certain laws freely decreed by God. These laws, therefoi'e, among which is the
pursuit of the best, must be contingent.


38


THK 1.AW OF SUFFICIENT REASON.

f

necessarily. The reason, as he perpetually repeats, inclines
without necessitating. This was his solution of the problem
raised by the fact, which he perceived as clearly as Hum^ and *
Kant, that causal connections are synthetic. Hume inferreij
that causal connections do not really connect, Kant inferred '
that the synthetic may be necessary, Leibniz inferred that a
connection may be invariable without being necos.siiry. As he
never dreamt of denying that the necessary must be analytic,
this was his only possible escape from a total denial of causal
connections. «

Thus the proposition that anything except God exists is
contingent, and so is the proposition that one existent is the
cause of another. At the same time, causality itself is necessary,
and holds in all po.ssible worlds. In all possible worlds, moreover,
causality can only be rendered intelligible by regarding the
cause {IS being in part a prevision or desire of the effect. This
follows, as we shall see in the next chapter, from the general
doctrine that “every extrinsic deiiomination has an intrinsic
one for its foundation ” (G. ir. 240), i.e. that no reLtion is
purely external. »So far as this is asserted by the law of suffi¬
cient reason, that law is metaphysically necessary. The effect
mast be the end in the psychological sense, %.e. the object of
desire. But in the actual world, owing to God's goodness, the
effect also is, or seems to be, the end in the ethical sense. The
psychological end is, as a matter of fact, what the agent
believes to be the ethical end, i.e. what he believes to be the
best possible effect. (In substances which arc not free, the
sufficient reason does not lie in them, but in God.) This is
what distinguishes the actual from any other possible world.
God might have created one of the possible worlds, but he
could not have been ignorant of its not being the best. For its
degree of excellence is an eternal truth, and an object of his
understanding. • But we are told (G. ll. 51) that whatever
world God had created, he would have had a design in so doing,
and that some design is metaphysically necessary to his acts*
It only remains, therefore, to interpret design psychologically,
not ethically, when design is said to bo necessary.

God's good actions then are contingent, and true only within
the actual world. They are the source, from which all explana-


39


THE LAW OF SUPFICIKNT REASON.

tion of contingerite by means of sufficient retison proceeds.
Th«s»y themselves, however, have their sufficieut re.ason in God’s
goodhess, wliich ojie must suppose metaphysically necessary’.
Leibniz failed to show why, since this is so, God’s good actions
are not also necessary. But if they were necessary, the whole
series of their consequences would have been also necessary,
and his philosophy would have fallen into Spiriozism. The
only remedy would have been, to declare God’s existence, like
all other existence, contingent—a remedy irresistibly suggested
by his logic, but regarded by him, for obvious reasons, as worse
than the disease of Spinozism which his doctrine of contingency
was designed to cure.

’ Leibniz nowhere, so far as I know, definitely asserts God’s goodness to be
ict*i y, but this conclusion seems to follow from his pbilosopby. For God’s
^ooduess is an eternal truth, not referring sidely, as do bis acta, to the actual
v'orld. We can hardly suppose that, in other possible worlds, God would not
been good, or that it is a merely contingent fact that God is good. Rut if
wcii lo make this supposition, we should merely remove tho difliculty one
, n.ge further, since wo should then require a sufficient reason for (lod’s good-
aoHS. ^ ‘his reason were necessary, God’s goodness would also be necessary;
‘ coni) at, it would itself require a sulUcient reason, concerning which tho
u uilty would recur.


40


CHAPTER IV.

THE CONCEPTION OF SUBSTANCE.

16. The question to be discussed in this chapter is: What
did Leibniz mean b}’ the word substance, and how far can this
meaning be fruitfully employed in philosophy ? This question
must be carefully distinguished from the question which is
answered by the doctrine of Mouads, namely, what existential
judgments can we make, in which the notion of substance is
employed? Our present question is simply, what is the notion
of substance? Not, what juclgnmnts about the world can be
made by the help of this notion ?

The conception of substance dominated the Oirtesian philo¬
sophy, and was no less important in the philosophy of Leibniz.
But the meaning which Leibniz attached to the word was
different from that which his predecessors had attached to it,
and this change of meaning was one of the main sources of
novelty in his philosophy. Leibniz himself emphasized the
importance of this conception in his system. As against Locke,
he urged that the idea of substance is not so obscure as that
philosopher thought it (N. E. 148; G. V. 133). The considera¬
tion of it, he says, is one of the most important and fruitful
points in philosophy: from his notion of substance follow the
most fundamental truths, oven tho.se concerning God and souls
and bodies (D. 09; G. iv. 469). To explain this notion is,
therefore, an indispensable pi’oliminary to a discussion of hiS
views on matter or of his theory of Monads.

The Cartesians had defined substance as that which needs,
for its existence, only God’s concurrence. By this they meant,
practically, that its existence was not dependent upon relations
to any other existents ; for God’s concurrence was an awkward


41


THE CONOEFl’ION OF SUBSTANCE.

condition, which hjtd led Dea Cartea to affirm that God alone
waa^ properly and strictly a substance. Thus although, practi-
•cally,^ they admitted two substances, mind and matter, yet,
whenever they took God seriously, they were compelled to deny
tile substantiality of everything except God. This inconsistency
was remedied by Spinoza, to whom substance was enma siii,
the self-caused, or that which is in itself and is conceived
through itself. Substance to him, was therefore God alone—a
remedy which Leibniz regarded as condemning the original
definitipn (G. Vl. 582). To Spinoza, extension and thought did
not constitute separate substances, but attributes of the one
substance. In S]>inoza as in ])es Cartes, the notion of sub¬
stance, though not by thorn clearly analyzed into its elements,
was not an ultimate simple notion, but a notion depoiident, in
some undo6ned manu<',r, upon the purely logical notion of
subject and juvdicate. The attributes of a substance an*, the
predicates of a subject; and it is sup})oscd that predicates
cannot exist without their subject, though the subject can
exist without tlmni. Ilrmcc the subject becomes that whose
existence does not depend upon any (jther existent.

There is an interesting discussion of this definition, in
connection with Malcbranche, in the Dialogue between Phila-
rete and Ariste (G. vi. pp. 579—594). In this dialogue, the
representative of Malebraucho begins by defining substance as
whatever can be conceived alone, or as existing independently
of other things (G. VJ. 581). Leibniz points out, in objection,
that this definition, at bottom, applies only to God. “ Shall we
then say,” he proceeds, “ with an innovator who is but too well-
known, that God is the only substance, and creatures arc mere
modifications of him ? ” If the independence is to extend only
to created things, then, Leibniz thinks, force and life, abstractly
at least, can be so conceived. Independence in conception, he
says, belongs not only to substance, but also to what is essential
t« substance. Malebiunche’s supporter then confines his defini¬
tion to concretes: substance is a concrete independent of every
other created concrete. To this Leibniz retorts (1) that the
concrete can perhaps only be defined by means of substance, so
that the definition may involve a vicious circle’; (2) that
^ This objection however is subseqacntly withdrawn (lb. 583).


42 THE CONCEFllON OF SUBSTANCE.

^ •

extension is not a concrete, but the abstract of the extended,
which is the subject of extension (Ib. 582). But he avoid|iln
this place, any definition of his own, contenting fiimself,*in a
characteristically conciliatory manner, with pointing out that
the above rectified definition will apply to Monads alone
(Ib. 585—6).

17. Leibniz perceived, however, that the relation to subject
and predicate was more fundamental than the doubtful infer¬
ence to independent existence (cf. G. Ii. 221). He, therefore,
definitely brought his notion of substance into dependence upon
this logical relation. He urges against Locke that there is
good reason to assume substance, since wo conceive several
predicates in one and the same subject, and this is all that is
meant by the words support or substratum, which Locke is using
as s^monymous with substance (N. K. p. 225; G, V. 201—2).

But when we examine further, we fiml that this, though an
essential part of the meaning of substance, is by no means all
that this word means. Besides the logical notion of subject,
there has been, as a rule, another element in the meaning
people have attached to the word substance. This is the clement
of persistence through change. Persistence is involved, indeed,
in the very notion of change as opposed to mere becoming.
Change implies something which changes; it implies, that is, a
subject which has preserved its identity while altering its quali¬
ties. Thi.s notion of a subject of change is, therefore, not inde¬
pendent of subject and predicate, but 'subsequent to it; it is
the notion of subject and predicate applied to what is in time.
It is this special form of the logical subject, combined with the
doctrine that there are terms which can only be subjects and
not predicates, which constitutes the notion of substance as
Leibniz employs it. If we are to hold, he says, that I am the
same person as I was, wo must not be content with mere
internal experience, but must have an d priori reason. This
can only be that my present and past attributes are predicates
of the same subject (G. il. 43). The necessity of substance in
the sense of a subject of change has been pointed out by Kant
in the first analogy of experience. But to Kant, this subject is
as phenomenal as its predicates. The distinctive feature of
substance, w'hen used as the basis of a dogmatic metaphysic, is


43


THE CONCEPTION OF SUBSTANCE.

I

the belief that certain terms are only and essentially subjects.
Wii^n several'predicates can bo attributed to a subject, and
this la turn cannot be attributed to any othei' sul)ject, then,
!|^eibniz says, we call the subject an individual substance (G. iv.
432). This point is important; for it is plain that any term
7nay be made a subject. I may say “ two is a number,'’ “ red is
a colour,” and so on. J^ut such terms can bo attributed to
others, and theretbre are not substances. The ultimate subject
is always a substance (G. ii. 457—8). Thus the term 1 appears
incapable of attribution to any other term ; I have many predi¬
cates, but am not in turn a pretlicate of anything else. I,
therefore, if th(5 word I docs denote auy thing distinct from the
mere sum of my states, and if I persist through time, fulfil
Leibniz’s definition of a substance. Space, as Leibniz often
admits, would, if it wore real, which he denies, be a substance;
for it persists through time, and is not a predic.atc*.

Substance, then, is that which can only be subject, not
predicate, which has many predicates, and persists through
change. It is, in short, the subject of change. I^he different
attributes which a substance has at different times are all pre¬
dicates of the substance, and though any attribute exists only
at a certain time, yet the fact of its being an attribute at that
time is eternally a predicate of the substance in (|uestion. For
the substance is the same subject at all times, and therefore
has always the same predicates, since the notion of the predi¬
cate, according to Leibniz, is always contained in the notion of
the subject. All my states and their connections have always
been in the notion of that subject which is I. Thus to say
that all my states arc involved in the notion of me, is merely to
say that the predicate is in the subject (G. Ii. 43). From this
proposition, Leibniz continues, it follows that every soul is a
world apart, independent of everything else except God (G. ll.
46, 47). For since all my predicates have always belonged to
me, and .since among these predicates are contained all my
states at the various moments of time, it follows that my
development in time is a mere consequence of my notion, and
cannot depend upon any other substance. Such a subject as I

^ In his yonth, Leibniz was inclined to admit space as a substance. See
G. I. 10 (16C6), and Selver, op. eit. p. 28.


THB CONCEPTION OF SUBSTANCE.


am may not exist; but if such a subject idoes exist, all my
states follow from the fact that I am such as I am, and /ibis
suffices to account for my changes, without supposing that I
am acted upon from without\

18 . We can now undei'stand what Leibniz means by
activity. The activity of substances, he says, is metaphysically
necessary (G. it. 16{)). It is in this activity that the very
substance of things consists. Without a force of some dura¬
tion, no created substance would remain ntimerically the same,
but all things would be only modifications of one divine sub¬
stance (D. 117; G. IV. 508)*. Substance, again, is a being
capable of action (1). 200; L. 406 ; G. vi. .598). But he does
not often explain clearly what he means by activity. Activity
is, as a rule, a cover for confused thinking; it is one of those
notions which, by appealing to psychological imagination,
appear to make things cleai’, when in reality they merely give
an analogy to something familiar. Leibniz’s use of activity,
however, tioes not seem open to this charge. He definitely
rejects the appeal to imagination, 'riie indwelling force of
substarmes, he says, may be conceived distinctly, but not
explained by images, for force must be grasped by the under¬
standing, not the imagination (1). 116; G. iv. 507). What
then is this activity, which can be clearly conceived, but not
imagined ?

Without an internal force of action, Leibniz explains, a
thing could not be a substance, for the nature of substance
consists in this regulated tendency, from which phenomena are
born in order (G. iii. 58). Again he says (L. 300, n .; G. IV.

^ Arnaald’s judgment upon thiti theory, immediately after reading the
Discount fie MMaphyaique, deserves quotation as a wanting to philosophers
who feel tempted to oondemn their juniors. “I have at present,” he writes,
"such a cold, that all I can do is tell your Highness, in two words, that I
find in these thoughts so many things which alarm me, and which almost all
men, if f am not mistaken, will find so shocking, that I do not see of what use
a writing can be, which apparently all tbe world will reject. I shall only give
as an instance what he says in Art. 18: 'That the individual notion of each
person involves once for all everything that will ever happen to him’” (O. ii. 15).
The selection of this remark as specially shocking may perhaps help to account
for Leibniz’s omission of it from his published works.

^ Cf. Spinoza, Ethics^ ni. 6, 7. For him also, individuality consists in
activity. Cf. Pollock’s Spinoza, 1st ed. pp. 217, 221; 2Dd ed. pp. 201, 205.


45


THE CONCEPTION 0¥ SUBSTANCE.

I

• «

4^2): “By force or power {puissance), I do not mean the
capi^ity (pouvoir) or mere faculty, which is nothing but a
near'possibility of acting, and which, being as it were dead,
5^ever produces an action without being stimulated from with¬
out, but I mean something between the capacity {pouvoir) and
action, something which includes an effort, an act, an entelechy,
for force passes of itself into action, in so far as nothing hinders
it. Wherefore I regard force as constitutive of substance, since
it is the principle of action, which is the characteristic of
siibstattce.” We can thus see what Leibniz means by activity,
and we can sec also that this notion is a nocc'ssary and legiti¬
mate consequence of his notion of substance. A substance, we
have seen, is a subject which has predicates consisting of various
attributes at various parts of time. We have .seen also that all
these predicates are involved in the notion of the subject, and
that the ground of its varying attributes is, therefore, within
the substance, and not to be sought in the influence of the
outside world. Hence there must be, in every state of a
substance, some element or ipiality in virtue of which that
state is not permanent, but tends to pa.ss into the next state.
This element is what Leibniz moans by activityh Activity is
to bo distinguished from what wo mean by causation. Causa¬
tion is a relation between two phenomena in virtue of which
one is succeeded by the other. Activity is a (juality of one
phenomenon in virtue of which it tends to cause another.
Activity is an attribute corresponding to the relation of causality;
it is an attribute which must belong to the subject of changing
states, in so far as those states are developed out of the nature
of the subject itself. Activity is not a more relation; it is an
actual cjuality of a substance, forming an element in each state
of the substance, in virtue of which that state is not permanent,
but tends to give place to another. Since a substance, as we
have seen, is essentially the permanent subject of changing
sfttributes, it follows that activity, in the above sense, is essen¬
tial to substance, and thus metaphysically necessary. It follows
also that, as Leibniz says, without activity a substance could
not preserve its numerical identity; for without activity a sub¬
stance would cease to have new attributes at new moments of

1 Cf. D.llu; G. XV. 606—7.


46 THE CONCEFflON OF SUBSTANCE.

f

r 9

time, and would thus cease to exist. Activity thus ,follojj?s
from the general doctrine, which Leibniz shares with i^ny
other philosophers Lotze), that every relation mul^t be*
analyzable into adjectives of the related terms. Two state?
have a relation of succession and causality; therefore there
must be con'espondiiig adjectives of the states. The adjective
of the preceding state is activity. Passivity, however, is not
the adjective of the succeeding state, but is something quite
different *.

19 . We may now return to the law of sufficient treason,
and interpret it in connection with activity. Although, as we
saw, all the states of a substancje arc contained in its notion,
and could, by perfect knowledge, be deduced from its notion,
yet this, as Leibniz means it, amounts to little more than the
law of identity^. Whatever my future actions may be, it must
be true now that they will be such as they will be. Whoever
acted otherwise would not be the same person. But that I
shall act in any specific manner cannot be inferred from any
general proposition about me. My specific actions arc con¬
nected with the notion of me, but are not related necessarily to
any of my general qualities or to each other. There is nothing
in me, Leibniz says, of all that can be conceived generally, or
by essence, or by a specific or incomplete notion, from which
my future actions follow necessarily. Nevertheless, if I am
going to take a journey, it is certain that I shall take it, and
therefore, if I did not take it, there would be falsity, which
would destroy the individual or complete notion of me (G. IT.
.52). That is to say, whoever did otherwise would not be the
same person. This really amounts to no more than (1) the
iissertion of permanent substances, (2) the obvious fact that
every proposition about the future is already dcjtcrmined either
as true or as false, though we may be unable to decide the
alternative. Thus we have no means, in all this, of determining,
from a given state of substance, what its future states will be;
and for this purpose, according to Leibniz, we require the prin¬
ciple of sufficient reason.

The principle fulfils, therefore, the same function as that

^ Cf. Chap, zii, § 64.

* Cf. G. n. 42, beginning of paragraph.


47


THE CONCEPTION OF SUBSTANCE.

* ^

ior which causalifcy^is now used ; it gives a connection between
events at different times. But unlike causality, it endeavours
to srrow why* and not merely that, certain sequences occur. In
an early letter, written before Leibniz had discovered his notion
of substance (1676?), he urges that a single thing cannot be
the cause of its changes, since everything remains in the state
it is in, if there is nothing to change it; for no reason can be
given in favour of one change rather than another (G. i. 372).
By the contrast between this and his later opinions, we see
clearly.the connection between activity and sufficient reason.
The sufficient reason for one change rather than another is to
be found in the Jiature of activity. In substances which are
not free, this activity is regulated by general laws, which them¬
selves have a sufficient reason in God’s perception of fitness; in
free substances, the sufficient reason lies in the more or less
confused perception of the good on the part of the substance
itself. But in no case is the connection betw'een two states in
itself necessary; it always ari.ses from the perception, either in
God or in the creature (if this bo free), that the change is good
(G. ir. 38). This topic, however, cannot be fully discussed
until wc have examined the doctrine of MotukIs.

20. From what has been said of activity, it is plain that
those predicates of a given sub.stauce which are existents in
time form one causal series. Leibniz sometimes goes so far in
this direction as to approach very near to Lotze’s doctrine that
things are laws\ All singular things, he says, are subject to
succession, nor is there anything permanent but the law itself,
involving continual succession. Successions, he continues, like
such series as numbers, have the property that, given the first
term and the law of progression, the remaining terms arise in
order. The only difference is, that in successions the order is
temporal, but in numbers the order is that of logical priority
(G. II. 263). Further, the persistence of the same law is the
ground for asserting that a new temporal existent belongs to
the same substance as a past existent. The identity of a sub¬
stance at different times is recognized, he says, “ by the persist¬
ence of the same law of the series, or of continuous simple
transition, which leads us to the opinion that one and the
^ See Lotze’s Metaphyaic, Book I. Chap. 111., especially § 32.


48


THE CONCEPllON OF SUBSTANCE.


same subject or monad is changing. Thati there should be.a
persistent law, involving the future states of that whiclj* we
conceive as the same, is just what I assert to constitute h; the *
same substance” (G. il. 264). These passages explain very
definitely what Leibniz means by his phnise, that each monad
contains in its nature the law of the continuation of the scries
of its operations (D, ;18; G. ii. 136). They enable us, also, to
see what would remain of the doctrine of monads if the appeal
to substance were dropped. All the predicates of a given
substance form one causal series: this series might, therefore, be
taken as defining what we are to moan by one substance, and
the reference to subject and predicate might be dropped. The
plurality of substances would then consist in the doctrine, that
a given existent at a given moment is caused, not by the whole
preceding state of the universe, but by some one definite existent
in the preceding moment. This lussumption is involved in the
f)rdinary search for causes of particular.s. It is supposed, for
instance, that two simultaneous existents A and B have been
caused, respectively, by two different preceding existents a and
not that each was caused by the whole preceding state of
the universe. 'I'liis assumption, if justified, would be sufficient
to establish something very like Leibniz’s philosophy. For A
and B will in turn cau.se, respectively, difforont existents A' and
B', and so on. The denial of the interaction of substances thus
reduces itself, when the series is substituted for the single
subject, to the assertion that there arc many causal series, and
not one only. 1 shall return to this assertion when I come to
Leibniz’s grounds for a plurality of substances'. At present I
wish to point out how easily Leibniz conk I have got rid, at this
stage, of the appeal to subject and predicate, and have sub¬
stituted the unity of the law or series for that of the logical
subject—a doctrine from which, as from his own, the persist¬
ence and independence of substances necessarily follows.

21. At this point it may be well to enquire how, in
Leibniz’s view, a substance differs from the sum of its predi¬
cates. If the monad had been reduced to a mere causal series,
it would have been identified with the sum of its predicates.
It would then have had a purely formal unity; there would not

' See end of Chap. YIl.


49


THE CONCEFITON OF SUBSTANCE.

«

• * .
h^ve been an actual subject, the same at all ])oints of time, but

onl)^ series of perpetually now terms. There would still have
•been’simplc substances, iu the sense of independent causal
series, but there would have been no reason for regarding the
soul as one of these simple substances, or for denying causal
interaction between my states and other exisUuits. On the
contrary, it is because the Ego appeared to Leibniz to be
evidently one subject, that its various states were hold to
constitute one indopi'.ndent causal series. We must not say,
therefore, as is often loosely <loim, that Leibniz identified sub¬
stance anti activity; activity is the essence of suhstanc<.>.s, but
substances themselves are not essences, but the subjects of
essences and other predicates'. Thus a substance is not, for
Leibniz, identical with the sum of its states-; on the contrary,
those states cannot exist without a substance in which to
inhere. The ground for {issuming substances—and this is a
very important point—is purely and solely logical. What
Science deals with are states of substances, and it is these only
that can be given in experience. They arc assumed to be
states of substances, because they are held to be of the logical
nature of predicates, and thus to demand subjects of which they
may be predicated. The whole docti'ine depends, throughout,
upon this purely logical tenet. And this brings us back to the
distinction, which we made in Chapter II., between two kinds
of subject-predicate proposition. The kind which is appro-
piiatc to contingent truths, to predicatitms concerning actual
substances, is the kind which says “ This is a man,” not “ man
is rational.” Here this must be supposed defined, not primarily
by predicates, but simply as that substance which it is. 'Fhe

^ Cf. D. 118; G. IV. 509: “Aa for me, as far as I lipJieve myself to have
grasped the notion of action, 1 hold that that most receivud philosophical dogma,
that actiong belong to subjecUi (egge guppogitorum), follows from it, and is proved
by it; and 1 think that this principle is so true that it is also reciprocal, so
thAt not only whatever acts is a single substance, but also that every single
substance acts without intermission.” It appears plainly, from this passage,
that the substance is conceived as a permanent subject, so that the assertion of
activity is significant, and not a mere tautology.

* Cf. G. II. 263: “Substances are not wholes which contain patta formaliter,
but complete things which contain partial ones eminenter." Cf. also G. vi.
360.


B. Ii.


4


50 THE CONCEPTION OF SUBSTANCE.

r

substance is not an idea, or a predicate, or b collection of predi¬
cates; it is the substratum in which predicates inhere (cf.^. E.
pp. 225—6; G. v. 201—3; esp. § 2). It would seem, however,*
that the word this must mean something, and that only a
moaning is capable of distinguishing which substance we are
speaking of. What is usually meant is some reference to time
or place, so that “ this is human ” would reduce itself to “ hu¬
manity exists here.” The reference to time and place is to
some extent countenanced by Lcibnix (see e.g. G. ir. 49), but
he regarded time and place as themselves ultimately rgsducible
to predicatc.s. Thus the substance remains, apart from its
predicates, wholly destitute of meaning*. As to the way in
which a term wholly destitute of mctaning can be logically
employed, or can be valuable in Metaphysics, I confess that I
share Locke’s wonder®. When we come to the Identity of
Indiscemiblcs, we shall find that Leibniz himself, by holding a
substance to be defined by its predicates, fell into the error of
confounding it with the sura of those predicates. That this
was from his stand-point an error, is sufficiently evident, since
there would be no ground for opposing subjects to predicates,
if subjects were nothing but collections of predicates. More-
ov(;r, if this were the case, [>redication8 concerning actual
substances would be just as analytic aj? those concerning
essences or species, while the judgment that a substance
exists would not be one judginoni, but as many judgments
as the subject has temporal predicates. Confusion on this point
seems, in fact, to be largely responsible for the whole theory of
analytic judgments.

22. The relation of time to Leibniz’s notion of substance is
difficult clearly to understand. Is the reality of time assumed
as a premiss, and denied as a conclusion ? A substance, we
have seen, is essentially a subject jiersisting in time. But by
the doctrine that all the states of a substance are eternally its
predicates, Leibniz endeavours to eliminate the dependence

^ Mr Bradley, in attempting to reduce all judgment to predication about
Reality, is led to the same view concerning bis ultimate subject. Reality, for
him, is not an idea, and is therefore, one must suppose, meaningless. See his
Logic, pp. 43, 4U, 50, 06.

a JSggay, Book II. Chap. XXIII. 8§ 1. 2; N. B. pp. 225—6,


51


yHE CONCEFflON OF SUBSTANCE.

ii 4 )on time. Ther^ is, however, no possible way, so far as I can
discover, in^ which such an elimination can be ultimately
efFecIed. For we must distinguish between the state of the
gubstaiice at a given moment, and the fact that such is its state
at the given moment. The latter only is eternal, and- there¬
fore the latter only is what Leibniz must take as the pre¬
dicate of the substance. The present state exists now, and
does not exist the next moment; it cannot itself, therefore,
be eternally a predicate of its substance. The eternal pre¬
dicate ds that the substance has such and such a state at
such and such a moment. The pretendcjl pretlicato, therefore,
resolves itself into a propositimi, which proposition itself is
not one of subject and prc'dicate. This point is well illus-
trateil by a passage in which Leibniz endeavours to explain
how an eternal predicate may refer to one pai t of time. What
follows ffoin the nature of a thing, he says, may follow per¬
petually or for a time. When a body moves in a straight line
under no force.s, it follows that at a given moment it will be at
a given point, but not that it will stay there for ever (0. ii.
258). What follows, in this cfise, for a time, is itself a proposi¬
tion, and one logically prior to the atteinj>ted subsecpient predi¬
cation. This instance should make it plain that such pi-oposi-
tions cannot be validly reduced to predications.

The doctrine of activity, however, seems designed to free such
propositions from all reference to actual parts of tinu^, and thus
to render the propositions concerning states of a substance
at different times merely complex predicates. It is necessary
for Leibniz to maintain that to eadst now and to exist then do not
differ intrinsically, but only differ in virtue of some relation
between what exists now and what existed then; and further,
that this relation is due to the quality of what exists in these
different times. This is attempted by the notion of activity.
In order to avoid the relation to moments of time, those
mflmcnts must be reduced to elements or parts of the corre¬
sponding states. Now activity is supposed to make a difference
of quality between preceding and succeeding staccs, by means
of which we could interpret their order of succession as a rcisult
of their own natures. The preceding state is the desire, the
succeeding state the desired—such is, roughly speaking, the

4—2


52


THE CONCEmON OF SUBSTANCE.

^ (

difference of states, to which it is sought to leduce the tempoi^
difference. But this attempt, I think, cannot be succe^ful.
In the first place, few people would be willing to* admit, ^hat«
follows from the doctrine, that it is a pure tautology to say that
activity or desire is directed to the future. In the second
place, the present doctrine cannot explain what is meant by
the simultaneity of states of different substances. If simul¬
taneity bo .‘idmitted. it follows that the present or any other
time is not merely in my mind, but is something single and
unique in respect of which .simultaneous states agree. . There
is, in short, one time, not as many times as there are substances.
Hence the time-order emmot be merely somethhig in my mind,
or a .set of relations holding between 7ny states. In the third
place, it may be (questioned what we gain by substituting the
order due to activity for that due to time. We have a series
of states A, B, C, D,..., such that A’s activity refers to B, B’s
refers to C, and so on. We then say that the order thus
obtained is what the time-order really means. The difficulty
is, to understand the relation of the activity of A to the B
which it refers to. It seems essential that the object of activity
or desire should be non-existent, but should be regarded as
capable of becoming existent. In this way, reference to future
time seems to bo a part of the moaning of activity, and the
attempt to infer time from activity thus involves a vicious
circle. Then again, the definition of one state of a substance
seems impossible without time. A state is not simple; on the
contrary, it is infinitely complex. It contains traces of all past
states, and is big with all future states. It is further a reflec¬
tion of all simultaneous st-at('.s of other substances. Thus no
way remains of defining one state, except as the state at one
time. And finally, all states consist of perceptions, and desires
for perceptions, either of the world or of the eternal truths.
Now the perceptions involved in mirroring the uiiiverse—from
which all knowledge of actual existence is derived—presuppose
simultaneity in their definition. This point will be proved
when wo come to deal with perception, and the general doctrine
of time will be dealt with again in connection with space. I
shall then endeavour to show, that there must be one and the
same order among the states of all substances, and that thia


53


THE CONCEPTION OP SUHSTANCE.

• •

ojder, conscquentljj, cannot depend upon the states of any one

substance.

Thus time is necessarily presupposed in Leibniz’s treatment
pf substance. That it is denied in the conclusion, is not a
triumph, but a contradiction. A precisely similar result will
appear as regards spsuse, when we come to the grounds for the
plurality of substances. We shall find that Leibniz made
a constant endeavour to eliminate, by subsequent fruitless
criticism, these indispensable, but, for him, inadmissible
premisges.


54


CPIAPTER V.


THE IDENTITY OF INDISCERNIBLES AND THE LAW OF

CONTINUITY.

rOSSIBILlTY AND COM POSSIBILITY.

23. I COME now to the last of Leibniz’s general logical
principles. The Identity of Indiscorniblcs and the Law of
Continuity arc closely connected, though not deducible one
from the other. 'I’hey arc both included in the statement
that all created substances form a series, in which every
possible position intiuinediate between the first and last terms
i.s filled once and only once. That every possible position is
filled once is the Law of Continuity; that it is filled only
once is a<lded by the Identity of Indiscemibles. I shall discuss
the latter principle first. We shall have to enquire (1) what
it means, (2) how Leibniz established it, (3) how far his
arguments in support of it were valid.

(1) There is no difficulty as to the meaning of the Identity
of Indiscemibles. It is not, like the principle of sufficient
reason, stated in different ways at different times. It asserts
“that there arc not in nature two indiscernible real absolute
beings ”, (1). 259; G. vii. 393), or again that “ no two sub¬
stances are completely similar, or differ solo numero** (G. iv*
433). ^It applies to substances only; existent attributes, as
Leibniz explains iii discussing place (D. 266 ; G. vil. 400, 401),
may be indisceniible. Leibniz’s doctrine is not that urged by
Mr Bradley, that all diversity must be diversity of content.
this were the principle, it would be far more fundamental, and


IHE IDKNTITY OF INDISOERNIBLES. {);>

t

W^l^uld have to be cq^iaidered before the definition of substance.
The ^principle, so far from maintaining diversity of content
•alone, presupposes material or numerical diversity as well as
diversity of content proper. To both these it is logically
subsequent. Diversity of content proper is the difierence
between one content and another. Material or ntiinerical
diversity is the difference between one subject, or one sub¬
stance, and another. Leibniz’s doctrine is, that two things
which are materially diverse, i,e. two different substances,
always differ also as to their predicates. This doctrine evi¬
dently presupposes both kinds of diversity, and asserts a relation
between them. Diversity of content is sometimes also used in
this latter sense, as meaning that difference, between two
subjects, which consists in their having different predicates.
But as this sense is complex, and composed of the two other
kirnls of diversity, it is better to restrict the term diversity of
C(Mteiit to the former sense, i.e. the diffei'cnce between contents.
The doctrine is, therefore, that any two substances differ as to
their predicixtes. It thus presupposes a knowledge of substance,
and could not be discussed until substance had been defined.

24. (2) This principle is not, like the Law of Sufficient
Reason, a premiss of Leibniz’s philosophy. It is tleduced and
proved in many passag<*s. But the proofs are various, not only
in their methods but even in their results. For once at least the
principle appears as merely contingent, like the laws of motion,
at other times as metaphysically necessary. In such cases of
inconsivstency, it is well to decide, if possible, which alternative
suits the rest of the system best, and which, if the inconsistency
had been pointed out, the philosopher would have chosen. T
hold that Leibniz should have regarded his principle as neces¬
sary, For the proof of this, we will examine his various
grounds.

In the fifth letter to Clarke, Leibniz says; “ This supposition

of*two indiscemibles.seems indeed to be possible in abstract

terms; but it is not consistent with the order of things, nor
with the divine wisdom, by which nothing is admitted without
reason” (D. 259; G. vir. 394), He continues: “ When I deny
tifet there are two drops of water perfectly alike, or any two
other bodies perfectly indiscernible from each other; I don’t


56 THE IDENTITY OP INDISC EKNIBLES.

4

say, ’tis absolutely impossible to suppose J^poser) them;
that tis a thing contrary to the divine wisdom, and which
consequently does not exist. I own that if twd thingsi^per-*
fectly indiscernible from each other did exist, they would be
two; but that supposition is false, and contrary to the grand
principle of reason ” (1). 260; G. vii. 394—5). In the pre¬
ceding paper (D. 247 ; G. vii. 371—2) he deduces the Identity
of Indiscerriibles from the Law of Sufficient Reason, saying that
God could have no reason for placing one of two indiscernibles
here, the other there, rather than for adopting the opposite
arrangement. This argument, however, though it is, of all his
arguments for the principle, the least A priori and the least
cogent, yet gives metaphysical necessity, for we saw, in
Ghapter 111., that the need for some sufficient reason is meta¬
physically neces.sary (G. ll. 420). Thus negative conclusions
from this principle— i.e. such a proposition is false, because it
could have no sufficient reason—arc necessary, though positive
conclusions, where a specific sufficient reason is assigned, may be
contingent. Accordingly, he concludes the above proof with the
remark that to suppose two things indiscernible is to suppose
the same tiling under different names (D. 247 ; G. Vll. 372).
The passage asserting indiscernibles to be possible—which, so
far as I know, is the only one—was probably due, therefore, to
the fact that he was deducing their non-existence from the
principle of Sufficient Reason, and that this principle generally
gives contingent results. And it is difficult to be sure how
great a reservation is implied by the words “in abstract
terms.”

The above argument for his principle is far from cogent as
it stands, and does not adequately represent his meaning. It
seems to presuppose here and there as sources of numerical
diversity, and then to infer that there must be some further
and apparently unconnected difference besides that of position.
What he really means, however, is that here and there must
themselves be reduced to predicates, in accordance with his
general logic. This is attempted by his theory of space, which
will be examined later. What I want Co insist on^j however^ is,
that the differentiation must not be supposed efffeefted by differ¬
ence of place, pel' se, Iiut Ry difference as to the predicates to.


57


TJIB IDENTITY OP INDISCERNIBLES.

I •

A^iich, on Leibnisi*8 theory, place must be reduced. Where

diffejrence of.place appears, there must be difference of predicates,
the latter being the truth of which the former is a confused
expression. Thus to assert that two substances cannot be in
the same place at the same time, is to assert a proposition
logically subsequent to the Identity of In discern ibles. The
proof which starts from difference of place is, therefore, merely
ad kominem, and does not represent the gist of the principle.
Clarke is willing to admit that two things must differ in place;
hence,* since place is a predicate, they must have different
predicates. Thus Leibniz says (N. E. 238; O. v. 213) that
besides the difference of time and place there must be an
internal principle of distinction, and adds that places and times
arc distinguished by means of things, n«>t mce versa. Again he
says (G. ii. 250) that things which differ in place must express
their p>'vje, and thus differ not only in place or in an cxii*iusic
denoiniiiatiou. He no doubt relied, as a rule, on his readers
admitting that two things (;ould not co-exist in one spatio-tem¬
poral point, and would thus deduce an intrinsic diffenmee from
this admis.si(ni. But with his theoiy of space and time, he
could not logically rely upon this argument, as he used the
Identity of Indisccrnibles to disprove the reality of space and
time. had also another and more abstract ground, derived
from the nature of substance, and closely connected wdth the
logical doctrines which we have alrearly examined. If he had
not had such a ground, he would have been involved in many
hopeless difficulties. For luj declares (1). 273; G. vii. 407)
that God will never choose among indiaceraibles, which is,
indeed, a direct result of sufficient reason. Consequently we
must infer that, among all actual substances, there is none to
which another precisely similar substance can bo even con¬
ceived. For if it were possible to conceive another, God would
have conceived it, and therefore could not have created either,
'rtie proof that, where the notions concerned are notions of
substances, indiscernibles are inconccuvable, is to be found in
Leibniz, and must now.be examined.

The Datare of an individual substance or complete being,
Leibniz says, -is to have so complete a notion that it suffices for
comprehending and deducing all the predicates of the subject


58 THE IDENTITY OB' INDISCERNIBL^S.

of the notion*. “From this,” he continues, “follow aeversif
considerable paradoxes, as, among others, that it, is not J^nie
that two substances resemble each other completely, and differ
only numerically” (G. iv. 483). In this argument, several
intermediate stops seem to have been omitted, I suppose
because Leibniz thought them obvious. I cannot find these
steps anywhere explicitly stated, but I imagine his argument
might be put as follows. All that can be validly said about a
substance con.sista in sissigning its predicates. Every extrinsic
denomination— i.e, every relation—has an intrinsic foundation,
i.e. a corresponding predicate (G. ii. 240). The substtmee is,
therefore, wholly defined when all its predicates are enumerated,
so that no way remains in which the substance could fail to be
unique. For suppose A and B were two indiscernible sub¬
stances. Then A would differ from B exactly as B would differ
from A. They would, as Leibniz once remarks regarding
atoms, be different though without a difference (N, E. p. 309;
G. V. 2C8). Or we may put the argument thus: A differs from
B, in the sense that they are different substance.s; but to
be thus different is to have a relation to B. This relation must
have a corresponding predicate of A. But since B does not
differ from itself, B cannot have the same predicate. Hence A
and B will differ as to predicates, contrary to the hypothesis.
Indeed, if we admit that nothing can be said about a substance
except to assign its predicates, it seems evident that to be a
different substance is to have different predicates. For if not,
there would be something other than predicates involved in
determining a substance, since, when these were all assigned,
the substance would still be undetermined.

26. (3) This argument is valid, I think, to the extent of
proving that, if subject and predicate be the canonical form of
propositions, there cannot be two indiscernible substances. The
difficulty' is, to prevent its proving that there cannot be two
substances at all. For the numerical diversity of the substance^

* See Appendix, § 17. So Wolff says {Logie, Gimp. I. § 27): “All that we
conceive, or all that is found, in an individutd^in determined in every respect;
and it is by this very fact, that a thing is determined, both as to what consti¬
tutes its essence, and as to what is accidental to it, that it acquires the quality
ot individuaV*


THE IDENTITY OF INDISCERNIBLES. 59

i^logically prior to^ their diversity as to predicates: there can
be no question of their differing in respect of predicates, unless
•they ‘first differ numerically. But the bare judgment of nu¬
merical diversity itself is open to all the objections which
Leibniz can urge against indiscorniblos*. Until predicates
have been assigned, the two substances remain indiscernible;
but they cannot have predicates by which they cease to be
indiscernible, unless they are first distinguished as numerically
different. Thus on the principles of Leibniz’s logic, the Identity
of Indi|cernibles does not go far enough. He should, like
Spinoza, have admitted only one substance. On any' other
logic, there can be no ground against ihe existence of the .same
collection of qualities in different places, since the adverse
proof re.sts wholly on the denial of relations. But fis a different
logic destroys substance, it destroys also anything resembling
Leibniz’s statement of his principle.

But further, the argument seems (o show an objection—the
same which was suggested in the last Chapter—against the
whole doctrine of substance. If a substance is only defined by
its predicates—and this is essential to the Identity of In-
discernibles—then it would seem to be identical with the .sum
of those predicates. In that cas(‘, to .say that such and such a
substance exists, is merely a compendious way of saying that
all its })redicates exist. Predicates do not inhere in the sub¬
stance in any other sense than that in which letters inhere in
the alphabet. The logically prior judgments arc tho.se asserting
the existence of the various predicates, and the substance is no
longer something distinct from them, which they determine,
but is merely all those predicates taken together. But this, sis
wo have already seen, is not what Leibniz intends to say. The
substance is a single simple indivisible thing, persisting through
time; it is not the same as the series of its states, but is the
subject of them. But in this c»ise, a substance is not properly
spoaking defined by its predicates. There is a difference between
asserting a given predicate of one substance, and asserting it of
another. The substance can only be defined as “this.” Or
rather—and this is where the doctrine of substance breaks
down—the substance cannot be defined at all. To define is
^ Of. the proof of Prop. V. Book I. of Spinoza's Ethics.


60 THE IDENTITY OF INDISCERNIBI^S.

to point out the meaning, but a substance is, by its volfy
nature, destitute of meaning, since it is only the predicates
which give a meaning to it. Even to say “this,” is to indi-*
cate some part of space or time, or some distinctive quality,;
to explain in any way which substance we mean, is to give
our substance some predicate. But unless we already know
which substance we are speaking of, our judgment has no
definiteness, since it is a different judgment to assert the same
predicate of another substance. Thus w'c necessarily incur a
vicious circle. The substance must be numerically determi¬
nate before predication, but only predicates give numerical
determination. Either a substance is wholly meaningless, and
in that case cannot be distinguished from any other: or a
substance is merely all or some of the qualities which are
supposed to be its predicates. These difficulties arc the in¬
variable result of admitting, as elements of propositions, any
terms which are destitute of meaning, i.e. any terms which
are not what may be called ideas or concepts. As against many
substances, we may urge, with Mr Bradley, that all diversity
must be diversity of meanings; as against one substance, we may
urge that the same is true of identity. And this holds equsilly
agiiinst the supposed self-identity of Mr Bradley's Reality.

26. Connected with the Identity of Tndiscernibles is the
assertion that every substance has aii infinite number of pre¬
dicates. That this must be the case, is evident from the mere
fact that every substance must have a predicate corresponding
to every moment of time. But Leibniz goes further than this.
The state of a substance at each moment is analyzable into an
infinite number of predicates. This might itself be deduced
from the fact that the present state has relations to all past
and future states, which relsitions, according to Leibniz, must
affect the present state—indeed it is in this that their truth
consists. - But another factor is the representation of the whole
universe, which necessarily involves infinite complexity in eafch
state of each substance. This infinite complexity is a mark of
the contingent. There is a difference, Leibniz says, between
the analysis of the necessary and that of the contingent. The
analysis from the subsequent by nature to the prior by nature
comes to an end in necessary matter with the primitive notions.


61


IDENTITY OF INDISCERNIHLBS.

al^ the analysis of numbers ends with unity. But in contingents
or existents, this analysis goes to infinity, without ever reaching
primitive eleuients (G. ill. 582). Again ho points out that it is
ynpossible for us to have knowledge of individuals, and to
determine exactly the individuality of anything. For individu¬
ality includes infinity, and only one who understands infinity
can know the principle of individuation of this or that thing
(N. E. 309; G. v. 268). Necessary and contingent truths
differ as rational numbers and surds, 'flie resolution of the
latter proceeds to infinity (G. vii. 309).

Again he says (G. vii. 200): “The diftercnce between
ncce.ssary and contingent truths is indeed tlie same as that
between commensurable and incoinmensurable numbers. For
the reduction of com mensurable numbers to a common mea¬
sure is analogous to the demonstration of necessary tiaiths, or
their reduction to such as are identical. But as, in the case of
surd ratios, the reduction involves an infinite process, and yet
approaches a common measure, so that a definite but unending
series is obtained, so also contingent truths require an infinite
analysis, which God alone can accomplish.”

1 am afraid Leibniz regarded this, to some extent, as a
confirmation of his doctrine of contingency. He seems to have
thought it natural that the contingent .should be that which we
cannot perfectly understand; he says, for example, that Gotl
alone sees how I and existence are joined, and knows cl priori
the cause of Alexander’s death’. The world of contingents is
characterized, not only by the fact that it exists, but also by the
fact that everything in it involves infinity by its infinite com¬
plexity, and is thus inaccessible to exact human knowledge.

Such passages have led many commentators to think that
the difference between the necessary and the contingent has an
essential refei*euce to our human limitations, and does not
subsist for God. This view, I think, rests upon a confusion,
and does q\iite undue damage to Leibniz’s system. The confu¬
sion is between the general character of all contingents, actual
as well as possible—-for possible worlds involve the same infinite
complexity, which indeed is a necessary result of time —and the
meaning of contingency itself. It is metaphysically necessary

1 G. IV. 433; v. 392 (N. E. 469).


62 THE IDENTITY OF INDlSCERNini^jS.

#

that the contingent should bo thus complex; but what maUts
contingency is not complexity, but existence. Or, to put the
matter otherwise, the confusion is between eternal truths about'
the contingent— i.e. the necessary propositions about the nature
of substances—and the contingent truth that such substances
exist. This distinction must be made—though Leibniz may
have been guilty of some confusion in the matter—for many
very weighty reasons. In the first place, truths about possible
worlds cannot be contingent, and all truths about the actual
world arc, when robbed of the assertion of actual existence,
truths about one among possible worlds. In the second place,
God was free, in croJition, because of the other possible worlds:
his choice was contingent. And liis freedom, as well us that of
creatures, can only result if contingency is metaphysically true,
and no mere delusion. In the third place, the Law of Sufficient
Rejison, in the sense in which it tisserts Huai causes, is coordi¬
nate with the Law of Contradiction, and applies to God’s acts
just as much as to the actual world; whereas, on the opposite
view, Leibniz’s belief that he used t\YO principles has to be
declared erroneous. The doctrines of final causes, of possible
worlds, of the synthetic nature of causal connections, and of
freedom—everything, in fact, that is characteristic of Leibniz—
depends upon the ultimately iiTeduciblo nature of the opposi¬
tion between existential and necessary propositions. Thus we
must maintain that Leibniz does not only mean, by contingent^
that which we cannot fully explain. But he cannot be absolved,

1 fear, from dwelling with pleasure on this supposed confirma¬
tion of the twofold nature of propositions.

Here again, I think, as throughout, Leibniz is not clear as
to the difference between the relation of individual to species,
and that of species to genus. He 8«unetime8 urges that there is
no difference between those two relations—a view to which I
see nonobjection, except that it is inconsistent with his notion
of individual substance. This view underlies, as we saw, the
Identity of Iridiscernibles, and is suggested in the New Essays,
where, however, it leads to results which he ought to have found
very inconvenient. “ In mathematical strictness,” he says, "the
least difference making two things in any respect dissimilar,
makes them different in species. In this sense, two


THE LAW OF CONTINUITY.


63


l^ysical individuafs will never bo perfectly similar, and what is
more, the same individual will pass from species to species, for
it is never wholly similar to itself even for more than a moment*”
(N. E. 335—6; G. v. 287—8). His view seems to be that, in
eternal truths, we start with essences and predicates, and
determine their relations; while in contingent truths, we start
with the existence of something undetermined, such as the Ego,
and enquire into its predicates. The question is, in this case,
what is the nature of this existent ? And since every substance
has an^infinite number of predicates, the question is one which
we can never fully answer. But it is (ividerit—though Leibniz
would seem not to have perceived it—that in starting with the
Ego, or any other existent, we must alreadj^ have deterniined some
unique property of our substatice, or eJsc we should not know
which we were speaking of, and the f(uestion would be wholly
indeterminate. Sp^itio-ternporal position is, 1 think, always
covertly a.s8umcd in such questions, and it is this assumption
alone which gives them a definite meaning and a definite ansM^er.

27 . The infinite complexity of substances will help us in
dealing with our next topic, the Law of Continuity. This law
u.sually holds a prominent place in expositions of Leibniz, but I
cannot discover that, except as applied to Mathematics, it has
any great importance. There are three distinct kinds of con¬
tinuity, all of which Leibniz asserts. None of them, he thinks,
has metaphysical necessity, but all are reganled as required by
the “order of things.” These three kinds are (1) spatio-tem¬
poral continuity, (2) what may bo called continuity of cases,
(3) the continuity of actual existents or of forms. Let us
consider these in turn.

(1) Spatio-temporal continuity is itself twofold. There is
the continuity of space and time themselves, which Leibniz
admits to be raetaphysicfilly iieceasiiry; and there is the con¬
tinuity of what exists in space and time. The former is not
in«questioii here. The latter includes motion and all othei* kinds
of change. As regards change, it is generally admitted that

* It seems probable that Leibniss does not mean, by a “physical individual,”
a single substance, for if he did, the passage would contradict his whole philo¬
sophy. This is the more probable from his illustrations, which are drawn from
circles and ellipses and other mathematical figures.


64


THE LAW OF CONTINUITY.


f


it must be gradual, that a change of position involves the
intermediate occupation of a continuous scries of intermediate
positions, or a change of colour involves the passag^3 through all
intermediate colotirs. I do not know any reason for such a
principle, unless it be that we only r(;gard (pialities in different
parts of time as belonging to the same thing when they are
coniioctfsl by some .such continuous scric.s. Jumps from place
to place and from state t<i state, according to Leibniz, arc
exactly on a level (G. ll. 169) ; any d priori reason against the
former will apply equally against, the latter. Both, be thinks,
are metaphysically possible, but are condemned by the same
reason as a vacuum, rest, or a liiatus (G. ii. 182), i.e. by what
he vaguely calls the “ order of things ”—a sort of metaphysical
perfection which seems to consist in all that gives pleasure to
the mcta{)hysiciau‘.

(2) Continuity of cases is tlic .solo form of the law of
continuity given in Leibniz’s letter to Bayle, on a general
principle useful in the explanation of the laws of nature
(D. 33—36; G. ill. 51—55). This principle states, that when
the diftercnce of two cases diminishes without limit, the differ^
once in their results also diminishes without limit, or, more
generally, when the data foim an orderctl si*rios, their respective
results also form an ordered scries, and infinitesimal differences
in the one lead to infinitesimal differences in the other (D. 33;
G. III. 52). This is properly a mathematical principle, and was
used as such by Leibniz, with great effect, against Cartesian
mathematics, especially against th(3 Cartesian theory of impact
(e.g. G. III. 47). In Mathematics, though it luis exceptions in
cases of what is called inHtability, it is still in constant use.
But ill philosophy it seems of no very groat moment.

(3) The third kind of continuity is peculiar to Leibniz,
and seems destitute either of self-evident validity or of grounds
from which it may bo proved. That nature makes no leaps,
which is the general statement of all forms of continuity, is
held by Leibniz to apply also in the passage from one substance
to another. If two substances differ by a finite difference, there
must be, according to Leibniz, a continuous series of inter-

* Cf. Qt. III. 558: “ There is order in proportion as there is much to remark
in a mnltiplioity."


THE LAW OF CONTINUITY.


65


rilpdiate substances^ each of which differs infinitesimaJJy from
the next^ As ho often expresses it, there is as JittJe a hiatus,
or vacuum of forms, as there is a vacuum in space {e.g, Q. u.
168). He sometimes pretends (e.g. L. 877 ; N, K. p. 51; G. v.
49—50) to deduce the Identity of Iii(iiscernibles from this
principle, but such a deduction must be taken only as showing
how the world can bo explained consistently with the Identity
of ludisccvnibles. For continuity asserts that every place in the
series is filled, whereas the Identity of lndisccrT\il)\es asserts
that place is filled twice over. The latter, we shall find, is
logically prior to the former. Moreover the latter, ns we saw,
is metaphysically nece.ssary, whereas tlu, former is only demanded
by order, i.e. is contingent. What Leibniz moans to do, in such
passages, is to point out that, since there are things which only
differ infinitesimally, and infinitesimal differences are insensible,
the discovery of things Avhich ajipoar to lie indiscernible does
not make .against the denial that they are really iiulisceniihlo.
And this is why Leibniz remarks parenthetically (L. 380; N. E.
52 ; G. V. 51) th.at he has d priori ro<ason8 for his view.

28 . Why Leibniz held that substances form a continuf)us
scries, it is difficult to say. He never, so far as I know, offers a
shadow of a rojison, except that such a world seems to him
pleasjinter than one with gaps. I cannot help thinking, how¬
ever, that spatial continuity was connected with this form of
continuity. We shall see here.after that every monad mirrors
the world from a certain point of view, and that this point of
view is often regarded as a spatial point. Accordingly neigh¬
bouring spatial points should give infinitesimally diffei*ent
points of view, and therefore, since the minoring of the universe
gives the whole of a monad’s perceptions, neighbouring points
in space should bo occupied by infinitesimally different monads®.
There are many objections to this interpretation, which will
appear when we come to the relation of the monads to space.

' Cf. N. E. 712; "All the different classes of beings, whose union forms the
universe, are in the ideas of God, who knows distinctly their essential grada¬
tions, only as so many ordinates of the same curve, the union of which does
not allow the placing of others between them, because that would indicate dis¬
order and imperfection.” [Gohrauer, Leibnitz: Eine Biographic, Anmerkungen
zum zweiton Buohe, p. 32.]

® Of. G. nr. 439.


R. L.


5


66 POSSIBILITY AND COM POSSIBILITY..

But it will then appear also, I think, that tfeese objections ap^y
against the whole theory of monads, and cannot, thjerefore, prove
that the confusions, involved in the above interpretation of the*
continuity of forms, did not actually exist in Leibniz's mind. ,
29 . The continuity of forms does not assert that all
possible forms are actual. On the contrary, it is vitally
important to Leibniz’s system to maintain that the possible
is wider than the actual. Things arc possible when they are
not self-contradictory; two or more things arc conipossible when
they belong to one and the same possible world, i.e. wh-m they
may coexist. All possible worlds have general laws, analogous
to the laws of motion ; what these laws are, is contingent, but
that there are such laws is necessary (G. ii. 51; cf. also G. II.
41). Hence two or more thing.s which cannot be brought under
one and the same siit of general laws are not compossihle. And
so it is with species. 'Phough actual species form a continuous
scries, there are other possible species outside the actual scries,
and these, though pos.sible, are not conipossible, with those that
exist. Not all possible species, Leibniz says, arc compossiblo, so
that some .species cannot exist. There are of necessity species
which never have existed and never will exist, not being com¬
patible with the series which God has chosen. There is no gap
in the order of nature, but no one order contains all po.ssible
species (N. E. 334; G. v. 286),

The (question of possibility and compossibility is important
in Leibniz’s philosophy, as his solution of the problem of evil
turns on it. It may be well, therefore, to examine the meaning
of compossibility in somewhat greater detail.

There are, according to Leibniz, an intinitc numbfer of
possible worlds, i.e. of worlds internally free from self-contradic¬
tion. ’Pheso w'orlds all agiee in certain respects— i.e. as regards
the eternal truths—while they ditfer in others. The notion of
an existent is possible when it does not involve a contradiction.
Any such notion forms part of the notion of somS. possible
world. When several notions of possible existeuta form part of
the notion of one and the Sfime possible world, they are corn-
possible, for in this case they may all exist (cf. G. III. 573).
When they are not compossiblo, then, though each separately
is possible, yet their coexistence is not possible.


67


iSSIBILITY AND COMPOSSimLITY.

' The meaning (if compossibility is thus sufficiently plain.
But a difficulty remains as regards its application. For we saw
“ that no two contingent predicates of a substance, according to
Leibniz, are necessarily connected. Each is necos.saiily con¬
nected with the notion of the substance, in the sense that, given
that substance, each predicate follows. But each separate
contingent predicate might also have belonged to a different
substance, and thus no two such predicates are necessarily
connected with each other. Thus it would seem that any
collection of possible existents must bo compossiblo, since their
coexistence cannot be solf-ct)ritradictory (cf. supra, pp. 19, 20).

This difficulty is evaded by Leibniz by means of the ncces-
vsity for some sufficient reason of the whole series. Although
this or that sufficient rea.son is contingent, there must be some
sufficient reason, and the lack of one condemns many scries of
existents as metaphysically impossible. “ There were,” he says,
“an infinity of possible ways of creating the world, according to
the different designs which God might form, and each possible
world depends upon certain principal designs or ends of God
proper to itself, i.e. certain free primitive decrees (conceived sub
ratione 2 )ossihiUtatis), or laws of the general ordei- of this possible
universe, to which they belong, and whose notion th(iy deter¬
mine, as well as the notions of all the individual substances
which must b(dong to this same Universe” (G. Ii. 51). This
pjussage proves quite definitely that all possible worlds have
general laws, which determine the connection of contingents
just as, in the actual world, it is determined by the laws of
motion and the law that free spirits pursue what seems best to
them*. And without the need for some gent?ral laws, any two
possibles would be compossiblo, since they cannot contradict
one another. Possibles cease to be compossiblo only when there
is no general law whatever to which both conform. What is
called tha “reign of law” is, in Leibniz’s philosophy, meta-
ph’ysically necessary, although the actual laws are contingent.
If this is, not realized, compossibility must remain unin¬
telligible.

30. At this point it may bo well, for the sake of clearness,

^ This is a point on which, according to Lotze, Leibniz never pronounced.
{Metaphysica, Book I. Chap. V. § 67.)


6—2


68 POSSIBILITY AND COMPOSSIBILIT/y.

i

to enumerate the principal respects in whidi all possible worlSs
agree, and the respects in which other p()ssible ,worlds might
differ from the actual world. For this purpose, since Leibniz /
himself is not very explicit, we have to consider which proposi^
tions are necessary and which contingent. I shall content
myself, at present, with stating opinions; the evidence will be
given where the various (luestions concerned are dealt with in
detail.

In the first place, God was free not to create any of the
possible worlds. Hence even what exists in all of thtfin does
not exist nece.ssarily. This applies especially to spjice, time,
and motion. These are necessary as regards their properties,
i.e.. as regards the propositions of Geometry and Kinematics,
but not as regards their existence. God couUl not have created
a world in which space and time would bo other than in the
present world, and time, at least, would form part of any
possible world, while space and motion would form part of any
w'orld in which there were many substances. All possible
worlds, again, consist of monads, i.e. of individual substances
endowed with activity; and in all possible worlds there are
general causal laws. But the plurality of substances is not
necessary; it would have been possible for God to create only
one monad, and this one might have been anj^ one of the
a(;tual created monads. All that is involved in perception and
the pre-established harmony, including the existence of other
substances, is contingent. It would seem, even, that any
casual selection among the actual monads would give a possible
world\ But worlds may differ from the actual world, not only
in number and (piantity, but in (piality. Other worlds might
have other laws of motion, and might, if I am not mistaken,
contain free substances which would not always choose the
apparently best. Every Ciiusal law, in fact (though not
CaUisality itself), might have been different.

These seem to bo the main points concerning the other
possible worlds. By keeping them in mind, we obtain a kind
of hierarchy among Leibniz’s principles, as they are successively

^ This appears not only from the mutual independence of the monads, but
also from a discussion with Des Bosses concerning the successive days of the
creation in Genesis: e.g. G. ii. 368, 370.


69


l\sSlBILITy AND COMPOHSIBILITY.

Specialized by the ^approach to the actual world. The in¬
consistencies in his logical doctrine of possibility will be best
■ postponed until we corae to the proofs of the existence of God.

31 . In relation to possibility and coinpossibility, Leibniz
distinguishes several kinds of necessity. Th(jre is first meta¬
physical or geometrical necessity, which alone is strictly called
neceasity. This is the sort we have hitherto discussed, where
the opposite is self-contradictory. There is next hypothetical
necessity, where a consequence follows with raetaphysicjxl neces¬
sity from a contingent premiss. Thus the motions of matter
have hypothetical necessity, since they are necessary conse¬
quences of tyhe laws of motion, while these arc themselves
contingent. There is lastly moral necessity, which is' the
necessity by which God and the angels and the jjerfect sage
choose the good The actions of free spirits hold a peculiar
place in relation to nocessityv Not only flo their states, in
so fill’ as they are the results of yu’cvious states, have only
hypothetical necessity, but the cou.se(|uence itself has only
hypothetical necessity, as involving a psychological law which
the spirits are not compelled to obey, though they always do
obey it*. The difficulties in this conception will be discussed
when we come to the problem of Freedom and Determination.
F’or the present, it is time to leave the logical discussions upon
which we have been engaged, ami proceed to the Philosophy of
Matter, from which, by the help of the logic with which we arc
now acquainted, Ijcibniz deduced the doctrine with wffiich ex-
pt)8itions usually begin, I mean the doctrine of monads.


1 Cf. D. 170, 171; (}. III. 400, 401.


70


CHAPTER VI.

WHY DID LKIBNIZ BELIEVE IN AN EXTERNAL WORLD ?

32. I PASS HOW to an entirely new order of ideas. From
qne.stiotjs of I^ogic—the nature of propositions, the definition of
substance, how substances must differ -if there be many—from
these (juestions I come to questions as to the actual world :
how can the notion of substance be applied in the world of
existents ? Is there one substance or many ? What properties
have actual substjxnces beyond those involved in the definition
of substance? And how doi'S this notion serve to explain the
difficulties which the actual world presents to the meta¬
physician ?

In this problem, fjeibniz, for reasons which apparently were
only historical and psychological, began with matter as his
datum. Ho would seem, when he first abandoned scholasticism,
to have turned to Gassendi and Hobbes, to atomism and
materialism (G. ill. 020; iv. 209; vii. 377; iv. 478 and L. 300
and D. 72; G. i. 52—4). That he did not remain a materialist
was due to difficulties which he found in the ordinary con¬
ception of matter. He therefore invented what may be called
a spiritualistic or ideali.stic theory of matter: but what his
theory started with was still matter. Accordingly, the problem
with which he began was not: Does matter exist ? But, what
is the nature of matter ? In this respect, Leibniz, whose
ontology begins with Dynamics, which it gradually transforms
into psychology, was less philosophical than Bishop Berkeley.
The question: Does matter exist ? is thus one which Leibniz
never thoroughly faced. Nevertheless, there are some remarks


WHY DID L&BNIZ BELIEVE IN AN EXTERNAL WORLD? 7l

of his, on this quesl^ion, which may help ns to understand his
position.

» Two short works are, in this respect, peculiarly important.

'^he first of these is a letter to Foucher, written in or about
the year 1676, nine or ten years before Leibniz completed his
philosophy (G. 1.369—374). The second is a paper without date,
entitled “ On the method of distinguishing real from imaginary
phenomena” (G. vii. 319—322; N. E. 717—720). Though
scattered remarks in his later wiitings seem in agreement with
these two papers, I can find nothing dated, after his philosophy
was complete, in which the existence of niatter is seriously
discusse<l, and it seems at least possible that Leibniz was only
led to question its existence by the difficulties of the continuum,
which, in his opinion, the doctrine of monads completely and
satisfjuitorily .solvcid. This view is supported by Leibrnz’s own
account of the origin of his views in the H/jsthne Nonmiu': “At
first, when 1 had freed inysidf from tin; yoke of Aiistotle, I took to
the void and the atoms, for that is the view wlilch best satisfies
the imagiri.ation. But having got over thi.s, 1 perceived, after
much meditation, that it is impossible to find the principles of
a real unity in matter alone, or in that which is only passive,
since it is nothing but a collection or aggregation of parts ad
inJinUimi. Now a multiplicity can derive its reality only from
genuine uniis, which come fro»n elsewhere and arc quite other
than mathematical points, which are only extremities of the
extended and modifications, of which it is certain that the
continuum cannot be composed. Accordingly, in order to find
these real units, I was constrained to have recourse to a real
and animated point,’* etc. It would seem that a good many
years elapsed between Leibniz’s discovery that mere matt(jr
involved the ins<.)luble difficulties of the continuum, and his
invention of monads as real units by which the continuum was
rendered discreteThis theory, at any rate, accounts both for
hia views, and for his manner of exposition, much better than
any other theory with which I am acquainteil. But it is time
to examine Leibniz’s actual words,

^ L. 300; D, 72; G. iv. 478; cf. also Arehiv. fur Geach. der Phil, i, 677 [L.
361—2].

* See Chapter IX.


72 WHY DID LEIBNIZ BELIEVE IN AN EXTE!


n^L


WORLD ?


33. Leibniz does not clearly distingivsh two totally dif¬
ferent questions, namely, (1) why admit a worl^il other than
ourselves? (2) granted such a world, how shall we distinguish^
true perceptions from hallucinations ? The latter, as the title^
indicates, is the main question discussed in the undated paper
above quoted. This is not a fundamental question, and Leibniz
answers it in the usual way—mutual consistency, and success
in prediction, he says, arc the best tests. He proceeds, how¬
ever, to a radicsilly unphilosophical remark on the first question.
"Although the whole of this life were said to be nothing but a
dream, and the visible world nothing but a phantasm, I should
call this dream or phantasm real enough, if, using reason well,
we were never deceived by it” (N. E. 718—9; G. vii. 320). In
this passage, the unduly practical nature of Leibniz’s interest
in philosophy very plainly appears. He confesses, both here,
and in many other p.as.sageH, that there is no " exact demon¬
stration ” that the objects of sense are outside us, and that the
existence of the external world has only moral certainty*. To
obtain even this, he requii’es first the existence of God, which
has absolute certainty. He says, for example: “ That there
should exist only one substance ” (crmited substance, he seems
to mean) “ is among those things which arc not conformable to
the divine wisdom, and thus do not happen, although they
might happen ” (G. ii, 307). And in one early passage (G. I.
372—3, ca. 1G7G), he actually suggests Berkeley’s philosophy.
All we know for certain, he says, is that our appearances are
connected inter se, and that they must have a constant cause
external to us; but there is no way of proving this cause to be
other than God. Yet, though he seems never to have found
arguments against this admission, he so far forgot his early
unresolved doubts, that, when Berkeley’s philosophy appeareci,
Leibniz had no good word for it. “ The man in Ireland,” he
writes, “ who impugns the reality of bodies, seems neither to
give suitable reasons, nor to explain himself sufficiently. * I
suspect him to be one of that class of men who wish to be
known by their paradoxes” (G. II. 492).

If any arguments for the existence of matter were to be
found in Leibniz, they would evidently depend upon the ex-
1 N. E. S18, 422, 719; G. v. 275. 365—6; vu. 320—321; i. 373; ii. 378, 602.


WHY DID L&IBNIZ BELIEVE IN AN EXTERNAL WORLD? 73

istenco of God, by vbich solipsism is dcvstroyod. The Cartesian
argument, hpwever, which rests on the assertion that, if there
were no matter, God would be a deceiver, is definitely rejected
>by Leibniz. “The argument by which Des Cartes seeks to
demonstrate the existence of material things is weak. It would
have been better therefore not to try” (D. 58; G. iv. 366).
God might, he says, have excellent reasons for deceiving us,
and, in any case, the deception could be undone by our own
reason (D. 58; G. iv. 367; i. 373; v. 275; N. E. p. 318).

Tlfere is, it is true, a kind of pantheistic argument, ac¬
cording to which our view of the world is part of God’s view,
and therefore has the same truth as belongs to God’s per¬
ceptions. “ God...regards all the aspects of the world,” Leibniz
says, “in all possible ways...; the result of each view, as if
seen from a certain place, is a substance ex})ressing the uni¬
verse from this point of view, if God sees fit to make his
thought effective and |>roduco this substanci^ And since God’s
view is always veritable, our po'rceptions are so too; but it is
our judgments, which are from us, that deceive us” (G. IV.
439). This whole passage, however, is so extreme an example
of Leibniz’s pantheistic tendencies, as to be scarcely consistent
with his usual monadism. He can hardly, therefore, have
relied ujion such an arguimmt to any great extent.

The only other positive argument is oiui no better than
that which is commonly urged for life on other planets. “ We
judge with the greatest probability,” he says, “that we do not
exist alone, not only by the principle of the Divine Wisdom,
but also by that common principle which I always inculcate,
that nothing happens without a reason, nor does a reason
appear, why we alone should bo preferred to so many other
possibles” (G. ii. 502)\

The ground upon which Leibniz seems to have mainly
relied, in this question, is the same as that which led him to
deny a vacuum, namely, that the more existence there is, the
better (cf. D. 102, 103; L. 340, 341; G. Vll. 303, 304). This
is the principle of metaphysical perfection, which I shall discuss
in connection with his Ethics. It led Leibniz to think that
there must be as many monads as possible, and that there

' Cf. Cl. II. 516.


74 WHY DID LEIUNIZ BELIEVE IN AN EXTERl^AL WORLD?

<■

must, therefore, be an infinity of substances other than him¬
self \ But historically and psychologically, I thjnk, Leibniz
started with matter and space in a purely common-sense spirit.
The resxson that a problem arises for him is, that by criticism*
of these notions he transformed them into something quite
different, namely, unextended substances and their perceptions.
But having arrived at the subjectivity of space, he did not, like
Kant, confine knowledge to experience, and render all d priori
knowledge really self-knowledge. He did not perceive that
the denial of the reality of space compels us to admit that we
know only phenomena, i.e. appearances to our minds. That
Kant w.'is able to assume even an unknowable thing-in-itsclf
was only due to his exten.sion of cause (or ground) beyond
experience, by regarding something not ourselves as the source
of our perceptions. '^Phis, which was an inconsistency in Kant,
would have been a sheer impossibility to Leibniz, since he held
perceptions to be wholly diu! to ourscslves, and not in any sen.stj
caused by the obj('cts pcu'ceived. The ordinary grounds for
jxsauming an (jxternal world w(‘re thus (lestntyed by Leibniz, and
I cannot discover that anything very solid was put in their place.

The existence of other substances, bcvsides God and our¬
selves, is therefore only probable: it has only a moral certainty.
This remark applies, conae([uontly, to all existential propo¬
sitions dei‘ived from the theory of matter, i.e. to the whole
doctrine of monads, in so far as this asserts the actual existence
of many monads. It is a pity that Leibniz tlid not devote
more attention to this fundamental question, that he did not
make himself the critic rather than the commentator of
common sense. Had he done .so, he might have invented some
more satisfactory theory of space than one which, while based
upon a common-sense assumption of its reality, arrives, on that
very basis, at a complete denial of that reality. I have brought
out this presupposition now, as the following Chapters will, with
Leibniz, start from a common-,sense belief in the reality of inattei^

* Cf. L. 323D. 8fi; G. iv. 4{)5: “I am aaked whence it cornea that God does
not think iC enough to produce all the thonghts and modifications of the soul,
without these useless bodies, which the soul, it is said, can neither move nor
know. The answer is easy. It is, that it was God’s will that there should be
more substances rather than fewer, and He thought it right that these modifica¬
tions should coiTespoud to something outside."


75


CHAPTER VIL

THE PHILOSOPHY OF MA'n'ER.

(«) As the outcome of the principles of Dynamics.

34. The word matter is, in ]>hilo.^ophy, the nume of a
problem. Assuming tliat, in perception, wo are assured of the
existence of something other, tlian ourselves—an assumption
which, as we saw in the last cha[)ter, Leibniz made on very
inadecpiate grounds—the (picstion inevitably arises: Of what
nature i" this something externa! to ourselves? In so far as it
appears to be in space, we name it matter (cf. 0. iv. lOG).
Our problem is, then, what is matter ? how arc we to conceive
that which, in perception, appears as spatial and ;is other than
ourselves ? It was the attenipt to answer this question, on
the basis of the logic which we have alretuly examined, that
led Leibniz to the doctrine of monads. In this and the three
succeeding chapter-s, I shall endeavour to follow the same course
as Leibniz followed. I shall interspor.se criticisms where they
seem called for, but the chief criticism of Leibniz’s procedure
is, that he never examined its starting-point, the assumption,
namely, that there is something other than ourselves to be per¬
ceived. The general trustwtn’thiness t)f perception is a premiss
of Leibniz’s philosophy, but a faulty premiss, even if it be true,
since arguments may be adduced for or against it.

• 36. Before I enter on any detail as to Leibniz’s theory of
Dynamics, I must warn readers that he uses the words matter
and body in at least five different senses. These are not con¬
fused in his own thinking, and are often distinguished in his
writings. At the same time, the words arc often employed
without any indication, except what the context provides, as to


7G THE PHILOSOPHY OF DYNAMICS.

C

the sense to be attached to them, and this ^ds greatly to the
difficulty of understanding Leibniz’s theory of matter. Of
these five senses, two are prior to the theory of monads, and
three are subsequent. There is, in the first place, the dis-/
tinction of primary atid socotidary matter; and this distinction
is one thing in Dynamics, and another in the theory of monads.
Thus wo have four meanings of matter. In addition to these,
there is the organic body of a monad, which consists of other
monads .subordinated to it. It is the object of Leibniz’s theory
to transform primary and secondary matter as they occur in
Dynamics, into primary and secondary matter as they occur in
the theory of monads. At the same time, since the first pair
are data, while the second pair are results, it is irnpoi’tant to
distinguish them, and Leibniz’s correctness may b<^ tested by
examining how far his criticism of dynamical matt(*r does
justify the transformation.

The five meanings, then, to be definite, arc as follows.

(1) 'rhere is priniarij nuttier as that which, according to

Leibniz, is presupposed by extension. Extension, as
we shall see in the next chapter, is regarded by him
as mere re})etition. I'hat which is repeated, taken
per se, is mnteria prima. TMiis is purely passive.

(2) 'J’here is secondary/ matter as it occurs in Dynamics,

that is, matter cndowf'cl with force. The further
explanation of these two meanings will occupy the
remainder of this cliapter.

(Ji) There is primary matter as an cleinent in the nature
of every created monad. In this sense, it is equiva¬
lent to passivity, or confusedness of perception.

(4) There is secondary matter as an aggregate of monads,
or mass: this is a mere aggregate with only an
accidental unity.

(ij) There is the organic body of a monad, i e. the collection
of monads which it dominates, and to which it giv^a
a more than accidental unity (G. ri. 252; N.E.

. p. 722 and G. vii. 501).

The transformation of the fimt pair of meanings into the
second pair constitutes the proof of the doctrine of monads,
and will occupy the next three chapters. The second and


77


THE PHrLOSOPliy OF DYNAMICS.

•

fourth senses arc often called mms or body, the fifth with the
dominant mj)nad is often called corporeal substance; without
* the dominant monad, it is called the organic body, or simply
\the body, of the dominant monad. But there is little regularity
in Leibniz’s use of all these words, and the meaning must
generally be gathered from the context.

36. Leibniz’s theory of Dynamics was framed in conscious
opposition to Des Cartes. J)es Cartes held that the es.sence of
matter is ext(;nsion, that the quantity of moti<Mi in the universe
is constant, and that force is proportional to (piantity of tnotion.
Leibniz, on the contrai'y, proved tliat tlie essence of matter is
not extension, that the total quantity of motion is not constant,
but that, what Des Cartes did not know, the (juantity of
motion in any given direction is constant. He also believed
himself to have ])roved that Dynamics required, ns an ultimate
notion, the conception of force, whic,h he identifieil with the
activity essetitial to substance. J^es Cartes and the Cartesians
measured force by quantity of motion, froui which they seem
scarcely to have <liHtinguished it. Leibniz, on the contrary,
believing force to be an ultimate entity, and holding as an
axiom that its quantity must be constatit, introduced a different
measure of it, by which it became proportional to what is now
called energy. On this (piestion of the true measure of force, a
famous controversy arose, which was distinguished by the fact
that it divided Voltaire and the Marquise du Chatelet, and
that it formed the subject of Kant’s first published workk
This controversy seems to modern mathematicians to be mere
logomachy. To Leibniz and his contemporai’ies it .seemed
something more, bccau.se force was supposetl to be an ultimate
entity, and one whose (juantity, like that of ma.ss, must be
constant.

37. That the essence of matter is not extension, is a
proposition on which Leibniz loves to dwell. Ho seems to
hflve discovered this proposition at least as early as 1672®, so

* Gedauken iiher die wahre. Schiitzuvg der lebenditjen KrUfte, 1747. Ed. Hart.
Vol. I.

3 This results e.g. from his saying that he has geometrical proofs of the
existence of a vacuum ((>. i. 68). That Leibniz was aware of the fact that a
vacuum is inconsistent with the view that the essence of matter is extension,
appears also from O. i. 621. Again in a letter to Antoine Arnauld, written


78


THE PHILOSOPHY OP DYNAMICS.

f

•

that it was probably one of the sources ,of his innovations.
The proof of the proposition is about as thorough as it could
be. It is derived (1) from the nature of extension, (2) from
the nature of the extended, or materia prima, (3) from the fact'^
that even materia prima, though not mere extension, is an
abstraction, requiring to be supplemented by force or activity.
The argument from the nature of extension, with its conse¬
quences, I leave for the next eliapter; the other two arguments
must now be given. J^et us begin with the definition of
materia pHma as it occurs in Dynamics.

38. Materia prima is defined by what Leibniz calls re¬
sistance. This, he says, does not consist in extension, but is
the principle of extension ((>. ii. 306), that is, it is the quality
in virtvie of which bodies occupy places. Resistance, again,
involves two distinct properties, impenetrability or antitypia,
and resistance (in the narrower sense) or inertia (G. ll. 171)*.
These two properties of materia pn'wnt might be defined as
(1) the property of bodies in virtue of which they are in phicos
(G. VII. 328), (2) the property in virtue of which they resist
any effort to make them change their places. Passive force,
Leibniz says, is a resistance, by which a body resists not only
penetration, but also motion, so that another body cannot come
into the phuie of the first unless the first gives way, and it does
not give way without retarding the other. Thus there are two
resistances or masses, impenetrability and inertia. These are
uniform everywhere, and therefore proportional to extension
(G. IV. 395; G. M. vi. 100 and N. E. p. 701). Inertia is spoken

probably at tlio end of 1071 or tho bc^iinning of 1672, Leibniz saya (G. i. 72)
that he has proved, among other thIngB, "titat the essence of body does not
consist in extension, since empty space must be different from body, and yet is
also extended’'; further “that the essence of body consists rather in motion.”
Cf. G. IV. IOC (1660): “ The deffnition of a body is that it exists in space.”
Also Ib. 171 (1670). See Selver, Iinlwickehing»gany iler Leibniz'nchen Monaden-
lehre^ p. 40. Leibniz appears to have been led to this discovery by the search
for a philosophical theory of the Eucharist. The Cartesian doctrine, that the
essence of matter is extension, was found by him to be inconsistent with both
transubstantiation and consubstantiation. See Guhraner, Leibnitz: Eine Bio¬
graphic, Vol. 1 . p. 77.

^ The use of resistance in two senses, (1) as the whole essence of materia
prima, (2) as inertia only, is very tiresome, and greatly confuses Leibniz’s
exposition.


79


THE PHILOSOPHY OF DYNAMICS.

of as a passive fmxe, a somewhat difficult phrase, which we
shall find to be equivalent to what, in the theory of monads, is
# called passivity simply. Thus Leibniz says ( 16 .); “-Again to
'^wafUKov or power in body is twofold—passive and active.
Passive force properly constitutes matter or mass, the active
constitutes ipreXexeia or form. Passive force is that very
resistance by which body resists not only penetration, but also
motion.” And passive force, as we shall find with active force
also,“is twofold, either primitive or derivative. And indeed the
priniiti^w force of etulurimj or resisting constitutes that very
t hing which is calh'il materia prima, rightly interpreftMl, in the
schools, by which it hnppcns that body is not penetrated by
body, but forms an obstacle to it, and is cmlowed also with a
certain laziness, so to speak, that is, rc])iignance to motion, and
does not indeed suffer itself to b(> set in motion unles.s by the
somewhat bmken force of the active body. Whence afterwards
the derivative force of enditrimj variously exhibits itself in
secondary matter" (N. E. p. C72—.S; G. M. vr. 236). Ke-
sistance, Leibniz says, is not merely not changing without
cause, but having a force and inclination to retain the actual
state and resist the cause of change. Thus in impsict (which
he has always in his mind in the mathematical discussion of
materia prima), when one body i.s at rest, the impinging body
loses some of its velocity in starting the other, and the other,
when started, moves more slowly than the first did*. Resistance
in this sense, he asserts, is not metaphysically necessary
(G. II. 170).

A.S p.art of an actual theory of Dynamics, the above analysis
is antiquated. But philosophically, it is easy to see what is
meant by the two elements of materia prima. Not only is it
impossible for one body to come into the place occupied 'by
another, unless that other gives way, and moves into a new
place, but also some of the first body’s motion is absorbed by
th« second body, or some effort is reejuired to cause the second
body to abandon its place. The importance of the doctrine
lies, as we shall afterwards see, in the connection with the
materia prima of each monad. A difficulty, which I think is a
bare inconsistency, is introduced by the statement that materia
1 See L. 362—8; N. E. 678; G. M. vi. 240,


80


THE PHILOSOPHY OF DYNAMICS.


priina, as an element in each monad, is metaphysically neces¬
sary ((3. II. 325). It is more consistent with Leibniz’s philo¬
sophy, I think, to hold both nccesvsary than to hold both
contingent; particularly as the necessity of the one is declarec^ '
much more emphatically than the contingency of the other.

Neither of the properties of materia prima can be deduced
from mere extension. That this is true of impenetrability,
follows from the simple consideration that place, though ex¬
tended, is not impenetrable ((3. ill. 453). As regards inertia,
Leibniz points out that, if bodies were wholly indifferent to
rest and motion, a big body could be set in motion by a small
one without any loss of velocity, whereas what is really con¬
served is momentum, which involves mass. But for inertia, we
should have action without reaction, ami n«) estimate of power
could be made, since anything might be accomplished by any¬
thing (L. 353; N. K. G78; G. M. vr. 241). Even if matter,
then, were purely ptissivc, Des Cartes’ theory, that the essence
of matter is extension, would bo mistaken.

39 . But this is still more evident when we pass to mat&ria
secunda, i.e. to matter as active and endowed with force. The
doctrine of force is closely connected with every part of
Leibniz’s philosophy—with the notion of contingent truths’,
with the conception of substance as the source of all its
predicates®, with the plurality of independent causal series
(D. 60, 61 ; G. iv. 369), with the psychical nature of all
substances®, and with the whole theory of activity, liberty and

* “Yon oro right in judging that (Dynamics) is to a great extent the founda¬
tion of my system; for it is there we learn the difference between truths whose
necessity is brute and geometrical, and truths which have their source in fitness
and final causes” (G. iir. 045).

2* “I am not astonished that you find insurmountable difficulties whore you
seem to assume a thing so inconceivable as the passage of an accident from one
subject to another; but I see nothing which compels ns to an assumption which
is scarcely less strange than that of the scholastics of accidents without a sub¬
ject” (N. E. p. 23.3, G. V. 208); in answer to Locke’s difficulties concerniug
impact. Of. also D. 124; G. iv. .51.5: in a series of impacts, “each ball, when
repelled from the next one impinging on it, is set in motion by its own force,
viz. its elasticity.”

^ *'We see also,'that thought, being the action of a thing on itself, cannot
happen in figures and motions, which can never show the principle of a truly
internal action” [G. tii. 69]. Such a principle, however, is found in force.


81


THE PHILOSOPHY OF DYNAMICS.

determination. It ia a central point in Leibniz’s philosophy,
and was by him recognized as such. Force is said to be prior
^to ex tension'(N.^E. 671; G. M. vi. 235), and to be the true
ground for inferring the plurality of .substances (G. ii. 372).
Jn so far as force is the same as activity, avc have already
considered it. What wo have now to examine, is the way in
which Leibniz developed the idea of force from Dynamics.

Leibniz discovered the con.sc*rvation of momentumj and
believed himself to have discovered another law, the conserva¬
tion of Vis Viva, both of Avhich were unknown to De.s Cartes
(D. 88; L. 327 ; G. iv. 467). He wa.s thus able theoretically—
assuming perfectly elastic impact to be ultimately the only
form of dynamical action—to determine completely the course
of any motion, ami to disprove, if the validity of his Dynamics
was allowed, the possibility, jwlmittcd by Des Carte.s, of a direct
action of mind upon matter. Des Cartes had supposed that,
though the quantity of motion is constant, its direction may be
altered by a direct action of the mind upon the animal spirits.
Had he known, Leibniz says, that the quantity of motioji in
eveiy direction is constant, he would probably have <liscoverod
the pre-established harmony (D. JC4; G. vi. 540); for ho
would have seen that an interaction bed,ween mind and matter
is irnjwssible. Why he should not have been led to the views
of Geulincx or of Spinoza, which Leibniz does not mention, it
is very difficult to see. That Leibniz was not led to occasional¬
ism, or to Spinoza’s theory that the mind is the idea of the
body, was due to his conception of force, which led him to
regard every piece of matter—or rather ()very collection of the
real substances whose appearance is matter—as an independent
source of all its own changes.

40 . The necessity of force is variously deduced. Much of
the argument—especially when it assumes the form of a
polemic against the Cartesians—depends, as Wundt has pointed
oi^t^ upon the axiom that the cause must bo equal to the effect.
The two measures of force only give the same result in the
case of equilibrium, i.e. in Statics; and Leibniz attributes the

^ Die phyaikalisehen Axiome und Hire Beziehting mm Camulprincip, Erlangen,
1866, p. 60 ft. Many valuable observations on Leibniz’s Dynamics are contained
in this work.


B. L.


6


82


THE PHILOSOPHY OF DYNAMICS.


persistence of the Cartesian measure to the fact that people
have devoted an undue share of attention to Statics as opposed
to Dynamics (N. E. C75; G. M. VI. 239). Since tlie quantity of r
motion is not conserved (tus Des Cartes had falsely assumed), th( 5 ,
true causes and effects cannot be inotion.s. Motion in a given
direction might have been substituted, if purely mathematical
considerations had been alone employed. But for an ultimate
physical entity, Leibniz desired some one unique quantity,
which had a constant sura in any independent system; and
this he believetl himself to have found in Vis Viva, i.e. the
mass fuiiltiplied by the square of tlui velocity. Statics and
Dynamics are to be. dotluced from the law “ that the total effect
must always be e(piivalent to its full cause.” “ As in Geometry
and numbers,” he explains, “through the principle of the
equality of the whole to all its parts. Geometry is subjected to
an analytical (Vilculus, so in Mechanics, through the equality of
the effect to all its causes, or of the cause to all its effects, wo
obtain certain cejuations, as it were, and a kind of mechanical
Algebra by the use of this axioms” In a thorough discussion
of the principles of Dynamics, it would be necessary to examine
this supposed law, but here it is sufficient to point out its influ¬
ence on Leibniz’s \iews. For, as he himself appears to recognize
{Archiv, loc. cit), it belongs more to the rnathemntics than to
the philosophy of the subject®. 1 therefore pass now to the
more strictly philovsophical arguments.

While Leibniz was cro.ssing from England to Holland, on
his way to visit Spinoza, he composed a highly interesting
dialogue on the difficulties arising from the continuity of
motion”. At the end of this dialogue he remarks: “Here I
have considered the nature of change and the continuum, in so
far as thesy belong to motion. It remains to consider, first the
subject of motion, that it may appear to which of two bodies,
which change their relative situation, the motion is to be

* L, Arc-hiv fur (hwhiclitf der Philosophie, i. p. 576. The same maxhn
was employed by Leibniz in ivr}>uing with Hpinoza in 1676 against Des Cartes’
laws of motion: sec L. p. 10, and Foucher de Careil, llefutation ivAdit^e de
Spinozd", p. Ixiv.

® Though in a lettor to Dayle he speaks of it as a “wholly metaphysical
axiom “ (G. m. 46).

* S(«3 Archiv f. Geschiclde, der Phil, i. pp. 211—6,


83


THE PHILOSOPHY OF DYNAMICS.

t

ascribed; secondly, ,the cause of motion, or motor force ”
(p. 215). Thg question of the continuum I leave for a later
“•chapter; the other two were solved together, in Leibniz’s
ilpinion, by the notion of force which he afterwards gained.

That motion requires force, or a principle of change, in the
moving body, was deduced by Leibniz partly from abstract
metaphysical reasons, partly from the relativity of motion, and
partly from the so-called law <jf inertia, i.e. the law that every
body persists in any motion which it has acquired, except in so
tar as it»is hiiwlored by outside causes. 1 shall begin with the
last of these arguintmts.

The law of inertia states, on the one hand, that a body will
not of itself begin a motion, but that, on the other hand, “ body
retains of its(df the impetus which it has once acquired, and
that it is constant in its levity, or has an oudonvour to perse¬
vere in that very series of changes Avhich it has entered upon ”
(T). 120; G. IV. 511). A moving body is not merely succes¬
sively in different places, but is at each moment in a state of
motion; it has velocity, and differs, in its .state, from a body .at
rest (D. 122; G. iv. 513). But this involves .some effort to
change its place, whence the next state follows «>f itself from
the pre.sent. Otherwise, in the priisent, and therefore in every
moment, a moving body would differ in no way from one at
rest {Ih.). This argument is valid, I think, as against those
who, like Clerk Maxwell {Matter and Motion, Art. XLi,), en¬
deavour to represent Newton’s First T^Jiw .as a self-evident
truth. Leibniz recognizes that, in a uniform rectilinear motion,
a body undergoes a series of changes, although its velocity is
unchanged. He infers that, sinc(‘- this series of changes is
possible without external influence, every body must contain in
itself a principle of change, i.e. force or activity, by means of
which a meaning is given to a state of change. But this
involves the continuity of change, concerning which we are
fac5d with those very difficulties to evade which, as regards
space, was a main purpose of the doctrine of mon.ads. Accord-
ingly, in other places, where Leibniz is thinking of the diffi¬
culties of the continuum, he holds all change to be discrete
once even asserting that motion is a continu.al transcreation’.

’ G. u, 279. Cf. the dialogue alluded to above, Archiv, Vol. i. p. 212 If.

6—2


84


THE PHILOSOPHY OF DYNAMICS.

I

This is an instance of the vacillation into Y^hich, as we shall see
in the next two chapters, Leibniz was led by,his refusal to
admit the antinomy of infinite division.

41 . The most important dynamical argument in favour
force is connected with the relativity of motion. On this point,
Leibniz’s views present some suggestion of a vicious circle. He
seems sometimes to argue that, because force is something real,
it must have a subject, and be an attribute, not a mere rela¬
tion ; whence it fi)llows that, in a change of relative situation,
the cause of cliange can be apportioned between the bodies, thus
giving a sense to absolute motion (e.g. G. M. ii. 184). But at
other times, he argues that some real change, not merely
relative, must imderlio motion, and can only bo obtained by
means of force {e.g. D. 60, 61 ; G. iv. 369). This argument is
interesting, both on account of its difference from the analogous
arguments by which Newton proved the need of absolute space,
and by the fact that Dynamics, at the present day, is still
unable to reconcile the relativity of motion with the absolute¬
ness of forced In every motion, Leibniz says, the motion per
se gives a mere change of relative situation, and it is impossible
to say which body has moved, or whether both have moved.
In ord(?r to be able to say this, we require to know in which is
the cause of the change of relative situation. This cause we
call forc(j (lb.). " When formerly,” he says, " I regarded space

SIS an immoveable real place, possessing extension alone, 1 had
been able to define absolute motion as change of this real space.
But gradually I began to doubt whether there is in nature
such an entity as is called space; whence it followed that a

doubt might arise about absolute motion. It seemed to

follow that that which is j*eal and absolute in motion consists
not in what is purely mathematical, such sis change of neigh¬
bourhood or si tusition, but in motive 101*00 itself; and if there
is none of this, then there is no absolute and real motion.

^ I cannot liero undertake to give the proof of this aBsertion. It depends
upon yhe fact that, if the laws of motion are to apply, the motion must be
referred, nut to any axes, but to what have been called kinetic axes, i.e. axes
which have no absolute acceleration. See Newton, Prineipia, Scholium to the
eighth definition. Contrast, in Clerk Maxwell’s Matter and Motion, Arts,
xviii, cv.


85


THE PHILOSOPHY OP DYNAMICS,

•

Accordingly I found no other Aiiadno thread to lojid me out of
this labyrinth than*thc calculation of forces, assuming this
..metaphysical principle, that the total effect is alwaijs equal to
complete cause " (L. 353 ; Archiv, i. p. 580).

On this question Leibniz’s position, unlike Ncjwton’s, is, 1
think, full of confusion. On the one hand, space is wholly
relational; hence motion is not a change of absolute position,
but merely a change of relative situation. Now a change of
relative situation is necessarily reciprocal, and hence Leibniz is
led to the equality of action and reaction (N. E. 689; (J. M. vi.
251—2). But in order to give any meaning to action, he has
to forget the relativity of motion, and consequently to do away
with the need for an equal reaction. He and Huygens agree,
as against Newton, that the phenomena of circular motion give
no more indication as to absolute motion than do those of
rectilinear motion, though Huygens has the honesty to confe.ss
that he has not examiuefl Newton’s grouinls ((}. M. ii. 177,
184—5, 192). 'Phe Copcrnican hypothesis, Leibniz says, anti¬
cipating Mach, is simpler, not truer, than the other (N. E. 085 ;
G. M. VI. 248). But he nevertheless holds that, by means of
force, some meaning may be given to the statement that, in
a change of relative situation, one body has moved and not the
other. “ As for the difference of absolute and relative motion,”
he says, “ I think that if the inotion, or rather the motor force
of bodies, is something real, as it seems that one must recog¬
nize, it is necessary that it should have a subject. 1 agree

that the phenomena could not furnish to us (or oven to the
angels) an infallible reason for determining the subject of
motion or of its degree; and that each can be conceived apart

as being at rest. But you will not deny (I believe) that

in truth each has a certain degree of motion, or, if you will, of
force; in spite of the equivalence of hypotheses. It is true I
draw from it this consequence, that there is in nature some¬
thing besides what Geometry can determine in it” (G. M. ii.
184). This, ho says, is not the least of his reasons for recog¬
nizing force. Again he says, even more explicitly: “I find
nothing in the eighth definition of the mathematical principles
of nature, or in the scholium, belonging to it [the scholium in
which Newton explains the need of absolute space, time and


86 THE PHILOSOPHY OF DYNAMICS.

(

motion] that proves, or can prove, the reality of space in itself.
However, I grant there is a difference between an^absolute true
motion of a body, and a mere relative change of situation with'*
respect to another body ” (D. 269; G. vil. 404). But it mui0
bo evident that, if position is relative, absolute motion is mean¬
ingless. The two cannot pos.sibly be reconciled. Leibniz, like
Newton, rightly perceived that Dynamics requires us to distin¬
guish, in a (ihangc of relative situation, the proportion in which
accelerations are shared between two bodies. He was also
right in maintaining that, on .a geometrical or kinematical
view, such a distinction cannot be practically effected. But
Geometry doc.s not show the distinction to be meaningless,
and if it did, Dynamics could not make the distinction. Thus
it would setnu that Newton was right in inferring, from Dy-
mimics, the necessity of absolute space. When I come to the
theory of space, I shall maintain that even Geometry retpiires
this, though (uily metaphysically, not, like Dynamics, for em¬
pirical reasons also.

As this })oiut is important, it may be Avell briefly to repeat
the argumenf.s which show the relativity of motion to be incon¬
sistent with the absoluteness of force. As regards Physios,”
Leibniz says, “ it is necessary to understand the nature of force,
a thing entirely different from motion, which is something
more relative. This force is to be measured by the quantity of
its effect” (D. 39; G. li. 137). But the objection which here
arises—an objection unavoidable on any relational theory of
space—is, that the effect can only be measured by means
of motion, and thus the pretended escape from endless relativity
breaks down. A new objection applies to another statement,
in which Leibniz endeavours to prove that motion is not purely
relative. “If there is nothing in motion but this respective
change,” ho says, “ it follows that no reason is given in nature
why motion must be ascribed to one thing rather than to
others. 'J’h<i conso«juenee of this will be that there is no real
motion. Therefore in order that a thing may be said to be
moved, we shall require not only that it change its situation in
respoc't to others, but also that the cause of change, the force
or action, be in it itself” (D, 61; G. iv. 369. Cf. also D. 269 ;
G. VII. 404). This endeavour to establish absolute motion is,


87


THE PHILOSOPHY OF DYNAMICS.

in the first place, wholly inconsistent with Leibniz’s theory of
space. Newton, from somewhat similar arguments, had rightly
* deduced the necessity of absolute position; Leibniz, who on
'many mathematical points was less philosophical than Newton,
endeavoured to save absolute motion, while strenuously denying
absolute position (cf. D. 2G6; G. vii. 401—2). But further,
the theory is inconsistent with the nature of monads. Let us
suppose two bodies A and B, which change their relative
situation owing to the force in B. Since A mirrors the uni-
veree, a change will ha]>pen in A when B moves. Hence if the
force resided only in B, B would cause a change in A, contrary
to the theory that monads do not ijiteract. Hence wo must, in
every case of a relative change of situation, place a force in
both bodies, by which the change is to be (‘fleeted. Thus we
shall lose that power of discrimination which for(;e was suppo.so(l
to provide. 'Phis argument could only be evaded by the denial
that monads have anything corresponding to position in space,
a denial which Leibniz often attempted, but which, jis we
shall .see later, woidd havis destroyed the only ground fur his
monadism.

42 . Leibniz’s deduction of force as a means of escaping
fi’om the relativity of motion is thus fallacious. Motion, in its
own nature, is or is not lelativo, and the introduction of force
can make no difi'enuice to that nature. It remains to t‘xamine
the metaphysical grounds for the notion of force. In so far as
these are the same as tho.se for activity in general, they have
been already dealt with. But others are derived from the con¬
tinuity of motion, and these mu.st now be set forth.

“We have elsewhere suggested," Leibniz says (N. E. 671;
G. M. VI. 235), “that there is in corporeal things something
besides extension, nay, prior to extension, namely the force of
nature everywhere implanted by its Author, which consists, not
in the simple faculty with which the schools seem to have been
cbntent, but is provided, bft.sides, with a tendency {conatn) or
effort, which will have its full effect unless impeded by a
contrary tendency. This effort often appears to the son.ses,
and in my judgment is known everywhere in matter by the
reason, even when it does not appear to the sense. But even if
we are not to assign this force to God through a miracle, it is


88


THE PIHLOSOPHY OF DYNAMICS.

«

certainly neceasary that it be produced in the bodies them¬
selves, nay that it constitute the inmost nature of bodies, since
to act is the mark of substances, and extension means nothing
else than the continuation or diffusion of the already presup?*
posed...resisting substance, so far is it from being able itself to
constitute the very essence of substance. Nor is it relevant that
every corporeal action arises from motion, and motion itself
does not exist unless from motion.... For motion, like time,
never exists, if you reduce the thing to aKpi^eta, because it
never exists as a whole, since it has not co-existing parta. And
nothing at all is real in it, except that momentary property,
which must be constituted by a force striving for change.”
This is the old argument of Zeno, suggested also in the dia¬
logue written for Si)ino7.a {Ai'chiv^ i. p. 213), and in many
other passag(j.s. Motion is change of position; but at any one
instant the position is <>110 and only one. Hence at every
instant, and therefore always, there is no change of position and
no motion Leibniz thought, however, what the Calculus was
likely to suggest, that the momentary increment was real in.;,
some way in which the whole sum of increments was not real’,
and hence force was called in to supply some reality other
than motion, out of which motion might be supposed to spring.
“Force,” he says, “is something truly real, even in created
substances; but space, time.aud motion partake of the nature of
mental entities (ea,v rationis) and are true and real, not of them¬
selves, but since they involve clivine attributes” (N. E. p. 684 5
G. M. VI. 247). And again, “ Only force, and thence nascent
eff«)rt, exists in any moment, for motion never truly exists”
(N. E. p. G89; G. M. vi. 2.52). What Leibniz designs to effect,
by this doctrine, is, as with activity in general, the reduction of
a relation to a quality. Motion is doubly a relation—-first, as
between successive moments, and secondly, as between bodies
in different places. Both relations were to be reduced by
means of force. A state of motion is distinguished fr(^*^a
state of rest, at each instant of the motion, by the presence
of force, which, in the last analysis, is akin to desire. By
this means, not -only are the difficulties of the temporal- con¬
tinuum supposed to be overcome (L. 351; Archiv. l. 577), but

^ Cf. Ck>hen, lafinitetiimlm^hode, p. 15.


89


THE PHILOSOPHY OF DYNAMICS.

also, when two bodjes change their relative situation, we can
enquire whether^oue or both contains force, and thus assign
an appropriate state of motion to each.

43. The objections to this view of force will appear more
dearly from an examination of its application to the case of
impact, and of the attempt to establish dynamically a plura¬
lity of causal series. We shall then find, if I am not mistaken,
that the relation of Leibniz’s Dynamics to his Metaphysics is
hopelessly confused, and that the one cannot stand while the
other fe maintained. Unfortunately, the fall of the one does
not involve the maintenance of the other. Leibniz hfia siccjuired
much credit for the vaunted interconnection of his views in
these two departments, and few seem to have perceived how
false his boast loally is. As a matter of fact, the want of
(jonnection is, 1 think, quite one of the weakest points in his
system.

The problem of impact was one whic.h pro-occupied the
mathematicians of Lciibniz’s day far more than those of our own.
It was CGiVod only after he had acquired his mathematical
equipment, and filled his mind to an extent which accounts for
several curious features of his theory of matter. He appears to
have quite unduly neglected impacts which are not perfectly
elastic, and to have held (though he nevtir definitely contends)
that if bodies were only taken small enough, they could always
be treated as perfectly elastic. Impact was ultimately, for him,
the only form of dynamical interaction. He definitely rejected,
as ultimately valid, the Newtonian gravitation, holding, with
most moderns, that it must be explained by means of an all-
pervading fluid. Perfect elasticity was ultimately required, if
his law of the conscrvjitioii of Vis Viva was to be preserved,
since, when the coefficient of restitution is less than unity (as
it always is in practice), Vis Viva is apparently lost. His
reply to this objection was that it is absorbed by the small
pilrts of bodies—transformed, in modern phraseology, from
molar into molecular motion (N. E. 660—670; G. M. vi.
230—231). But if impact be the ultimate form of inter¬
action, this answer can only serve if the smaller parts which
receive the motion are themselves perfectly elastic. When
preyed by Huygens on this point, Leibniz meanly evades the


90 THE PHILOSOPHY OF DYNAMICS.

c

diffictilty by denying that there are any lasj elements of bodies
(G. M. II. 157). But a further difficulty remsdns, which is this.
Impact is only elastic, according to Leibniz, because of a ” subtle '
and penetrating fluid, whose motion is disturbed by the tension,
or by the change of the elasticity. And as this fluid must
be itself in turn composed of little solid bodies, elastic among
themselves, we see that this replication of solids and fluids con¬
tinues to infinity” (N. E. p. OOS; G. M. vi. 228). He proceeds
to confess that plasticity is necessary to the conservation of Via
Viva. Again he says—and this is an argument by which he
often suggests the doctrine of monads:—“ It is true that this
conservation of force can only be obtained by putting elasticity
everywhere in matter, and that a conclusion follows which will
appear strange to those who do not suBiciently conceive the
marvels of things: this is, that there are, so to apeak, worlds
in the smallest bodies, aincxi every body, however small it may
be, has elasticity, and coiisecjuently is surrounded and pene¬
trated by a fluid as subtle, in relation to it, as that which makes
the elasticity of sensible bo<iics can be in relation to us; and
that ther(‘fore there are no first elements, since we must say as
much of the smallest portion of the most subtle fluid that can
be supposed” (G. iir. 57). But it must bo evident that, in the
end, the motion of his fluid must be regulated by something
other than the laws of ehistic impact, since the elasticity of
w’hat is comparatively solid is only due to the presence of what
is comparatively fluid. In order to develop the theory of an
all-pervading fluid, Leibniz needed, what in his day did not
exist, either Hydrodynamics or the modern Dynamics of the
ether.

44. There arc, speaking broadly, three great types of
dynamical theory. There is the doctrine of hard extended
atoms, for which the theory of impact is the appropriate
weapon. There is the doctrine of the plenum, of an all-pervad¬
ing fluid, for which the modern doctrine of the ether—the
theory of Electricity, in fact—has at last partially forged the
necessary weapons. And finally, there is the doctrine of unex¬
tended centres of force, with action at a distance, for which
Newton supplied the retjuired Mathematics. Leibniz failed to
grasp these alternatives, and thus, from his love of a middle


91


THE PHILOSOPHY OF DYNAMICS.

position, fell between, not two, but throe stools. His view of
impact as the fondamcntal phenomenon of Dynamics should
have led him to the theory of extended atoms, supported by
Gassendi, and, in his own day, by Huygens. His belief in the
plenum and the fluid ether should have led him to the second
theory, and to the investigation of fluid motion. His relational
theory of space, and his whole doctrine of inonatls, should have
led him, as it led Boscovioh, Kant* and Lotze, to the theory of
uuextcnded centres of force. The failure to choose between
those alternatives made his Dynamics a mfuss of confusions.
The true Lcibnizian Dynamics is not his own, but that of
Boscovich*. This theory is a simple development of the
Newtonian Dynamics, in which all matter consists of material
points, and all action is action at a distance. These material
points .ire unextende<l like the mona<ls, to which Boscovich
appeals as analogous*; and in order to preserve their mutual
independence, it is onl}^ nece.ssary to nigard the attraction or
repulsion as due to the perception of one nw.nad by the other,
which, a matter of tact, Leibniz actually does. Why, then,
was this theory not that of Leibniz ?

There was, T think, to begin with, in later life, a personal
reason. Leibniz had (piarrelled with Newton concerning the
Calculus, and he did not choose to admit that Newton had
anything to teach him"*, lie therefore rejected gravitation as
an ultimate account of things, giving as his reason that action
at a distance is impo.ssibIc. But this personal reason can only
have opemted after the publication of the Prineijna in 1687,
by which date Leibniz had constructed both his philosophy and
his Dynamics. It becomes necessary, therefore, to search for
more objective reasons.

* That Kant’s tlioory of space in the Metnphysische Anfunysgriinde der
Naturwisaenschoft is different from that of the Kritik, has been often observed.
See Vaihinger’s Commentar, p. 224 fl.

• ** Theoria PhilosopMae Naturalis. See csp. Part I, § 1,38 ff.

* Venetian edition of 1763, p. xxv. Boscovich differs from Newtonian
Dynamics chiefiy in assuming that, at very small distances, the force between
two particles is repulsive. Ho differs from the Newtonian philosophy by regard*
ing action at a distance as ultimate.

* It has even been suggested—and the suggestion appears very probably
oorreot—that Leibniz never took the trouble to read the Principia, See
Onhrauer, op. cit. Vol. i. p. 297.


92 THE PHILOSOPHY OF DYNAMICS.

I

Leibniz rejected atoms, the vacuum, and action at a distance.
His grounds for these three rejections must be now,examined.

46 . (1) Against extended atoms he haS, I think, fairly
valid grounds. These are best set forth in his correspondence
with Huygens, who maintained atoms. (See G. M. ii. pp. 136,
H5, 155—7). In the first place, the extended atom is
composed of parts, since extension is repetition; it cannot,
therefore, afford a metaphysical solution of the composition of
matter. Moreover, if the laws of motion are to be preserved,
the atom must be perfectly elastic, which is impossible since it
must also be perfectly hani, and can contain no “ subtle fluid.”
Again there is a breach of the law of continuity in assuming
infinite hardness and absolute indivisibility to emerge suddenly
when a certain stage is reached in division. And primitive
rigidity is, in any case, a quality wholly without reason, and
therefore inadmissible. In short, infrangible atoms would be a
perpetual miracle. T'hcsc arguments have*, been urged many
times since, and are, one may suppose, on the whole valid.

46 . (2) With regard to the vacuum, Leibniz relied mainly
on the argument from what he called metaphysical perfection.
He admitted that a vacuum is conceivable (N. E. 157; G. V.
140), but held that, wherever there is room, God might have
placed matter without harm tt> anything else. Since, generally,
the more existence the better, God would not have neglected
the opportunity for creation, and therefore there is matter
everywhere (D. 240, 253; G. vii. 356, 378). This principle of
metaphysical perfection will be discussed later; for the present
I confine myself to less theological arguments. A very weak
argument, which Leibniz sometimes permits himself, is, that
there could be no sufficient reason for determining the propor¬
tion of vacuum to filled sjmcc, and therefore there can be no
vacuum at all (D. 253; G. ii. 475; vil. 378). The only argu¬
ment which attempts to bo precise is one which is fatally
unsound. If space be an attribute, Leibniz says, of what can
empty 8j>aco be an attribute (D. 248; G. vii. 372) ? But space,
for hiin, is a relation, not an attribute; his whole argument
against the view that space is composed of points depends, as
we shall sec in Chapter IX., upon the fundamental relation of
distance. He has, in fact, no valid arguments whatever against


93


THE PHILOSOPHY OF DYNAMICS.

I'

a vacuum. He seems to regard a belief in it as necessarily
associated ^ith a t)elief in extended atoms—"atoms and the
void ” are always spoken of together. In fact, when action at a
distance is rejected, the two are necessarily connected; since
unextended atoms must act at a distance, if there is to be any
dynamical action at all^

47. (3) This brings me to Leibniz’s grounds against
action at a distance. T cannot discover, on this point, anything
beyond vulgar prejudice. Both on this and on the previous
point,*his immetiiate followers, under the influence of Newton,
abandoned the views of tl>eir master, which seem to have been
mainly due to a lingering (iJartesian prejudice. 'J’hc spatial and
temporal contiguity of cause and effect are apparently, placed
on a level. " A man will have an ecpial right to say that any¬
thing is the result of anything, if that which is absent in space or
time can, without intermediary, operate here and now” (D. 115;
G. IV. 507). With regard to time, though a difficulty arises
from continuity, the maxim may be allowed; but with regard
to space, it is precluded, as a metaphysical axiom, by the denial
of transeunt action. For since nothing really acts on anything
else, there seems no possible metaphysical reason why, in
monads which mirror the whole universe, the perception of
what is distant should not bo a cause, just as much as the
perception of what is near, 'rhere seems, therefore, in Leibniz’s
system, no metaphysical ground for the maxim; and in his time
(which was that of Newton), there was certainly no dynamical
ground. The denial of action at a distance must, therefore, be
classed as a mere prejudice, and one, moreover, which had a
most pernicious effect upon the relation of Leibniz’s Dynamics
to his Metaphysics.

48. I come now to another purpose which the doctrine of
force was designed to fulfil. It showed, in the first place, that

^ On ono minor point, however, namely the possibility of motion in a
plenum, Leibniz is unquestionably in the right. Locke had maintained that
there must be empty space, or else there would be no room for motion. Leibniz
rightly repUes {N. E. pp. 63—4; L. 386; G. v. 62), that if matter be fluid, this
difficulty is obviated. It should indeed be obvious, even to the non-mathematical,
that motion in a closed circuit is possible for a fluid. It is a pity philosophers
have allowed themselves to repeat this argument, which a week’s study of
Hydrodynamics would suffice to dispel. The complete answer to it is contained
in what is callfMl the equation of continuity.


94 THE PHILOSOPHY OF DYNAMICS.

actual secondary matter—as opposed to primary matter, which
is a mere abstraction—is essentially active, as everything
substantial must be. But it also attempted to show—what is
essential to the doctrine of monads—that every piece of matter
has its own force, and is the source of all its own changes. It
was necessary, as we saw in Chapter IV., to maintain the
plurality of independent causal series, and thus to exhibit force
as really affecting <mly the body in which it was, not those
upon which it apparently acted. Hert! Leibniz, quite uncon¬
sciously, took one side of what appears to be an antinomy, and
appealed to his Dynamics as proving the thesis only, when it
proved, with (juite equal evidence, the antithesis also*. This
brings us to the aspect of force in which it confers indi¬
viduality*—au aspect which Leibniz also employs to prove the
necessity of force. Without it, he says, all matter would be
alike, and therefore motion, since space is a plenum, would
make no difference (D. 122; 0. iv. nl2—3). This argument is
certainly valid, on a relational theory of space, as against those
(Cartesians or moderns) who hold to the relativity of motion,
while they reduce all motion to vortices in a perfect fluid. But
this is a digression, from which we must return to Dynamics
and impact.

Every body, we arc told, is rctally moved, not by other
bodies, but by its own force. Thus in the successive impacts
of a number of balls, “ each ball repelled from the next one
impinging on it, is set in motion by its own force, viz. its
elasticity” (D. 124; G. iv. 515). The laws of motion, Leibniz
thinks, compel us to admit intlepondent causal action on the
part of each particle of matter, and it is only by such action
that we cun free the ide.a of motion from a relativity which
would make it wholly indeterminate. Therefore there must be,
ill each particle of matter, a force or activity from which its
changes spring, by which we can give a meaning to a state of
motion, and connect the states of a body at successive instants.

* See ^ 49, 50.

^ This is connectod with the doctrine of activity as the essence of in¬
dividuality-a doctrine with which, by the way, Spinoza’s dictum may be
compared, that “desire is the very nature or essence of a person.” Kthict,
Pt. III. Prop. IX. Schol. and Prop. lvii.


95


THE PHILOSOPHY OF DYNAMICS,
c

Force is related to materia pmma as form to matter in the
Aristotelian sense. •“ Because of form every body always ficts,
,and because of mdtttcr every body always endures and resists”
(N. E. 073; G. M. vi. 237). In active force is the entelcchy,
analogous to a soul, whose nature con-sists in a certain perpetual
law of its series of changes, which it spontaneously carries out
(G. II. 171). It is this force which constitutes the identity of
each piece of matter, and ditfcreutiates it from all other pieces.
And Leibniz endeavours, as his metaphysics reipiires, to show
that, foyce only acts on the body in which it is, an<l never on
ariv oth(U‘ bt)dy. Ceases where a body appears to be acted upon
by another are called cases of passion, but even here, the
appearance is deceptive. “ The passion of tivcry body is spon¬
taneous, or arises from internal force, though upon occiision of
something external. I understand here, however, j)assion proper,
which arises from percussion, or which remains the same, what¬
ever hypothesis is finally assigne<l, or to whatever we finally
ascribe absolute} rest or motion. For since the penmssion is the
same, to whatever at length true motion belongs, it follows that
the result of the percussion is distributed etpially between both,
and thus both act equallij in the encounter, and thus half the
result arises from the action of the om;, the other half from the
action of the other; and since half also of the I'esult or jnission
is in one, half in the other, it is sufficient that we derive the
passion which is in one from the action which is also in itself,
and wo need no influence of the one upon the other, although
by the one an occ{ision is furnished to the action of the other,
which is producing a change in itself” (T^. E.fiHS; G. M. vr. 251).

49. To bring this doctrine into harmony with the facts, a
further distinction was recjuired between primitive and deriva¬
tive force. The latkjr, which is a modification of the former, is
the actual present state while tending to the future. The prinu-
fiive force is pensistent, and is, as it were, the law of the series,
while the derived force is the determination designating a
particular term of the series (G. ii. 262). “Active force,”

Leibniz says, “.is twofold, namely pniriitive, which exists

in every corporeal substance per se (since I think a wholly
quiescent body abhorrent to the nature of things), or dei'ivative,
which by a limitation, as it were, of the primitive, resulting


96


THE PHILOSOPHY OF DYNAMICS.

f

through the conflicts of bodies with each other, is variously
exercised. And, indeed, the primitive forde (which is nothing
other than the flrst eiitelcchy) corresponds to the soul or
substantial foi'm, but for this very reason pertains only to
general causes, which cannot suffice fur the explanation of
phenomena. And so wc agree with those who deny that forms
must be employed in deducing the ]>articiil<'ir and special
causes of sensible things” (N. K. (>72; O, M. VL 236). The
primitive force is constant in each body throughout all tinie;
the sum of derived forces throughout the universe ,is also
constant, being what Leibniz calls Vis Viva, and what is still
sometimes so called, which is double wluit is now known as
kinetic energy (G. lir. 457). “Derivative force is what some
call impetus, that i.s a conatus or tendency to some determinate
motion, by which the primitive force., or principle of action, is
modified. This (the derivative force) I have shown to be not
conserved the same in the same body, but yet being distributed
among nuiny bodies, to preserve a constant sum, and to differ
from motion, whose quantity is not conserved” (N. E. 702;
G. IV. 396).

In this argument, it must be evident that, so fiw from
basing Metaphysics upon Dynamics, Leibniz has inleiTed, on
purely metaphysical grounds, a primitive force of which no
dynamical use is mado^ What was u.seful in Dynamics was,
not the primitive force, which wns constant in each separate
piece of matter, but the derivative forte, which was transferred
from body to body. The primitive fv»rce was thus invoked for
purely metaphysical reasons, and could not validly bo used to
show that Dynaniic.s supported the doctrine of the inde¬
pendence of substances. Here again, 1 think, as in the case
of continuity, there is an antinomy which Leibniz refused to
face. The total effect on any particle is, dynamically, made
up of effects caused by all other particles; thus the separate
causation of separate elements seems conceded. But none of
those separate effects ever happen: they are all mathematical

• ,jDf. G. II. 251; “ Every modification presupposes something durable.
Therefore when you say,' Let ua suppose that nothing is to be found in bodies
except derivative forces,’I reply that this is not a possible hypothesis.” Of. also
G. Ti. m


91


THE PHILOSOPHY OF DYNAMICS.

fictions. What really happen^ is the sura of effects, i,e. the
effect of the,summer of the whole. Thus oven when a thing
is defined as one causal scries, wo can hardly escape the
admission, which however is directly self-contradictory, that
things do, after all, interact.

And this is, in fact, admitted practically in Leibniz’s
writings. Although Dynamics requires us to assign causal
action to each piece of matter, it requires us, just as much,
to take account of all material particles in discussing what
will happen to any one. That is, wo reejuire, on a purely
dynamical basis, to admit transeunt action, the action of one
thing on another. This was not avoi<led by Leibniz: on the
contrary, the purely material world remained, for him, one in
which every motion affects every other, though direct inter¬
action occurs only in impact. “ All is a plenum (and thus
all matter is connected together), and in the plenum every
motion has an effect upon distant bodies in proportion to their
distance, so that each body not only is affected b}' those which
are in contact with it, and in some way feels the effect of
everything that happens to them, but also is mediately affected
by bodies touching those with which it is in immediate
contact. Wherefore it follows that this intercommunication
of things extends to any distance, however great. And conse¬
quently every body feels the effect of all that takes place in
the universe” (Monadology, § 01; L. 251; D. 227; (1. vi. 017).
Re then proceeds to deduce the jiroposition that all substances
mirror the universe from this standpoint, which is diametrically
opposite to that of the independence of all material particles*.
He explained this apparent interaction by a subjective theory,
in which motions became merely representations in all monads,
because all monads mirror the universe. The true account
of the matter became, that representations of causes are
causes of representations of effects (G. IV. 533), a kind of
Berkeleian theory, which renders it absurd to deduce the ac¬
tivity of substance from anything whatever in Dynamics.

Moreover, if—as one must suppose—what seems to be
motion is a real change in some assemblage of monads, and is
therefore part of an independent causal series, its perception,

1 Cf. G. II. 112.


B. L.


7


98 THE PHILOSOPHY OF DYNAMICS.

the subjective motion, is also part of such a series, and there
arc as many independent causal series in each mqnad as there
are monads in the world which it mirrors. This difficulty,
however, may be left till we come to the pre-established
harmony.

60 . There remains one last .and principal difficulty, a
difficulty which, .so far as I know, no oxi.stiug theory of Dy¬
namics cat! avoid. When a particle is subject to several forces,
they are compounded by the parallelogram law, and the re¬
sultant is regarde<l as their sum. It is hold that ca<5k inde¬
pendently produces its elfect, and that the resultant effect
is the sum of the partial cffect.s. 'Phus “every conation is
compatible with every other, .since every motion can bo com¬
pounded with every other to give a third motion, which can
always bo determined geometrically. And thus it did not
appear how a conation could be naturally destroyed or with¬
drawn from a body ” {Archiv filr Gesch. d. Phil. i. 578). If
we arc to admit particular causes, each of which, independently
of all ot.hers, produces its effect, we must i*egai*d the resultant
motion as compounded of its components. If we do not admit
8\ich particular causes, every part of matter, and therefore all
matter, is incapable of causal .action, and Dynamics (unless the
descriptive school is in the right) becomes impossible. But it
h{is not been generally perceived that a sum of motions, or
forces, or vectors geiicially, is a sum in a quite peculiar sense—
its constituents are not parts of it. This Is a peculiarity of all
addition of vectors, or even of quantities having sign. Thus no
one of the constituent cixuses over really produces its effect:
the only effect is one compounded, in this special sense, of the
effecis which %uoidd have resulted if the causes h.ad jicted inde¬
pendently. This is a fundamental difficulty concerning the
nsiture of addition, and explaining, I think, how Leibniz came to
be so confused as to the causation of particulars by particulars.
So great is this confusion, that it is not unfairly expressed
by Wundt in the wonls: “Every substance determines itself,
but this self-determination is determined by another sub¬
stance ** {Die physikalischen Axiome, p. 57).

Thus the attempt to establish, on the basis of Dynamics,
a plurality of independent CJiusal series, must be pronounced


TH^ 1‘HILOSOPHY Ob’ DYNAMIC'S.


99


a complete failure. ^ Not only was it faulty in detail, but it
was also mistaken^in principle, since the result aimed at—
the reduction of the whole series of dyuarnical phenomena
to .subjective series of perceptions—should have made the
whole dynamical world a single series in each percipient
monad. The confusion was due—as we sliall find to be the
case with most of Leibniz’.s confusions—to a failure to grasp the
consequences, drawn boldly (except as to the thing in itself)
by Kant, of the subjectivity of spaijc. fii the next two
chaptei^, wo shall have to consider a better argument, an
argument from the ditticulties of the continuum to the un¬
reality of space, and the conscipiciit non-spatial nature of the
monads.


7—2


CHAPTEU Vlll.

THE Pinr.OS()PIlY OF MATI’Ell (OONTINUED).

(6) As explaining continuity and extension.

61. We now reach at last the central point of Leibniz’s
philosophy, the doctrine of extension and continuity. The most
distinctive feature of Leibniz’s thought is its pre-occupation
with the “labyrinth of the continuum.” To find a thread
through this labyrinth was one main purpose of the doctrine of
monads—a purpo.se which, in Leibniz’s own opinion, that
doctrine completely fulfilled. And the problem of continuity
might very well be taken, as Mr Latta takes it (L, 21), as the
starting-point for an exposition of Leibniz: “ How can that
which is continuous consist of indivisible elements”? To
answer this tjuestion was, I think, one of the two chief aims of
Leibniz’s doctrine of substance and of ail that is best in his
philosophy. That 1 did not begin with this question, was due
to motives of logical priority; for the abstract doctrines which
we have hitherto considered, though perhaps invented largely
with a view to this problem, are logically prior to it: they form
an apparatus which must be mastered before Leibniz’s treat¬
ment of the present question can be understood.

The present chapter may bo regarded as a commentary on
the first two paragraphs of the Monadology. “ The Monad, of
which we shall here speak,” Leibniz says, “is nothing but a
simplii substance, which enters into compounds. By ‘ simple ’
is meant ‘ without parts.’ And there must be simple substances,
since there ore compounds; for a compound is nothing but a
collection or aggregate of simple things ” (L. 217; D. 218;


101


THE ANALYSIS OP EXTENSION.
e

G. VI. 607). Now in this .statement, I should like to point out
the following presuppositions: (1) that the meaning of substance
• is known, (2) that we have grounds for assuming the existence
of something substantial but complex, (3) that everything
substantial and complex must ultimately be composed of parts
which are not complex, i.e. have no parts, but are themselves
simple substances. Of the.so presuppositions, the meaning of
substance has been already discussed. The as.sumption that
matter exists has also been shown to be c.saential. It remains
to enquire why matter is an aggregate of substances, and why
it must consist of simple substanc(is.

62. Leibniz starts, in this discussion, from the fact that
matter is extended, and that extension is nothing but re¬
petition (cf. G. IT. 201). In this assertion, extension must be
carefully distinguished from space. TOxtension, like duration,
is a property of an extend(Ml tiling, a property wliirdi it carries
with it from place to placii, ‘'A body can change space, but
cannot leave its extension ” (D. 203; G. vii. 308); everything
has its own extension and duration, but not its own space and
time (IJ. 265; G. vir. 390). What we arc now concerned with,
then, is extension, not apace. As regards extension, Leibniz
took up a more or less common-son.se athtuile; as regards space,
he had a complicated and I’ather paradoxical theory, which can
only be fully dealt with after the doctrine of exten.sion htus been
developed. The great error-, in Jjoibniz, was the idea that exten¬
sion and dui-ation are prior to space and time. His logical
order, as opposed to the order of discovery, is as follows; First
comes the notion of substance, secondly the existence of many
substances, thirdly extension, resulting from their repetition,
and fourthly space, depending on extension, but adding the
further notion of order, and taking away the dependence upon
actual substances. The order of proof or of discovery, however,
is difierent from this. The existence of many substances is
inferred from the fact of extension, by the contention that ex¬
tension means repetition. That extension logically presupposes
space, being in fact the property of occupying so much space,
seems sufficiently evident. Leibniz, however, overlooked this
fact. He began with extension, as was indeed natural to any
one who regarded substance as logically prior to space. It is


102 TJIE ANALYSIS OF EXTENSION.

e

instructive to contrast the order of Kant’s Critique, which
begins with space and time, and only then advances to the
categories, among which are substance and attribute. That this
was not Leibniz’s order, is the main objection to his philosophy
of the continuum. He began, instead, with a common-sense
theory of extension and duration, which ho vainly endeavoured
to jxitch up by a paradoxical theory of space and time.

63. Ill my last chapter (p. 78), I stated that one of
Leibniz’s arguments against the view that the essence of
matter is extension was derived from the nature of' exten¬
sion itself. This argument we must now examine. Extension,
he says, in a dialogue directed against Malebranchc, is not a
concrete, but the abstract of what is extended. This, he con¬
tinues, is the essential difference between his theory of sub¬
stance and the Cartesian theory advocated by Malebranche
(G. vr. 582—4). “ Besides extimsion,” he says in another place,
“ there must be a subject which is extended, i.e. a substance to
which it belong.s to be repeated or continued. For extension
signifies only a repetition or continual multiplication of that
which is extended, a plurality, continuity and coexistence of
parts; and hence extension is not sufficient to explain the
nature of the extended or repeated substance itself, the notion
of which is anterior to that of its repetition” (D. 44; G. IV.
467). And not only must there be a plurality of substances,
but also—T suppose in order that the plurality may constitute
a repetition—there must be a repeated or extended quality.
Thus in milk there is a diffusion of whiteness, in the diamond
a diffusion of hardness (G. VJ. 584). But the diffusion of
such qualities is only apparent, and is not to be found in tho
smallest parts. Thus the only quality which is properly ex¬
tended is resistance, which is the essence of riiateria prinia
(N. E. p. 700; G. iv. 304). Thus the essence of materia prima
is not extension, but is extended, and indeed is the only quality
which can, strictly, be called extended: for it is the only quality
which is common to all created substances, and thus repeated
everywhere. Extension or primary matter, Leibniz says, is
nothing but a certain repetition of things in so far as they are
similar or indiscernible. But this supposes things which are
repeated, and have, in addition to common qualities, others


103


THE ANALYSIS OF EXTENSION.

which are peculiar (D. 176; F. de C. 28—30). This theory
explains two^mpo^nt points. First, it shows why all monads
have materia prima ; for it is in virtue of this common quality
that a collection of monads is extended. Secondly, it con¬
nects the Identity of Indiscornibles with the abstract and
phenomenal nature of extension. For extension is a repetition
of things in so far as they are mdisccrnible; and thus, since no
two things arc really indiscernible, extension involves abstrac¬
tion from those qualities in which they differ. Thus a collection
of monads is only extended when wc leave out of account
everything except the mateHa prima of each monad and the
general property of activity, and consider merely the repetition
of these qualities.

64. But matena prima, as wc saw in the last chapter, and
as appears further from the fact that two pieces of materia
jyrima are indiscernible, is a mere abstraction; the substances
whose repetition results in extension must have other properties
besides this pure psissivity, namely the activity essential to
substance, and the differences recpiired to make them many.
Now wherever there is repetition, there must be many indivis¬
ible substances. “ Where there are only beings by aggregation,”
Leibniz says, “ there are not even real btjings. For every being
by aggregation presupposes beings endowed with a true unity,
since it only derives its reality from that of those of which
it is composed, so that it will have none at all if every com¬
ponent is again a being by aggregation.” If we admit aggre¬
gates, “we must either come to mathematical points,...or to
the atoms of Epicurus,...or wc must avow that there is no
reality in bodies, or, finally, wc must recognize in them some
substances which have a true unity ” (G. ii. 96). The special
objections to mathematical points I shall consider in connection
with the continuum. The objections to atoms—and these
apply also against points—are, that they are indiscernible, and
that, if they are purely material, they cannot have activity.
The objection to not ailmitting the reality of bodies seems to
be, as I have already pointed out, nothing bettor than common
sense; but this led Leibniz to prefer, if he could logically do so,
the theory of “ true unities ” to the mere unreality of bodies.
At the same time, it is remarkable that, in his early statements


104 THE ANALYSIS OP EXTENSION.

t'

of the doctrine of monads, he hesitates to allow real unities to
all bodies, and inclines to think that thci^may i)e inanimate
bodies without any unities, and therefore without reality (G. Ii.
77 and 127)\ His argument may, then, be stated thus:
Assuming that what appears to us as matter is something real,
it is evident that it must be a plurality. Now a plurality is
only real if its constituents are real, and nothing is ultimately
real except substances and their states. But the plurality, in
this case, since its constituents exist simultaneously, is not a
mere plui’ality of states; therefore it is a plurality of substances,
and substances are necessarily indivisible. Hence what appears
to us as matter must be a collection of indivisible substances.
What is not truly one being, is not truly a being ; if it were of
the essence of a body to have no unity, it would be of its
essence to bo a mere phenomenon (G. ii. J)7). These real
unities are what Leibniz calls entelechies or forms. These terms,
which ho boiTowed from Aristotle, denote, when accurately
used, not the whole monad, but its activity, or that in it which
is analogous to a soul, as opposed to its matena prima, which
is passive, and is matter also in the Aristotelian sense, opposed
to form (of. G. ll. 252).

^ What is the nature of these “ true unities ” involved in the
reality of what appears as matter? I’his nature in general I
shall discuss in Chapter XI.; for the present, I am concerned
with it only in so far as it is required to explain extension. We
.shall have in the next chapter to investigate the abstract
doctrine as to the continuous and the discrete, as to space and
extension, which underlies this present argument; but it will
be well to begin with the more concrete form of Leibniz’s
difficult doctrine of the continuum.

66. Leibniz distinguishes three kinds of points. “Atoms

of matter,” ho says, “ are contrary to reason.onl}' atoms of

substance, i.e. unities which are real and absolutely destitute of
parts, are sources of actions and the absolute first principles of
the composition of things, and, as it were, the last elements
of the analysis of substances. They might bo called meta¬
physical points’, they possess a certain vitality and a kind of
perception, and mathematical points are their points of view to
* Contrast 8tein, op. eit. p. 167 uoto.


THK ANALYSrS OF EXTENSION. 105

express the universe. But when corporeal substances are com¬
pressed, all their orgjkns together form only a physical point to
our sight. Thus physical points are only indivisible in appearance;
mathematical points arc exact, but they are merely mo<ialities;
only metaphysical points or those of substance (constituted by
forms or souls) are exact and real, and without them there would
be nothing real, for without true unities there would not be
multiplicity” (D. 76; L. 310—1 ; G. iv. 482). The expression
“metaphysical points” is not usual, and is only employed,
apparently, to bring out the connection with infinite division.
We may put the matter thus: Space consists of an assemblage
of relations of distance; the terms of such relations, taken
simply as terms, are mathematical points. They arc thus mere
modalities, being a mere aspect or quality of the actual terras,
which are metaphysical points or mon.uls. 'Phe physical point,
on the contrary, is an infinitesimal extension, of the kind used
in the Infinitesimal Calculus. This is not truly indivisible,
since it is, after all, a small extension, and extension is es.senti-
ally repetition. The argument, then, is briefly this: Matter as
such is exten<led; extension is essentially plurality; therefore
the elements of what is extended cannot themselves be ex¬
tended. A simple substance cannot be extended, since all
extension is composite (G. Iii. 3G3). Atoms of matter arc
contrary to reason, because they would have to be indivisibles
whose essence is divisibility. Hence the constituents of matter
are not material, if what is material must be extended. But
the constituents cannot be mathematical points, since these
are purely abstract, are not existents, and tlo not compose
extension. The constituents of what appears as matter, there¬
fore, are unextended, and are not mathematical points. They
must bo substances, endowed with activity, and differing inlet'
se because of the Identity of Indiscernibles. Hence there
remains nothing, among the objects of experience, which these
substances can be, except something analogous to souls. Souls
are concrete existents, or substances, differing itiier se, and
unextended. These, therefore, must be the constituents of what
seem to be bodies. Bodies as such, i.e. as extended, are
phenomena; but they are phenomena bene fundata, because
they are the appearances of collections of real substances. The


IOC THE ANALYSIS OF EXTENSION.

nature of these is force, and they are indivisible like our minds
(D. 72; L. 301; G. iv. 479).

The argument is excellently stated in a letter to De Voider
(G. Ji. 2G7). De Voider says: Extension being necessary to a
mathematical body, it is rightly concluded that, in such a body,
no indivisible unities can be assigned. But this does not prove
the mathematical body to be destitute of reality. To this
argument Leibniz makes a very full reply. What can be
divided into several, he says, is an aggregate of several; an
aggi'egate is one only for the mind, and has no reality bat what
is conferred by its constituents. Hence there are in things
indivisible unities, because otherwise there will be in things no
true unities, nor any niality not derived, which is absurd. For
where there is no true unity, there is no true multitude. And
where there is no reality not derived, thei-e is no reality at all,
for this must at length be derived from some .subject. Again,
he says, I conclude that in the mass of bodies indivisible
unities, or prime constituents, can be fo»ind. Bodies are always
divisible and always divided, but not so the elements which
constitute them. The mathematical body is not real, because
it has no such constituents; it is something mental, and desig¬
nates a mere plurality of parts. As number is not substance
without things numbered, so the mathematical body, or exten¬
sion, is not substance, without activity and pa.ssivity. But in
real corporeal things, the parts are not indefinite (as in space,
which is a n>eiital thing), but actually ai^signed in a certain
manner, as nature institutes actual division.^ and subdivisions
according to the varieties of motion; and these divisions
proceed to infinity, but none the less result in certain primary
constituents or real unities, only infinite in number. But to
speak strictly, matter is not composed of constitutive unities, but
results from them, for matter or extended mass is only a well-
founded phenomenon, and all reality consists of unities. There¬
fore phenomena can always be divided into lesser phenomena,
and there are no least phenomena. Substantial unities are not
parts, but foundations, of phenomena.

66.' Many things in this argument presuppose Leibniz’s
general position as to continuity, a position which, with his
theory of space, must be left to the next Chapter. To represent


THE ANALYSIS OF EXTENSION.


107


fairly, however, the drift of Leibniz’s argiiniont from extension
to monads, it jnust ^ remembered that he believed himself, on
a purely dynamical bfisis, to have shown matter to be the
appearance of something substantial. For force, which he
regarded as equivalent to activity, is required by the laws of
motion, and is reejuired in each piece of matter. That there
must be entclechios dispersed everywhere throughout matter,
follows from the fact that principles of motion are thus dis¬
persed (G. VII. 330). And from this point of view, we may give
a slightly better meaning, than before a})pearcd, to the doctrine
of force. 1^’orce is more real than motion, or even matter.
Motion is not a cause, but an effect of force, and is no more a
real being than time. But force is a real being, though matter
is only a well-founded phenomtiuon (G. li. 115; ill. 457).* Thus
though matter and motion arc onl' appearances, they are
!i}>pcarances of something having activity, ami therefore of
something substantial. If we assume, as Leibniz always d«)es,
that our j)crc<q)tions of matter correspond to a real world out¬
side us, then that world, on dynamical giounds, must contain
forces, and therefore substances. The only difficulty is, to recon¬
cile this view with the arbitrary and infinite divisibility of
matter. This difficulty brings us to the doctrine of infinity and
continuity.


CHAPTER IX.

THE LABYRINTH OF THE CONTINUUM.

67. In the last chapter, wc saw that matter is a phe¬
nomenon, resulting from aggregates of real unitu'S or monads.
Extension is repetition, and the extended is therefore plural.
But if what appears as matter is a plurality, it must be an
infinite plurality. For whatever is extended, can be divided
ad infinitum. Mass, says Leibniz, in discrete, i.e. an actual
multitude, but composed of an infinity of units (G. il. 379).
Here we have Leibniz’s belief in the actual infinite. An actual
infinite has been generally regarded as inadmissible, and Leib¬
niz, in admitting it, is fiice to face with the problem of the
continuum. At this point, therefore, it is necessary to examine
his views about infinity, continuity, infinite number, and infinite
division. These must be dealt with before we proceed any
fiirther with the description of the true unities or monads, since
Leibniz professes to deduce the existence and nature of monads
largely from the need of explaining the continuum. “ In this
consideiation ” {i.e. of monads), he says, “ there occurs no exten¬
sion or composition of the continuum, and all difficulties about
points vanish. And it is this that I meant to say somewhere
in my Theodiede, namely that the difficulties of the continuum
should admonish us that things are to bo conceived in quite a
different manner” (G. i[. 451; cf. G. vi. 29). Again he says
(G. II. 262): “The momid alone is a substance, body is sub¬
stances, not a substance; nor cjin the difficulties of the compo¬
sition of the continuum, and othern allied to these, be otherwise
evaded ”; and “ nothing but Geometry can furnish a thread for
the labyrinth of the composition of the continuum, of maxima


THE LABYRINTH OF THE CONTINUUM.


109


and minima, and of the unassignable and the infinite, and no
one will arri>{/e at a^ruly solid metaphysic who has not passed
through that labyrinth*.” Now what arc the difficulties of
the continuum, and how are they evaded ? I cannot hope to
succeed in making the subject plain, both because it is nearly
the most difficult subject in philosophy, and because Leibniz’s
treatment offers special difficulties to the commentator.

58. E very one who htus over heard of Leibniz knows that
he believed in the actual infinite. Few (piotatiot)s from him
are more familiar than the following (I). 65; G. I. 410); “ I am
so much in favour of the actual infinite, that, instead of tuhnit-
ting that nature abhors it, as is commonly said, I liold that
nsiturc affects it everywhere, in order the better to mark the
perfections of its author. So I believe that there is no part of
matter which is not, I do not say divisible, but actually divided;
and consequently the least particle must bo nigarded as a world
full of an infinity of different creatures,” Such passages, I say,
are well known, and arc embodied in the common remark that
Leibniz believed in the actual infinite, i.e. in what a Hegelian
would call the false infinite. But thi.s is by no means the
whole truth on the matter. To begin with, Leibniz denied
infinite niuvbei\ and supported his denial by very solid argu¬
ments®. In the second place, he was familiar with the distinc¬
tion, afterwards used by Hegel, between the true and false
infinite. ” 'rhe true infinite,” he sjiys, “exists, strictly speaking,
only in the Absolute, which is anterior to all composition, and
is not formed by the addition of parts * ” ; an infinite aggregate
is not truly a whole, and therefore not truly infinite (G. il.

* Cohen, Infinilesinialniethode, p. 64; G. M. vii. 320.

Cf. G. VI. 629; i. 338; ii. 304- 5; v. 144; N. K. p. 161.

® N. R. p. 162; G. v. 144. Cf. the follovvinK passage: “1 believe with Mr
Locke that, strictly speaking, it may be said that there is no space, no time and
no number which is infinite, but that it is only true that however groat may
bo a space, a time, or a iinmber, there is always another greater than it, ad
infinitum', and that thus the true inOnite is not found in a whole made up of
parts. It is none the less, however, found elsewhere; namely, in the ahmlute,
which is without parts, and which has influence upon compound things because
they result from limitation of the absolute. Hence the positive infinite being
nothing else than the absolute, it may be said that there is in this sense a posi<
tive idea of the infinite, and that it is anterior to that of the finite ” (D. 97;
N. B. 16—17; G. v. 17 ; Erdmann’s edition, p. 138. G.’s text appears to be
defective).


110


THE LABYRINTH OP THE (CONTINUUM.


3 {) 4 ,_r,. N. E. pp. 161—3; G. v. 143—5). And these state¬
ments are not madtj in forgetfulness ofl^is advocacy of the
actual infinite. On the contrary, he says in one passjige:
“ Arguments against actual infinity assume, that if this be
admitted, there will bo an infinite number, and that all infini¬
ties will be equal. But it is to be observed that an infinite
aggregate is neither one wliole, or possessed of magnitude,
nor is it consistent with number” (G. ii. 304). The actual
infinite is thus defended on the express ground that it does not
lead to infinite number. We must agree, therefore, that
Leibni^i’s views as to infinity are by no means so simple or so
naive as is often supposed. To expound the theory from which
the above remarks follow, is a difficult attempt; but this
attempt I must now undertake.

1 have already had occasion to mention Hegel, and I think
an analogy in other respects may serve to throw light on
Leibnizs arguments. In the first place, he often seems to
imply, as we have already seen in connection with extension,
the essentially Hegelian view that abstraction is falsification.
In the second place, his argument on the present question, and
his whole deduction of Moiiadism from the difficulties of the
continuum, seems to bear a close analogy to a dialectical argu¬
ment. That is, to put the matter crudely, a result is accepted
as true because it can be inferred from premisses admittedly
false, and inconsistent with each otherS Those who admire
these two elements in Hegers philosophy wdll think Leibniz’s
argument the better for containing them. But in any case, a
comprehension of the argument is, if I am right in my interpre¬
tation, greatly faciiitJited by this analogy to a method which
has gi’own familiar.

^ The argument is not strictly dialectical, but the following statement shows
its weakness. The general premiss is: Since mutter has parts, there are many
reals. Now the parts of matter are extended, and owing to infinite divisibility,
the parts of tlie extended are always extended. But since extension means re¬
petition, what is repeated is ultimately not extended. Hence the parts of
matter arc ultimately not extended. Therefore it is self-contradictory to suppose
that matter has parts. Hence the many reals are not parts of matter. (The
argumenf is stated almost exactly in this form in G. vii. 552.)

It is evident that this argument, in obtaining many reals, assumes that these
are parts of matter—a premiss which it is compelled to deny in order to show
that the reals are not material.


Ttft; LABYRINTH OF THE CONTINUUM.


Ill


69. In spite of the law of continuity, Leibniz’s philosophy
may be described a complete denial of the continuous.
Repetition is discrete, he says, where aggregate parts are dis¬
cerned, as in number: it is continnous where the parts arc
indeterminate, and can be assumc;d in an infinite number of
ways (N. E. p, 700; G, iv. 394). That anything actual is con¬
tinuous in this sense, Leibniz denies; for though what is actual
may have an infinite number of parts, thestj parts are not inde¬
terminate or arbitrary, but perfectly definite (G, li. 379): Gnly
space aad time arc continuous in Leibniz’s sense, and these! are
purely ideal. Jn actuals, he says, the simple is prior to the
aggregate; in ideals, the whole is prior to the part (G. it, 379).
Again he says that the continuum is ideal, because it involves
indeterminate parts, whereas in the actual everything is deter¬
minate. The labyrinth of the continuum, he continues—and
this is one of his favourite remarks—comes from looking for
actual parts in the order of pos.sibles, and indeterminate parts
in the aggregate of actuals (G, ii. 282. Cf. lb. 379; iv. 491).
'rhis means that points and instants are not actual parts of
space aud time, which arc ideal*; and that nothing extended
(since the extended is indeterminate) can be a true component
of an aggregate of substances, which is actual. As regards space
and time, and number also, the finite whole is logically prior to
the parts into which it may be divided; as regards substance,
on the contrary, the aggregate is logically subsecpiont to the
individual substances which compose it®

What Leibniz means, .seems to be this. There are two sra ts
of indivisibles, namely sim})le ideas, and single substances. In
the former sense, the number one is indivisible ; it is a simple
idea, logically prior to the fractions whoso sum is one. These
fractions presuppose it, and its simplicity is not disproved by
the fact that there are an infinite number of fractions of which
it may be composed. It is truer, in firct, to regard fractions as
formed by dividing unity, than to regard unity as formed by
compounding fractions. Similarly one half, abstractly tjikcn, is a
mere ratio, not the sum of two quarters; the latter is only true

1 Contrast Cohen, op. cit. p. 63, G. M. v. 385: “A point is an infinitely
small or evanescent line.” This seems only to be meant mathematically.

® Cf. O. M. IV. 811 ff.


112


THE LABYRINTH OF THE CONTINUTS'M.


(


of numbered things (G. iv. 491). Thus many who have philo¬
sophized about the point and unity ha”e become confused,
through not distinguishing resolution into notions and division
into parts (G. iii. 583). Similarly, Leibniz thinks, the abstract
line is not compounded (G. iv. 491), for what is true about the
line is only the relation of distance, which, (juA relation, is
indivisible. Composition exists only in concretes, i.e. in the
masses of which these abstract lines mark the relations. In
substantial actual things, the whole is a result or aasemblage of
simple substances (/6.). It is the confusion of the ideal and
the actual, Leibniz says again, which has embroiled everything,
and produced the labyrinth of the continuum.

60. At this point, it seems essential to consider Leibniz’s
theory of space. This theory is more or less involved in every¬
thing that can be said about his philosophy; I have already
said something about it, and much more will follow. But hero
a few explicit remarks will illustrate the doctrine of the con¬
tinuum.

The ideals in which, according to Leibniz, the wdiole is
prior to the part, are numbers, space, and time. A.s regards
numbers, it is evident that unity, and even the other integers,
are prior to fractions. As regards space and time, a similar
result is attained by the relational theory. In all these cases,
Leibniz would have done better to say boldly, that, though
numbers and distances may be greater or smaller, they have no
parts. With regard to fractions, he does say this (G. iv. 491),
and this is what ho means to say in all such cases. Ideals, if
they are numbers, are concepts applicable to possible aggre¬
gates, but are not themselves aggregates; if they are distances,
they are possible relations, and must be distinguished from an
extension which extends from one end of the distance to the
other.

61. There are two great types of spatial theory, the one
represented by Newton, the other by Leibniz. These two are
brought face to face in the controversy with Clarke. Both
result from emphasizing one or other of the following pair
of ideas. If we take two points A and B, they have (1) a
distance, which is simply a relation between the two, (2) an
actual length, consisting of so much space, and stretching from


THE Lx\BYHlNTH OF THE CONTINUUM. IIB

A to B. If wc insist on tho former as the essence of space, we
get a relational the^iry; the terms A and 13, whose distance is
spatial, must themselves be non-spatial, since they are not
relations. If we insist on tho lattrir, the actufil intervening
length, we find it divisible into an infinite number of points
each like the end points A and B. This alternative gives the
Newtonian theory of absolute spacti, consisting, not in an
iisseinblage of possible relations, but in an inlinite collection of
actual points. The objection to Newton’s theory is, that it is
self-cojfctradictory; the obji^ctioii to Leibniz’s, that it is plainly
inconsistent with the facts, and, in the end, just as self-contra¬
dictory as Newton’s. A theory free from both these defects is
much to be desired, as it will be something wliich philosophy
has not hitherto known. I shall return to Leibniz’s arguments
in my next chapter, b'or the present, I only wish to point out
the consequences of his relational theory—consequences also
drawn by Lotze and others who have adv(x;ated this theory.

S[)acc is an assemblage of possible relati(»ns of distance.
These become actual only when the points A, B are occu¬
pied by actual substances. Distances may bo greater or less,
but cannot be divided into parts, since they are relations.
(This consetpience is not drawn by Leibniz, indeed it is ex¬
pressly denuid; but he uses paH inore generally than I am
using it. lie says, what sullices for me, that in space and time
there are no divisit)ns but such as are made by the mind [(3. ii.
278—f)]). And the terms which are distant, since spjice is
relational, cannot themselves bo spatial or extended. The
distance, moreover, should be analyzeil into predicates of the
distant terms A and B; this Leibniz does by representing
distance as pai-t of the manner in which A and B mirror one
another. And thus a mathematical point, the place of A, is
merely that quality of A in virtue of which, at any moment, it
miiTors other things as it d*X).s. This is why mathematical
points are the points of view of the monads, and also why they
are more modalities, and not parts of space. This view of space
also explains why the whole is not composed of its parts. For
the parts of a distance are merely othc'.r smaller relations of
distance, and are in no way presupposed by the larger distance,
which is logically independent of them. The distinction is, in

8


K. lu


114


THE LAliYRlN I’H OF THE CONTINUUM.


fact, that between intensive and extensive quantities. Exten¬
sive quantities presuppose all the constituents wljose sum they
are; intensive (j[uanl»ities, on the contrary, do not in any way
presuppose the existence of smaller quantities of the same
kind. Leibniz’s position is, then, that spatial and temporal
quantities arc relations, and therefore intensive; while exten¬
sion is an extensive (piantity, and presupposes actual parts in
that which is extended*.

The distinction between the composition of what is actual,
and the resolution of what is ideal, is thus of great importance.
It explains Avhat Leibniz means by saying that an instant is
not a part of time (G. Itr. 591), nor a mathematical point a part
of the .spatial continuum (D. (14, 76; L. 311 ; G. i. 416; il.
279; IV. 482). The spatial continuum is the ajssorablagc of all
possible distances. Mathematical points are merely positions,
i.e. possible terms for the relations of distance. Thus they are
not of the same order as the possible distances which make up
the spatial continuum; they are not parts of this continuum.
Indeed a distance, being a relation, has properly no parts, and
thus w'o have no reason to re.solve it into indivisible parts.
What is extended in space, on the contrary, i.s concrete ; we
have not merely distances, but also terms between which the
distances hold. An abstract space is not plural, but a body
which occupies that space must be plural. For instead of bare
possibility, we now have something actual in the positions
which, otherwise, are “ mere modalities.”

62. We may put the whole argument briefly thus.
(1) Nothing is absolutely real but indivisible substances and
their various states (G. ii. 119). This is the outcome of the
abstract logical doctrine with which I began my account of

^ TUns in reply to Clarke, Leibniz says: “As for tlio objection that space
and time are quantities, or rather things endowed with quantity, and that
situation and order arc not so, I answer, that order also has its quantity; there
is ill it that which goes before, and that which follows; there is distance or
interval. Relative things have their quantity, as well as absolute ones. For
instance, ratios or proportions in mathematics have their quantity, and are
measured by logarithms; and yet they are relations. And therefore, though
time and space consist in relations, yet they have their quantity” (D. 270; G.
VII. 404). Leibniz’s views on intensive quantity wore, however, by no means
clear.


THE LABYlllNTH OF THE CONTINUUM.


115


Lcihniz; it is presupposed in the urgiiment from extension to
monads, and jmust not be regarded as a result of that argu¬
ment. (2) What appears to us as matter is real, though qud
matter it is phenomenal. The reality of what appears as
matter is, as we saw, a mere prejudice. (3) Matter, quA phe¬
nomenon, is an aggregate, in fact an aggregate of an infinite
number of parts. (4) An aggregate can have no reality b»it
what it derives from its constituents, since only substances are
real, and substances are indivisible. (5) Hence, if the reality
of what appears to be matter is to bo saved, this must consist
of an infinite plurality of indivisible substances.

63. But infinite number is self-contradictory, and we
cannot be content with the assertion that there is an infinite
number of monads. I’o evade this argument, Leibniz makes a
VG)-y bold use of his principle that, in concretes, the pai't is
prior to the whole, and that nothing is absolutely real but
indivisible substances and their various states. Being and
unity, he says, arc convertible terms (0. 11. 304). Aggregates,
not having unity, arc nothing but phenomena, for except the
component monads, the rest (the unity of the aggregate, I
suppose) is added by perception alone, by the very fact of their
being perceived at one time (G. ii. 517). This remark is of the
utmost importance. It is a legitimate outcome of Leibniz’s
general position, and is perhaps the best alternatives which that
position allowed him. At the same time, its implications, as
will soon be evident, completely destroy the possibility of a
plurality of substances.

Leibniz’s position is this: that the notion of a whole can
only be applied to what is substantially indivisible. Whatever
is real about an aggregate is only the reality of its constituents
taken one at a time; the unity of a collection is what Leibniz
calls semi-mental (G. ir. 304), and therefore the collection is
phenomenal although its constituents are all real. One is the
only number that is applicable to what is real, since any other
number implies parts, and aggregates, like reljitions, are not
“real beings.’’ This explains how infinite number can be
denied, while the actual infinite is admitted. “There is
no infinite number,” Leibniz says, “or line or other infinite
tiuantity, if they are taken as veritable wholes” (N. E. p. 161;

8—2


116


TilE LAllYUlNTH OF THE CONTINUUM.


G. V. 144). One whole must be one substance, and to what
is not one whole, number cannot properly be applied. The
world is only veibally a whole (G. ii. 305), and oven a finite
aggregate of monads is not a whole per se. The unity is
mental or semi-mental. In most pass.ages, Leibniz only applies
this doctrine against infinite aggregates, but it is evident that
it must apply ecpially against all aggregates. This Leibniz
seems to have known. Thus he says (N. E. p. 148; G. V. 132):

“ Perhaps a dozen <ir a score arc only relations, and are consti¬
tuted only by rcl.ation to the understanding. The units are
separate, and the understanding gathers them together, hoiV-
cver dispersed they may bo.” The same view is expressed at
the end of the same chapter (Book 11. Chap, xn.), where he
says: “ This unity of the idea of aggregates is very true, but at
bottom, it must be confessed, this unity of collections is only a
respect {rapport) or a relation, whose foundation is in what is
found in each single substance by itself. And so these beings
by aggregation have no other complete unity but that which is
mental; and consequently their entity also is in some way
mental or phenomenal, like that of the rainbow” (N. E. 149;
G. V. 133).

Now this position is a legitimate deduction from the theory
that all propositi(»ns ai-e to be reduced to the subject-predicate
form. The assertion of a plumlity of substances is not of this
form—it does not assign predicates to a substance. Accord¬
ingly, as in other instances of a similar kind, Leibniz takes
refuge, like many later philosophers, in the mind—one might
almost say, in the synthetic unity of apperception. The mind,
and the mind only, synthesizes the diversity of monads; each
separate monad is real apart from the perception of it, but a
collection, as such, acquires only a precarious aiul derived
reality from simultaneous perception. Thus the truth in the
judgment of plurality is reduced to a judgment as to the state
of every monad which perceives the plurality. It is only in
such perception that a plurality forms a whole, and thus per¬
ception is defined by Leibniz as the expression of a multitude
in a unity (G. iii. 69).

64. This notion, that propo.sitions derive their truth from
being believed, is one which I shall criticize in dealing with


THE LABYRINTH OF THE CONTINUUM.


117


God’s relation to the eternal truths. For the present, it is
enough to place a dilouima before Leibniz. If the plurality
lies only in the percipient, th(jrc cannot be many percipients,
and thus the whole doctrine of monads collap-ses. If the plu¬
rality lies not only in the percipient, then tliere is a proposition
not reducible to the subject-predicate form, the basis for the
use of substance has fiillen through, and the assertion of infinite
aggregates, with all its contradictions, becomes (piite inevitablt^
for Leibniz. The boasted solution of the difficulties of the con-
tinuunt is thus resolved into smoko, and we are left vviih all the
problems of matter unanswered'.

We have now seen the use which Lciibuiz made of his prin¬
ciple that in actuals the part is prior to the whole, W(5 have
seen how this enabled him to say that rii(*re is an infinite
multitude of things, while at the sjuno time denying infinite
number. The multitude of things, he says, passes every finite
number, or rather every number (G. vr. C29). We could only
demand that some number should be applu able, if this multi¬
tude v/ci e a whole; and that it is a whole, he demies, tiiough
the {isscrtion of a whole is involved even in calling ii. a multi¬
tude. It cannot be denied that this position is consistent with
his principles, and is even a direct result of them. Jfut the
consistency is of that kind which shows a mistake in the
princi])ios. The dilemma in which Leibniz is placed, is a direct
l esult of the combination of three premisses, which, as I jrsserted
in Chapter I. (p. 4), are hopelessly inconsistent. These three
premisses are (1) that all propositions have a subject and a
predicate, (2) that perception gives knowledge of a world not
myself or my predicates, (3) that the Ego is an ultimate logical
subject.

' Tho general principle that all aggregates are phenomenal must not be
confounded with the principle, which Leibnix. also hold, that iniiuito aggregates
have no number. This latter principle is perhaps one of the best ways of
escaping from the antinomy of infinite number.


118


CHAPTER X.

THE THEORY OF SPACE AND TIME AND ITS RELATION TO

MONADISM.

65. I STATED brofully, in the preceding chapter, the nature
of Leibniz’s theory of space and time; I wish to examine, in
this chapter, what were its grounds, how far those grounds are
the same as the grounds for monadism in general, and what
was the relation of Leibniz’s monads to space. Much of what I
shall say will be applicable also to Lotze’, and generally to all
theories which advocate a plurality of things. Let us begin
with the theory of space.

“ I have several demonstrations,” Leibniz says, “ to confute
the fancy of those who take space to be a substance, or at least
an absolute being” (1). 243; G. vii. 363). These demonstra¬
tions, as they occur in Leibniz, proceed on the basis of the
traditional logic, and have, on that basis, very great force. For
the traditional logic—the logic underlying all use of substance
or of the Absolute—assumes, as I have endeavoured to show,
that all propositions have a subject and a predicate. If, now,
space be admitted to exist per .96, while the doctrine of substance
is retained, there will be a relation between substances and the
spaces they occupy. But this relation will be mi generis \ it
will not be a relation of subject and predicate, since each term
of the relation exists, and may continue to exist though the
relation be changed. Neither the thing nor the part of space
is annihilated when the part is evacuated by the thing and
reoccupied by a different thing. The relation, then, between a

1 Althongh Lotze did not ultimately advocate plnmlity, but merged all
in hie M.


119


THE THEORY OF SPACE AND TIME.

place and the substance occupying it, is one for which the
traditional logic had no room. Accordingly, the independent
existence of places was denied by careful philosophers, and
admitted by Newton only because he was blind to its conse¬
quences. Clarke, to evade the consequences, made space and
time parts of God's essence, a position which Leibniz easily
showed to be absurd (D. 263; G. vii. 398). The contention
Leibniz was really combating was, that space exists per- se, and
not as a mere attribute of anything.

thus see why, for a philosophy of substance, it is
essential to disprove the reality of space. A mouist must
contend that space is an attribute; a inonadist, that space is
an assemblage of relations. Against the fonner view, Leibniz
is fairly strong; in favour of the latter, lie is inconclusive. But
let us proceed to his arguments.

“ If there wore no creatures,” Leibniz says, “ space and time
would be only in the ideas of God” (D. 252; G. vii. 376—7).
Against this view, Kant says; “ Wo can never imagine that
there Muould be no spacti, though we can quite well think that
there should be no objects in it” (cd. Hartenstein, 1867, V^ol. hi.
p. 59). Here we have a sharp and definite opposition: Kant
has drawn the consequence which Leibniz’s theory is designed
to avoid’. “If space be an absolute I’oality,” Leibniz say.s, “far
from being a property or an accident opposed to substance, it
will be more subsistent than substances” (D. 248; G. vii. .373).
What, then, were the arguments by which Leibniz disproved
the reality of space ?

66. The abstract logical argument, that space must, if
real, be cither .subject or predicate, but is evidently neither, is
not, so far as I know, set forth explicitly in Leibniz, though in
the controversy with Clarke he urges that space, since it has
parts, cannot be an attribute of God, and that empty space
cannot be an attribute of anything (D. 264, 248; G. vii. 399,
372). Against regarding space as an attribute, the real argu¬
ment is, that the essence of matter is not extension—an
argument we have already seen to be conclusive. Agtiinst
regarding space as a stibstance, or independent existent,
Leibniz’s favourite argument is derived from the Identity of
1 The Kantian subjectivity of space may be here loft out of account.


120 THE THEORY OF SPACE AND TIME.

Indiscernibles and the Law of Sufficient Reason; and this
argument applies equally against time. Space ‘is absolutely
uniform, and one point of it is just like another. Thus not
only are the points indiscernible, but various arrangements of
things would be indiscernible—for example, the actual arrange¬
ment and that w'hich would result from turning the whole
universe through any angle (D. 243—4; G. vii. 364). Again,
if time were real, the world might have been created sooner, and
no sufficient reason could appear for creating it at one time
rather than another (D. 249; G. vii. 373). And goncra'lly, the
universe as a whole cannot have different absolute positions in
space or time, since these positions would be indiscernible, and
therefore one and the same (D. 247; G. vii. 372). Besides
these arguments, there are the contradictions of the continuum,
which we examined in the last chapter. Space and time, if
they are real, cannot be composed otherwise than of mathe--
matical points but of these they can never be composed, since
these are mere extremities; two of them are not bigger than
one, any more than two perfect daiknesses are darker than one
(G. II. 347). And fis regards time, nothing of it exists but
instants, and they are not properly parts of it, and how can a
thing exist, whereof no part does ever exist (D. 26S; G. vii. 402)?

67. But if spac(‘ and time are not real, what are they ?
The answer is suggested by the argument from the Identity of
Indiscernibles. From that argument it follows that there is no
absolute position, but only mutual relations of thing.s, from
which position is abstracted. Space is an order according to
which situations arc disposed, and abstract space is that order
of situations, when they are conceived as being possible
(D. 281; G. VII. 415). Time, again, is a being of reason
exactly as much as space, but co- pre- and post-existence are
something real (G. ii. 183). But if space is an order of
situation.s, what are the .situations themselves ? How arc tlwy
to be explained relationally ?

On this question, Leibniz is very explicit (D. 266—7;
G. VII. 400—402). When the relation of situation of a body A
to other bodies C, D, E etc., changes, while the mutual relations
of situation of C, D, E etc., do not change, we infer that the
came of change is in A, and not in C, D, E etc. If now


121


THE THEORY OP SPACE AND TIME.

s-''

another body B has, to C, D, E etc., a prcci.sely similar
relation of situation to that which A formerly had, we say
that B is in the same place as A wsis. But really there
is nothing individually the same in the two eases; for in
the first case, the relations of situation were .affections of A,
while now they are affections of B, and the same individual
accident cannot be in two tlifftjrcnt subjects. Thus the identity
implied in speaking of the same place is an illusion; there .are
tally precisely similar relations of situation. Leibniz’s account
is rendA-od unnecos.s.arily self-contradictory by the introduction
of absolute motion, which, as wtj saw, he deduced from force
(cf D. 26.9 ; 0. vn. 404). From absolute motion he ought, like
Newton, to have inferred absolute position. But his account of
situation can be freed from this inconsistency. He i.s anxious
to give an unambiguous meaning to s(tme place, .so as to be
able to 8.ay definitely that the two bodies A and B either are,
or arc not, successively in the same place. But this, on his
theory, is neither necessary nor possible. He must .always
npecify the bodies by relation to which place is to bo estimated,
and must admit, as he may without contradiction, that other
bodies of reference would, equ.ally h'gitimately, bring out a
dilTenmt result. His reference to the came of change of
situation is due to an iiiconsisttjucy, fundamental in his
Dyn.amics, and in all Dynamics which works with relative
position, but avf)idab]e, in a relational theory of space, so long
as ho reference to Dynamics is introduced. Thus we may
accept the following definition: “ Place is that which is the
same in different moments to different existent things, when

their relation.s of coexistence to certain other existents.

agree entirely together.” But when he adds that these other
existents “are supposed to continue fixed from one of those
moments to the other,” he is making a supposition which, on a
relational theory, is wholly and absolutely devoid of meaning
(D. 266; G. vit. 400). It is such additions which show the
weakness of the theory. There is plainly something more than
relations about 8p.ace, and those who try to deny this are
un.able, owing to obvious facts, to avoid contradicting them¬
selves. But by practice in denying the obvious, it must be
admitted, the relational theory may acquire a high degree of
internal self-consistency.


122 THE THEORY OF SPACE AND TIME.

68. I come now to another closely allied topic, namely, the
relation of space to the monads. Space, we have'seen, is some¬
thing purely ideal; it is a collection of abstract possible
relations. Now relations must always be reduced to attributes
of the related terms. To effect this reduction of spatial relations,
the monads and their perceptions must be introduced. And
here Leibniz ought to have found a great difficulty—a difficulty
which besets every inonadi.srn, and generally every philosophy
which, while admitting an external world, maintains the sub¬
jectivity of space. '*

The difficulty is this. Spatial relations do not hold between
moniids, but only between simultaneous objects of perception
of each monad*. Thus space is proptuly subjective, as in Kant.
Neverthcle.ss, the perceptions of different monads differ, owing
to the difference of the points of view; but points of view are
mathematical points, and the assemblage of possible points of
view is the assemblage of possible positions^ Thus Leibniz
had two theories of space, the first subjective and Kantian, the
.second giving aii objective counterpart, i.e. the various points
of view of the monads. The difficulty is, that the objective
counterpart cannot consist merely in the difference of points of
view, unless the .subjective .space is -purely subjective; but if it
be purely subjective, the ground for different points of view has
disappeared, since there is no reason to believe that phenomena
are bene fimdata.

The nature of this difficulty will be made clearer by ex¬
amining the development of Leibniz’s views on the relation of
the Monads to space. We shall see that, when ho was young,
in accordance with his materialistic bias, he definitely regarded
souls as occupying points in space, while later, after he had
become persuaded of the unreality of space, he endeavoured
more and more to emphasize the subjectivity of space at the
expense of the objective counterpart.

69. “Many yeans ago,” Leibniz wrote in 1709, “when my
philosophy was not yet sufficiently mature, I located souls in
points” (G. H. 372). From this early view he seems to have

* G. II. 444, 450—1, 378; iii. 357, 623.

* Of. G. II. 253, 324, 339, 438; iv. 439,482—3 (D. 76; L. 311), 484—6 (D. 78;
L. 314) ; VII. 303—4 (D. 102 ; L. 340—2).


THE THEORY OF SPACE AND TIME.


123


derived many of the premisses of his doctrine, and these pre¬
misses he theseafter accepted as an established basis for further
argument. Forgetting that those premisses were themselves
derived from the reality of space, he was not afraid of using
them to disprove that reality. Such, at least, appeai-s to me a
plausible view of his development. Ho would seem to have
come very near to his theory of monads in l()7l-2, and then,
by his contact with Cartesianisra, to have been led away, for a
while, from his individualistic tendencies, returning to them
only when he had proved the inadeijuacy of Cartesian
Dynamics, and the falsity of the dictum that extension is the
essence of matter.

He had, before his journey to Pans, already come very near
to the doctrine of monads. “ I can prove,” he says, “ fi*om the
nature of motion...that mind iu!ts on itself...that mind consists
in a point or centre, and is therefore indivisible, incorruptible,
immortal.... Mind is a little world, comprised in a point, and
consisting of its ideas, as a centre, th(jugh indivisible, consists
f)f angles” (G. i. 61). And in 1071 he says that his proofs
of God and immortality rest on thii difficult doctrine of the
point, the instant, the indivisible, and conation—precisely the
same difficulties as his later theory was designed to solve.
“Mind itself,” he continues, “consists properly in a single point
of space, whereas a body occupies a place.” “If wo give the
mind a larger place than a point, it is already a body, and hrus
partes extra pai'tes ; it is nt)t therefore immediately present to
itself.” But if we posit that the mind consists in a point, it is
indivisible and indestructible. The body, he says, has a kernel
of substance which is always prcsei-ved, and this kernel consists
in a physical point, while the soul consists in a mathematical
point (G. I. 52—4).

70. In these early views there is a frank acceptance of the
reality of space, and a materialism which reminds one of Karl
Pearson’s central telephone exchangeh The mind, ho says,
must bo in the place of concourse of all motions which are
impressed by objects of sense (G. I. 53). It must have been
soon apparent to Leibniz that this doctrine did not solve the


* Orammar of Science, Chap. ii. § 3.


124


THE THEORY OF SPACE AND TIME.


difficulties of the point and the instant, or affoixl a consistent
theory of substance. And so we find, in his early published
accounts of the doctrine of monads, a third kind of point added
to the above two, namely the metaphy.sical point, while the
mathematical point is no longer that in which the soul consists,
but only its point of view (D. 7fi ; L. 311; G. iv. 482—3).

71, But even here space and the mathematical point
retained more reality than was to bo wished, aiid accordingly
both the expression “ metaphysical points,” and the assertion
that mathematical points are the poirits of view of substances,
disappear after 1695\ After this time, he still speakr of
points of view, and always explains them on the analogy of
spatial points from which the world is, as it were, seen in
perspective (G. il. 438; ill 357). But he insists that this is
only an analogy, without, however, tolling us to what it is
analogous. He seems to have been aware of the difficulty, for
in his later writings he avoids any distinct statement as to the
.soul’s uheity. Souls may have, he thinks, at least in relation
to bodies, what may be called definitive ubeity, i.e. they are in
a certain volume, without our being able to assign them any
.special point in that volume (N. E. 230—1; G. v. 205—6). In
the la.st year of his life, he is even more negative in his
remarks. “ God,” he says, “ is not present to things by .situa¬
tion, but by essence; his presence is manifested by his immo-
diat() operation. The presence of the soul is of (piite another
nature.. To say that it is diffused all over the body i.s to make
it extended and divisible. To say it is, the whole of it, in every
part of some body, is to make it divisible from itself. To fix it
to a point, to diffuse it all over many points, are only abusive
expressions, trihus" (J), 245—6; G. vii, 3G5—C). After
this purely negative statement, Leibniz advances to another
topic. He seems, in fact, to have nothing better to say, than
that there are three kinds of ubeity, circumscriptive, definitive,
and repletive®, that the first belongs to bodies, the second to

^ The disappearance of the former is not to be asoribed solely to the discovery
of the term monad in 1696, for he retained other terms—entelechios, simple
substances, forms etc.—in spite of the adoption of the word monad.

2 An opinion which, it is true, is quoted as that of the schools, but without
disapproval.


THE THE()RY OF SPAOK AND TIME.


125


souls, and the third to God (IS. E. 230; G. v. 205). 1'hc most
definite statement is one in a letter to Lady Masham (G. HI.
357): ‘ The question whether (a simple substance) is somewhere
or nowhere, is one of words: for its nature does not consist in
extension, but it is related to the extension which it represents;
and so one must place the soul in the body, where is its point
of view according to which it now represents the universe, 'fo
want anything more, and to enclose souls in dimensions, is to
wish to imagine souls like bodies.” Here, and in all other
pjissagee known to me, Leibniz refuses to face the fact that all
monads represent the same world, and that this world is always
imagined by him to have something analogous to the space of
our perceptions. He seems once, indeed, to have perceived
that the argument from extension to plurality of substances in¬
volved an objective space, and to have accordingly repiidiated
this argument. “ What belongs to extension,” he says," must not
be assigned to souls, nor must we derive their unity or plurality
from the predicament of quantity, but from the predicament ol
substance, i.e. not from points, but from the piimitive force of
operation” (G. ii. 372). This suggests that the argument from
Dynamics is more fundamental than that from extension—a
view which, as we have seen, cannot be maintained. A closer
investigation shows more and more hopeless confusions. He
tries to give position to monads by relation to bodies. Monads,
he says, though they are not extended, have a certain kind of
situation, ie. an ordered relation of coexistence to other things,
through the macliine which they dominate. “ Extended things
involve many things having situation; but siinple things,
though they have not extension, yet must have situation in
extension, though this cannot be designated piuivtatim as in
incomplete phenomena” (G. ii. 253). Again he says that a
simple substance, though it has no extension, has position,
which is the foundation of extension, since extension is a
simultaneous continuous repetition of position (G. ll. 330). As
he also insists that an infinite number of points do not
together make an extension (ib. 370), we must suppose the
position, in this case also, to be presence in a volume, not in a
point. This view, curiously enough, is definitely put forward in
the New System, the Siime work in which he speaks of mathc-


126


THE THEORY OF SPACE AND TIME.


niatical points as the points of view of souls. After explaining
the union of soul and body by means of the pre-established
harmony, he continues: “ And we can hence understand how
the soul has its seat in the body by an immediate presence,
which could not be greater, since the soul is in the body as the
unit (or unity : the French is unite) is in the resultant of units,
which is the multitude’.” This preposterous notion of imme¬
diate presence in a volume was rendered plausible by reference
to the organic body or machine; but as this in turn consisted
of monads, a new explanation would have been roijnsrcd for
their position. Souls, Leibniz says, are not to be considered as
in points, but we may say they are in a place by correspond¬
ence, and thus are in the whole body which they animate (G. ii.
371). But as the body in turn consists of monads, the obvious
question arises: Whore is the body ? None of his devices, in
short, give Leibniz any escape from an objective space, prior to
the phenomenal and subjective space in each monad’s per¬
ceptions; and this ought to have been obvious to him, from
the fact that there are not as many spaces as monads, but one
space, and even one only for all possible worlds". The conge¬
ries of relations and places which constitutes space is not only
in the perceptions of the monads, but must be actually some¬
thing which is perceived in all those perceptions. The confu¬
sions into which Leibniz falls arc the penalty for taking exten¬
sion Jis prior to space, and they reveal a fundamental objection
to all monadisms. For these, since they work with substance,
must deny the reality of space; but to obtain a plurality of
coexistent substances, they must surreptitiously assiitne that
reality. Spinoza, we may say, had shown that the actual world
could not be explained by means of one substance; Leibniz
showed that it could not be explained by means of many sub¬
stances. It became necessary, therefore, to base metaphysics
on some notion other than that of substance —a task not yet
accomplished.

^ O. IV. 485; D. 78; L. 314. Cf. Mr Latta’s note on this passage. On tho
notion of presence by operation which Leibniz seems here to be thinking of, 1
shall speak later, when I come to the theory of soul and body. Leibniz,
however, rejected with ridicule the view, which seems to follow from this theory,
that souls are extended. See D. 267; O. vu. 402.

a Cf. D. 102; L. 340—2; G. VM. 303-4; ii. 379.


THE THEORY OF SPACE AND TIME.


127


72 . It remains to say something concerning time and
change. Hero we have much fewer passages to refer to, and—
po far as I know—no thorough discussion after Leibniz’s
philosophy is mature. Time, like space, is relational aud
subjective (cf. D. 244; G. vil. 364; ii. 183). Its subjectivity
has been already discussed in Chapter IV.; I wish here to
discuss only its relativity. Leibniz docs not seem to have
perceived clearly what is involved in this. What is involved is,
that in time, as in space, wo have only distances, not lengths or
points. , That is, we have only before and after : events are not
at a certain time, but those which are not simultaneous have a
distance, expressed by saying that one is before the other.
This distance does not consist of points of time, so that we
cannot say time has elapsed between two events. Other events
may be between them— i.e. there may be events before one of
our pair and after the othci’. But when two events have no
event between them, they have merely a relation of before and
after, without being separated by a series of moments. No
event can Inst for any length of time, for there is no such thing
as a length of time—there arc only different events forming a
scries. Nor can we say that events last for an instant, since
there are no instants. Thus there will be no such thing as a
state of change, for this implies continuity. In motion, for
example, we shall have different spatial ])ositions occupied
serially, but there} will not be a passage from one to the other.
It is true, Leibniz holds time to be a plenum (1). 281; G. vij.
415)—a phrase which, as in space, can only mean, on a re¬
lational theory, that the .smallcvst distances which actually
occur are infinitesimal. Or rather, since, as Leibniz confesses
(N. E. 159; G. v. 142), if two events were only separated by
empty time, we could never discover the amount of such time,
we must mean, when we say that time is a plenum, that
between any two given events there is always another. B»it
this view leaves the difficulties of continuity intact.

When applied to motion, this view must not be expressed
as saying that a body passes instantaneously from one place to
another, and then remains there till it takes another leap. For
this would imply that time elapsed between successive leaps,
whereas the essence of the relational view is, that no time


128


THE THKOKY OF SPACE AND TIME.


elapses: presence in one position in space is separated by a
temporal distance, but not by a temporal length (y. p. 112), from
presence at the position next occupied. Nor must we say, that
a moving body is sometimes in motion and sometimes at rest;
in fact it can never, in the usual acceptation of the words, be
either at rest or in motion. To say that a body is at rest, can
only mean that its occupancy of a certain position in space is
.simultiiucous (simultaneity being an ultimate relation) with
two events which are not simultaneous with each other. And
to say that a body is in motion will mean that its occupancy
of one position and its occupancy of another are successive.
But from this wc shall never arrive at a state of a motion, even
by taking an infinite number of spatial positions successively
occupied. Exactly the same argument will apply to change in
general, and a state of motion or change, as we have seen, is
absolutely necessary to Leibniz’s doctrine of activity*.

73. The relational theory of time is altogether more
pai-ixdoxical than that of space, and is rendered so by the fact
that the past and future do not exist in the same sense as the
present. Moreover Leibniz admits that previous time has a
priority of nature over subsequent time (G. III. 582), and that
there was probably a first event, i.e. the creation (D. 274;
G. VII. 408) — admissions which greatly add to the difficult}'' of
maintaining the relativity of temporal position. There is,
moreover, in all monadisms, an asymmetry in regard to the
relation of things to apace and time, for which there is, so far
as I know, nothing to urge exc(;pt the apparent persistence of
the Ego. It is held that substances pei-sist through time, but
do not pervade space. Difference of spatial position at the
same time shows difference of substance, but difference of
temporal position at the same place does not show this. The
time-order consists of relations between predicates, the space-
order holds between substances. P’or this important assumption
there is, in Leibniz, no sort of argument. It is made con¬
fusedly by common sense as regards things, and seems to bo
borrowed thence quite uncritically by all monadisms. That it

* Cf. Q. IV. 513. I know of no disenssion of the difficulties of motion except
that in the Archiv f. Gesch, der Phil, i. 213—4 which belongs to 1676, and
throws littlo light upon what Leibniz thought when his philosophy was mature.


THE THEORY OF SPACE AND TIME.


129


should have been so little discussed, even by those who believed
that they were treating time and space quite similarly, is a
curious and unfortunate instance of the strength of psychological
imagination.

74 . It would thus appear that Leibniz, more or less uncon¬
sciously, had two theories of space and time, the one subjective,
giving merely relations among the perceptions of each monad,
the other objective, giving to the relations among perceptions
that counterpart, in the objects of perception, which is one and
the same for all monads and even for all possible worlds. This
counterpart Leibniz would fain have regarded a.s a “purely
ideal thing,” a “being of reason,” a “mental entity.” I wish to
repeat briefly the rejisons which make these abusive epithets
applicable only to subjective space and time, not to that counter¬
part which they must have outside pOTCeption. This will bo
effected by recapitulating the arguments on which the Monado-
logy is based.

“ Body is an aggregate of substances,” Leibniz says, “ and
not propcily one substance. It must be, consequently, that
everywhere in body there are found indivisible substances”
(D. 38; G. II. 135^). This argument would vanish if space
were purely subjective, and extended body, as with Kant, a pure
phenomenon. Another favourite argument for difference among
monads, which, according to Leibniz, is on a level with geo¬
metrical proofs (G. II. 295), is, that if they were not different,
motion in a plenum would make no difference, for each place
could receive only the equivalent of what it had before (D. 219;
L. 221; G. VI. 608)—again an argument involving a place
which is not merely in the perceptions of monads. And this is
to be connected with his argument, that there must be ente-
lechies dispersed throughout matter, since principles of motion
are thus dispersed (G. vii. 330). Another reason for the
objectivity of space and time is, that they are orders of the
possible as well as the actual, while yet, in some sense, they
existed after the creation in a way different from that in which
they had previously existed in the mind of God. In the origin

^ Cf. G. n. 301: “Since monads or principles of substantial unity are
everywhere in matter, it follows hence that there must be an actual infinity,
since there is no part, or part of a part, which does not contain monads."

R. L. 9


130


THE THEORY OF SPACE AND TIME.


of things, we arc told, a certain divine mathematics was
employed to determine the greatest quantity, of existence,
“ regard being had to the capacity of the time and of the place
(or of the possible order of existence) ” (D. 102; L. 341; G. vil.
304). Now this possible order, before creation, existed only in
the mind of God (D. 252; G. vii. 377), but after the creation,
it existed in some other way; for Leibniz definitely declares
that space does not, like God, exist necessarily (G. vi. 405),
though space as the mere object of God’s underetanding must,
of course, necessarily exist. Hence we must distinguish (1)
space and time in the mind of God, (2) space and time in the
perceptions of each monad, (3) objective space and time, which
existed after the creation, but not before. This third kind
would, of course, for Leibniz, be still relational. Thus, he says
(D. 209; L. 408; G. vi. 598), “There are simple substances
everywhere, which are actually separated from each other by
actions of their own, which continually change their rela¬
tions.” But the important point is, that the relations, being
between monads, not between the various perceptions of one
monad, would be irreducible relations, not pairs of adjectives
of monads. In the case of simultaneity, this is peculiarly
obvious, and seems, indeed, to be prc.supposed in the idea of
perception. If this be the fact, to deduce simultaneity from
perception is a fatally vicious circle.


131


CHAPTER XL

THE NATUHE OF MONADS IN GENERAL.

76. I COME now to the description of the common ({ualities
of monads. The first of these arc -perception and appetition.
That monads must have perceptions is proved in various ways.
(1) (D. 209 ; L. 407 ; G. vi. 598) Monads “ cannot have shapes;
otherwise they would have parts. And conscipicntly a monad,
in itself and at a given moment, cannot be distinguished
from another except by its internal qualities and actions, which
cannot be other than its perceptions (that is to say, representa¬
tions of the compound, or of what is outside, in the simple)
and its appetitions (that is to say, its tendencies to pass from
one perception to another), which are the principles of change.”
That is, owing to the Identity of Indiscernibles, monads must
differ; but since they have no parts, they can only differ in
their internal states; and internal states, as far as experience
goes, are either perceptions or appetitions. (2) There is
another argument of a more dynamical nature (D. 210; L. 409 ;
G. VI. 599). “ Since the world is a plenum all things are
connected together, and every body acts upon every other,
more or less, according to their distance, and is affected by the
other through reaction. Hence it follows that each Monad
is a living mirror, or a raimir endowed with inner activity,
representative of the universe according to its point of view.”
Leibniz could not evidently employ this argument to prove
that he himself has perceptions, since these, according to such
a system os his, are presupposed in Dynamics. Thus the proof

9—2


132 THE NATURE OP MONADS IN GENERAL.

that all monads have perceptions presupposes that oneself has
them, and this remains a premiss. What is proved is that
everything else consists of similar substances with similar *
perceptions.

That Leibniz himself had perceptions, or, if you prefer it,
that there is a world not oneself or one’s predicates, was never
deduced^ by him from any further principle. “Souls know
things,” he says, “because God has put in them a principle re¬
presentative of things without” (D. 251; G. vii. 375. Cf.
D. 275-6; G. vn. 410). “What is miraculous, or rather mar¬
vellous is that each substance represents the universe from its
point of view ” (G. Hi. 464). Perception is marvellous, because
it cannot be conceived as an action of the object on the
percipient, since substances never interact. Thus although it
is related to the object and simultaneous with it (or approxi¬
mately so), it is in no way due to the object, but only to the
nature of the percipient. Occasionalism prepared the way for
this view by the doctrine that the mind perceives matter,
though the two cannot interact. What Leibniz did, was to
extend to an infinite number of substances the theory invented
for two only (D. 275-6; G. Vll. 410).

As to the meaning of perception, it is “ the expression of
plurality in a unity {Pexpression de la multitude dans VuniU ”)
(G. III. 69). As to what is meant by expressimi, Leibniz is very
definite. “One thing expresses another,” he says, “...when
there is a consUint and regular relation between what can be
said about the one and the other. It is thus that a projection
in perspective expresses its original. Expression is common to
all forms, and is a genus of which natural perception, animal
feeling, and intellectual knowledge arc species. In natural
perception and in feeling it suffices that what is divisible and
material, and dispersed among several beings, be expressed or
represented in one indivisible being, or in a substance endowed
with a true unity” (G. ii. 112). Again Leibniz says: “It
is not necessary that what expresses be similar to the thing
expressed, provided a certain analogy of conditions is preserved

.And so the fact that ideas of things are in us is nothing

else than the fact that God, the author alike of things and
the mind, has impressed a faculty of thought upon the mind,


THK NATURE OF MONADS IN GENERAL.


133


such that out of its own workings it can draw what perfectly
corresponds to, what follows from the things. And so, although
the idea of the circle be not similar to the circle, yet from it
truths can be drawn , which in the true circle experience would
no doubt have confirmed” (N. E. 716-7; G. vii. 264). Thus
perception might seem to be hardly distinguishable from the
pre-established harmony, and to amount only to the assertion
that every state of a monad corresponds, according to some
law, with the simultaneous state of every other monad : and it
is thus* that, as I suggested at the end of Chapter X.,
simultaneity is involved in the definition of perception. There
is, liowever, one element in perception, namely the synthesis or
expression of the multitude, which is not involved in the pre-
established harmony alone; and this element accordingly must
be remembered and cmj)hasized.

76 . As regards appetition, there is little to say beyond
what was said about the activity of substance. “Appetite is
the tendency from one perception to another” (G. III. 575). It
is conceived on the analogy of volition. The nature of sub¬
stantial forms, Leibniz says, is force, which involves something
like sensation or desire, so that they become similar to souls
(D. 72; L. 301; G. iv. 479). Perceptions in the monad spring
from one another according to the law of appetites, or by the
final causes of good and evil (D. 210; L. 409; G. vi. 599).
Only volition, however, which is confined to self-con.scioiis
monads, is definitely determined by the fact that the object of
desire seems good. This point, on which Leibniz is somewhat
vague, will be treated later.

77 . Leibniz’s theory of perception is rendered peculiar by
the fact that he denies any action of outside things upon the
percipient. His theory may be regarded as the antithesis of
Kant’s. Kant thought that things in them-sclves arc causes (or
grounds) of presentations, but cannot be known by means of
presentations ^ Leibniz, on the contrary, denied the causal
relation, but admitted the knowledge. His denial of the
causal relation was, of course, due to his general denial of
transeunt action, which, as we saw, wtis duo to his conception
of an individual substance as eternally containing all its

^ E.g. Reitie Vernunft, ed. Hartenstein, 1867, p. 349.


134 THE NATURE OF MONADS IN OENERAI..

predicates. " I do not believe,” he says, “ that any system is
possible in which the monads interact, for tl\ere seems no
possible way of explaining such action. Moreover, such action
would be superfluous, for why should one monad give another
what the other has already ? For this is the very nature of
substance, that the present is big with the future” (G. ll. 603).
His fimt somewhat tentative expression of the mutual inde¬
pendence of substances, in January 1686, is interesting as giving
very clearly his grounds for this opinion. “We may say, in
some manner, and with a good sense, though not according to
usage, that a particular substance never acts on another
particular substance, and does not suffer from it either, if we
consider that what happens to each is only a consequence of its
idea or complete notion quite alone, since this idea already
contains all its predicates or events, and expresses the whole
universe,” He proceeds to explain that nothing can happen to
us but thoughts and perceptions, which will be consequences
of the present ones. “If I could see distinctly all that is
happening to me now, I could see all that ever will happen to
me, and this would happen though all were destroyed but God
find me ” (G. iv. 440).

This theory of perception hjis, no doubt, a paradoxical
appearance. It seems absurd to suppose that knowledge of
what is going on outside me should arise in me simultaneously
with the external event, unless there is some causal connection
between the two. But to the theory that external objects act
on the mind and produce perceptions there are many objections.
One of these is that such an explanation does not apply to the
knowledge of eternal truths. We cannot suppose that the
proposition “ two and two are four ” acts on the mind whenever
the mind is aware of it. For a cause must be an event, and
this proposition is not an event. We must admit, therefore,
that some knowledge is not caused by the proposition which is
known. There seems no reason, when this is admitted, to deny
that all knowledge may be otherwise caused. Leibniz does not,
so far as I know, expressly use this argument, but his special
anxiety in the first book of the New Essays to prove that
Vernal truths are innate may be connected with some such
view. For according to his theory, all knowledge is innate in


135


THE NATURE OF MONADS IN GENERAL.

the same sense as the eternal truths, i.e. all knowledge springs
from the nature of the mind, and not from the objects of sense.
The argument which Leibniz does use is a better one, namely
the unintelligibility of any such causal action as is ascribed to
objects of sense. “ I don’t assent,” Leibniz says, “ to the vulgar
notions that the images of things are conveyed by the organs of
sense to the soul. For it is not conceivable by what aperture or
by what means of conveyance these images can be carried froni
the organ to the soul” (D. 275 ; G. vii. 410). Indeed it is
only necessary to state these notions in order to see how very
“ vulgar ” they are. But when Leibniz goes on to say, in
agreement with the Cartesians, that “it eaituot be explained
how immaterial substance is affected by matter” (D. 276; G.
VII. 410), he is employing an argument which doubtless greatly
influenced the formation of his theory, but which, none the less,
he has not the slightest right to employ. For as he holds that
there are only monads, perception, if it were caused from with¬
out, would still be an action of like upon like, and not, as he
suggests, an action of mere matter upon the mind. The relation
of mind and body, in fact, is a relation between many monads,
not between two I'adically different substances, mind and
matter.

78. Lotze has given, in his Metaphysic (§§ 63-67), a
criticism of the independence of monads, which .seems to me to
sfiow a radical misconception of Leibniz’s grounds. “ I cannot
admire,” he says (§ 63), “ this expression (that monads have no
windows), because I 6nd it quite immotivcd, and find that it
curtly excludes just what was still in question.” If Lotze
had remembered the array of logical arguments set forth in
Chapters II.—IV. above, proving that, if there be substances at
all, each must be the source of all its predicates, he could
hardly have made this statement. If he had remembered his
own philosophy—how, in the very next chapter (Bk. I. Chap. VI.)
he has to abandon plurality of things on the explicit ground
that transeunt action is unintelligible—if he had remembered
that, in his own teaching, the unity of a thing is essentially the
unity of one causal series—if all or any of these considerations
had been in his mind, he would have spared his own glass house,
and not ventured on throwing stones. And when we consider


136


,THK NATURB OF MONADS IN GENERAL.


i


that a thing for him is a single causal series, the absurdity of
allowing interaction of things becomes a direct «contradiction.
The antinomy of causation—that every element of the present
must have its eflFect, while yet no effect can be affirmed without
taking account of the whole present—this antinomy, I think, is
one on which he was never clear. He contents himself with
asserting first the thesis, while he is concerned with plurality,
and then the antithesis, when he comes to his M, his unity.
But to assert, as he does, that two causal series can interact,
is a direct contradiction, and one which, even if it embodies a
real antinomy, a man can hardly be called .absurd for denying.
Lotze’s criticism of Leibniz, therefore, seems due rather to his
own confusion of thought, than to any error in Leibniz. There
is as good ground for Monadisrn as for Monism, and a Mouadist
must, with Leibniz, maintain the mutual independence of sub¬
stances.

79. To explain how perceptions give knowledge of present
external things^ though not due to these things, Leibniz
invented the crowning conception of his philosophy, the con¬
ception by which he denoted his system. He loved to call
himself “the author of the system of the pre-established
hai-mony.” The pre-established hai*mony is that in his
philosophy of which he seems to have been proudest. Like
the mutual independence of substances, this was doubtless
sviggested by the course of Cartesian philosophy. The simile
of the clocks, by which he illustrated it, is to be found in
Geulincx and other contemporary occasionalists, and even in
Des Cartes'. The relation of thought and extension in Spinoza
is very similar to that of any two monads in Leibniz. The
advantage which he had over occasionalism, and of which he
made the most, was that by the activity of every substsince he
was able to preserve the harmony of all the series without the
perpetual intervention of God. This advantage was already
secured in Spinoza, but not in occasionalism such as that of

* See Ludwig Stein, SSur Qenenis dea Occaaiomlismua, Arehiv fur Geach. der
PkiLf Vol. I.; esp. p. 59, note. Leibniz has been accused of stealing this
illustration from Geulincx, but Stein points out that it was so common as to be
obtainable from many other sources, and not to require special ochnow*
ledgment.


THE NATURE OF MONADS IN GENERA!* 137

Malebranche. It was there held that, since matter is essentially
passive, the changes in matter corresponding to those in mind
must be effected by the direct operation of God in each case.
In Leibniz, on the contrary, only one original miracle was
required to start all the clocks (G. III. 143) —the rest was all
effected naturally. We may suppose that Leibniz began with
the Cartesian problem of the harmony of soul and body, and
found in his doctrine of monads a far wider harmony by which
far more was explained. The pre-established harmony, he
thinks,‘is proved d priori', only three explanations of the
relation of soul and body are poasible, and of the three his is
the best (G. iir. 144). The other two arc, of course, the
injiuxus phyaicus or direct causal action, and the system of
occasional causes, i.e. the action of God upon matter on occasion
of every volition. As long as the perfect passivity of matter
was m.aintained, Leibniz’s hypothesis certainly was the best.
But the systems of Geulincx and Spinoza, which he leaves out
of account in this connection (Geulincx, iii fact, is never
mentioned, and seems to have been unknown to him), have
many of the advantages in this problem which he claims as
peculiarly his own. It is interesting to compare, for instance,
the enunciation of Prop. XII. Part II. of Spinoza’s Ethics :
" Whatever happens in the object of the idea constituting the
human mind must be perceived by the human mind, or, in
other words, an idea of that thing will necessarily exist in the
human mind. That is to say, if the object of the idea con¬
stituting the human mind be a body, nothing can happen in
that body which is not perceived by the mind.” From such a
theory it is evident that Leibniz may have derived many
suggestions for his theory of perception and pre-established
harmony. It is to be regretted, therefore, that ho did not take
more account of this more allied hypothesis.

The pre-established harmony is an immediate result of
perception and the mutual independence of monads. “ The
nature of every simple substance, soul, or true monad,” Leibniz
explains, “ being such that its following state is a consequence
of the preceding one; here now is the cause of the harmony
found out. For God needs only to make a simple substance
become once and at the beginning a representation of the


138


THE NATURE OF MONADS IN GENERAL.


universe, according to its point of view ; since from thence alone
it follows that it will be so perpetually; and that all simple
substances will always have a harmony among themselves,
because they always represent the same universe” (D. 278;
G. VII. 412)^. Each monad always represents the whole
universe, and therefore the states of all monads at every
instant correspond, in that it is the same universe they
represent. To this Lotze objects that some monads might run
through their series of perceptions faster or slower than others
(Met. § 66). To this difficulty, he says, he remembers no
answer in Leibniz. He appears to have forgotten that Clarke
raised precisely the same point (G. VIT. 387-8) and that
Leibniz replied to it (G. vil. 415 and D. 281). “ If the time is
greater,” he says, “ there will be more successive and like states
interposed; and if it be less, there will be fewer; seeing there
is no vacuum, nor condensation, nor penetration (if I may so
speak) in times, any more than in places.” That is to say, just
as the quantity oimat&i'ia prima is proportional to extension, so
the number of events is proportional to time. Whatever may
be thought of this answer, it is evident that the monads, if
each of them mirrors the present state of the universe, neces¬
sarily keep pace with one another. It is bettor, perhaps, to
start with perception, and deduce the pre-established harmony.
For some arguments can be adduced, if it be admitted that
we have perceptions of an external world, to show that this
is also true of other substances; and hence the pre-estab¬
lished harmony follows.

It remains to explain, in terms of monads, the relation of
soul and body, and the activity and passivity of substances.
This will be attempted in the next chapter.


' Cf. alBo G. r. 382 -3.


139


CHAPTER XIL

SOUL AND BODY.

80. I PASS now to an entirely new department of- the
doctrine of monads. Hitherto we have considered single
monads as isolated units, but we must now attend to their
relations. We have to consider, in fact, the s.amc problem as
that which, in a dualistic system, would be the relation of
mind and matter. The special form of this problem, which is
usually considered, is the relation of Soul and Body. In dis¬
cussing this relation, Leibniz introduced a new idea, that of
passivity. This idea, it is true, was already involved in materia
prirna, but there it was not, as in the theory of soul and body,
relative to the activity of some other monad. By this relation,
both activity and passivity actpiire new meanings. From this
point onwards, Leibniz’s philosophy is less original than hereto¬
fore. Indeed he is chiefly engaged in adapting to the doctrine
of monads previous theories (notably' that of Spinoza), which,
by means of the relation of activity and passivity, become
available for him in spite of the denial of transeunt action.
Thus a sharp line should, I think, be drawn between those
parts of Leibniz’s philosophy which we have hitherto di.scussed,
and those which, through passivity, depend upon the apparent
interaction of monads. The former seem mainly original, while
the latter arc boiTowed in great part, though always without
acknowledgment, from Spinoza.

81. The problem of the relation of Soul and Body was one
which occupied much of the attention of Cartesians. Des
Cartes’ own position on this question, that a direct action of
mind on matter is possible, by altering the direction, though


140


SOUL AND BODY.


not the quantity, of the motion of the animal spirits, was aban¬
doned by his followers for very good reasons. They perceived
that, if mind and matter are two substances, they must not be
supposed capable of interaction. This led to Occasionalism on
the one hand—the theory, namely, that God moves the body on
occasion of our volitions—and to the theory of Spinoza on the
other hand. In this latter theory, which is more akin to
Leibniz’s, mind and body arc not different substances, but
different attributes of one substance, whose modifications form
two parallel scries. The mind is the idea of the body, and any
change in the body is accompanied, though without inter¬
action, by a corresponding change in its idea, i.e. in the mind.
This theory, as well as that of the Occasionalists, was rendered
impossible for Leibniz by the discovery that the essence of
matter is not extension, but that matter is necessarily plural.
Accordingly he required a new theory of Soul and Body, and
this requirement was doubtless a main motive to the doctrine
of pre-established harmony’. The use of this doctrine in
explaining the relation of Soul and Body is most ingenious.
I shall now endeavour to set it forth.

82. Briefly, the doctrine is as folhjws. Since there is
nothing real but monads, the body is the appearance of an
infinite collection of monads. But monads differ in the clear¬
ness of their perceptions, and those which have clearer percep¬
tions are more active. When a change in one monad explains
a change in another, the first is said to be active, the second
passive. So, in my body, that monad which is myself has
clearer perceptions than any of the others, and may be said to
be dominant in the body, since, in relation to the other monads,
it is active while they arc passive. There is no real interaction,
but the appearance of it results from the pre-established har¬
mony. Thus the soul is one, the body many, and there is no
interaction between them. But in so far as the soul has clear
perceptions, the reasons for what happens in the body are to be
found in the soul; and in this sense the soul acts on the body
and dominates it. This is the outline of the theory which must
now be examined in detail.

* In Wolff’s philosophy, the harmony of all monads has disappeared, and
only that of soitl and body remains.


SOUL AND BODY.


141


83. There are, in the first place, three great classes in the
hierarchy of arndhads, not sharply distinguished, but merging
into each other.* These are bare monads, souls and spirits.
Bare rnonads, which are also called forms or entelechies, have
the minimum of perception and desire; they have something
analogous to souls, but nothing that could strictly be called a
soul. Souls are distinguished from the first class by memory,
feeling, and attention (I). 190—1; G. vii. 529; D. 220; L. 230;
G. VI. 610). Animals have souls, but men have spirits or
rationdl souls Spirits include an infinite hierarchy of genii
and angels superior to men, but not differing from him except
in degree. They arc defined by self-consciousness or appercep¬
tion, by the knowledge of God and eternal truths, and by the
possession of what is called reason,. Spirits do not, like souls,
mirror only the universe of creatures, but also God. They thus
compose the City of God, in relation to which alone God
properly possesses goodness [G. VI. 621-2 (D. 231; L. 267—8);
contrast G. vi. 169]. Spints also are immortul: they preserve
moral identity, which depends on memory of self, while other
monads are merely incessant, i.e. they remain numerically
identical without knowing it.

84. In relation to clearness of pei-ception, monads are said
to be fictive or passive\ We can still popularly speak of one
substance acting on another, Leibniz says, when a change in
the one explains a change in the other (D. 79; L. 317; G. iv.
486). But “ the domination and subordination of monads, con-
siderctl in the monads themselves, consists only in the degrees
of their perfections” (G. ii. 451). “ Modifications of one monad
are ideal causes of those of another, in so far as the reasons
appear in one monad which led God in the beginning to
arrange for modifications in the other ” (G. ii. 475). And so the
body depends upon the mind in this sense, that the reason of
what happens in the body is to be found in the mind. In so
far, Leibniz continues, as the soul is perfect, and has clear per¬
ceptions, the body is subject to it; in so far as it is imperfect,
it is subject to the body (G. Vl. 138)®. Again he says that the

^ This sense of activity must not be confounded with that which is essential
to substance.

* Cf. Spinosa’s EthicK, Pt. V. Prop. X.


142


SOUL AND BODY.


creature is said to act externally so far as it is perfect, and to
suffer from another in so far as it is imperfect.' Action is there¬
fore attributed where perceptions are distinct, passion where
they are indistinct. One creature is more perfect than another,
when it contains what accounts d priori for what happens in
the other, and in this way it is said to act on another. The
influence of one monad on another is purely ideal, through
God, who takes notice of the superior monad in regulating
others [G. vr. 615 (D. 225; L. 245)]. Every substance which
jMisses to a greater degree of perfection acts, and ond which
passes to a lesser degree of perfection suffers, fn any sub-
.stance which has perception, action brings joy, while passion
brings pain (G. iv. 441).

The activity which is opposed to passivity is quite distinct
from that which is essential to substance. “ Taking action in
metaphysical strictness,” Leibniz says (N. E. p. 218—9; G. V.
195), “ as that which takes place in a substance spontaneously
and from its own nature, whatever is properly a substance only
acts, for everything comes to it from itself, after God, since it is
impossible that one created substance should have influence on
another. But taking action as an cxerci.se of perfection, and
passion as the contrary, there is action in true substances only
when their perception (for I grant it to all) is developed and
becomes more distinct, as there is passion only when it becomes
more confused; so that in substances capable of pleasure and of
pain, all action is a step to pleasure, and all passion a step to
pain.”

86. In this theory, which is fiill of reminders of SpinozaS
there are two elements in what is active, namely perfection, and
clearness of perception. It is plain that Leibniz does not con¬
fuse these two elements, but regards them as necessarily
connected. He evidently thinks, moreover, that his usage will
cover the cases which are ordinarily regarded as cases of action
and passion respectively. But these ideas need some expla¬
nation, as does also the phrase “ accounting d prioH for what
happens in another monad.” The explanation, I think, is as
follows.

Only spirits are good or bad as ends in themselves: bare
* Of. e.g. Spinoza, Ethiea, Bk. III. Prop. i.


SOUL AND BODY.


143


monads and souls are mere means to them. Now in spirits,
volition is always determined by the reason of the good*, i.e. we
pursue what we judge to be the best possible®. Hence we shall
always act rightly if we always judge rightly (G. vii. 92)“.
Accordingly, since right judgment depends upon clear percep¬
tion, we are more or less perfect according as we have more or
less cleai* perceptions. In volition, where wo are ordinarily said
to be active, the passage to a new perception is perceived to be,
what it always is really, determined from within, .and our per¬
ception* therefore, is so for clear. But in sensation, where we
are ordinarily said to bo passive, the new perception falsely
appears to come from without, and our perception is therefore
confused. We do not perceive the connection with the previous
perception, and are so for imperfect. Thus Leibniz’s use of the
words active and passive is not wholly disconnected from the
popular use, though it woultl be unwise to see toi> close a
relation.

And thus the phrase “containing what accounts d priori
for the changes in .another monad,” is to be undei'stood in
relation both to perfection and to clearness of pemeption.
Owing to the pre-established harmony, the changes in different
monatls are inter-related; but the changes in inferior monjids
exist m.ainly for the sake of the correlated changes in spirits^.
Thus the explanation by sufficient reason, or by ffual causes, of
what happens in an inferior monad, is only possible by taking
.account of some superior monad, in which the correlated change
is good. But when this superior monad is free, and owing to
confused perception chooses wh.at is really bad, this explanation
by final causes no longer holds, and the superior monad is

» G. IV. 464; V. 171 (N. E. 190-1); F. de C. 62 (D. 182).

^ It is thus, by the way, that actual KiiOicient reasons of the actual are
distinguished from possible sufficient reasons of the possible. All actual
sufficient reasons are volitions either of God or of free creatures, and these are
always determined by the (true or false) perception of the good. But it would
be possible, not only for us, but also for God, to pursue evil, and then the per¬
ception of evil would be a sufficient reason. Thus actual sufficient reasons are
final causes, and involve reference to the good. Cf. § 15, supra.

* That this view was often contradicted by Leibniz {e.g. implicitly, ib. p. 95)
was only due to theological reasons. It was the only view to which he was
entitled.

* For Leibniz’s inoonsistenoy on this point see § 124.


144


SOUL AND BODY.


therefore regarded os passive, since the final reason of its
change for the worse is not in itself, but in so,me correlated
change elsewhere.

86 . There are, in the above theory, many obvious gaps,
which I leave without comments It is more important to
explain the connection of passivity and viatemi prima. Leibniz
distinguishes in one plaec (G. il. 252) the following five terms:
“(1) The primitive eiitelechy or soul, (2) primary matter or
primitive passive power, (3) the monad composed of these two,
(4) mass or secondary matter or the organic machine, feo which
innumerable subordinate mon.ads concur, (5) the animal or
corporeal substance, which the dominant monad makes into
one machine.’' Moreover the connection of soul and body is
only explicable by means of mateHa prima \ Hence we must,
before we can understand the connection of soul and body,
examine the nature of materia prima as an element in each
monad, and its connection with materia prima in Dynamics.

Materia prima, as an clement in each monad, is that whoso
repetition produces the materia prima of Dynamics. It is also
identified with the passivity or passive force of each monad,
with confused perception, and with finitude generally. God
could deprive a monad of matena secunda, i.e. of the assemblage
of monads which constitutes its body; but He could not deprive
a monad of materia pritmi, without which it would be actus
purus, i.e. God Himself (G. ii. 325). It is thus by materia
prima that monads are distinguished from God, and rendered
limited and finite; and this seems to be Leibniz’s meaning in
saying that confused perceptions are what involve matter or
the infinite in number (G. in. 630). In writing to Arnauld,
Leibniz says: “If we understand by matter something always
essential to the same substance, we might, with some .scholas¬
tics, understand by it the primitive pas.sive power of a sub¬
stance, and in this sense matter would be neither extended nor

1 The chief of these is that there seems no reason why action in one
Hubstanee shonld correspond to passion rather than action in another. Leibniz
seems indeed to regard it as more or less accidental when this occurs; thus he
says (G. iv. 440): “It may happen that a change which increases the expression
of the one diminishes that of the other.”

* G. II. 520, 248; vi. 640 (D. 169).


SOUL AND BODY.


145


divisible, though it would be the principle of divisibility, or of
that, in it, that belongs to substance” (G. ii. 120) (1G87). This
IS, I think, the first time that he introduces into the theory of
monads materia ‘pnma in the sense given it by “ some scholas¬
tics,” and it has the tcntativencss of a new idea. But to this
sense he afterwards always adheres. Materia prima, he says,
is not extended, but is what extension presupposes. It is the
passive power which, with the entelcchy or active power, com¬
pletes the monad, and it ailheres always to its own monad*.
Substances have n»etaphysical matter or jxissive power in so far
as they express anything confusedly ; they have active power in
so far as they express anything distinctly (N. E. 720; G. vii.
322). Monads arc subject to passions, and are thus not pure
forces; they are the foundations not only of actions, but also of
resistances and possibilities, and their passions are in ermfusod
perceptions (G. ITI. 636). For substance acts as much as it
can, unless it is impeded; and it is not impeded naturally
except from within. When one monad is said to be impeded
by anothiir, this is to be understood of the representation of
that other in itself (G. ll. 516). Moreover it is not absurd,
Leibniz thinks, that resistance in a substance should do nothing
but impede its own activity; we need, he says, a principle of
limitation in limit(‘d things, as of action in agents {ih. 257).

87. Beveml thing.s arc intere.sting and noteworthy in this
theory of materia, prima. First, it is instructive to observe
the difference between Leibniz’s account of limitation and that
of Spinoza. “That thing is called finite in its own kind,”
Spinoza says (Eth. i. Def. 2), “ which can be limited by another
thing of the same nature.” I'hus finitude consists in a relation
to something else, and the finite is not self-subsislent. But
Leibniz’s mateHa prima is nothing relative, but part of the
nature of each monad. Each monad is limited, not by some¬
thing else, but by itself®; and thus God is not the sum of finite

» G. n. 306; of. also G. iv. 511 (D. 120).

'■* Of. Erdmann, GruiidrUs der GeschichUt der Philosophie, 3rd ed. Berlin, 1878,
Vol. II. p. 150. In a highly interesting paper, which is very Spiuo/.iBtic through¬
out, and belongs probably to the period between 1676 and 1680, Leibniz actually
gives Spinoza’s definition of finitude as his own: “The finite involves negation
of something of its own kind ’’ (G. vii. 196). He proceeds to remark, however,
that this definition seems inapplicable to discreta.


B. L.


10


SOUL AND BODY,


14t)

monails, but something radically diflFcrent in his nature. Con¬
nected with this point is the way in which jpaseivity involves
matter and the infinite in number (G. ill. 636). There is only
one way of perceiving the world clearly, namely the way in
which God perceived it, i.e. as it really is. But there is an
infinite number of ways of perceiving it confusedly. Thus the
Identity of Indiscc^ruibles allows only one God, and is only
compatible with many other substances if these all have per¬
ceptions which arc more or less confused. And as matter is
the confused perception of an infinite plurality of Vnonads,
matter doubly presupposes materia prirna, namely as the source
of the plurality, and again as the reason why the plurality is
perceived as matter. And this brings ns to the relation of the
'nuitena prima in each mona<l to the materia prima in Dy¬
namics. The two (iloments in the dynamical definition—
impenetrability and inertia—correspond respectively, 1 think
(though this is only an inference), to the fact that monads
differ as to their point of view, and the fact that passivity
causes a resistance to a now perception in the monad. Both
these arc included under confused perception. God, who alone
secs quite clearly, has no point of view—space, to him, is as it
is in Geometry, without any here or there. All points arc alike
in their relation to God (G. iv. 439; il. 438), ami the same
must be true of the parts of time. Thus the point of view is a
part of confused perception, and therefore of mat&i'ia prima;
and the difference of points of view is the source of impenetra¬
bility. Similarly, owing to pavSsivity or indistinctness of per¬
ception, a given perception does not give rise to the perception
which would result if the same thing were more clearly per¬
ceived ; and this, we may suppose, is the source of inertia.
'Pherc is. hosvever, a diflforenoe between the dynamical use of
materia prima ami the use in the theory of monads, namely
that, in Dynamics, the word is usually applied to a finite
extension, resulting from an infinite number of monads, whereas
in the theory of monads it is applied to the corresponding
quality of each monad, i.e. to that quality whose repetition is
required to produce extension.

88. The connection of confused perception with the point
of view explains also some rather diflBcult dicta on the inter-


SOUL AND BODY.


147


connection of monads. “ If there were only spirits,” Leibniz
says, “ they wQuld be without the re(|uired connection, without
the order of times and placc.s. This order d(3niands matter and
motion and its laws” (G. vi. J72). God alone is above all
matter; creatures free from matter would be deserters from the
general order, and detached from the universal concatenation
(D. 169; G. VI. 54G). Again Leibniz pronounces against the
view that angels are disembodied s{)irits. To remove them
from bodies and from j)lace, he says, is to ri'movc them from
the unifersal connection and order of the world, which is made
by relations to time and place (G. ii. 324). All these sayings
seem explained by the fact that places result from points of
view, and points of view involve confused perception or matena
prinw.. And this, again, is intirnatolv connected with the
doctrine of unconscious perception, which Leibniz urged with
such success against Locke. To maintain that Ave mirror the
whole universe was only possible by a largo use of this doctrine.
And Leibniz did, in fact, carrj' the doctrine so far as to inaiTi-
tain that every perception of which we are sensible is compostul
of an infinite number of inscmsible pcjrceptions (N. E. 116—8;
G. V. 105—7). He once even deduces the infinite number of
monads from this oonsidoration aloiie. In our perceptions, he
says, however distinct they may be, there are confused ones to
any degree of smallness, and to these, as to the greater and
more distinct ones, monads will correspond (G. ii. 460—1).

89. We can now endeavour to understand tlus connection
of soul and body. There are here, I think, two inconsistent
theories, both contained in Leibniz. This has led to a division
among commonta,tors, some insisting on the one as the only
theory, others on the other. As I have found no way of recon¬
ciling all Leibniz’s statements on the matter, I shall first set
forth the theory which seems to me consistent with the rest of
his philosophy, and shall then proceed to the second theory,
showing why it cannot be reconciled with his other views, and
how he seems to have been led to it. The first theory has been
supported by Erdmann, the second by Kuno i'ischer, in whose
histories the arguments will be found at length.

90. We must, to begin with, distinguish an organic body
&om a mere mass. An organic body has one dominant monad,

10—2


148


SOUL AND BODY.


I


by relation to which it acquires a certain unity. It is as
regards the nature and degree of this un^ty ithat the two
theories differ. An inorganic body has no such single domi¬
nant monad, but is a mere aggregate\ But every monad
belongs to some organic body, either as dominant or as subordi¬
nate monad®. Every organic body is composed of an infinite
number of smaller organic bodies, the smallest organic bodies
occupying only a physical point. A natural machine, Leibniz
says, is a machine oven in its smallest perceptible parts [G. VI.
599 (1). 209; L. 408); G. ri. 100; iv. 492]. In the first theory,
the dominant monad dominates in the sense that it represents
more clearly what the other m(.)nads represent very confusedly.
In accordance with the affections of the body, the dominant
monad represents, as a centre, the things outside itself [G. vi.
598 (D. 209; L. 407)]. Leibniz is not very definite as to the
meaning of domination, but the following seems to be his
meaning. 15very monad perceives more clearly what happens
in its neighbourhood than what happens at a distance [G. II.
74; G. VI. 599 (D. 210; L. 409)]. If, then, in a certain
volume, there is one monad with much clearer perceptions than
the rest, this monad may perceive all that happens within that
volume more clearly than do any of the others within that
volume. And in this sense it may be dominant over all the
monads in its immediate neighbourhood.

But vve must not suppose that the monads composing the
organic body are always the same. There is not a portion of
matter, i.e. of inferior living beings, appropriated to the soul for
ever, for bodies arc in perpetual flux. The soul changes its
body, but always gradually [G. vi. 619 (D. 229; L. 258)].
Thus we cannot be certain that the smallest particle of matter
ii.e. secondary matter) received by us at birth, remains in our
body. But the same animal or machine subsists in a sense
[G. VI. 543 (D. 167)]; it persists, as Leibniz puts it, specifically
but not individually [G. V. 214 (N. E. 240)]. Certain organs
remain, at least by the substitution of an equivalent, as a river
remains the .same though its matter changes (G. IV. 629).
This is merely the ordinary scientific view, according to which

‘ G. VI. 539 (D. 163); G. v. 309 (N. E. 362); G. ii, 75,100.

^ G. II. 118, 135; Ill. 356; vil. 502.


SOUL AND BODV.


140


the body remains of the same kind, though not composcil of
the sam^ master. Thus the body consists merely of those
inferior monjids wliose points of view, at any given time, are so
near that of the dominant monad that they perceive everything
less clearly than it does, since every monad perceives most
clearly what is in its own neighbourhood. Body and soul do
not together form one substance (G. vi. 595), and do not even
interact. “Bodies act as if (what is impossible) there were no
souls, and souls act as if there were no bodies, and both act as
if the one influenced the other” [G. vi. G21 (I). 230; L. 2G4)].
The organized mass, within which is the point of view of the
soul, is ready to act of itself, at the moment when the soul wills
it. This, Leibniz says, produces the so-called union of soiil'and
body [G, IV. 484 (D. 78; L. 314)], Soul and body do not
interact, but only agree, the one acting freely, ac<;ording to the
rules of final causes, the other acting mechanirially. according
to the laws of efficient cfiuses. But this does not derogate from
the liberty of the sotil. For every agent which acts accortliiig
to final causes is free. God, foreseeing what the free cause;
would do, regulated the machine to agree with it [(.}. vii. 412
(D. 278)].

This, then, is the first theory of soul and body. An oiganic
body is a collection of changing monads, which ac(piircs unity
by being always subject to one and the same dominant monad.
This subjection consists both in the clearer perceptions of the
dominant monad, and in the fact that the final causes, whicdi
govern all events, have reference, so far as the body is con¬
cerned, either to the dominant monad, or to some monad
outside the body, or to “ nictaph} sical perfection ” and the
“order of things.” A body dominated by a spirit consists of
innumerable smaller organic bodies, but does not itself, ap¬
parently, form part of any larger organic body. Secondary
matter, or mass, consists of a collection of organic bodies not
unified by one dominant monad. There are, however, many
things in Leibniz inconsistent with this simple theory. To
these we must now turn our attention.

91 . Though everything in the above theory, as I set it
forth, is to be found in Leibniz, there are many other passages,
concerning which I said nothing, which lead to a totally dif¬
ferent theory. This theory is to be rejected, I think, because


SOUL AND BODY.


15(K


%


it is wholly inconsistent with Leibniz’s general philosophy.
But it is necessary to say something about ft, particularly
as it has been supported, with constant appeal to the sources,
by a recent commentator, Dillmann*.

In this other theory, mind and body together make one
substance, having a true unity. The mind makes the body
into a unwm per se, instead of a mere aggregate. Against this
view, we have perfectly definite assertions, such as the following
(1). 177 ; F. do C. pp. 32, 34): “ Corporeal substance has a soul
and an organic body, that is, a mass made up of other sub¬
stances. It is true that the same substance thinks, and has
an extended mass joined to it, but it does not consist of this
mass, sinc(j all this can be taken away from it without altering
the substance,” Nevertheless, in other places, Lfubniz speaks
as if the soul ar»d the body make one substance.

“The eutelccliy,” he says, “is either a soul, or something
analogous to a soul, and always naturally actuates some organic
body, which taken by itself, apart froni the soul, is not one
substance, but an aggregate of several, in a word, a natural
machine” (C, IV. 3!)5—6; N. E. 701) (1702). Again he says:
“Every created monad is endowed with some organic body”
(G. VI I. 502), “principles of life bcdoiig only to organic bodies”
[G. vr. 530 (D. 103)], and again: “ There are as many entele-
chies as organic bodies” (G. IT. 308). It is evident that not
every monfid can have an organic body, if this consists of other
subordinate monads. And there are many more direct reasons
for the view that body and soul together make one substance.
“ Bo<lies which are a unnm per se, like man,” Leibniz says, “are
substances, and have substantial forms” (G. IV. 459) (Jan. 1686).
And Leibniz always speaks as if the presence of the soul pre¬
vented the body from being a mere aggregate: he su^ests
that the body without the .soul is a mere aggregate, but tuith it,
acquires a true unity. “ The number of simple substances,” he
says, “ in any mass, however small, is infinite; for beside the
soul, t^^hich makes the real unity of the animal, the body of the
sheep, for example, is actually divided, i.e. is an assemblage
of invisible animals or plants, similarly composite except for
what makes their real unity; and though this goes to infinity,

Eine neue Darstellunff der Leibnizischen Mmiadenlehre auf Gmnd der
Quellen. Leipzig, 1891.


SOUL AND BODY.


.151

it is plain that all in the end depends on these unities, the
rest, or ythe ^reshlts, being only well-grounded phenomena ”
(G. IV. 492). This tendency is carried farthest in a theory
which has given commentators much trouble, but is really no
more inconsistent with Leibniz’s system than many other pas¬
sages—I mean the doctrine of the vinculum suhatantiale.

92. This doctrine is developed in the letters to Des
Bosses, and springs from Leibniz’s endeavour to reconcile his
philosophy with the dogma of transubstaiitiatiou. Tt is neces¬
sary to* find some sense in which the Body of Christ is one
substance. Leibniz first admits "a certain real metaphysical
union of soul and organic body” (G. ii. 371), an admission ho
had already made to Tournemine (G. vi. 595), but Des Bosses
persuades him that this is not sufficieiiL Ibr Catludic orthodux 3 ^
Ke then suggests, as a. view which he does not acc<>pt, but
which might be helpful to a good Catholic, the hyjiothesis of
{1 mhsUmtial bond (G. Ii. 435). “If corporeal substance,” he
says, “is something real beside monads, as a line is held b)
be something beside its points, we shall have to say, that
corporeal substance consists in a certain union, or rather in
some real thing which unites, and is added by God to the
monads; that from a certain union of tin; pixssive power of
monads mateiia prima results, that is, what is recpiired by
extension and antitypia, or diffusion and resistance; but that,
from the union of the entelechies of monads, a substantial form
arises, but one which can thus be born and extinguished, and
is extinguished when that union ceases, unless God miraculously
preserves it. But such a form will not be a soul, which is a
simple and indivisible substancob” This vinculum siibstcmtiale
is only asserted to be useful “ if faith leads us to (joi’poreal
substances ” (ib.). And later he says (ib. p. 458): “ And this
seems what should be said by people of your way of thinking
{secundum vestros), of the change of the whole substance of
one body into the whole substance of another body, which yet
retains its former nature.” The vinculum suhstcmtiale differs
from the real union of soul and body—which Leibniz also
admits elsewhere—by the fiict that the monads are not added
as wholes to form a sum having a true unity, but are split
* Cf. the schedule of all entities, G. n. 606.


162. SOtJL Am> B03>y. .

up into materia prima and entelechy beforo addition. Thus-
the sum of constituent elements of vmterid pinma ^j^ves an
extended passive mass, while the sum of the'entelechies gives
a substantial form animating the mass. There is one vinmlum,
subetantiale for each organic body, i.e. one corresponding to each
dominant monad (G. II. 481, 48G, 496). Leibniz is afterwards
led by Dos Bosses to admit that this substantial bond must, if
it is to be th<3ologically serviceable, be imperishable like the
individual soul (G, il. 481). In later U'tters, the doctrine is
usually presupposed as the basis of discussion, and is employed
to establish real matter and a real continuum. But nowhere
does Leibniz himself assert that he believes it. He was ex¬
tremely anxious to persiuule Catholics that they might, without
heresy, believe in his doctrine of monads. Thus the vinculum
suhstantiale is rather tlui concession of a diplomatist than the
creed of a philosopher (cf. G. ir. 499).

93. It seems not impossible that others of Leibniz’s re
marks, in so far as they are inconsistent with the first theory
of body, are also due to theological influences. The problem
of the Real Pre.seuce occupied Leibniz from the time when
ho was in the service of the Archbishop of Mainz, and formed
one of his grounds for denying that the e.ssence of matter is
extension. In his earliest iiccounts of his system, designed tor
the zealous and proselytising Arnauld, similar suggestions are
to be found. “ The body by itself,” Leibniz says, “ apart from
the soul, has only a unity of aggregation” (G. 11/100); and
this seems to imply that with the soul the body has a real
unity. Again be says that the body, apart from the |oui, is
not properly a substance, but an aggregate, like a of

stones (ib. 75). And when Aniauld objects to the how phi*./
losophy, that the soul joined to matter does not, make one,
since it gives only an extrinsic denomination, Leih^kf. tellies
that the matter belongs to the animated subst^ifi^, %liibh'is
veritably one being; and matter taken only as mass iii.merely a
Well-founded phenomenon, like space and time This

might be understood as referring, in the first th^ m^teriA
prwia, but the following passage is more difficult “Those
who will not admit,” ho says, “ that there are souls ifi lieasts;
and substantial forms elsewhere, can nevertheless approve the


SOUL "AND BODY.


153

way in which I, explain the union of mind and body, and all
that I sjfy about* true substance; but it remains to them to
scave, as they best* may, without such forms, and without any¬
thing which has a true unity, either by points, or, if it seems
good to them, by atoms, the reality of matter and of corporeal
substances ” (G. Ti. 127). Again he says that if there are no
corporeal substances such as he wants, then bodies are merely
tnn‘pheni./C la, lit he rainbow. For, since matter is actually
infinit<'ly cl’^ddeci, wc r>hail ntjver reach a true being, save when
v.c Huff a. .tri.ated machines, whoso soul or substantial form
makes a subsi ntial unity inrlepcndent of mere t;ontiguity.
Ann if there ar*' nerv' such, he concludes, then man is the
only suhs ’u rial thing in the visible world (G. II. 77). ' All
Lmv,.* st ‘■riionts imply that soul and body together are veri-
Lthlv 1 , 1 -^ though the body alone, in so far as it is real, is
fn the Ic'tters to Ariiauld, this might be attributed
!•». ii;!^ tc( the crudity of a new philosophy, but, as we have
seen, i.h< re are many lat(‘r expressions of a similar kind. And
till! doi.'i.nne which, in discussing the relation of monads to
space jsl 71), we found inevitable; namely that the soul is present
' 'iilunie, not in a mere point, is to be associated with
ew The soul by its pr(*sonce iiilln’ins the whole body
aim makes it one though other subordinate souls are present
various of the body, and make each such part one*.

A.gain spai if, for Lcibiii/, is a plenum, but is not composed of
matlnnnatical points. Hence av<! must suppose every monad
to occupy at least a physical point. Such a physical point
niight .be called au organic Ixidy, and might explain how all
monads tome to have an organic IxHly. The organic body of
a monad Which does not dominate would, by itself, be a pure
phenomeiiiMt# and in no sense an aggregate. It is impossible,
however, to frpe this view from incoiisistencie.s. To these two
causes may have contributed, the one the theological desire
to save thd ^<mi]^y of bodies®, the other an occasional confusion

* Cf. tho(Q, ti. 474): “It is asked whether the soul of a worm
<;<xieting in the hody-of a man is a substantial part of tlie human body, or rather,
os 1 shouid. prefer to say, a bare reiinisite, and something not metaphysically
n^ssary, but which is only required m the course of nature.”

® Thus in one passage Leibniz clinches his arguments by the remark;
“HkToreoyer the last likteran Council declares that the soul is veritably the
substantial forui of.our body” (Q* n* 75).


154


SOUL AND BODY.


of primary matter, af? an element in each monad, either with
primary matter as extended, or even with secchadarj^ matter.
The latter may have been a partial cause *in the letters to
Arnauld ; in the letters to Des Bosses, the former must have
operated alone, for the distinctions of the various kinds of
matter are there more clearly drawn than anywhere else'.

There may be a theory which accounts better for these
apparent inconsistencies, but I have been unable to find one.
My theory is substantially that of Erdmann, to whom I may
refer for further discussion. *

94. A few words seem necessary about Preforination, the
theory by which Leibniz explained generation. As every
monad is eternal, the monad which is myself must have pre¬
viously existed. Leibniz holds that it formed one of the
monads composing the body either of father or mother
(G. III. 505). Besfore conception, ho thinks, it was either a
mere sen.sitive monad, or had at any rate only an elementary
reason. Tlie latter view has the advantage that it enables
us to do without miracles. On the former view, since a
sensitive monad cannot naturally become rational, we must
suppose generation to involve a miracle. Leibniz cannot
decide between these alternatives, indeed both are to be found
in* the Theodiede'^ (G. vr. 152, 352). It would seem that the
miraculous alternative is the best, because Leibniz wishes to
maintain that human beings cannot naturally, after death, sink
to the level of mere sensitive monads; but if monads can
naturally hecovie rational, there seems no reason why they
should not naturally cease to be so. Leibniz supported his
theory of preformation by reference to the microscopic em-^
bryology of his day. It is, however, sufficiently evident that
he could not account for the equal influence of both parents.
When this is taken into account, we lose the simplicity of
the one dominant monad, but wo get a theory uncommonly
like Weissmann’s continuity of the gcrm-pla.sm. A few years
ago, therefore, wo might have referred to Leibniz as an¬
ticipating the latest results of modern science; but since the
fall of Weissmann, we must deny ourselves this pleasure.

» See e.g. G. ii. 368, 370, 371.

9 A fact which, by the way, supports Stein’s contention that the parts were
written at very different times: v. Leibnie und Spimea, Berlin, 1890, p. 275 ff.


155


CHAPTER XIII.

CONFUSED AND UNCONSCIOUS PERCKPriON.

96. There arc, we have seen, two respects in which
monads differ. 1’hoy differ as to point o/’ view, and they differ
as to clearness of perception. The first of these is continually
changing: the reality underlying the phenomenon of motion
is change of point of view, 'fhis seems to me, at least, the
only possible interpretation, though Leibniz nowhere definitely
makes this statement. In this way we shouhl be able to
interpret the difference between absolutci and relative motion.
The monad which changes its point of view has absolute
motion, while another which perceives this change has only
a relative change of situation\ 1’his view again involves the
objective counterpart to space, which we have seen throughout
to be unavoidable.

The point of view, as we have seen, depends upon con¬
fused perception, but not upon different <legrees of confusion.
As regards the degree of confusion, also, we must sujjpose
change possible. Leaving aside the possibly miraculous change
in conception, Leibniz could hardly maintain that babies have
as clear perceptions as grown-up people. And he says that
death, though it cannot entirely destroy memory, does I’ender
our perceptions confused [G. vn. 531 ; (D. 193)]. This is also
his explanation of sleep. He maintains, against Locke, that the
soul always thinks, but he confe.sses that it is not always con¬
scious of thought. We are never without perceptions, he says,
but often without apperceptions, namely when we have no
distinct perceptions (N. E. p. 166; G. V. 148). Thought is

> Oomparo, on this subject, G. or. 92 and iv. 513.


156


CONFUSED AND UNCONSCIOUS PERCEPTION.


the proper activity of the soul, and a substance once in action
will be so always (G. v. 101; N. E. 111). If its activit^’ ceased,
the substance too, as we have seen, would cease, and on waking
we should not be numerically the same as when we went to
sleep.

96. This brings us to a very important advance which
Leibniz made in Psychology. Locke thought there could be
nothing in the mind of which the mind was not conscious.
Leibniz pointed out the absolute necessity of unconscious
mental states. He <listinguished between perception, which
consists merely in being conscious of something, and apper¬
ception, which consists in self-consciousness, i.e. in being aware
of perception [0. v. 46 (N. E. 47; L. 370); G. vi. 600 (D. 211 ;
L. 411)]. An uncon.scious perception is a state of consciousness,
but is unconscious in the .sense that we are not aware of it,
though in it we arc aware of something else. How important
these unconscious perceptions are, appears from the Intro¬
duction to t.he New Essays. It is in consecpience of these
that “ the present is big with the future and laden with the
past, that all things conspire, and that, in the least of sub¬
stances, eyes as penetrating as those of God could read the
whole course of the. things in the universe ” (N. E. 48; L. 373 ;
G. V. 48). 'rhey also preserve the identity of the individual,
and explain the pre-established harmony ; they prevent an
indifference of eciuilibrium (^5.), and it is in virtue of them
that no two things arc perfectly alike (G. V. 49; N. E. 51;
L. 377).

In favour of unconscious mental states Leibniz has several
arguments, some quite cogent, others, I think, depending upon
confusions. Locke’s argument, ho says, that we cannot know
anything which we are not aware of knowing, proves too much,
for then we know nothing that wc are not actually thinking
of (G. V. 80; N. E. 84). Again, and this is the most conclusive
argument, “it is impossible for us always to reflect expressly
upon all our thoughts; otherwise the mind would reflect upon
each reflection to infinity, without ever being able to pass to a
new thought. For example, in perceiving some present feeling,
I should always have to think that I think of it, and again
think that I think of thinking of it, and so on to infinity”


CONFUSED AND UNCONSCIOUS PERCEPTION.


157


(O. V. 108; N. E. 118—9). Another less conclusive argu¬
ment is,4that:k aH impressions have their effect, and the per-
ccptible/inust bo composed of imperceptible parts [G. v. 24,
105, 107 (N. E. 25, 116, 118)]; whence it is supposed to follow
that finite perceptions, like their objects, must bo infinitely
divisible, and therefore composed of parts of which we are not
conscious. Leibniz, in fact, identified four apparently different
things, namely (1) unconscious perception, (2) confused- per¬
ception, (3) minute perception, arid (4) psychical disposition.
Of these tour, the first is proved by the endless regress re¬
sulting from self-consciousness, and is retjuirod f<»r maintaining
th.'it we .always think and always mirror the whole universe.
The second is required for explaining sense-perception,-and,
!is we have seen, for the differeiices between different monads.
The third follows from the argurmmt that a perception, which
is supposed finite, has as many parts as its object, and since
its object may be the whole universe, the number of its p.arts
may bo infinite. The fourth is i-equired to explfiin the sense
in which truths .are innate—a sense, by the w.ay, very like
that in which Kant’s d priori is in the mind. All four appear
to have been equally denied by Locke and asserted by Leibniz.
It is worth while, therefore, to enquire into their connections.

97. It seems evident th.at unconscious perception is the
most fundamental, and th.at the others follow if this be ad-
jnitted. A confused perception, we rn.ay say, is such that we
are not separately conscious of all its parts. Knowledge is
confused, in Leibniz’s phraseology, when I cannot enumerate
separately the marks required to distinguish the thing known
from other things (G. iv. 422; D. 27). And .so, in confused
perception, though I may be conscious of sovie elcment.s of my
perception, 1 am not conscious of all {e.g. G. v. 100 ; N. E. 120);
for the perception is supposed to be as complex as its object,
and therefore, if I were conscious of all the elements in my per¬
ception, I could wholly distinguish the object from other different
objects. The parts which I do not distinguish are minute*.

^ Cf. G. IV. 674: “At bottom oonfused thoughts are nothing but a multitude
of thoughts which in thoinsclves are like those that are distinct, but are so small
that each separately does not excite our attention, and docs not cause us to
distinguish it.”


168


CONFUSED AND UNCONSCIOUS PERCEPTION.


Again, as regards minute perceptions, Leibniz holds, with
modern psycophysics, that a perception must reach certain
magnitude before we become aware of it, anil thus suraciently
minute perceptions are necessarily unconscious. Psychical
dispositions, finally, are a name for .something which must
be assumed by anyone who holds that every mind has a
definite nature, and is not Locke’s tabula rasa; but the
name per se is not an explanation, which Leibniz’s theory is
intended to be. Locke had denied that any truth is innate,
because whatever wo know ha.s been learnt. Leibniz, ifi reply,
does not, like Shelley on Magdalen Kridge, show astonish¬
ment that babies should forget so soon. But he says that
innate truths are always in the mind, but are only elicited,
i.e. made objects of apj>erception, by experience and education.
The senses, he says, give the material for reflection; we
should not think of thought, if we did not think of some¬
thing else, i.e. of the p.'irticular things which the senses
funii.sh (G. v. 197; N. E. 220). There may, he confesses, be
innate truths in the soul, which the soul never knows; but
until it knows them, it o^mnot know they were always there
(G. V. 75; N. E. 80). That is to say, the mind perceives these
truths, but is not conscious of perceiving them, 'fliis is an
ex]>lanation of the vague idea of psychical dispo.sitions by
means of unconscious percej»tion. Leibniz explains that when
he says truths are innate, he does not mean sintply that the
mind has the faculty of knowing thorn, but that it has the
faculty of finding them in itself (G. V. 70; N. E. 74—5)^
Everything we know is developed out of our own nature, that
is, it is obtained by reflection, by rendering conscious the
perceptions which before were unconscious. Thus all in the
end depends upon unconscious {)erception, whose possibility
was denied by Locke, and whose necessity was demonstrated by
Leibniz.

At the same time, it would appear that minute and un¬
conscious perceptions are, after all, very nearly synonymous,
and that confused perceptions are such as contain parts which

* It cannot be denied, howeror, that both in the remainder of this paneage,
and elsewhere, he falls back into the explanation of truths as psychical disposi¬
tions [e.g. G. V. 79, 97 (N. E. 84,105)].


CONFUSED AND UNCONSCIOUS PERCEPTION.


169


are rainiite or unconscious. To begin with, not all cognitions

are confined. i The knowledge of a necessary truth is distinct

and indivisible—if we have it at all, it is not confused. And

ill any given complex perception, if any part be distinctly

known, that part may bo separated from the remainder, which

alone is properly confused. Since our ptu'ceptions are always

parlially coirect, the part which is correct maybe abstnwjted

as distinct perception, and only the remnimlor will bo confused.

For example, in the perception of matter, since there really

is plura'tity, it is not in the plurality that our conception is

confused. The confusion li(5s in the apparent continuity of

parts, and this is due to their minuteness. And in all Leibniz’s

favourite illusti’ations of confused perc(.*ption— e.g. tho roar

of tho sea, which is com]io.se(l of noi.'^c.s niadcj by separate

waves—he alwavs insists on the niinuteties.s of the constituents.
«/

Thus it seems that we may identify minute and unconscious
perception. This, however, would create a ditticulty in the
o\p!anati<m of innate truths of which wo are unconscious, un-
lofc,;. w<i suppose that our perception of such truths may grow
intensively greater and less, without being divisible into parts.
On this point there is, to my knowledge, nothing definite in
Leibniz, lie does not seem to have periicivcd that confused
perception, if it gives any true knowledge, must bti partly
distinct; and this, I think, prevented him from a clear per¬
ception of the I’olation between confusion and minutcnes.s.
Tho use which he made of these will appear further in the
next chapter, where we shall have to examine his theory of
knowledge.


160


CHAPTER XIV.

LKIHNIZ’S TUKORY OK KNOWLKDGE.

98. Bkkouk 1 begin au account of Leibniz’s theory of
knowledge, I may jus well point out that what 1 am going to
discuss is not exactly Epistemology, but a subject which
belongs in the main to Psychology. The logical discussions of
Chapters II.—V. dealt with that part, in what is commonly
called Epistemology, which seems to me not psychological.
The problem wo are now concerned with is of a different kind;
it is not the problem : What are the geiu;ral conditions of
truth ? or. What is the" nature of propositions ? It is th(5
entirely subsequent pi-oblcm, How do we and other people
come to know any truth ? What is the origin of cognitions as
events in time ? And this question evidently belongs mainly
to Psychology, and, as Leibniz says, is not preliminary in
philosophy [G. V. 15 (N. E. 15; D. 9.5)]. The two questions
have been confused—at any rate since Des Cartes—because
people have supposed that truth would not be true if no one
knew it, but becomes true by being known. Leibniz, as we
shall sec in discussing God, made this confusion, and Locke
might seem to have made it, since he disclaims a merely
psychological purpose*. But that is no reason for our making
it, and in what follows I shall try to avoid it. At the same
time Locke is in one sense justified. The problem is not a
purely psychological one, since it discusses knowledge rather
than belief. From the strict standpoint of Psychology, no
distinction can be made between true and false belief, between
knowledge and error. As a psychical phenomenon, a belief

^ Essay, Introdnction, § 2.


Leibniz’s theory oe knowledge.


161


may be distinguished by its content, but not by the truth or
falsity oflfthat cdlitent. Thus in discussing knowledge, i.e, the
belief m a truer proposition, we presuppose both truth and
belief. The inquiry is thus hybrid, and sub.sequont both to the
philosophical discussion of truth, and to the psychological
discussion of belief.

99. I explained briefly in niy last chapter the sense in
which Leibniz held to innate ideas and truths. They arc in
the mind always, but only become properly known by be¬
coming^ conscious objects of apperception. Leibniz only
endeavours, in the New Essays, to show the innateness of
necessary truths, though he is bound to hold, owing to the
independence of monads, that all the truths that ever come to
be known are imiatii. He finds it easie)-, however, to prove
the impossibility of learning necessary truths by experience,
and trusts, 1 siippose, that this will afford a presumption
against Tjocke’s whole theory of knowledge. He uses the
expression innate truth in the Now Essays, to denote a truth
in which all the ideas are innate, i.e. not <lcrived frt)m sense ;
but he explains that there is a different use of the word
[G. V. 66 (N. E. 70)]. In the .sen.se in which he uses it, “ the
sweet is not the bitter ” is not innate, because sweet and
hittei' come from the external sense.*?. But “ the square is not
the circle” is innate, because square and ciy'cle arc ideas
furnished by the understanding itself [G. V. 79 (N. E. 84)].
Now the cpiestion arises: How does Leibniz distinguish ideas
of 8en.se from other ideas ? For he cannot hold, as other
philosophers might, that ideas of souse are impressed from
without. Nor can he hold that they are such as alone are
capable of representing external things, for they are one and all
confused, and would be absent in a true knowledge of the
world [G. V. 77,109 (N. E. 82, 120)]. Sense-idetis must, there¬
fore, be distinguished by their own nature, and not by a
reference to external causes. On this point, Leibniz, so far
as I know, says nothing quite definite. The nearest approach
to a definite explanation is in the Discours de MMaphysique
(G. IV. 452). He speaks of the action of objects of sense
upon us, he says, in the same way as a Copernican may
speak of sunrise. There is a sense iu which substances may

U


B. L.


162


LEIBNIZ’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE.


be sjiid to act upon each other, “ and in this same sense it may
bo said that wo receive knowledge from with6ut,‘by ^ae minis¬
tration of the senses, because sonic external things cmitain or
express more particularly the reasons which determine our soul
to certain thoughts.” Thus sense-ideas are those in which we
are passive in the sense explained in Chapter XII. Again
sense-ideas are confused and express the external world. “Dis¬
tinct ideas are a representation of God, confused ideas are a
repre.sentation of the universe” [G. v. 99 (N. E. 109)]. He
does, as a matter of fact, denote as sense-ideas all those which
presuppose extension or spatial externality, though space itself
is not an idea of sense. “The ideas which are said to come from
more than one sense,” he explains, “ like those of space, figure,
motion, rest, are rather from eoinmou-scnsc, that is from the
mind itself, for they are ideas of the pure understanding,
but they are related to the external, and the senses make
us perceive them” [G. v. 116 (N. E. 129)]. Thus the quali¬
ties which appear as external are ideas of sense, but all that
is involved in externality itself is not sensational. And the
qualities that appear as external are confused, since they
cannot, as they appear, be states of monads. Ideas derived
from reflection, on the contrary, are not necessarily confused
(cf. G. II. 265), for if they truly describe our own states of
mind, they describe something actual and not a mere phe¬
nomenon. Besides this reason, there is also the fact that by
reflection we discover the categories (or predicaments, as
Leibniz calls them). There is, indeed, much that reminds
one of Kant in Leibniz’s theory of knowledge. Existence, he
says, cannot be found in sensible objects but by the aid of
reason, and hence the idea c»f existence is derived from re¬
flection [G. V. 117 (N. E. 130)]. To the maxim that there is
nothing itj the intellect but what conies from the senses,
Leibniz adds, except the intellect itself (G. v. 100; N. E. 111).
“ It is very true,” he says, “ that our perceptions of ideas come
either from the external senses, or from the internal sense,
which may be called reflection; but this reflection is not
limited to the mere operations of the mind, as is stated (by
Locke); it extends even to the mind itself, and it is in per¬
ceiving the mind that we perceive substance ” [G. v. 23 (N. E.


LEIBNIZ’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE.


163


24)J. The soul, he says, is innate to itself, and therefore con¬
tains cemin i5eas essentially [G. iii. 479; G. V. 93 (N. E. 100)].
Thus it comprises being, unity, substance, identity, cause,
perception, reason, an<l many other notions which the senses
cannot give [G. v. 100 (N. E. Ill)]; and these ideas are pre¬
supposed in any knowledge that can be derived from the
senses. And uoces.sary truths, Leibniz points out, are certainly
known, though the senses cannot show them to be necessary
[G. V. 77 (N. E. 81)]. It follow's that such truths are developed
from the nature of the mind. It may be surmised that Leibniz
dwelt on necessary truths because, in tlu'ir case, knowledge
cannot be supposed due to a causal action of what is known
upon the mind. For what is known, in this case, is not in time,
and therefore cannot be the (?ause of our knowledge. This
inaile it easier to suppose that knowledge is never caused by
what is known, but arises independently from the nature of the
mind.

100. ’l^he doctrine of innate truths, as developed in the
New Essays, is more like Kant’s doctrine than it hjis any right
to be. Space and time and the categoi-ies are innate, while the
(jualities which appear in space are not innate. To the general
theory that all truths which are known are innate, which
Leibniz should have adopted, there is no answer but one which
attacks the whole doctrine of monads. But to the theory of
the New Essays, which adopts the common-sense view that
sense-perceptions are caused by their objects, while innate
truths are incapable of such a cause, there are, I think, answers
which apply equally against Kant’s doctrine that the d priori
is subjective. The argmiient for subjectivity seems to be
simply this : When what we know is the existence of something
now, our knowledge may be supposed caused by that existence,
since there is a temporal relation between them. But when
what we know is an eternal truth, there can be no such
temporal relation. Hence the knowledge is not caused by what
is known. But nothing else, it is hold, could have caused it
unless the knowledge had been already obscurely in the mind.
Hence such knowledge must be, in some sense, innate.. It is
diflScult to state this argument in a form which shall be at all
convincing. It seems to depend upon the radically vicious

11—2


164 LEIBNIZ’S TUKORY OF KNOWLEDGE.

disjunction that knowledge must be either caused by what is
knoAvn or wholly uncaused. In Leibniz, who rejecte^ a causal
action of the objects of perception, this argument, as a means
of distinguishing different kinds of knowledge, is peculiarly
scandalous. But leaving aside this special doctrine, and
admitting that objects cause our perceptions, does it follow that
necessary truths must be innate ^ All who hold this view are
compelled, like Leibniz, to admit that innate knowledge is only
virtual [C. v. 7l (N. E. 76)], while all conscious knowledge is
acquired, and hjis its definite causes. Now if the knowledge
can be rendered conscious by causes other than what is known,
why cannot it be wholly due to .such cau.ses ? All that we can
say is, that the mind must have had a disposition towards such
knowledge—a vague phrase which explains nothing. Moreover,
the same argument applies to sensc-perception. If the mind
were not capable of sense-knowledge, objects could not cause
such knowledge. Sensations of colours, .sounds, smells, etc., must
be equally innate on this view. There is, in fact, just the same
difficulty in admitting conscious knowledge of a necessary truth
to be caused, as in admitting any knowledge of it to be cau.sed.
The difficulty, in each case, is manufactured by supposing that
knowledge can only be caused by what is known. This sup¬
position would have disappeared if people had asked themselves
what really is known. It is supposed that in d priori know¬
ledge we know a proposition, while in perception we know an
existent. This is false. Wc know a })roposition equally in
both ca.scs. In perception we know the proposition that some¬
thing exists. It is evident that wc do not merely know the
something, whatever it be, for this is ccpially present in mere
imagination. What distinguishes perception is the knowledge
that the something exists. And indeed whatever can be known
must be true, and must therefore be a proposition. Perception,
we may say, is the knowledge of an existential proposition, not
consciously inferred from any other proposition, and referring to
the same or nearly the same time as that in which the know¬
ledge exists. If this had been duly realized—if people had
reflected that what is known is always a proposition—they would
have been less ready to suppose that knowledge could be caused
by what is known. To say knowledge is caused in perception


Leibniz's theory of knowledge.


165


by what exists, not by the fact that it exists, is at once to admit
that sucly knowledge is not caused by what is known. Thus
perceptiifa and intellectual knowledge become much more akin
than is generally supposed. We must either hold all knowledge
to be always in the mind, in which case its emergence into
consciousness becomes a problem, or we must admit that all
knowledge is acquired, but is never caused by the proposition
which is known. What its causes are, in any particular case,
becomes a purely empirical problem, which may be left wholly
to Psychology.

101. There is, moreover, a great difficulty as to what
Leibniz meant by ideas which arc innate. This question is
dealt with in the New Essays, at the beginning of Book TI
[G. V. 09 (N, E. 109)]. “ Is it not true,’' Locke is made to ask,

‘'that the idea is the object of thouglit?” “I admit it,"
Leibniz replies, “ prf)vided you add that it is an immediate
internal object, and that this object is an expression of the
nature or the (qualities of things. If the idea were the foriti
of thought, it would spring up and cease with the actual
thoughts which correspond to it; but being the object, it may
be before and after the thoughts'." Thus an idea, though it
is in the mind, is neither knowledge nor desire; it i.« not a
thought, but what a thought thinks about. This passage
makes it clear that the only reason Leibniz had for saying ideas
exist in the mind is that they evidently do not exist outside of
it. He seems never to have asked himself why they should be
supposed to exist at all, nor to have considered the difficulty in
making them merely mental existents. Consider, for example,
the idea 2. This is not, Leibniz confesses, my thought of 2,
but something which my thought is about. But this .some¬
thing exists in my mind, and is therefore not the same as the
2 which some one else thinks of. Hence we cannot say that
there is one definite number 2, which different people think of;
there arti as many numbers 2 as there are minds. These, it
will be said, all have something in common. But this some¬
thing can be nothing but another idea which will, therefore, in
turn, consist of as many different ideas as there are minds.
Thus we are led to an endless regress. Not only can no two
' Cf. also G. HI. 659 (D. 236); iv. 451.


166


LEIBNIZ’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE.


people think of the same idea, but they cannot even think of
ideas that have anything in common, unlcsu there'^re ideas
which are not essentially constituents of any mind With
Locke’s definition, that an idea is the object of thought, we may
agree; but we must not seek to evade the consequence that an
idea is not merely something in the mind, nor must we seek to
give every idea an existence somewhere else. Precisely the
same criticism applies to the statement that knowledge, ideas
and truths "are only natural habits, i.e. active and passive
dispositions and aptitudes” (N. E. 105 ; G. V. 97). *

102. Sense-knowledge in Leibniz is not properly dis¬
tinguished from intellectual knowledge by its genesis, but by its
nature. It differs in that the qualities with which it deals are
spatially extended, and are one and all confused. From their
confusion it follows that those which seem simple are in reality
complex, though we are unable to make the analysis. Thus
green, though it appears simple, is, Leibniz thinks, really a
mixture of insensible portions of blue and yellow [G. V. 275
(N. E. 320)]. But how blue and yellow would appear, if they
were distinctly perceived, he does not inform us. He seems to
think, however, as was natural to one who believed in analytic
judgments, that the nature of our evidence for necessary and for
sensational truths is different- The first truth of reason, he
says, is the law of contrsidiction, whilst the first truths of fact
are as many as the immediate perceptions. That I think is
no more immediate than that various things are thought by
me, and this is urged as a criticism of Dos Cartes’ cogito
[G. IV. 357 (D. 48)]. That is to .say, the law of contradiction
is the solo ultimate premiss for necessary truths, but for con¬
tingent truths there are as many ultimate premisses as there
are experiences. Nothing, he says, should be taken as primitive
principles, except experiences and the law of identity or contra¬
diction, without which last there would be no difference be¬
tween truth and falsehood [G. v. 14 (D. 94; N. E. 13)]. Thus
many truths of fact have no evidence except self-evidence, but
this is only the case, among necessary truths, as regards the
law of contradiction. The self-evident truths of fact, however,
are all psychological: they concern our own thoughts. To this
extent Leibniz is at one with Des Cartes and with Berkeley.


LEIBNIZ’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE.


167


Where he is more philosophical than either is in perceiving
that trutfts o£ fafct presuppose necessary truths, and that our
own exfetence is* not therefore an ultimate and fundamental
premiss for all truths. My own existence is an axiom, he says,
in the sense of being indemonstrable, not in the sense of
being necessary [G. V. 391 (N. E. 469)]. Like all finite exist¬
ence, it is contingent, but it is just as certain as necessary
truths (N. E. 499; G. v. 415). Thus Leibniz agrees with Locke
that we have an intuitive knowledge of our own existence, a
demon.^rative knowledge of God’s existence, and a sensitive
knowledge of that of other things {ib.). But the sensitive
knowledge may be doubted, and cannot be accepted without
some general ground for the existence of other things [G. v. 117
(N. E. 130)]. In this theory which, in its general outlines, is
more or loss Cartesian, there are, as I have already pointed out,
two distinct advances u{)on Des Cartes. The first is that my
own existence is not taken as the premiss for necessary ti-uths;
the second is that the existence of my various thoughts is as
certain as the existence of myself. Leibniz did not discover,
what seems equally true, that the existence of external things
is just as certain and immediate as that of my own thoughts,
and thus he was unable, as we saw, to justify his belief in
an external world.

103. I come now to another respect in which Leibniz
refined upon lies Cartes, namely in the doctrine known as the
quality of ideas. This is developed in the “ Thoughts on
Knowledge, Truth and Ideas” (D. 27—32; G. iv, 422—6)
(1684). Des Cartes held that whatever is clearly and dis¬
tinctly conceived is true. This maxim, Leibniz points out,
is useless without criteria of clearness and distinctness [G. IV.
425 (D. 31)]. He therefore lays down the following defini¬
tions. Knowledge is either obscure or clear. Clear knowledge
is confused or distinct. Distinct knowledge is adequate or
inadequate, and is also either symbolical or intuitive. Perfect
knowledge is both adequate and intuitive.

As to the meanings of these terms, a notion is obscure when
it does not enable me to recognize the thing represented, or
distinguish it from other similar things; it is clear when it does
enable me to recognize the thing represented. Clear knowledge


168


Leibniz’s theory of knowledge.


is confused when I cannot enumerate separately the marks
required to distinguish the thing known frdirn V)theSr things,
although there arc such marks. Instances of this are'^ colours
and smells, which though we cannot analyze them, are certainly
complex, as may be seen by considering their causes, (We
must remember that Leibniz believed perception to have
always the same degree of complexity as its object, and since
green can be produced by mixing blue and yellow, a green
object is complex, and therefore our perception of gi-eon is also
complex.) Clear knowledge is distinct, either when we can
separately enumerate the marks of what is known— i.e. when
there is a nominal definition—or where what is known is
indefinable but primitive, i.e. an ultimate simple notion. Thus
a composite notion, such as gold, is distinct when all its marks
arc known clearly ; it is adequate, if all the marks are also
known distinctly; if they are not known distinctly, the know¬
ledge is inadequiite. Leibniz is not certain whether there is
any perfect example of ade(inate knowledge, but Arithmetic,
he thinks, approaches it very nearly. Distinct knowledge is
also divided according as it is symbolical or intuitive. It is
symbolical or blind, when we do not perceive the whole nature
of the object at one time, but substitute signs or symbols, as in
Mathematics, whose meaning we can recall when we will.
When we embrace in thought at once all the elementary
notions which compo.se an idea, our thought is intuitive. Thus
our knowledge of distinct primitive ideas, if we have it, must be
intuitive, while our knowledge of complex notions is, in general,
only symbolical.

104. This doctrine has important bearings on definition.
A real definition, as opposed to one which is merely nominal,
shows the possibility of the thing defined, and thtmgh this may
be done d posteno7i, by showing the thing actually existing, it
may also be done d priori, wherever our knowledge is
adequate. For in this case, a complete analysis has been
effected without discovering any contradiction; and where
there is no contradiction, that which is defined is necessarily
possible [G. iv. 424—5 (1). 30)]. On definition generally,
Leibniz makes many important observations. A definition is
only the distinct exposition of an idea [G. V. 92 (N. E. 99)],


LEIBNIZ’S THEORY OP KNOWLEDGE.


169


but it may be either real or nominal. It is nominal when
it merel/ en&m^rates marks, without showing them to be
compatible. It fs real when all the marks are shown to be
compatible, so that what is defined is possible. The idea
defined is then real, even if nothing ever exists of which it
can be predicated [G. v. 270 (N. E. 325)]. Simple terms can¬
not have a nominal definition ; but when they are only simple
with regard to us, like green, they can have a real definition
explaining their cause, as when we say green is a mixture of
blue and yellow [G. V. 275 (N. E. 319)]. The continuity of
forms gives him some trouble in regard to definition, and com¬
pels him to admit that we may be in doubt whether some
babies are hmnau or not. But he points out, against Locke,
that though we may be unable to decide the (piestion, there
always is only one true answei-. If the creature i.s rational, it
is human, otherwise it is not human ; and it always is cither
rational or not rational, though we may bo in doubt as to
the altemativc to be chosen [G. v. 290 (N.E. p. 339)]. There
is, however, a real difficulty in all cases of continuity, that
an infinitesimal change in the object may make a finite change
in the idea; as the loss of one more hair may just make a
man bald. In such cases, Leibniz thinks that nature has not
precisely determined the notion [G. v. 281 (N. E. 328)]; but
this seems an inade(|uate reply.

106. Coimectetl with Leibniz’s notion of definitions, and
of the reduction of all axioms to such as are identical, or
immediate consequences of definitions [G. V. 92 (N. E. 99)],
is his idea of a Charactenstica Universalis, or Universal
Mathematics. This was an idea which he cherished through¬
out his life, and on which he already wrote at the ago of
20^ He seems to have thought that the symbolic method,
in which formal rules obviate the necessity of thinking, could
produce everywhere the same fruitful results as it has produced
in the sciences of number and quantity. “ Telescopes and
microscopes,” he says, “ have not been so useful to the eye
as this instrument would bo in adding to the capacity of
thought” (G. VII. 14). “If we had it, wo should be able to
reason in metaphysics and morals in much the same way as
^ In the Dissertatio de Arte Combinatoria, O. iv. 27—102.


170


Leibniz’s theory of knowledge.


in geometry and analysis ” (G. VIT. 21), “ If controversies
were to arise, there would be no more nedd of dhjputation
between two philosophers than between two aecoVintants.
For it would suffice to take their pencils in their hands, to sit
down to their slates, and to say to each other (with a friend
as witness, if they liked): Let us calculate” (G. vil. 200).
By establishing the premisses in any a prioH science, the
rest, he thought, could be effected by mere rules of inference;
and to establish the right premisses, it was only necessary
to analyze all the notions employed until simple notions were
reached, when all the axioms would at once follow as identical
propositions. He urged that this method should be employed
in regard to Euclid’s axioms, which he held to be capable of
proof [G. V. 92 (N. E. 99)]. The Universal Characteristic seems
to have been something very like the syllogism. The syllogi.sm,
he says, is one of the most fruitful of human inventions, a kind
of universfil Mathematics [G. V. 4G0 (N. E. 559)]. What he
desired was evidently akin to the modern science of Symbolic
Logic*, which is definitely a branch of Mathematics, and was
developed by Boole under the impression that he was deal¬
ing with the “ Laws of Thought.” As a mathematical idea—
as a Universal Algebra, embracing Formal Logic, ordinary
Algebra, and Geometry as special cases—Leibniz’s conception
has shown itself in the highest degree useful. But as a
method of pursuing philosophy, it had the formalist defect
which results from a belief in analytic propositions, and which
led Spinoza to employ a geometrical method. For the business
of philosophy is just the discovery of those simple notions,
and those primitive axioms, upon which any calculus or
science must be based. The belief that the primitive axioms
are identical leads to an emphasis on remits, rather than
premisses, which is radically opposed to the true philosophic
method. There can be neither difficulty nor interest in the
premisses, if the.se are of such a kind as “ A is A ” or “ AB
is not non-A.” And thus Leibniz supposed that the great
requisite was a convenient method of deduction. Whereas,

1 Cf. G. vn. 214—15, 230, where several of the rules of the Calculus of
Symbolic Logic ore given.


LEIBNIZ’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE.


171


in fact, the problems of philosophy should be anterior to
deductioif, An •idea which can be defined, or a proposition
which /tean be proved, is of only subordinate philosophical
interest. The emphasis should be laid on the indefinable and
indemonstrable, and here no method is available save intuition.
The Universal Characteristic, therefore, though in Mathematics
it was an idea of the highest importance, showed, in philo¬
sophy, a radical misconception, encouraged by the syllogism,
and based upon the belief in the analytic nature of neces¬
sary tfuths^


• For an account of Leibniz’H views on this matter sue Guhrauer, op. cit.
Vol. I. p. 320ff. For a full treatment, see Couturat, I.a J.onique de Leibnitz,
Pans, 1900 (in the press).


172


CHAPTER XV,

PHOOt'S OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD.

106. I COME HOW to the weakest part in Leibniz’s phi¬
losophy, the part most full of inconsistencies. Whatever, in
the doctrine wo have examined, seemed arbitrary, or in need
of further explanation, was easily explained by the lazy device
of reference to an Omnipotent Creatfir. And not only unavoid¬
able ditHculties, but others which might have been avoided,
were left, because they reinforced the arguments upon which
Leibniz’s orthodoxy loved to dwell. A philosophy of substance,
we may say generally, should be either a monism or a monad-
ism. A monism is necessarily pantheistic, an.d a rnonudism,
when it is logical, is as necc.ssarily atheistic. Leibniz, how¬
ever, felt any philosophy to bo worthless which did not estab¬
lish the existence of God, and it caniiot be denied that certain
gaps in his system were patched up by a reference to the
Divine Power, Goodness and Wisdom. Let us now examine
what the arguments were by which this result was attained.

There arc four distinct arguments, in Leibniz, which
attempt to prove the existence of God. Only one of these, so
far as I know, was invented by him, and that was the worst of
the four. They are: The Ontological Argument, the Cosmo¬
logical Argument, the Argument from the Eternal Truths, and
the Argument from the Pre-established Harmony.

107. The Ontological Argument, which Des Cartes had
adapted from Anselm, is not much used by Leibniz, and is, in
the Cartesian form, severely criticized by him. At the same
time, it and the argument from the eternal truths alone start


PROOFS OP THE EXISTENCE OF GOD.


173


from necessary premisses, and alone, therefore, are formally
capable of hfrin^ing out a necessary result. And it is, of
coursefquite essential to show that GckI’s existence is a neces¬
sary truth. Moreover, if this be true, the Ontological Argu¬
ment must be substantially correct. ITor if it is .self-contra¬
dictory to suppose that God does not exist, it follows that his
existence is of his es.sence, and conso(|uently, that his existence
can be inferred from his essence. And this is precisely‘what
the Ontological Argument attempts. Accordingly Leibniz is
carefuT not wholly tf) reject it.

The Ontological Argument may be ])ut in many ways. Tn
its original form, it states that God has all perfections, and
cxi.stence is among perfections—that is, the goo«l is better if it
c^xists than if it does not exist. Couse»|uently existence is of
God’s essence; to suppose that the most perfect Being docs not
exist, is .self-contradictory. Again God may bes defined, without
reference to the Good, as the most real Being, or the sum of all
reality, and then etjually it follows from his e.ssenco that he
exists. To these aigumciits Lciibniz objected that they do not
prove the idea of God to be a 2 >ofisihle irlea. 'rhoy pi-ove, he
admits, what is true only of God, that if he be po.sHible he
exists [e.g. G. v. 419 (N. E. 004); G. vi. G14 (J). 224; L. 242)].
This objection had been already marie to Des Cartes, and
replied to in the answers to the second objections to his Medi¬
tations’. Leibniz showed, without difficulty, that the idea of
God is possible. His possibility follows d posterioi-i from the
existence of contingent things; for necessary being is being of
itself, and if this were not possible, no being would be possible
[G. IV. 40G (D. 137)]. But this line of argument belongs
rather to the cosmological proof. God’s possibility follows
d pHori from his having no limitations, no negation, and there¬
fore no contradiction [G. vi. G1.4 (1). 224; L. 242)]. This
argument is well stated in the paper which Leibniz submitted
to Spinoza at the Hague in 1G7G, with the title, “That the
most perfect Being exi.sts’*.” The contents of this paper, in
spite of its early date, are in complete harmony with his later

^ See Oeuvres de Des Cartes^ ed. Cousin, Vol. i. pp. 407, 440 ff.

^ G. VII. 261 (N. E. 714). Also Stein, Leibniz u, Spinoza, Ocilage x. Cf.
Beilago vn., Jan. 1678.


174


PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD.


philosophy. He undertakes to prove, from premisses which
he always accepted, that God is possible, add then uses the
Ontological Argument to show that God is Rctual. 'Ehus h©
prefaces the Ontological Argument by exactly the reasoning
which he always held to be required.

108. The argument is as follows. Every quality which is
simple or absolute, positive and indefinable, and expresses its
object without limits, is a perfection. All such qualities can be
predicates of one and the same subject. For let us assume that
two of them, A and B, are incompatible. Their incompatibility,
Leibniz says, cannot be provetl without resolving them, other¬
wise their nature would not enter into the reasoning. But
both are irresolvable. Nor can their incompatibility, Leibniz
thinks, be known per se. Hence, A and B are not incompatible,
and such a subject is possible. And since existence is a per¬
fection, such a subject exists.

This reasoning is certainly valid, in so fjir as it proves that
God, so defined, is not self-contradictory; and with the analytic
theory of necessary judgments, this is all that is re<|uired to
prove him possible. The- interesting point, however, i.s the
Ontological Argument itself, which is involved in saying that
since existence is a perfection, God exists. This depends upon
reganling existence as a predicate, which Leibniz does [G. V.
339 (N. E. 401)]. But he recognizes, as regards finite things,
a great difference between existence and all other predicates.
Existential judgments alone are not analytic. In any proposi¬
tion in which the predicate is not existence, the predicate is
contained in the subject; but when the predicate is existence,
it is nob so contained, except in the one case of God. Leibniz
would have admitted, what Kant urged, that a hundred thalers
which I merely imagine are exactly like a hundred thalers
which really exist; for this is involved in the synthetic nature
of assertions of existence. If this were not the case, the notion
of a hundred actual thalers would be different from that of a


hundred possible thalers; existence would be contained in the
notion, and the existential judgment would be analytic. But
Leibniz ought not to have held existence to be a predicate at
all, since two subjects, one of which has a given predicate,
while the other does not have it, cannot possibly be exactly


PROOFS OF 1’HE EXISTENCE OF GOD.


175


alike. Ho ought, therefore, to have arrived at Kant’s position,
that cxistSiiic© is tiot a predicate, and that God’s non-existence
cannot rf>be self-coutradictory\ Ho endeavoured, instead, to
bridge the gulf between contingent and necessary truths, i.e.
between such as are existential and such as are not so, by
means of the necessary existence of God. This attempt is at
the bottom of all his arguments, and is especially obvious in the
case of the cosmological argument, which wo must now examine.

109. The cosmological argument is, at first sight, more
plausibre than the ontological argument, but it is less philo¬
sophical, and derives its superior plaiusibility only from conceal¬
ing its implications. It has a formal vice, in that it starts from
finite existence as its datum, and admitting this to bo 'con¬
tingent, it proceeds to infer an existent which is not contingent.
But as the premiss is contingent, the conclusion also must be
contingent. This is only to be avoided by pointing out that
the argument is analytic, that it proceeds from a complex
proposition to one which is logically presupposed in it, and that
necessary truths may be involved in those that are contingent.
But such a procedure is not properly a proof of the presupposi¬
tion. If a jiidgnuiut A prosu]r)poses another B, then, no doubt,
if A is true, B is true. But it is impossible that there should
bo valid grounds for admitting A, which ai c not also grounds
for admitting B. In Euclid, for example, if you admit the
propositions, you must admit the axioms; but it would be
absurd to give this as a reason for admitting the axioms. Such
an argument is at best ad hominem, when your opponent is a
poor reasoner. If people art* willing to admit finite existence,
then you force them to admit God’s existen(;e; but if they ask
a reason why they should admit finite existence, the only
grounds, if the cosmological argument be valid, are such as
lead first to the existence of God; such grounds, however, if
they exist, are only to be found in the ontological argument;
and this Leibniz virtually admits by calling this pn)of an argu¬
ment d posteriori [G. vi. 614 (D. 224; L. 242)].

^ “Being is evidently not a real predicate, i.e. a conception of something,
which could be added to the conception of a thing. It is merely the positing of
a thing, or of certain determinations, in itself” {Reine Vernunft, ed. Hart,
p. 409).


176


PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD.


The cosmological argument, as Leibniz states it, is briefly
as follows. The present world is necessary kypcthetically, but
not absolutely. Since it is what it is, it follows that it,will be
what it will be. But causality, which connects one state of the
world with the next, never shows why there is any world at
all. Even if wc suppose the eternity of the world, we cannot
escape the necessity for some reason of the whole series;
though each stjite follows from the preceding, we never got a
suflicicnt reason why there are any states at all. Hence there
must be some extrarnundane reason of things. The whole
collection of finite existeiits is contingent, and theretore
demands a sufficient reason; but this cannot be found within
the series, since every term is contingent, and itself requires a
sufficient reason. Hence the sufficient reason of all contingents
must be itself not contingent, but metaphysically necessary.
Moreover the reason of the existing can only be derived from
the existing. Hence the metaphysically necessary sufficient
reason of all contingents must be a necessary existent, t.e. a
Being whose essence involves existence; and this can only be
God [G. VII. 302 (D. 100; L. 337)].

110. This argument is open to attack on the ground that,
if the reason of an existent can only be some other existent,
then the ontological argument cannot be valid. “ For in
eternal things it must be understood that, even if there were
no cau.se, there is a reason, which, in perduring things, is
necessity itself or essence” (lb.). Thus it is only the reason
of a contingent existent that must be an existent. But this
can only be on the ground chat the reason of the contingent
mu.st be one that inclines, but does not necessitate, which is,
indeed, of the very essence of contingency. Accordingly, when
God’s necessary existence has been obtained, the world of con¬
tingents must not follow from it necessarily. It follows that
God’s volitions must be contingent, for they necessarily attain
their effects, and if these effects are to bo contingent it can
only be, therefore, because the volitions are contingent. The
volitions themselves, therefore, require a sufficient reason,
which inclines but does not necessitate. This is found in God’s
goodness. It is held that God is free to do evil, but does not
do so [G. VI. 386 (D. 203); G. vii. 409 (D. 274)]. But God’s


PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OP GOD.


177


goodness itself must be supposed necessary (cf. p. 39 supra).
Thus the coninngbncy of existential propositions rests ulti¬
mately Aipon the assertion that God docs not necessarily do
good (G. IV. 438). God’s good actions, in fact, have to be
conceived as a collection of particular cxistents, each having a
sufficient reason in his goodness. Or else we may place their
sufficient reason in his wisdom, namely in his knowledge of
the good, which is a knowledge of necessary propositions.
God’s goodness, Leibniz says, led him to desire to create the
gowl, hiS wisdom showed him the best possible, and his power
enabled him to create it (G. vi. 167).

But to return to the cosmological argument. By saying
that the whole world of contingents is still contingent, and
must have a reason in some metaphysically necessary Being
other than itself, Leibniz endeavours to exclude the pantheism
which lurks in all arguments for God. He might equally well
have said that every finite existent is conditioned by some
other existent, but the whole series of existents cannot be con¬
ditioned by any existent. It would follow that its sufficient
reason w^as not an existent, and therefore that the sum total of
existence is metaphysically necessary. This form of argument
would, however, have landed him in Spinozism. It is very
Jinalogous to the form used by Mr Bradley, and it really under¬
lies Leibniz’s argument. Its validity is indisputable if the
existential theory of judgment be admitted. To maintain that
there is no truth is self-contradictory, for if our contention were
itself true, there would be truth. If, then, all truth consists in
propositions about what exists, it is self-contradictory to main¬
tain that nothing exists. Thus the existence of something is
metaphysically necessary. This argument, which is set forth
at length in Book I., Chaps, ii.—iv. of Mr Bradley’s Logic,
partakes of both the Ontological and Cosmological arguments.
It also suggests Leibniz’s proof from the Eternal Truths, from
which we shall discover the sense in which he held the existen¬
tial theory of judgments.

111 . We have seen that Leibniz held the eternal truths
to be one and all hypothetical. They do not assert the exist¬
ence of their subjects. The possible is wider than the actual,
and all the possible worlds can only be described by eternal

B. 12


1*78


PROOFS OP THE EXISTENCE OF GOD.


truths. But this view, which seems to me thoroughly sound,
alarms Leibniz. It may be objected, he thinlcs, that possibilities
or essences prior to existence are fictions. To this h^5 replies,
that they are not fictions, but must be sought in the mind of
God, along with the eternal truths. The existence of the actual
series of things, he continues, shows his assertion to be not
gratuitous; for the I'eason of the series is not to be found
within it, but must be sought in metaphysical necessities or
eternal truths, while at the same time the reason of a con-

C

tingent existent must itself exist. Therefore the eternal truths
must have their existence in an absolutely or metaphysically
necessary Being, i.e. in God [G. vii. 305 (D. 103; L. 343)].
Thus confused ideas are those which represent the universe,
while distinct ideas, from which necessary truths are derived,
are a representation of God (N. E. 109; G. v, 99). And God’s
understanding is described as the region of the eternal truths
(G. VI. 115; G. VII. 311). In God those things which otherwise
would be imaginary are realized [G. vir. 305 (D. 103; L. 343)].
Thus relations derive their reality from the supreme reason
(G. v. 210; N. E. 235), i,e. from the fact that they exist in the
divine mind. God, according to Leibniz, sees not only indi¬
vidual monads and their various states, but also the relations
between monads and in this consists the reality of relations^
Thus in the case of relations, and of eternal truths generally,
esse is percipi. But the perception must be God’s perception,
and this, after all, has an object, though an internal one [G. vi.
614 (D. 225; L. 243)]. Thus our knowledge of the eternal
truths becomes a knowledge of God, since these truths are
part of God’s nature. And this is why rational spirits, which
know eternal truths, are said to mirror not only the universe
of creatures, but also God.

112. This argument I can only describe as scandalous. In
the first place it confuses God’s knowledge with the truths
which God knows—a confusion which, in other places, Leibniz
quite clearly exposes. “ Essences,” he says, “ can, in a certain

way, be conceived of without God.And the very essence of

God embraces all other essences to such a degree that God
cannot be perfectly conceived without them” (D. 175; F. de C.

^ G. II. 488. Cf. also Monadology, § 48.


PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD.


179


24). And /igain; “ It can no more be said that God and the
things known Hy CTod are one dnd the same thing, than that the
mind attfl the things perceived by the mind are the same”
(D. 177; F. de C. 34). This last passage is an argument against
Spinoza, and doubtless has only existents in view. But if truths
can be the same as the knowledge of them, why may not this be
so when the truths are existential ? And the fomer passage
cannot be thus disposed of, since it deals explicitly with essences,
and points out the true argument, namely that God cannot be
conceived of without essences. Moreover, as I have already
suggested, God’s existence itself, since it is proved, has a
ground; and this ground cannot be identified with God’s know*
ledge of it. The eternal truths, Leibniz strongly urges, do
not depend, as Dos Cartes had held, upon God’s will. For this
there are many reasons. In the first place, God’s will depends
upon a sufficient reason, which must always be his perception
of the good. But this can only bo a motive to God’s choice, if
the good itself is independent of such choice. God could have
no motive in deciding what was to bo decreed good, unless one
possible decree was better than another, and thus we get into
a vicious circle*. Moreover God’s existence is among eternal
truths, and who would dare, Leibniz asks triumphantly, to
declare that God’s existence is diie to his will (G. vii. 310—1) ?
But who would dare, we may retort, to say that God’s existence
depends upon his understanding ? Would any one maintain
that the reason of God’s existence is his knowledge of it ? If
this were the case, proofs of the existence of God ought first to
prove that God knows of it, and thence deduce that what he
knows, i.e. his own existence, is true. But it must be obvious
that his existence docs not depend upon his knowledge of it.
Nor c>an it be maintained that the two arc identical, for his
knowledge comprises many other propositions, and he contains,
besides knowledge, the attributes of Goodness and Power.
Thus his existence cannot be synonymous with his knowledge
of it. And the same is evident, on reflection, concerning all
other truths. Leibniz maintains that God’s view is veritable,
that what he knows is true {e.g, G. iv. 439); and he evidently
regards this statement as not tautological. But if truth means
* G. VII. 366 (D. 244), 379; iv. 344.


180


PEOOFS OP THE EXISTENCE OP GOD.


what God knows, the statement that God’s view is ^veritable is
equivalent to the statement that he knov^s \5^hat he knows.
Moreover, God’s existence is deduced from fhe Law of- Contra¬
diction, to which it is therefore subsequent. Hence we cannot,
without a vicious circle, maintain that this law is only due to
God’s knowledge of it. Again, without the law of identity or
contradiction, as Leibniz truly says [G. v. 14 (D. 94 ; N. E. 14)],
there would be no dilference between truth and falsehood.
Therefore, without this law, it could not bo true, rather than
false, that God exists. Hence, though God’s existence may
depend upon the law of contradiction, this law cannot in turn
depend upon God’s existence. Finally, consider the very mean¬
ing of the word proposition. Leibniz htis to maintain that
eternal truths ewist in the mind of God [G. VI. 2.30; VII. .305
(D. 103; L. .343)]. Thus we cannot say that God is subjected
to eternal truths, for they form part of his very nature, to wit
his understanding. But again Leibniz speaks of them as the
internal object of his understanding [G. vi. 614 (D. 225; L.
243)], thus suggesting by the word object, what the word
internal is intended to deny, that the truths are something
different from the knowledge of them. And this, if we consider,
is obvious. For how can an eternal truth exist ? The Law of
Contradiction, or the proposition that two and two are four, or
the truths of Geometry—these, we are told, exist in the mind
of God. But it must surely be evident, if we consider the
matter, that these truths are wholly incapable of existence, and
that what exists is only the knowledge of them. It can scarcely
be maintained that in studying Euclid we are studying God’s
Psychology. If, to mend matters, we were to say that truths
actually constitute God’s understanding, and if this is what
makes them true, then, since we must always distinguish
between a proposition and the knowledge of it, the impious con¬
sequence follows that God can have no knowledge. Truths are
God’s states of mind, and we know these truths; but God cannot
know them, since knowledge is distinct from what is known',

1 This objection is urged by Leibniz himself, in a paper written probably
about 1680, against Des Cartes. “The God of Des Cartes,** he says, “has
neither will nor understanding, since, according to Des Cartes, he has not the
good for the object of his will, nor the true for the object of his understanding **
(G. IV. 299).


«


PROOFS OP THE EXISTENCE OF GOD.


181


And generally if a truth be something existing in some
mind, then that mind, and another which knows the tnith,
cannot fee aware of the same truth. If we once admit that
there is one and only one Law of Contradiction, which is
the same whoever knows it, then the law itself is something
distinct from all knowledge, and cannot logically depend upon
God’s mind. Unless truth be distinct from God’s knowledge,
there is nothing for God to know. God’s understanding is
constituted by knowledge of the eternal truths, and if these in
turn are* constituted by his knowledge, there is no way for his
knowledge to begin, and no reason why it should know the
propositions it docs know rather than other propositions. Thus
the eternal truths must bo true apart from God’s knowledge,
and cannot therefore be used to prove his existence. Leibniz
seems, in fact, never to have made up his mind as to whether
God’s understanding is a collection of truths, or the knowledge
of this collection. The former alternative would have led to a
God almost exactly like Spinoza’s, but would have left no place
for God’s will. The latter should have left the truth of what
God knows independent of his knowledge, and therefore not a
ground for inferring the existence of the knowledge or of the
K newer.

113. We have now seen the fillacies involved in Leibniz’s
deduction of God from the eternal truths. I wish to reinforce
the above arguments by some general remarks on truth and
knowledge, suggested by that proof.

It is a view commonly held that, as Leibniz puts it, the
eternal truths would not subsist if there were no understanding,
not even God’s (G. vi. 226. Cf. Spinoza, Ethics, ir. 7, Schol.).
This view has been encouraged by Kant’s notion that d priori
truths are in some way the work of the mind, and has been
exalted by Hegelianism into a first principle. Since it is self¬
contradictory to deny all truth, it has thus become self-contra¬
dictory to deny all knowledge. And since, on this view,
nothing can be true without being known, it has become neces¬
sary to postulate either a personal God, or a kind of pantheistic
universal Mind from whose nature truths perpetually fiow or
emanate. What I wish to point out is, that Leibniz’s proof of
God is merely a theological form of this argument, and that


182


PROOFS OP THE EXISTENCE OF GOD.


everything that I urged against Leibniz applies equally against
all who make truth dependent upon knowJodgs. It is to be
remembered, in this connection, that knowledge is aicomplex *
conception, compounded of truth and belief. Belief, as a
psychical phenomenon, is just the same when the proposition
believed is false as when it is true. The first difficulty en¬
countered by the view I am discussing is, therefore, the distinc¬
tion between true and false belief, between knowledge and
error. The second difficulty is analogous to the difficulty of
supposing the truth that God exists to be dependent upon
God’s knowledge of this truth. Is the proposition, that truth
depends upon knowledge, itself true or false? If false, the
position collapses. If true, how can it be itself dependent
upon knowledge ? To make it thus dependent is to incur a
vicious circle; to make it not dependent, is again to abandon
the position. A third difficulty is, that knowledge is not a
simple idea, and the propositions defining it must be prior to
the proposition that knowledge exists.

The position rests on the same basis as the cosmological
argument. This depends upon the existential theory of judg¬
ment, the theory, namely, that all truth consists in describing
what exists. The dependence of truth upon knowledge is really
a particular case of the existential theory of propositions, and
like that theory, involves the gross atisumption that what does
not exist is nothing, or even meaningless. For truth is evi¬
dently something, and must, on this theory, bo connected with
existence. Now knowledge (perhaps) exists, and therefore it is
convenient to make truth a property of knowledge. Thus the
proposition, that a given proposition is true, is reduced to the
proposition that it is known, and thus becomes existential.
Hence Leibniz is right in connecting veiy closely the cosmo¬
logical argument and the argument from the eternal truths
[e.g, G. VII. 302—5 (D. 100—103; L. 337—343)]. But he is
mistaken, at least so it seems to me, in holding that truth de¬
pends upon existence. And for one who held the possible to be
wider than the actual, this theory is quite peculiarly untenable.

The inconsistencies, in which Leibniz is involved by the
belief in God, are so many and various that it would take long
to develop them all. The one which I have just mentioned is.


• PROOFS OP THE EXISTENCE OF GOD. 183

however, among the most important. The view that the actual
is not coe^ten»ive*with the possible is, as we have seen, quite
essentia^ to Leibniz’s doctrine of contingency and freedom, as
well as to his solution of the problem of evil. This view is
denied by the existential theory of judgments, upon which two
of Leibniz’s proofs of God depend. If every proposition ascribes
a predicate to some existent, then we cannot maintain, as an
ultimate truth, that the non-existent is possible. We can only
mean by this that God, or some one else, believes it to be
possible* and we must hold, if we are logical, that this belief is
erroneous. Thus Leibniz falls, by his introduction of God, into
a Spinozistic necessity: only the actual is possible, the non¬
existent is impossible, and the ground for contingency -has
disappeared.

Another aspect of Spijiozism is also inevitable, if God be
conceived as having any influence on the monads. This is the
belief in only one substance. Before developing this inconsist¬
ency, however, it will be well to examine the proof which was
Leibniz’s favourite, the proof which he himself invented, that,
namely, from the pre-established harmony.

114. The proof from the pre-established harmony is a
particular form of the so-called physico-theological proof, other¬
wise known as the argument from design. This is the argument
of the Bridgewater Treatises, and of popular theology generally.
Being more palpably inadequate than any of the others, it has
acquired a popularity which they have never enjoyed. The
world is so well constructed, we are told, that it must have had
a highly skilful Architect. In Leibniz’s form, the argument
states that the harmony of all the monads can only have arisen
from a common cause \e.g. G. iv. 486 (D. 79; L. 316)]. That
they should all exactly synchronize, can only be explained by a
Creator who pre-determined their synchronism. Let us see
what this theory involves.

There are, roughly speaking, two functions which a Chris¬
tian God has to fulfil. He has to be a Providence and a
Creator. Leibniz merged the first of these functions in the
second S though he often denied that he had done so. God, he


^ See Aniauld’s objectione, G. ii. 16.


184


j?ROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD.


says, is the soul’s immediate external object, and is able to act
directly on the soul, though apparently he vtsry sselclom does so
[G. V. 99 (N. E. 109)]. This is a sense in which Leibnici agrees
to Malebranche’s doctrine, that we see all things in God [G. vr.
578 (D. 189)]. But it is better to do away entirely with the
immediate operation of God on the world, which is plainly
inconsistent with Leibniz’s logic. All the grounds against the
interaction of substances are, as we saw, grounds giving meta¬
physical necessity, and therefore applying equally against God’s
action on the world. We will therefore suppose that* God is
the Creator, and that his Providence is shown only in creating
the best possible world.

Whenever Leibniz is not thinking of theological objections,
he regards God’s action on the woild as entirely limited to
creation. God’s goodness, he says, led him to desire to create
the good, his wisdom showed him the best possible, and his
power enabled him to create it (G. vi. 1C7). God’s wisdom and
goodness correspond, roughly speaking, to knowledge and voli¬
tion in us, but his power is a peculiar attribute, to which crea¬
tures have nothing paralleP. God’s wisdom consists of his
knowledge of all truths, necessary and contingent alike. In so
far as truths are necessary, his knowledge of them, which consti¬
tutes his understanding, is prior to his volitions; for his
volitions are determined by his knowledge of the good, and all
true propositions ' bout the good arc necessary truths. Leibniz
perceived {e.g. G. iv. 344) that God’s volitions could not signifi¬
cantly be called goo<l, unless the good was independent of them,
though he did riot see that God’s thoughts could not bo signifi¬
cantly called ivise, unless the truth was independent of them.
Thus wisdom and goodness concur in creating a good world,
since wisdom is required to know that it is good. But power
is required for the creation of it, not for determining its nature.
And here Leibniz seems to be guarded against inconsistency by
the theory of contingent judgments. Every existential propo¬
sition not concerned with God is contingent, and thus, though
God cannot, without positive contradiction, be supposed to
affect the nature of any one substance, yet he may, without


* E.g. G. VI. 616 (D. 226; L. 244—5). But contraat G. iv. 616 (D. 125).


PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OP GOD.


185


contradiction, be supposed to cause the earistmice of that sub-
stancp^ i'his'is the sense in which the prt-established harmony
is dueato God. God chose to create monads which harmonized,
and though the harmony arises from their natures, the eadstence
of monads having such natures is due to God’s power.

116. Concerning this argument, we may observe that, if
the cosmological proof be sound, the present proof is super¬
fluous. If God’s existence can be inferred from any 'finite
existence, the particular nature of what exists is irrelevant, or
is useful at most, for a subsequent empirical proof that God is
good. Moreover, with Leibniz’s conception of substance, there
is much difficulty in the idea of creating a sub.stancc. Here he
falls into inconsistency with the ontological argument, to which
I must now return.

If existence can be of God's essence—and it is necessary to
the ontological proof that it should be so—then existence is a
predicate of God. But if existence is a predicate of God, then
it is a predicate. H.iico, when we say anything exists, exist¬
ence is a predicate of this existent. So far, Leibniz would
admit the argument [G. v. 339 (N. E. p. 401)]. But if existence
be a predicate, then it is part of the nature of a substance, and
a substance, by being created, acquires a nev predicate. Hence
the special position of existence, as a cont* igent and synthetic
predicate, falls to the ground. If all subs' ancea always contain
all their predicates, then all .substances always contain or do
not contain the predicate existence, an(f Gi>d must be as power¬
less over this predicate as over any other. To add the predi¬
cate existence must be metaphysically impossible. Thus either
creation is self-contradictory, or, if existence is not a predicate,
the ontological argument is unsound. But the other argu¬
ments, as Kant pointed out, all depend upon this arguments
Hence if we accept it, we must regard God as the only
substance, as an immanent pantheistic God incapable of crea¬
tion ; or, if we reject it, we must admit that all monads exist
necessarily, and are not dependent upon any outside cause.
This is why I said (§ 106) that monism must be pantheistic, and
monadism must be atheistic. And so it happens that Leibniz»


^ Heine Vemunft, ed. Hartenstein, 1867, pp. 414, 427.


186


PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD.


whenever he treats God at all seriously, falls involuntarily into a
Spinozistic pantheism. *

116. Some of these pantheistic consequences are*worth
noting. “ Everything is in God,” Leibniz says, " as place is in
that which is placed” (1). 178; F. de C. 38). Now place, in
his system, is a mere attribute of what is placed; therefore
things should be mere attributes of God. “ God alone,” we
are told in the Monadology, “is.the original simple sub¬

stance, of which all created or derivative monads are products,
born, so to speak, from moment to moment by continual ful-
guratious of the Deity ” [G. vi. 614 (D. 225; L. 243)]. The
following passage of the Discours de M^taphysique might almost
have been written by Spinoza. “ Created substances depend on
God, who conserves them, and even produces them continually
by a kind of emanation, as we produce our thoughts. For

God.views all aspects of the world in all possible ways;

the result of each view of the universe, as if seen from a certain
place, is a substance expressing the universe conformably to
this point of view, if God sees fit to make his thought clfective
and produce this substance. And since God’s view is always
veritable, our perceptions are so too; it is our judgments,
which are from us, that deceive us ” (G. IV. 439). One wonders
what change is made when God “ makes his thought effective*.”
It would seem that the sum of all substances must be indis¬
cernible from God, and therefore identical with him—the very
creed of pantheism*. Leibniz once approaches very near to
the doctrine that all determination is negation, though he
seems unaware that this ought to lead him to Spinozisra. The

* Contrast tbe following passage in the same work (Q. iv. 453): “I am not,
however, of the opinion of some able philosophers, who seem to maintain that
our ideas themselves are in God, and not at all in us. This comes, in my
opinion, from their not yet having sufficiently considered what we have just
explained hero concerning substances, nor all tho extent and independence of
our soul, which causes it to contain all that happens to it, and to express Ood
and with him all possible and actual beings, as an effect expresses its cause.
Also it is an inconceivable thing that I should think by tbe ideas of another.”

* It is true Leibniz assures us on the next page that God sees the universe
not only as created substances see it, but also quite differently. But this still
leaves all created substances indiscernible from a part of God—a view no less
pantheistic than the other.


PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD.


187


argument is as to the necessity of a primitive force in each
monad, of which*the derivative force is a modification. Without
primitive entelethies, he says, “there would be modifications
without anything substantial to be modified; for what is merely
passive could not have active modifications; since modification,
far from adding any perfection, can only he a vai'iahle restrict
tion or limitation, and consequently cannot exceed the per¬
fection of the subject ” (G. in. 67). (My ibUics). Leibniz even
confesses (G. ir. 232) that his assertion of many substances is
rather arbitrary. “If the notion of substance in its generic
definition,” he says, “ is only applicable to the simplest or
primitive substance, this alone will be substance. And it is
in your power,” he continues, “ so to take the word substance,
that God alone shall be substance, and other substances shall
be called otherwise. But 1 prefer to seek a notion which fits
other things, and agrees with common u.sage, iiccording to
which you, he, and I are deemed substances. You will not
deny that this is legitimate, and, if it succeeds, useful.”

It is thus evident how wide a gulf, when God is being
considered, there is between God, the primitive substance, and
the monads or created substfinces. But when Leibniz is occu¬
pied with the monads, God h.'is to be debased from the high
position which pantheism gives him, and twice, at least, he is
spoken of as one among monads (G. HI. 636; vii. 602). These
two passages should, I think, be regarded £is slips. The usual
expressions for God are simple primitive substance, or primi¬
tive unity. In the two passages where God is called a monad,
this does not occur very directly. In one, we are told that
“ monads, except the primitive one, are subject to passions ”
(G. III. 636). The other is more direct. “The monad or
simple substance contains in its generic definition perception
and appetition, and is either the primitive one or God, in which
is the ultimate reason of things, or is derivative, i.e. a created
monad” (G. vii. 502). That these two passages are to be
regarded as slips seems likely if only because (so far as I know)
there are no others. This is rendered still more probable by
the fact that the traditional expression monos monadum, so far
as I can discover, occurs nowhere. It was used by Bruno, fi-om
whom it used to be thought that Leibniz got the word monad.


188


PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD.


This fact seems to have led HegeU to suppose that Leihniz also
used the phrase, and subsequent writers, with *che' exception of
Erdmann (v. Geschichte, Vol. il. 2, p. 62), seeih to havewashly
assumed that Hegel had some authority for the supposition.
Thus it is better not to regard Leibniz’s God as one among
monads, especially as the monads form a continuous series, and
evidently there cannot be one differing infinitely little from
God.

We may now sum up the inconsistencies into which Leibniz
is led by his theology. The ontological argument, which is alone
capable of proving that God’s existence is a necessary truth, is
incompatible with the unique position which, where finite
things are concerned, is assigned to existence. Leibniz’s phi¬
losophy of the finite and the contingent, if it be valid, involves
Kant’s position, that existence adds nothing to the nature of
what exists, i.e. that existence is not merely one among predi¬
cates. If this be so, existence cannot form part of any essence,
and the ontological argument falls. The cosmological argument
depends upon the existential theory of judgment, which is
inconsistent with Leibniz’s separation of the possible and the
actual. For his theory of contingency, it is essential that
something non-existent should be possible; and this is not an
existential judgment. The proof by means of the eternal
truths supposes that the truth of propositions results from their
being believed—a view which is in itself wholly false, and
which, further, renders it quite arbitrary what propositions
God is to believe. It also depends upon the existential theory
of judgment, since its basis is, that truth, being as such non¬
existent, is nothing per se, but must be a mere property of
true beliefs—a vievr whose circularity is self-evident. The
argument from the pre-established harmony, again, involves
a Creator, and the creation of substances is only possible if
existence be not a predicate. But in that case, God’s existence
cannot be an analytic proposition, and must, on Leibniz’s logic,
be contingent. The ontological argument will be unsound, and

* E.g, in his history of philosophy, Werke, Yol. xvi. pp. 418, 422. Also in
the smaller Logic, Werke, Vol. ▼. p. 365; Wallace’s Tramlation, p. 334.
Leibniz in all probability derived the word monad from his friend van Helmont.
See Stein, Leibniz md Spinoza.


PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OP QOD.


189


God’s existence itself, being contingent, must have a sufficient
reason Aids inclines without necessitating. But if this be
requised, we might just as well admit the preestablished
harmony as an ultimate fact, since the assumption of God’s
existence is insufficient for its explanation.

117. A few words seem needed as to God’s goodness.
Most philosophers seem to suppose that, if they can establish
God’s existence, hi.s goodness necessarily follows. Accordingly,
though Leibniz does, in certain passages, give some argument
for what, in a metaphysical sense, may be called God’s 'perfec¬
tion, he nowhere take'< the trouble to prove his goodness. In
the argument submitted to Spinoza, wc saw that a perfection is
defined as any quality which is simple and absolute, positive and
indefinable, and expresses its object without limits (G. vii. 261).
Leibniz seems to have adhered to this definition of a perfection.
Thus he says in the Monadology [§§ 40, 41; G. vi. 013 (D. 223;
L. 230)]: " Wo may judge also that this supreme substance,
which is uniejue, universal and necessary, having nothing out¬
side of itself which is independent of it, and being a simple
consequence of possible being, must be incapable of limits, and
must contain just as much reality as possible. Whence it
follows, that God is absolutely perfect, perfection being nothing
but the magnitude of positive reality strictly understood, setting
aside the limits or boundaries in things which have them.
And where there are no boundaries, that is to say, in God,
perfection is absolutely infiniteBut perfection understood
in this sense, though it docs appear to involve God’s infinite
goodness, involves equally, except on a piirely privative view of
evil, his infinite badness. To escape this, Leibniz, like most
optimists, asserts that evil is a limitation. God, he says, is
infinite, the Devil is limited; good advances ad infinitum, evil
has bounds [G. vi. 378 (D. 196)]. Thus God’s perfection in¬
volves infinite goodness, but not infinite badness. If Leibniz

^ This seems also Leibniz’s ethical sense of perfection. Cf. G. vn. 303
(D. 101; L. 340): “Among the infinite combinations of possibles and possible
series, that one exists by which the most of essence or of possibility is brought
into existence.” Also G. vii. 805 (D. 103; L. 342). But the two are distinguished
on the next page, where moral perfection appears as a species of metaphysical
perfection.


190


PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD.


had admitted badness to be a positive predicate, he ^.ould not
have retained his definition of God, or his dodtririb of analytic
judgments. For good and bad would then* have been not
mutually contradictory, but yet obviously incompatible as pre¬
dicates of God. Accordingly he asserted—though without
arguments of any kind—^that badness is essentially finite. But
this brings me to his Ethics, with the discussion of which this
work will come to an end.


in


CHAPTER XVL

%

LEIBNIZ’S ETHICS.

118. In the last chapter we saw that God’s goodness is
the metaphysically necessary sufficient reason of God’s good
acts, which arc contingent, and indeed the ultimate contingents
from which all others flow. This brought us to the threshold
of Leibniz’s Ethics, in which, more even than in his doctrine of
God, all the difficulties and inconsistencies of his system cul¬
minate. By the emphasis which he laid on final causes, he
gave Ethics very grtiat importance in his philosophy. And
yet he appears to have bestowed but the smallest part of
his thought on the moaning and nature of the good. His
Ethics is a mass of inconsistencies, due partly to indifference,
partly to deference for Christian moralists. Thoiigh I shall
treat the subject briefly, I shall give it quite as large a space,
proportionally, as it seems to have occupied in Leibniz’s
meditations.

There are three separate questions, which I shall have to
treat of. The first two are psychological, and the last only
is properly ethical. These are (1) the doctrine of freedom and
determination, (2) the psychology of volition, (3) the nature
of the good.

(1) The doctrine, by which Leibniz sought to reconcile
free will with his thorough-going determinism, depends wholly
upon contingency and the activity of substances. Freedom,
as Leibniz points out, is a very ambiguous term.

“Freedom of will,” he says, “is...understood in two different
senses. The first is when it is opposed to the imperfection
or slavery of the spirit, which is a coercion or constraint, but


m


LEIBNIZ’S ETHICS.


internal like that arising from the passions. The other sense
is used when freedom is opposed to necessit/.” In the Arst
sense, “ God alone is perfectly free, and created spirits ^e so,
only in proportion as they are superior to their passionk.
And this freedom properly concerns our underst^ding. But
the freedom of spirit, opposed to necessity, concerns the bare
will, and in so far as it is distinguished from the under¬
standing. This is what is called free-will, and it pmisists in
this, that we hold that the strongest reasons or impressions,
which the understanding presents to the will, do no#' prevent
the act of the will from being contingent, and do not give it
a necessity which is absolute, and so to speak, metaphysical
Of these two senses, the first corresponds to the distinction
of activity and passivity. The will is free in so far as we are
active, i.e. determined by distinct ideas; God alone, who has
only distinct ideas, is perfectly free. And thus this sense is
connected with the iinderatanding*. The other is the sense
which is relevant in the free-will controversy, and the one
which must be examined now.

Leibniz recognized—as every careful philosopher should—
that all psychical events have their causes, just as physical
events have, and that prediction is as possible, theoretically,
in the one case as in the other. To this he vras committed
by his whole philosophy, and especially by the pre-established
harmony. He points out that the future must be determined,
since any proposition about it must bo already true or false
(G. VI. 123). And with this, if he had not been resolved to
rescue free will, he might have been content. The whole
doctrine of contingency might have been dropped with ad¬
vantage. But that would have led to a Spinozistic necessity,
and have contradicted Christian dogma. Accordingly he held
—as the connection of the analytic and the necessary also led
him to hold—that all existential propositions and all causal
connections are contingent, and that consequently, though
volitions have invariable causes, they do not follow neces¬
sarily Ooin those causes*. He rejected entirely the liberty of

»•

* N. E. pp. 179—180; O. V. 160—1, Bk. ii. Chap. xxi.

* Cfi O’, vn. 109—110, for farther developmento-Hf lo titMdom in this sense.

» a G, V. 168—4 (N. B. 188).,.. , , 'ft


Leibniz’s ethics.


193


indifference—the doctrine that the will may be uncaused—and
even held thi^ to* be self-contradictory*. For it is necessary
that ev«ry event should have a cause, though it is contingent
that the cause should produce its effect. He held also that
the indifference of equilibrium would destroy moral good and
evil. For it would imply a choice without reason, and there¬
fore without a good or a bad reason. But it is in the goodness
or badness oi the rcfison that moral good and evil consist
(G. VI. 411). He rejected also the protended introspective
proof of freedom, by our supposed sense of it; for, as he
rightly says, we may be determined by insensible perceptions
(G. VI. 130). Freedom in the present sense is equally attributed
to God; his volitions, though always determined by the motive
of the best, are none the less contingent (G. vii. 408—9;
D. 273—4). It may be asked why beasts and even bare monads
are not free. For this there is, I think, no adequate ground.
Beasts, Leibniz confesses, have spontaneity (G. vii, 109), but
not liberty (G. vi. 421). Spontaneity, he says, is contingency
without constrsiint, and a thing is constrained when its prin¬
ciple comes from without (G. vii. 110). By the principle of
a thing, I imagine Leibniz must mean the sufficient reason
of its changes. This, then, in an animal, should be intcinal.
The only sense, accordingly, in which an animal is not free,
would seem to be that its volitions arc not determined by
knowledge of the good*.


» Cf. G. II. 420; III. 401 (D. 171); v. 164 (N. E. 183); vit. .379.

^ Leibniz’s views on this point arc collected in a short paper, given by
Gerhardt both in French and Latin (G. vii. 108—111). 1 translate from the
French.

"Liberty is spontaneity joined to intelligence.

"Thus what is called spontaneity in beasts and in other substances destitute
of intelligence, is raised in man to a higher degree of perfection, and is called
liberty.

"Spontaneity is contingency without compulsion; in other words, we call
spontaneous what is neither necessary nor constrained.

"We call contingent what is not necessary, or (what is the same thing) that
whose opposite is possible, implying no contradiction.

**Constrained is that whose principle comes from without. (Of. Pollock’s
Spinoza, 2nd ed. p. 193. Spinoza has only the opposition free or comtrained,
not Leibniz’s further ^slfhotioim.)

"There is indifierenoe, wh^ there.is 90 more reason for one than for the

13


B. tu


194


LEIBNIZ’S ETHICS.


119 . (2) This brings me to the psychology volition
and pleasure. Leibniz holds that pleasure‘is h sense of per¬
fection, and that what Locke calls uneasirtess is essential to
the happiness of created beings, which never consists in com¬
other. Otherwise, there would be detorminstiou. (The Latin has: And the
determined is opposed to it.)

“All the actions of single substances are contingent. For it can be shown
that, if things happened otherwise, there would be no contradiction on that
account.

“All actions are determined, and never indifferent. For there i^ always a
reason inclining ns to one rather than the other, since nothing happens without
a reason. It is true tliat these inclining reasons are not necessitating, and
destroy neither contingency nor liberty.

“ A liberty of indifference is impossible. Ho that it cannot be found any¬
where, not even in God. For God is determined by himself to do always the
best. And creatures aie always determined by internal or external reasons.

“The more substances are determined by themselves, and removed from
indifference, the more perfect they are. For, being always determined, they will
have the determination cither from thcinselvcs, and will be by so much the
more powerful and perfect, or they will have it from without, and then they will
be proportionally obliged to serve external things.

“The more we act according to reason the more we arc free, and there is the
more servitude the more we act by the passions. For the more we act according
to reason, the more we act conformably to the perfections of our own nature,
and in proportion as we allow ourselves to be carried away by passions, we are
slaves of external things which make us snffer.-

“To sum up: All actions are contingent, or without necessity. But also
everything is determined or regular, and there is no indifference. We may
even say that substances are freer in proportion as they are farther removed
from indifference and more self-determined. And that the less they have need
of external determination, the nearer they approach to the divine perfection.
For God, being the freest and most perfect substanoe, is also the most completely
determined by himself to do the most perfect. So that Nothing {le Rien), which
is the most imperfect and the furthest removed from God, is also the most
indifferent and the least determined. Now in so far as we have lights, and act
according to reason, we shall be determined by the perfections of our own
nature, and consequently we shall be freer in proportion as we are less
embarrassed as to our choice. It is true that all our perfections, and those of
all nature, come from God, but this, far from being contrary to liberty, is rather
the very reason why we are free, because God has communicated to us a certain
degree of his perfection and of his liberty. Let us, then, content ourselves with
a liberty which is desirable, and approaches that of God, which makes us the
most disposed to choose well and act well; and let us not pretend to that
harmfhl, not to say chimerical liberty, of being in uncertainty and perpetual
embarrassment, like that Ass of Buridan, famous in the schools, who, bdng
placed at an equal distance between two sacks of wheat, and having nothing
that determined him to go to one rather than the otiier, allowed himself to die
of himger.”


LEIBNIZ’S ETHICS.


195


plete posse^^ion [G. v. 175 (N. E. 194); vii. 73 (D. 130)]. Action,
he says, brings^joy® while passion brings pain; and action and
passion ^consist in passing to a greater or less degree of per¬
fection (G. IV. 441 )^ Thus when Leibniz agrees with Locke,
that the good is what produces pleasure [G. V. 149 (N. E. 167)],
he is not accepting Utilitarianism, but asserting a psycho¬
logical connection between the attainment of good and the
feeling of pleasure. In the same way ho may be freed from
the apuiearance of psychological hedonism, to which he ap¬
proaches dangerously near (New Essays, Bk. I. Chap. ii.).
There are, Leibniz thinks, innate instincts, from which innate
truths may be derived. “Although wo may say truly that
morals have indemonstrable principles, and that one of the
first and most practical is, that we must pursue joy and shun
sorrow, we must add that this is not a truth which is known
purely by reason, since it is founded on internal experience,
or on confused knowledge, for we do not feel what joy and
sorrow arc” [G. v. 81 (N. E. 8G)]. “This maxim,” he con¬
tinues, “is not known by reason, but, so to speak, by an
instinct” (?’5.). But reason should load us nither to seek
felicity, which “is only a lasting joy. Our instinct, however,
does not tend to felicity proper, but to joy, i.e. to the present;
it is reason which prompts to the future and the enduring.
Now the inclination, expressed by the understanding, passes
into a precept or practicjil truth; and if the instinct is innate,
the truth is innate also” [G. v. 82 (N. E. 87)]*. Leibniz
seems, in this passage, to suggest that he thinks joy good
because it is desired, and reason only useful in showing that,
if joy be good, more joy is better than less*. But this cannot

^ Of. Spinoza, Ethics, Part HI. Prop. XI, Scholium: "By pleasure I shall,
therefore, hereafter understand an affection whereby the mind passes to a
greater perfection; and by pain an affection whereby it passes to a less perfec¬
tion.” Cf. also ib. Prop. LIX. Schol.: "Pleasure is the passage of a man from
less to greater perfection. Pain is the passage of a man from greater to less
perfection.” Cf. Hobbes, Human Nature, Chap. vii. (cd. Molesworth, Vol. iv.).

^ He proceeds to explain that the instincts are not necessarily practical, but
fumi^ similarly the principles of the sciences and of reasoning, which are
employed nnoonsdoaBly.

* Of. Spinoza, Ethics, Part 111. Prop. IX. Scholium: “We have not en-
deavouzi, will, appetite or desire for anything because we deem it good, but

/ 13—2


196


LEIBNIZ’S ETHICS.


be his true meaning. For, as we saw, he holds tljat joy is a
sense of perfection, and therefor^ perfection must be distinct
from joy. Moreover, it is a contingent truth that volition, is *
determined by the good (G. il. 38; iv. 438). But if volition
is always necessarily detennined by desire, as Leibniz seems
to hold, and if the good means what is desired, then volition
would be necessarily determined by the good. We must
suppose, therefore, that Leibniz considers it a synthetic and
contingent proposition that we desire the good, and jloes not
commit the fallacy of supposing that the good means the
desired. This appears also from a passage where Leibniz
points out that God’s will could not have the good for its
effect, unless it had it for its object, and that the good is
therefore independent of God’s will (G. IV. 344) *, or from the
explanation that God’s goodness made him desire to create
the good, while his wisdom showed him the best possible
(G. VI. 167).

120. The question of sin is one which is very inconvenient
for Leibniz’s theory of volition. Virtue, he says, is an un¬
changeable di.sp(jsitiou to do what we believe to be good.
Since our will is not led to pursue anything, except as the
understanding presents it as good, we shall always act rightly
if we always judge rightly (G. vii. 92). We pursue the greatest
good we perceive, but our thoughts are for the most part surd,
i.e. mere empty symbols; and such knowledge cannot move us
[G. V. 171 (N. E. 191)]. And similarly vice is not the force of
action, but an impediment to it, such as ignorance (G. il. 317).
In fact, original sin and materia prima are almost indis¬
tinguishable. From this basis he sets about manuiacturing
immorality. It is evident that, had he been consistent, he
would have said boldly, all sin is due wholly to ignorance.
Instead of this, what he does say is that we must make a
rule to follow reason, though perceived only by surd thoughts
[G. V. 173 (N. E. 193)]; that it depends upon us to take pre¬
cautions against surprises by a firm determination to reflect,
and only to act, in certain junctures, after having thoroughly

oonirariwiso deem a thinj; good beoauso we have an endeavour, will, appetite,
or deeire for it.” Cf. also ib. Prop. XXXIX. Schol. It seems probable that
Leibniz was confused in his own mind as regards this altemativtji; ■


LEIBNIZ’S ETHICS.


197


(ieliberated^(G. iv. 454); that the chief rule of life is, always
to do, not wlfiat *the passions {Bewegungen), but what the
understanding indicates as the most useful, and when we
have done it, to account ourselves happy however it turns
out (G. VII. 99). All these remarks are discreditable subter¬
fuges to conceal the fact that all sin, for Leibniz, is original
sin, the inherent finitude of any created monad, the con¬
fusedness of its perceptions of the good, whence it is led, in
honest and unavoidable delusion, to pursue the worse in place
of the better. We cannot make a rule to follow reason, unless
we perceive that this rule is good; and if wc do perceive this,
we certainly shall make the rule. His determinism has gone
too far for morality and immorality, though it in no way
interferes with goodness and badness.

121. (3) This brings me to the nature and moaning of
good and evil themselves in Leibniz. He distinguishes three
kinds of good and evil, metaphysical, moral and physical. The
theory of metaphysical good and evil is clear and consistent,
and harmonizes with the rest of his system; but there is no
obvious ethical meaning in it. The other two seem less fun¬
damental, and are .sometimes treated as mere consequences of
metaphysical good and evil. Thus Leibniz’s Ethics, like many
other ethical systems, suffers from non-existence. Something
other than good is taken as fundamental, and the deductions
from this are taken as having an ethical imports

" Evil,” we are told, “ may be taken metaphysically, physi¬
cally, and morally. Metaphysical evil consists in simple imper¬
fection, physical evil in suffering, and moral evil in sin. Now
although physical and moral eyil are not necessary, it is enough
that, in virtue of the eternal truths, they arc possible. And
08 this immense region of Truths contains all possibilities®, there

^ The theory of metaphysical good and evil was derived from Spinoza, and
was earlier than the rest of Leibniz’s Ethics. It was capable of pnrely logical
development, and did not involve the appeal to final canses which, after 1660,
Leibniz perpetually supported by an allusion to Plato’s Fliaedo (v. Stein, op. eit.
p. 118 fi.). The clearest statement of the principle of metaphysical perfection
occurs in an undated paper {Gt. vii. 194—7), written probably about the year
1677 (v. G. vu. 41—2), though agreeing exactly in this respect with The ultimate
Origine^ian of thirds, e.g. G. vn. 303 (L. 340; D. 101). See Appendix, § 121.

3 This passage proves, what might otherwise be doubtful, that Leibniz realized
that proposiUpna about possible contingents are necessary. See p. 26 supra.


198


LEIBNIZ’S ETHICS.


must be an infinity of possible worlds, evil must^enter into
several of them, and even the best of all Inu^c contain evil;
this is what has determined God to permit* evil ” (G. FI. 115).
This gives Leibniz’s solution of the problem of evil, and it
is plain that metaphysical evil is the source of the whole. The
folldwing passage leaves this beyond doubt. “We ask first,
whence comes evil ? If God is, whence the evil ? if he is not,
whence the good? The ancients attributed the cause of evil
to matter, which they believed increatc and independent of
God; but we, who derive all things from God, where shall we
find the source of evil ? The answer is, that it must be sought
in the ideal nature of the creature, inasmuch as this nature
is contained among eternal truths, which are in the under¬
standing of God, independently of His will. For we must
consider that there i.s an original iwperfection in the creature^
anterior to sin, because the creature is essentially limited;
whence it comes that the creature cannot know everything,
and can bo mistaken and commit other faults” (G. VI. 114—5).
And hence Leibniz rejects Des Cartes’ principle, that errors
depend more on the will than on the inttdlect [G. iv. 361
(H. 52)].

122. Thus metaphysical evil, or limitation — though
Leibniz hesitates to declare this openly—is the source of sin
and pain. And this is sufficiently evident. For if we always*
judged rightly, we should always act rightly; but our mis-
judgraent comes from confused perception, or materia prima,
or limitation. And pain accompanies passage to a lower per¬
fection, which results from wnmg action. Thus physical and
moral evil both depend upon metaphysical evil, i.e. upon
imperfection or limitation. Leibniz does not usually speak
of the opposite of this as metaphysical good, but as meta¬
physical perfection. Many of his arguments, however, involve
the assumption that metaphysical perfection is good, as when
he argues against a vacuums or when he urges that “ among
the infinite combinations of possibles and possible series, that
one exists by which most of essence or of possibility is brought
into existence®.” The same view seems implied in a passage

^ E.g. O. vn. 377 (D. 263); bat contrast O. n. 476.

^ G. vu. 308 (D. 101; L. 340). See also the preceding sentence.


Leibniz’s ethics.


199


which inc^entally defines metaphysical perfection. As pos¬
sibility,” he say8,»'“isthe principle of essence, so perfection,
or the degree of essence (by which as many things as possible
are compossible), is the principle of existence.” And in the
preceding sentence he has used imperfection and moral
absurdity as synonyms [G. vii. 304 (D. 103; L. 342)]. And
on the next page, where he endeavours to distinguish meta¬
physical and moral perfection, he only succeeds in making, the
latter a species of the former, “And in order,” he explains,
“ that no one should think that we here confound moral per¬
fection, or goodness, with metaphysical perfection, or greatness,
and should admit the latter while denying the former, it
must be known that it follows from what has been said that
the world is the most perfect, not only physically, or, if you
prefer it, metaphysically, because that series of things has
been produced in which the most reality is actualized, but
also morally, because, in truth, nmral perfection is physical
perfection for minds themselves ” [G. vii. 306 (D. 104; L. 345)].
That is to say, moral perfection is right action, and this
depends upon physical perfection for minds, i.e. upon clear
perception'.

On the relation of metaphysical and moral perfection,
Leibniz can with difficulty be cleared of dishonesty. He uses
the dependance of the latter on the former to solve the
problem of evil, and to show that evil is a mere limitation.
This last is essential, as we saw in the preceding chapter, to
his proof of God’s goodness, and to his whole connection of evil
with Tnateria prima and Rnitude. But he endeavours to make
moral evil independent, as soon as be thinks of sin, punish¬
ment, and responsibility, of Heaven and Hell, and the whole
machinery of Christian moralists. If anything is to be made of
his Ethics, we must boldly accept the supremacy of metaphysical
perfection and imperfection, and draw the consequences.

Metaphysical perfection is only the quantity of essence
[G. VII. 303 (D. 101; L. 340)], or the magnitude of positive

1 Cf. also the following passage (O. m. 32): "Metaphysioal good and evil is
perfeetion or imperfection in the unlTerse, but is specially understood of those
good and evil things which happen to creatures that are unintelligent, or so
■ to ffiieak unintelligent.”


200


LSIBNHS*S ETHICS.


reality [G. vi. 618 (D. 224; L. 240)]. This raeai^ the pos¬
session of all possible simple predicates in the highest possible
degree. Leibniz asserts, against Spinoza, that one thing may
have more reality than another by merely having more of one
attribute, just as well as by having more attributes. For
instance, he says, a circle has more extension than the inscribed
square [Q. i. 144 (D. 17)]. But in another place he asserts
that things not capable of a highest degree, such as numbers
and figures, are not perfections (G. iv. 427). As he also asserts
that G(Mi is infinite, while the Devil is finite, that good advances
ad infinitum, while evil has its bounds [G. VI. 378 (D. 196)],
numbei's and figures are evidently excluded because they are
not true predicates, and because, as we saw in discuasing the
continuum, infinite number is self-contradictory, though the
actual infinite is permissible. Thus metaphysical perfection
consists in having as many predicates as possible in as high
a degree as possible, and no true predicates are excluded from
this definition\

From this it follows, of course, that imperfection is some¬
thing merely negative, namely, the mere absence of perfection.
Thus monads differ from God only as less and more; they
have the same perfections as God has, but in a lower degree
(G. II. 12.'5)“. The Devil, on this view, should be the lowest
of bare monads—a view which theologians would scarcely
accept, since they always suppose him capable of knowledge.
There is one passage where Leibniz endeavours directly to
connect perfection with good. "It being once posited,” he
says, “that being is better than not*being, or that there is
a reason why soniething should be rather than nothing, or
that we nmst pass from possibility to actuality, it follows
that, oven in the absence of every other determination, the
quantity of existence is as great as possible” [G. vil. 304
(D. 102; L, 341)]. Thus he seems to admit that goodness
Tfieaiis something different from quantity of existence, and to
regard the connection of the two as significant.

1 Cf. aluo G. V. 16 (D. 96; N. E, 16).

^ Gf. Spinoza, Ethiis, Fart II. Prop. XLIX. Scholium: “We are partakers
of the Divine Nature in proportion as onr actions become more and more
perfect, and we more and more understand God.” Also Monadology, § 42.


LEIBNIZ'SI ETHICS.


201


, 123. ^The Ethics to which this view leads is a common
one. Goodness and Ileality are held to go hand iq hand, if
not tg be synonymous^ Hence it easily follows that Beatity
is good; and this consequence is, so far as I can discover, the
sole recommendation of such an Ethics. For Leibniz especially,
who admits the existence of evil [G. vi. 370 (D. 194)], such a
view is absuixi. For if evil be a mere limit.ation, all that
exists is good in different dcgi’oes, and never evil in any degree
at all. If any existent, such as pain, be pronounced evil, it
follows that evil is a positive predicate, like good*. Hence
it will be included in metaphysical perfection. The doctrine
of anfilytic judgments must have contributed to the view that
evil is a more negation. For it is obvious that good and
bad are incompatible predicat('s, and if both are positive, this
is a synthetic judgment. Hence evil was regarded as the mere
negation of good, though it would have been equally logical
to regard good as the mere negation of evil. When once it
is recognized that evil is a positive predicate, the whole
privative theory of evil falls, and with it the connection of
metaphy.sical and ethical perfection, as also the definition of
God as having all po.sitive predicates.

124. There remaiiib one minor inconsistency which must
bo noticed. Leibniz spt'aks often as if final causes had ex¬
clusive reference to spirits [G. iv. 430 (I). 73; L. 304)], but
at other times definitely denies this {e.g. G. vi. 168). Ho .seems
to hold that only spirits, among monads, arc ends in them¬
selves ; other cuds arc not individual monads, but metaphysical
good, the order aud beauty of nature. The first principle of
the physical world, he says, is to give it as much perfection
as possible, and of the moral world, or City of God, to give it
the greatest possible felicity (G. IV. 462). This leads to a
harmony between the kingdoms of Nature and of Grace, be¬
tween God as Architect and God as Monarch (G. vi. 605 (D. 215;
L. 421)]. In the first, he seeks only order and metaphysical

^ Cf. Spinoza, Kthic$^ Part II. Def. VI.: "By reality and perfection I under¬
stand the same thing.”

* Even in 1677, when Leibniz was as near as at any time to Spinozism, he
ntges against a Cartesian that " both pleasure and pain are something positive”
(O. z. 211). Cf. Stein, op. cit. pp. 90, 91.


202


LEIBNIZ’S ETHICS.


perfection; in the second, he seeks the happiness pf spirits.
But so well is the world contrived, that the two ends lead
to the same series of events, and in this again we l^ve a
pre-established harmony.

In Leibniz’s philosophy everything, from tho Law of Suf¬
ficient Beason onwards, depends, through the introduction of
final causes, upon Ethics. But Ethics, being a subject on
which theology is very definite, could not be dealt with by
Leibniz in a free spirit. The Ethics to which he was entitled
was very similar to Spinoza’s; it had the same fallacies, and
similar consequences. But being the champion of orthodoxy
against the decried atheist, Leibniz shrank from the conse¬
quences of his views, and took refuge in the perpetual iteration
of edifying phra.ses. The whole tendency of his temperament,
as of his philosophy, was to exalt enlightenment, education,
and learning, at the expense of ignorant good intentions.
This tendency might have found a logical expression in his
Ethics. But he preferred to support Sin and Hell, and to
remain, in what concerned the Church, the champion of igno¬
rance and obscurantism. This is the reason why the best parts
of his philosophy are the most abstract, and the worst those
which most nearly concern human life.


APPENDIX.


EXTRACTS FROM LEIBNIZ

CLASSIFIED ACCORDING TO SUBJECTS.

II. § 8. Outline of Leibniz’s logical argument.

G. II. 46 (1686). In consulting the notion which I have of
every true proposition, I find that every predicate, necessary or
contingent, past, present, or future, is comprised in the notion of

the subject, and I ask no more.Tlie proposition in question is

of groat importjince, and deserves to bo well established, for it
follows that every soul is as a world apart, independent of every¬
thing else except God ; that it is not only immortal and so to speak
impassible, but that it keeps in its substance traces of all that
happens to it. It follows also in what consists the intercourse of
substances, and particularly the union of soul and body. This
intercourse does not happen according to the ordinary hypothesis
of the physical influence of one on the other, for each present state
of a substance comes to it spontaneously, and is only a consequence
of its previous state. It does not hapjien either according to the

hypothesis of occasional causes.but it happens according to the

hypothesis of concomitance, which appears to me demonstrative.
That is to say, each substance expresses the whole sequence of the
universe according to the view or respect which is proper to it,
whence it happens that they perfectly agree together.

II. § 10. Are all propositions reducible to the subject-

predicaie form?

G. IL 240. There is no denomination so extrinsic as not to
have an intrinsic one for its foundation.

G. IL 250. Things which differ in place must express their
place, t.e. the surrounding things, and thus be distinguished not
only by place, or by a mere extrinsic denomination, as such things
are commonly conceived.


206


THE LAW OF CONTRADIOTION.,


G. V. 139 (N. B. 144). In my view, illation is more general
than comparison. For relations are either of comparison or con-,
currence (poncours). The former concern agreement {convmance) or
disagreement (I take these terms in a less wide sense), which com->^
prebends re.semblance, equality, inequality, etc. The second class
involve some connection, as of cause and effect, whole and parts,
situation and order, etc.

G. V. 210 (N. E. 235). Kelations and orders partake of the
nature of rational entities {ont quelque chose de PHre de raison),
although they have their foundation in things ] for it may he said
that their reality, like that of eternal truths and of possibilities,
conies from the supreme reason.

G. V. 377 (N. E. 451). It is better to place truths in the
relation between the objects of ideas, which causes one to be com¬
prised or not comprised in the other.

G. V. 378 (N. E. 452). Let us be content to seek truth in
the correspondence of the propositionsj, which are in the mind, with
the things concerned.

G. II. 233. For my part, I do not think it possible that there
should 1)0 an A and a B having no common predicate. It does not
follow, however, if two predicates concurring to form the concept
of C are separable, that there is not some one concept of 0. M.g. a
square is an equilateral rectangle, but the rectangle can be separated
from the equilateral..., and the equilateral from the rectangle...,
and yet a square is one figure and has one concept.

G. II. 486. You will not, I believe, adniit an accident which
is in two subjects at once. Thus I hold, as regards relations, that
paternity in David is one thing, and filiation in Solomon is another,
but the relation common to both is a merely mental thing, of which
the modifications of singulars are the foundation.

II. § 11. Analytio and synthetic propositions.

G. V. 92 (N. B. 99). Far from approving the acceptance of
doubtful principles, I would have people seek even the demonstra¬
tion of the axioms of Euclid... And when I am asked the means of

knowing and examining innate principles, I reply.that, except

instincts whose reason is unknown, we must try to reduce them to
first principles, i.e. to axioms which are identical or immediate by
means of definitions, which are nothing but a distinct exposition of
ideas.

e. V. 34^ (K. E. 403). It is not the figures which make the


TgE LAW OF CONTRADICTION. 207

proof witli^geometers...l4 is the universal propositions, i.e. the defi¬
nitions, the (jifiornUi, and the theorems already proved, which make
the r^^ning, anth would maintiiin it even if there were no figure.

^ 0. V. 343 (N. E. 404). The primitive truths, which are

known by intuition, are, like the derivative, of two kinds. They
are among the truths of rea.son or the truths of fact. Troths of
reason are necessary, and those of fact are contingent. The primi¬
tive truths of reason are those which I call by the general name of
identicals, because it seems that they only repeat the same thing,
withofit teaching us anything. Those which are aftirmative are
such as the following: ewrylhing is whM it is, and in as many

examples as wo may desire, A is A, B is B.The equilateral

rectangle is a rectangle.If the regular four-sided figure is an

equilateral rectangle, this figure is a rectsingle.If A is not-B,

it follows that A is not-B.I ctnne now to the negative identi¬

cals, which depend either upon the principle of contnuliction or
upon that of disparates. The principle of contnidiction is in
general: A proposition is either true or false.

a V 347 (N. E. 410). As for the proposition that three is

equal to two and one, ...it is only the definition of the term three _

It is true there is in this a hidden enunciation, ...namely, that these
ideas [of numbers] arc possible; and this Ls here known intuitively,
so that we may say intuitive knowledge is contained in definitions
when their possibility is immediately evident.

0. VI. 323. The triple number of dimensions is determined
[in matter], not by the reason of the best, but by a geometrical
necessity; it is because geometers have been able to show that there
are only three mutually perpendicular straight lines which can
intersect in the same point. Nothing could be chosen more appro¬
priate for showing the difference there is between moral necessity,
which governs the choice of the sage, and the brute necessity of
Strato and the Spinozists,...than to cause people to consider the
difierence between the reason of the laws of motion, and the reason
of the triple number of dimensions: the first consisting in the
choice of the best, the second in a geometric and blind necessity.

0. IV. 367 (D. 48). The first of the truths of reason is the
principle of contradiction, or, what couies to the same thing, that of
identity.

0. VI. 612 (D. 223 ; L. 236). Truths of reasoning are neces¬
sary and their opposite is impossible: truths of fact are contingent
and their opposite is possible. When a truth is necessaiy, its


208


THE LAW OP SUFFICIENT RBASOjJ.


reason can be found by analysis, resolving it into siippler ideas
and truths, until we corae to those that are ^rimftry. ...Primary
principles...cannot be proved, and indeed have ho need of oroof j
and those are identical enunciations, whoso opposite involves an
expi-eas contradiction.

G. VII. 355 (D. 239). The great foundation of mathematics
is the principle of contradiethm. ...And this principle alone suffices
for proving all Arithmetic and all Oeometry, i.e. all mathematical
principles. Hut in order to proceed from mathematics to natural
philosophy another principle is requisite... : 1 mean the principle of
a sufficient reason.

G. III. 400 (D. 170). A truth is necessary when the opposite
implips contradiction; and when it is not necessary it is called
contingent. That (Jod exists, that all right angh'S are equal to
each other, are necessary truths; but it is a contingent truth that
I exist, or that there are bodies which show an actujil light angle.

G. I. 384. In order to be assui-ed that what I conclude from a
deiinition is true, 1 must know that this notion is po.ssible. For if
it implies a contradiction, we may at the sain(‘ time draw oppo.site
conclusions from it. ...This is why our uh'os involve a judgment.

G. V. 21 (N. E. 21). Ideas and truths can lie divided into
such as are primitive and such as are derivative; the knowledge of
those that arts primitive does not need to lie formed, hut only to l )0
distinguished.

G. III. 443. Definitions are not arbitrary, as Hobbes lielievcd,
and we cannot form ideas as we like, though it .seems that the Car¬
tesians are of this opinion. For it is necessary tiuit these ideas which
we undertake to form should be veritable, i.e, possible, and that the
ingredients which we put into them should be compatible inter se.

III. § 13. The range of contingent judgments in Leibniz.

G. V. 428 (N. E. 515). As for the eternal truths, it is to l)o
observe<l that at bottom they are all liypothetical, and say in fact:
Such a thing being posited, sucli another thing is.

G. III. 400 (D. 171). Although all the facts of the universe
are now certain in relation to God, or (what comes to the same
thing) determined in themselves and even interconnected, it does
not follow that their connection is always truly necessary, i.e. that
the truth, which pronounces that one fact follows from another,
is necessary. And this must be especially applied to voluntary
actions.


209


TflE^LAW OF SUFFICIENT REASON.

O'. VI.«123. Philosophers agree now-a-days that the truth of
future cou&ng«nta«is doternuiied, i.e. that future contingents are
future, or that they will be. ...Thus the contingent, though future, is
none tlie less contingent; and determination, wliich would be called
certainty if it were known, is not incompatible with contingency.

G. 11. 39 (1686). The notion of a species involves only eternal
or necessary truths, but the notion of an individual involves, siih
ratione what is of fact, or lelated to the existence of

things and to time, and conse(|uently depends upon certain free
decroeswof God considered as possible; for truths of fact or of exist¬
ence depend upon the decrees of God.

G. 11. 40 (1686). I believe there are oidy a few free primitive
decrees, which regulate the consequences of things, which, joined to
the free decree creating Adam, decide the result.

G. IV. 437 (IMG). Gonnection or consecution is of two sorts :
the one is absolutely necessary, so that its oontrar''’ implies contra¬
diction, Jiml this deduction occurs in eternal truths, .si; h as are
those of geometry; the other is only necessary e.« and

so to speak by accidmit, and it is contingent in i;..self, when the
contrary does not imply coutnuliction.

G. III. 54 (D. 35). The true Fhysicr must "'‘ally be derived
from tlm source of the Divine porfectioi. .. Par from excluding
final oause.s, and the consideration of a Ilcing acting with wisdom,
it i‘ ^ence that everything in Plij'-sics must be deduced.

III. 646. [dynamics] is to a grojit oxtisnt the foundation
my system; for wo there learn the diirerenco between truths
whose ncc(?ssity is brute and gmniictric, and trutb.s which have their
source In fitne.ss and final causes.

G. VI. 319. The laws of motion wViich actually occur in
nature, and are verified by expci'iincnts, are not in truth absolutely
dembhstrahle, a.s a geouietric{j,l propo.sition would Imj : but also it is
not neces.sary that they should be so. They do not spring entirely
from tlie principle of necessity, but they spring from the principle
of perfection and order; they are an effect of the choice and wisdom
of God.

III. § 14. Meaning of the principle of sufficient reason.

G. VII. 309. There are two first principles of all reasonings,
the principle of contradiction...and the principle that a reason must
be given, i.e. that every true proposition, which is not known per se,

14


K. L.


210


THE LAW OF SUFFICIENT REASON.


has an A priori proof, or that a reason can be given for gsveiy truth,
or, as is commonly said, that nothing hap{)en% without a cause.
Arithmetic and Geometry do not need this principle, but ^Physics
and Mechanics do, and Archimedes employed it. [In a marginal
note Leibniz remarks:] The true cause, why certain things exist
rather than others, is to Ije derived from the free decrees of the
divine will, the first of which is, to will to do all things in the best
possible way.

G. VII. 374 (D. 250). Wlieu two things which cannot both
be together, are equally good ; and neither in themselves,' nor by
tlieir combination with other things, has the one any adviuitage
over the other; G<k 1 will produce neither of them.

G, IV. 438 (1686). This demonstration of this predicate of
Caesar [that he resolved to cross the Rubicon] is not as absolute as
those of numbers or of Geomctiy, but presupposes the series of
things which God has chosen freely, and which is founded on the
first free decree of God, namely, to do always what is most perfect,
and on the decree which God has made (in consequence of the first),
in regal'd to human nature, which is that man will always do
(though freely) what appears best. Now every truth which is
founded on decrees of this kind is contingent, although it is certain.
...All contingent propositions have reasons for being as they are
rather than otherwise, or (what is the same thing) they have d priwi
proofs of their truth, which render them certain, and show that the
connection of subject and predicate in these propositions has its
foundation in the nature of the one and the other; but they do not
have demonstrations of necessity, since these reasons are only
founded on the principle of contiiigeucy, or of the existence of
things, i.e. on what is or appears the best among several equally
possible things.

G. II. 40 (1686). As there are an infinity of possible worlds,
there are also an infinity of laws, some proper to one, others to
another, and each possible individual of any world contains in its
notion the laws of its world.

G. VII. 199. In demonstration I use two principles, of which
one is that what implies contradiction is false, the other is that a
reason can be given for every truth (which is not identical or imme¬
diate), i.e. that the notion of the predicate is always expressly or
implicitly contained in the notion of its subject, and that this holds
good no less in extrinsic than in intrinsic denominations, no less in
contingent than in necessary truths.


THE LAW OP SUFFICIENT REASON.


211


III. I 15. ^ts relation to the law of contradiction.

G. Sm. 419 (D. 285), Is tliis [the principle of sufficient
reason] a principle that wants to be proved ?

G. VII. 364 (D. 244). It appears from what I have said, that
my axiom has not been well understood; and that the author
[Clarke] denies it, though he seems to grant it. ^Tis ti'ue.y says he,
that there is nothing without a sufficient reason...hnt lie adds, that
this sufficlerU reason is often the simple or mere will of 6'of/. ...But
this is plainly inaintfiining tliat God wills something, witliout any
sufficient roixson for his will: against the axiom, or general rule of
whatever happens. This is falling back into the loose indifference,
which T have confuted at large, and showed to be absohrtely
chimerical, even in creature.s, and contniry lu th»i wisdom of God,
as if he could oi)erate without acting by reason.

G. II. 56 (168G). If w'e were aljsolutely to reject pure pos¬
sibles, we should destroy contingency and liV)erty; for if there were
nothing possible but what God actually creates, what God creates
would be necessar}', and if God wished to create something, he
could only create that, without liberty of choice.

G. II. 423. When any one has chosen in one way, it would
not imply a contradiction if ho had chosen otherwise, because the
dotennining reasons do not neoessihite (the action).

G. II. 181. I think you will concede that not everything

possible exists_But when this is admitted, it follows that it is not

from absolute necessity, but from some other reason (as good, order,
perfection) that some possibles obtain existence rather than others.

G, 11. 49 (1686). Notions of individual substances, wliich are
complete and capable of wholly distinguishing their subject, and
involve consequently contingent truths or truths of fact, and in¬
dividual circunistiinces of time, place, etc., must also involve in
their notion, taken as possible, the free decrees of God, also taken
as possible, because these free decrees are the principal sources of
oxistents or facts ; whereas essences are in the Divine understand¬
ing before the consideration of the will.

G. IV. 344. In maintaining that the eternal truths of geome¬
try and morals, and consequently also the rules of justice, goodness,
and beauty, are the effect of a free or arbitrary choice of the will of
God, it seems that he is deprived of his wisdom and justice, or
rather of his understanding and will, having left only a certain
unmeasured power from which all emanates, which deserves rather

14—2


212 THE CONCEFriON OF SUBSTANCE.

•

the name of nature than that of God j for how is it f/hssible that
his understanding (whose object is the truths ol the ideas contained
in his essence) can depend upon liis will ? And how can have a
will which has the idea of the good, not for its object, but for its
effect ?

Or. II. 424. In my opinion, if there were no best possible
series, God would have certainly created nothing, since he cannot
act without a reason, or prefer the less perfect to the more perfect.

i

IV. § 16. Cartesian and Spinozistic views on substance.

G. VI. 681. [Dialogue between Philai‘6te (Leibniz) and Ariste
(Malebranche).] Ariste. All that can be conceived alone, and
without thinking of anything else, or without our idea of it repre¬
senting something else, or what can be conceived alone as existing
independently of anything else, is a substance. ..

G. VI. 682. Philarete. This definition of substance is not
free from difficulties. At bottom there is nothing but God that
can be conceived as independent of other things. Shall we say
then, with a certain innovator who is but too well known, that God
is the only substance, of whom creatures are mere modifications 1
If you restrict your definition, by adding that substance is what can
be conceived independently of every other creature, we shall
perhaps find things which, without being substances, have as much
independence as extension. For exainido, the force of action, life,
antitypia, are something at once essential and primitive, and we can
conceive them independently of other notions, and even of their
subjects, by moans of abstractions. On the contrary, subjects are
conceived by moans of such attributes....

Ariste —Let us say that the definition must l>e only understood
of concretes; thus suljstance will be a concrete independent of every
other created concrete.

G. VI. 686. Philarete. ...Theve is nothing but monads, i.e.
simple or indivisible substances, which are truly independent of
every other created concrete thing. [Contrast G. iv. 364, quoted in
Appendix, iv. § 17.]

G. II. 249. I do not at all approve the doctrine of attributes
which people form now-a-days, according to which some one simple
absolute predicate, which they call an attribute, constitutes a sub¬
stance ; for I find among notions no predicates wholly absolute, or
not involving connection with others. Certainly thought and exten-


THE CONCEPTION OP SUBSTANCE. 213

sion, which Are commonly alleged as examples, are nothing less^han
such attributes,•as S'have often shown. Nor is the predicate, unless
taken i|jj the concrete, identical with the subject; and thus a mind
coincides (though not formally) with the thinker, but not with
thought. For it belongs to the subject to involve, l>esides the
present, future and past thoughts also.


IV. § 17. The meaning of substance in Leibniz.

Gt. ll. 12 (1686). Since the individual notion of each person
involves, once for all, what will happen to him for ever, we see here
the ct prim'i proofs or reasons of the truth of each event, or why one
lias happened rather than the other. But these truths, though
certain, are none the less contingent, being founded on the free will
of God and of creatures. It is true that their choice always has
reasons, but they incline without necessitating.

G. II. 37 (1686). Mons. Arnaud finds strange what it seems
that I maintain, namely, that all human events follow with hypo¬
thetical n*‘f'e^sity from the sole supposition that God chose to create
Adanij to which I have two answers to give, the one, that mj'
supposition is not merely that God chose to create an Adam, whose
notion was vague and incomplete, but that God chose to create such
and such an Adam, suificiently determined for an individual. And
this individual complete notion, according to me, involves relations
to the whole series of things_The other reply is, that the conse¬

quence, in virtue of which the events follow from the hypothesis, is
indeed always certain, but is not always necc'ssary with a meta¬
physical necessity, as is that which is found in M. Arnaud’s example
(that God, in resolving to create mo, could not fail to create a
nature capable of thought), but that often the consequence is only
physical, and presupposes certain free decrees of God, as do conse¬
quences depending on the laws of motion, or on this principle of
morals, that every spirit will pursue what seems to it the best.

(J, IV, 432 (1686). It is rather difficult to distinguish the
actions of God from those of creatures; for there are some who
believe that God does everything, while others imagine that he only
preserves the force which he has given to creatures : the sequel will
show how both may be said. Now since actions and passions
belong properly to individual substances (actioftes mnt aupposito-
rum), it would be necessary to explain what such a substance is.
It is true, indeed, that when several predicates can be attributed to


2l4


THE CONCEPTION OF SUBSTANCE.


1 ,


the same subject, and this subject can no longer be attrib¥.ted to any
other, we call it an individual substance; but that'is not enough,
and such an explanation is only nominal. We*must therefore con¬
sider what it is to be truly attributed to a certain subject, ^ow it
is certain that every true predication has some foundation in the
nature of things, and when a proposition is not identical, i.e. when
the predicate is not expressly contained in the subject, it must be
contained in it virtually, and this is what philo-sophcrs call in-esse,
by saying that the predicate is in the subject. Thus the subject-
term must always contain the predicate-terra, so that one who
perfectly understood the notion of the subject would judge also that
the predicate belongs to it. This being so, we may say that the
nature of an individual substance, or complete being, is to have a
notion so completed that it suffices to comprehend, and to render
deducible from it, all the predicates of the subject to which this
notion is attributed. Thus the quality of king, which belongs to
Alexander the Great, abstracting from the subject, is not sufficiently
determined for an individual, and docs not involve the other quali¬
ties of tho same subject, nor all that tlie notion of this Prince
contains, whereas God, seeing the iudivulual notion or hecceity of
Alexander, sees in it at the same time tho foundation and the reason
of all the predicates which can truly be attributed to him, as e.g.
whether he would conquer Darius and Porus, eveii to knowing
d priori (and not by experience) whether he died a natural death or
by poison, which we can only know by history.

G. II. 54 (1686). There would be several Adams disjunctively
possible...whatever finite number of predicates incapable of deter¬
mining all the rest we may take, but wliat determines a certain
Adam must involve absolutely all hjs predicates, and it is this
complete notion which determines the general into the individual
{i'ationem yeneralitatis ad indimduurni).

G. V. 96 (N. E. 105). I am of opinion that reflection suffices
for finding the idea of substance in ourselves, who are substances.

G. V. 137 (N. E. 154). I believe that the consideration of
substance is one of the most important and fruitful points in
philosophy.

G. V. 274 (N. E. 316). I am not of your opinion that in this
[as regards real and nominal definitions] there is a diflerence
between the ideas of substances and the ideas of predicates, as if
the definitions of predicates...were always real and nominal at the
same time, while those of substances were nominal only....We


THE CONCBFflON OF SUBSTANCE.


215


have a knowledge of true substances or unities (as God and the
soul) as intimate a# we have of most of the modes. Moreover there
are placates as little known as the contexture of bodies.

G. IV. 364 (D. 65). I know not whether the definition of
substance as that which needs the concurrence of God only for its
existence, is appropriate to any created substance known to us,
unless interpreted in a somewhat unusual sense. For we need not
only other substances, but also, much more, our accidents. Since,
therefore, substance and accident mutually require each other,
there ^ill be need of other criteria for distinguishing substance
freni accident, among which this may be one, that a substance,
though it does need some accident, yet often has no need of one
determinate accident, but when this is taken away, is content with
the substitution of another ; whereas an accident docs not need
merely some substance in general, but also that one of its own in
which it once inheres, so as not to change it. There remain, how'cver,
other things to be .said elsewhere of the nature of substance, which
are of greater moment and require a more profound discussion.

G. IV 469 (D. 69). The notion of substance, which I assign,
is so fruitful that from it follow primary truths, even those concern¬
ing God and minds and the nature of bodies.

0. VI. 493 (D. 151). 8ince I conceive that other beings have
also the right to say /, or that it may bo said for them, it is by this
means that I conceive what is callcsd substance in general.

G. VI. 350. What does mit act, doe.s not deserve the name of
substauhe.

G. II. 45 (1686). [ti order to judge of the notion of an indi¬
vidual substance, it is well to consult that which I have of myself,
as we must consult the specific notion of the sphere to judge of its
properties.

G. III. 247. I believe that wo have a clear but not a distinct
idea of substance, which comes in my opinion from the fact that we
have the internal feeling of it in ourselves, who are substances.

G. II. 43 (1686). Let ABC be a line representing a certain
time. And let there be a certain individual substance, for example
myself, which lasts or subsists during this time. Let us then take
first me who subsist during the time AB, and also me who subsist
during the time BO. Since then we suppose that it is the same
individual substance which endures, or that it is I who subsist
during the time AB and am then at Paris, and also I who subsist
during the time BC and am then in Germany, there must necessarily


2l6 TH£ CONCEPTION OF SUBSTANCE.

be a reason which makes it true to say that we last, i.e. .that I, who
have been in Paris, am how in Germany. For If tKere were none,
we should have just as much right to say that it is another. It is
true that my internal experience has convinced me ft posteriori of
this identity, but there must also be an ft priori reason. Now it is
impossible to find any other, except that my attributes of the
earlier time and state, as well as my attributes of the later
time and state, are predicates of the same subject, irhswni, &dem
subjecto. But what is meant by saying that the predicate is in the
subject, if not that the notion of the predicate is found in sohie way
Contained in the notion of the subject? And since, from the
moment that T began to be, it could be truly said of me that tl|,is or
that would happen to me, we must admit tliat these predicates were
laws contained in the subject, or in the complete notion of me,
which makes what is called /, which is the foundatioX| of the con¬
nection of aU my different states, and which God knew perfectly
from all eternity. After this, I believe, all doubts must disappear,
for in saying that the individual notion of Adam involves 'aH tlmt
will ever happen to him, I mean nothing else but whafi all ,philo¬
sophers mean when they say that Uie predicate is in the svbjeM^f Oi
true, proposition,

G* II. 76 (1686) Substantial unity demands a complete, iad^
visible, and naturally indestructible being, since its notion involves
all that is ever to happen to it.

6. II. 77 (168G). The notion of individual substance in
general, which I have given, is as clear as that of truth'

G. 11.457. For the nature of an accident, it does not suffice
that it should be dependent on a substance, for composite substance
also depends on simple ones or Monads ; but it must be added that
it depends on a substance as its subject, and moreover as its ulti¬
mate subject; for an accident may be an afi'ection of another
accident, e.g. magnitude [may be an affection] of heat or of impetus,
so that the impetus is the subject, and its magnitude inheres in it
as the abstract of a predicate, when the impetus is said to become
great, or so great. But the heat or impetus is in a body as its
subject; and the ultimate subject is always a sul>stance.

G. II. 458. I do not see how we can distinguish the abstract
from the concrete, or from the subject in which it is, or explain
intelligibly what it is to be or inhere in a subject, unless by con¬
sidering the inherent as a mode or state of the subject.

G. II. 271. If the principle of action were external to all,


THE CONOBPTION OF SUBSTANCE. 217

internal ti; none, it would be nowhere at all, but we should have
to recur, with "the ^ccasionalists, to God as the sole agent. There¬
fore i^is, in trutlf, internal to all simple substances, since there is
no reason why it should be in one rather than another; and it
consists in the progression of perceptions of each Monad.


IV. § 18. The meaning of activity.

Q-.*V. 46 (N. E. 47; L. 369). I maintain that, naturally, a
substancu cannot be without action, and indeed that there is never
a l^y without motion.

V. 100 (N. E. 110). Faculties without some act, in a word
the'pure powers of the school, ar(j mere fictions, unknown to nature,
and obtained only by making abstractions.

G. V. 200 (N. E. 224). if power is taken as the source of
'^action, it means something more than an aptitude or facility...for it

involves tendency also_ This is why, in this sense, T am .‘iccus-

toihed to Apply to it the term enleleahy, which is either primitivey
and"?jorresponds to the soul taken as something abstract, or fieriva-
tive, such as is conceived in conation, and in vigour and impetu¬
osity.

G. IV. 469 (D. 69). The notion of force or power..., for the
explanation of which I have designed the special subject of Dy¬
namics, brings very much light for the understanding of the true
notion' of substance.

G. IV. 479 (D. 73; L. 302). As all simple substances
which have a genuine unity can have a beginning and an end only
by miracle, it follows that they can come into Wing only by creation
and come to an end only by annihilation. Thus I was obliged to
recognize that (with the exception of the souls which Goil still
intends specially to create) the constitutive forms of substances
must have been created with the world and subsist always.

G. II. 264. “That changes happen," you say, “experience
teaches; but we are not inquiring what experience teaches, but
what follows from the very nature of things.” But do you then
suppose that I am either able or desirous to prove anything in
nature, unless changes are presiupposed ?

G. IV. 507 (D. 115), Since this past decree [by which God
created the world] dues not exist at present, it can produce nothing
now unless it then left after it some perduriug effect, which now


218


THB CONCEPTION OP SUBSTANCE.


still continues and operates. And he who thinks ot^rwise re¬
nounces, if I judge rightly, all distinct explanalfcon t>f thin^, and
will have an equal right to say that anything is “the result any¬
thing, if that which is aV>sent in space or time can, without inter¬
mediary, operate here and now. ...But if, on the contrary, the law
decreed by God [at the creation] left some trace of itself impressed
on things; if things were so formed by the mandate as to render
them fit to accomplish the will of the legislator, then it must be
admitted that a certain efficacy, form, or force, ...was impressed on
things, whence proceede<l the series of phenomena, aecording'to the
prescription of the first command. This indwelling force, however,
may indeed be distinctly conceived, but not explained by images
{inuigitMlnliter)i nor indeed ought it to bo so explained, any more
than the nature of the soul, for force is one of those things which
are not to be grasped by the imagination, but by the intellect....

G. IV. 508 (D. 117). The very substance of things consists in
the force of action and passion; whence it follows that even durable
things could not l>e produced at all, unless a force of some perma¬
nence can l»e imprintetl upon them by the divine power. In that
case it would follow that no created sul)stance, no soul, would
remain numerically the same; that nothing would be preserved
by God, and consequently that all things would be only certain
passing and evanescent modifications and apparitions, so to speak,
of one permanent divine substance.

G. IV. 509 (D. 117). Another ((uostion is whether we must
say that creatures properly and truly act. This question is irfcluded
in the first, if we once understand that the nature given to them
does not differ from the force of notion and passion.

G. II. 169. Tbe system of things might have been constituted
in innumemble ways, but that which had the strongest reason on
its side prevailed. The activity of substance, however, is rather of
metaphysical necessity, and would have harl a place, if 1 am not
mistaken, in any system whatever.


IV. § 19. Comeciion between activity and sufficient reason.

G.' I. 372 (ca. 1676). This variety of thoughts cannot come
from what thinks, since a single thing cannot be the cause of the
changes in itself. For everything remains in the state in which it
is, if there is nothing to change it; and not having been determined
of itself to have certain clianges rather than others, we could not


THE IBENTITY of INDISCERNIBLES. 219

begin attmbuting any variety to it, without saying something for
which there is Confessedly no reason, which is absurd.

aji. 263. From uuiversals follow eternal things, from singu¬
lars follow also temporal things, unless you think that temporal
things have no cause. “Nor do I see,” you [De Voider] say, “how
any succession can follow from the nature of a thing regarded in
itself.” No more it can, if we assume a nature which is not singu¬
lar.But all singular things are successive, or subject to

succession. ...Nor is there, for me, anything permanent in them,
exceptf the law itself, which involves continued succession, agreeing
in singulars with that which is in the universe as a whole.


IV. § 22. lielation of time to Leibniz's notion of substance.

G. IV. 582. The essential and the natural are always distin¬
guished_Properties are essential and eternal, but modifications may

be natural though changing.

G. II. 258. 1 distinguish l)etwccn properties, which are per¬
petual, and modifications, whicli are. transitory. What follows from
the nature of a thing may follow perpetually, or for a time. ...From
the nature of a body moving in a given straiglit line, with given
velocity, it follows, if nothing extrinsic be assumed, that after a
given time has elapsed it will reach a given point in the straight
line. But will it therefore reach this point always and perpetually?

V. § 23. Meaning of the identity of indisce-niibles.

G-. VII. 372 (D. 247). Those great principles, of a sufficient
reason, and of the identity of indiscernibles, change the state of
metaphysics. That science bticomes real and demonstrative by
means of these principles; whereas before it did generally consi.st
in empty words.

G. V. 100 (N. E. 110). According to the proofs which I
believe I possess, every substantial thing, whether soul or body, has
its own proper relation to eiich of the others; and one must always
differ from the other by intrinsic denominations.

G. VII. 393 (B. 258). I infer frarn that principle [of sufficient
reason], among other consequences, that there are not in nature two
real, absolute beings, indiscernible from each other; because if there
were, Qod and nature would act without reason, in ordering the one
otherwise than the other.


220


THE IDENTITY OF INDISCpRNIBLES.


G. VII. 407 (D. 273). God...will never choose am^ng indis-
cerniblcs. c ••

G. V. 213 (N. E. 238). It is always neceaftary that, besides
the difference of time and place, there should be an internal prin¬
ciple of distinction, and though there be several things of the same
species, it is none the less true that there are none perfectly similar:
thus, though time and place (i.«. relation to the external) help us to
distinguish things which by themselves we do not well distinguish,
things are none the less distinguishable in thcinselvea Thus the
e.H3euce {le precis) of identity and diversity consists not in time and
place, though it is true that the diversity of things is accompanied
by that of time and place, because they bring with them different
impressions on the thing.

G. II. 131. Can it be denied that everything (whether genus,
species or individual) has a complete notion, according to which it
is conceived by God, who conceives everything perfectly— i.e. a
notion containing or comprehending all that can be said about the
thing: and can it l)c denied that God can form such an individual
notion of Adam or Alexander, which comprehends all the attributes,
affections, acci»lents, and generally all the predicates of this subject.

G. II. 249. Things which are different must differ in some
way, or have in themselves some assignable diversity; and it is
wonderful that this most manifest axiom has not l)een employed by
men along with so many others.


V. § 25, Is Leibniz's proof of the prijidple valid t

G. V. 202 (N. E. 225). We know that it is abstractions which
give rise, when we wish to scrutinize them, to the greatest number

of difficulties,.of which the thorniest fall at once if we agree to

banish abstract beings, and resolve to speak ordinarily only in con¬
cretes, admitting no other terms in the demonstrations of science but
such as represent substantial subjects. ...When we distinguish two
things in substance, the attributes or predicates and the common
subject of these predicates, it is no wonder if nothing particular can
be conceived in this subject. This is necessary, since we have already
separ.ated all the attributes, in which we could conceive some detail.
Thus to demand, in this pure subject in general, anything beyond
what is required to conceive that it is the same thing {e.g. which
understands and wills, imagines and reasons), is to demand the
impossible, and to contravene our own supposition, which we made


THE IDENTITY OF INDISCERNIBLES. 221

ill abstra^nfiiig and conceiving separately the subject and its quali¬
ties or accidetits. *


V. § 26. Every substance has an infinite number of predi¬
cates. Connection of this with contingency and with the
identity of indiscernibles.

G. III. 582. There is a difference lietween analysis of the
ncce.ssary an<l analysis of the contingent: the analysis of the neces¬
sary, ^hich is that of essences, going from the posterior by nature
to the prior by nature, ends in primitive notions, and it is thus that
numbei’s are resolved into units. liut in contingents or existents,
this analysis from the subsequent by nature to the pritir by nature
goes to infinity, without a reduction to primitive elements being
ever possible.

G. V. 268 (N. E. 309). Paradoxical as it ap^iears, it is impos¬
sible for us to have knowledge of individuals, and to find the means
of determining exactly the individuality of any thing, unless we
keep it [the thing?] itself; for all the circumstances may recur; the
smallest differences are insensible to us ; the place and the time, far
from determining [things] of tliomselves, need to lie themselves
determined by the things they contain. What is roost noteworthy
in this is, that individuality involves infinity, and oidy he who is
capable of understanding it [infinity] can have knowledge of the
principle of individuation of such or such a thing; which comes
from \he influence (rightly understood) of sill the things in the
universe on one another. It is true that the matter would be other¬
wise if there were atoms of Democritus; but also there would then
be no dififerencff between two different individuals of the same shape
and size.

P. de C. 24 (D. 176). Individuals cannot be distinctly con¬
ceived. Hence they have no necessary connection with God, but
are produced freely.

G. VII. 309. It is essential to discriminate b<3lween nccessai*y
or eternal truths, and contingent truths or truths of fact; and these
differ from each other almost as rational numbers and surds. For
necessary truths can be resolved into such as are identical, as com¬
mensurable quantities can be brought to a common measure; but
in contingent truths, as in surd numbers, the resolution proceeds to
infinity without ever terminating. And thus the certainty and the
perfect reason of contingent truths is known to God only, who


222


THE LAW OF CONTINUITY.


embraces the infinite in one intuition. And when thi». secret is
known, the difficulty as to the absolute neccssi^/y of all things is
removed, and it appefirs what the difference is betAreen the infallible
and the necessary.

O’. VII. 200. Any truth which is incapable of analysis, and
cannot lie proved from its reasons, but takes its ultimate reason and
its certainty from the divine mind alone, is not necessary. And
such are all those tliat I call trutfis of fact And this is the source
of contingency, which no one, to my knowledge, has hitherto
explained. **

V. § 27. The Law of Continuity: three forms of continuity

maintained hy Leibniz.

G. V. 49 (N. E. 50; L. 376). Nothing happens all at once,
and it is one of my great maxims, and among the most completely
verified, that nature never makes leaps: which T called the Law of
Continuity. ...\ have romarketl also that, in virtue of insensible
variations, two individual things cannot l)o perfectly similar, and
must always ditter more than numerically.

G. V. 456 (N. E. 652).. Everything goes by degrees in nature,
and nothing by leaps, and this rule a.s reganls changes is piirt of my
law of continuity. But the beauty of nature, which desires distin¬
guished perceptions, demands the appearance of leaps.

G. III. 52 (D. 33), A principle of general owler which
I have noticed...is of great utility in i-easoniog. ...It takes its’origin
from the infinite, it is absolutely necessary in Geometry, but it
succeeds also in Physics, because the sovereign wisdom, which is the
source of all things, acts as a perfect geometer, following a harmony
to which nothing can lie added_It [the principle] may be enun¬

ciated tlius: “When the difference of two cases can be diminished
below every given magnitude in the data or in what is posited, it
must also be possible to diminish it below every given magnitude in
what is sought or in what results,’* or, to speak more familiarly,
“ When the cases (or what is given) continually approach and tire
finally merged in each other, the consequences or events (or what is
sought) must do so too.” Which depends again on a still more
general principle, namely ; “ When the data form a series, so do the
consequences ” {datis ordinatis etiam quaesita sunt ordinata).

G. II. 168. No transition happens by a leap. ...This holds, I
think, not only of transitions from place to place, but also of those


POSSIBILITY AND COMPOSSIBILITY.


223


from forii^ to form, or from state to state. For not only does ex¬
perience oonfiube ail sudden clianges, Imt also 1 do not think any
d priori reason can be given against a leap from place to place,
which^vould not militate also against a leap from state to state.

Gt II. 182. Assuming that everything is always created by
God, nothing prohibits a body, if we depart from the laws of order,
from being transcreated by a leap froiri phice to place, so that it
jumps in one moment, and then all at once remains at rest for a
while. A leap, a hiatus, a vacuum, and rest, are condemnfxl by
the same law.

G. II. 193. This hypothesis of leaps cannot be refuted, except
by the principle of order, by the help of tin? supreme reason, which
does everything in the most perfect way.

G. V. 473 (N. E. 575). T conceive things unknown or* con¬
fusedly known only after the manTier of those which we kiwjw
distinctly; which renders philosophy vciy easy, and I even believe
that we must do so. .. This is why I believe that th(?re is no genius,
however sublime, but has an infinity of others above him.


V. § 29. Vosdhility and Gompossibility.

G. V. 286 (N. E. 334). I have reasons for believing that not
all possible species are compossible in the univcj-se, great as it is,
and that this holds not only in respect to the things which exist
together at one time, but even in relaticin to the whole series of
things. ’ That is, I believe that there neces.sarily are species which
never have existed and never will exist, not being compatible with
that series of creatures which God has chosen. ...The law of con¬
tinuity states that Nature leaves no gap in the order which she
follows; but not every form or species belongs to every order.

G. III. 573. The Universe is only the collection of a certain
kind of compossibles; and the actual Universe is the collection of
all existent possibles, f.«. of those which form the richest compound.
And as there are different combinations of possibles, some better
than others, there are many possible Universes, each collection of
compossibles making one of them.

V. § 31. The three kinds of necessity.

G. III. 400 (D. 170). The whole universe might have been
made differently; time, space, and matter being absolutely in-


224 WHY DID LEIBNIZ BELIEVE IN AN EXTEBNAL WpELD ? *

different to motions and figures; and God has chosen,among an
infinity of possibles what he judged to lie the i^ostcsuitable. But
as soon os he has chosen, it must be admitted «that everything is
comprised in his choice, and that nothing can be changed, sifnce he
foresaw and arranged everything once for all. ...It is this necessity,
which can be attributed now to things in the future, which is called
hypothetical or consequential.... But though all the facts of the
universe are now certain in relation to God,...it does not follow
that their connection is always truly necessary, i.e. that the
truth, which pronounces that one fact follows frtitu another, is
necessary.

a. VII. 389 (D. 255). We must distinguish lietween an abso¬
lute and an hypothetical necessity. We must also distinguish
between a necessity which takes place because the opposite implies
a contradiction (which necessity is called logical, metaphysical, or
mathematical), and a necessit}' which is moral, whereby a wise
being chooses the best, and every mind follows the strongest incli¬
nation.


VI. § 33. The existence of the external world has only

“ moral certaw ty."

G. I. 372 (crt. 1676). This variety of thoughts cannot come
from what thinks, since a thing cannot itself lai the cause of its own
changes....Therefore there is outside of us some cause of the variety
of our thoughts. And since we agree tiiat there are certain sub¬
ordinate causes of this variety, which nevertheless themselves need
causes, we have established particular beings or substances in which
we recognize some action, i.e, of which we conceive that from their
change follows some change in ourselves. And we are marching
with great strides towards the construction of what wo call matter
and body. But it is at this point that you [Foucher] are right in
delaying us a little, and renewing the complaints of the ancient
Academy. For all our experiences, at bottom, assure us of only
two things, namely, that there is a connection between our appear¬
ances which gives us the means of successfully predicting future
appearances, and that this connection must have a constant cause.
But from all this it does not follow, strictly speaking, that matter
or bodies exist, but only that there is something which presents
well-ordered appearances to us. For if an invisible power took
pleasure in making dreams, well connected with our previous life


WHY DID LEIBNIZ BELIEVE IN AN EXTERNAL WORLD? 225


and agreeis^ with each other, appear to us, should we he able to
distinguish tliesi from realities until wo had been awakened? Or
what prevents the Whole course of our life from being a great orderly
dream, of which we might be disillusioned in a moment? And T
do not see that this Power would for that reason-be imperfect, as
M. Des Cartes assures, besides that its imperfection does not enter
into the question.

G. V. 275 (N. E. 318). God has ideas (of substances) before
creating the objects of these ideas, and nothing prevents him from
also coTftmunicating such ideas to intelligent creatures ; there is not
even any exact demonstration proving that the objects of our senses,
and of the simple ideas which our senses present to us, are outside
of us.

G. V. 355 (N. E. 422). T believe the true eriffirinn, as regards
objects of sense is the connection of phenomena, i.e. the connection
of what happens in diflerent times and places, and in the experience;
of difibrent men, who are themselves, in this respect, very imporbint
phenomena to one another. ...But it must be confessed that all this
certainty is not of the highest degree. ...For it is not impos.sible,
metaphysically speaking, that there should be a dream as connected
and lasting as the life of a man; but it is a thing as contrary to
reason as would be the fiction of a book produced by chance in
throwing the printer’s types pell-mell.

G. VII. 320 (N. E. 719). It cannot bo absolutely demon¬
strated, by any argument, that there are bodies, and nothing
prevents*some well-ordered dreams from being offered to our minds,
which would be judged by us to be true. ..Nor is the argument of
great weight, which is commonly adduced, that thus God would
be a deceiver; undoubtedly no one fails to sec how far this is from
a demonstration giving metaphysical certainty, since, in asserting
something without accurate investigation, wo should be deceived
not by God, but by our own judgment.

G. V. 205 (N. E. 229). It is very true that the existence of
spirit is more certain than that of sensible objects.

G. 11. 516. From the reason of things we judge (even without
respect to the divine wisdom) that we do not exist alone, since there
appears no reason of a privilege in favour of one. Nor will you be
able otherwise to convince by reason any one who contends that he
alone exists, and that others are merely dreamed by him. But
there is a reason for the privilege of existents over non-existents, or
why not all possibles exist. Moreover even if no creatures existed

15


B. L.


226


THE PHILOSOPHY OF DYNAMICS.


except the percipient, the order of perceptions would’ show the
divine wisdom. Thus there is no circle here, ftlthcAigh the wisdom
of God is also derived d priori, and not oid/^ from the order of
phenomena. For from the mere fact that there are contingents it
follows that there is a necessary Being.

VII. I 35. VarioiLS meanings of matter and body.

G, III. 657 (D. 234). Primary and pure matter, taken without
the souls or lives which are united to it, is purely passive j also,
properly speaking, it is not a substance, but something incomplete.
And secondary matter {e.g. an organic body) is not a substance, but
for another reason, namely, that it is a collection (nmas) of several
substances, like a pond full of fish, or a flock of sheep, and con¬
sequently it is what is called unum per accidem —in a word, a
phenomenon. A true substance (such as an animal) is composed of
an immaterial soul and an organic body, and it is the compound of
these two which is called unum per se.

0. VII. 601 (N. E. 722). Matter is what consists in Antitypia,
or what resists penetration; and thus bare matter is merely passive.
But body has, besides matter, active force also. Now body is either
corporeal substance, or a mass composed of corporeal substances. I
call corporeal substance wdiat consists in a simple substance or monad
{i.e. a soul or something analogous to a soul) and an orgaiuc lx)dy
united wdth it. But mass is the aggregate of corporeal substances,
as cheese sometimes consists of a concourse of worms. i,

G. II. 252. I distinguish (1) the primitive entelechy or soul,
(2) primary matter or primitive passive power, (3) the monad, com¬
pleted by these two, (4) mass or secondary matter or the organic
machine, to which innumerable subordinate monads concur, (5) the
animal, or corporeal substance, which is made into one machine hy
the dominant monad.

VII. I 36. Relation of Leihnizian and Cartesian Dynamics.

G, IV. 497 (D. 88). You know that M. Des Cartes believed
that the same quantity of motion is preserved in bodies. It has
been shown that he was mistaken in this; but I have shown
that it is always true that the same motive force is preserved, for
which he had taken the quantity of motion. However the changes
which happen in bodies in consequence of modifications of the soul
embarrassed him, because they seemed to violate tins law. He


THE PHILOSOPHY OF DYNAMICS.


227


believed, thV'sfore, that he had found an expedient, which is
certainly ingeniouSj^By saying that we must distinguish Ijetween
motion q^id direction ; and that the soul cannot augment or diminish
the moving force, but alters the direction, or determination of the
course of the animal spirits, and that it is through this that voluntary
motions take place. ..'.But it must be known that there is another
law of nature, which I have discovered and proved, and which M.
Des Cartes did not know: this is that not only the quantity of
moving force is conserved, but also the same ijuantity of direction
[momentum] towards whichever part it may be taken in the woi’ld,...
This law, being os beautiful and general as the other, wiis also
worthy of not being violated: and this is what my system effects,
by conserving force and direction, and in a word all the natural
laws of bodies, notwithstanding the changes which happen in them
in consequence of those of the soul.

G. VI. 540 (D. 164). If people had known, at the time of
M. Des Cartes, that new law of nature, which I have proved,
which asserts that not only the total force of bodies that have
connection with each other is conserved, but also their total direction,
he would apparently have come to my System of the pre-established
Harmony.

G. IV. 286 (D. 5) (1680). The Physics of M. Des Cartes has
a great defect; this is that his rules of motion, or laws of nature,
which are intended to bo the foundation, are for the most part
false. There is proof of this: and his great principle, that the same
quantity of motion is conserved in the world, is a mistake. What
T say here is recognized by the ablest people in Franco and England.


VII. § 37. The esseiice of matter is not extension.

G. I. 58 (ca. 1672). In natural philosophy I am perhaps the
first to have proved thoroughly...that there is a vacuum. [It follows
that the essence of matter is not extension.]

G. II. 71 (1686). [Assuming that bodies are substances] it can
bo inferred that corporeal substance does not consist of extension or
divisibility; for it will be admitted that two bodies remote one from
another, e.g. two triangles, are not really one substance; let us
suppose now that they approach so as to make a square; will mere
contact make them into one substance 1 I think not. Now every
extended mass can be considered as composed of two or a thousand
others; we have merely extension by contact. Thus we shall never

16—2


228


THE PHILOSOPHY OF DYNAMICS.


find a body of which we can say that it is truly one substance. It
will be always an aggregate of many. Or rsi^lier it will not be a
real being, because the pai'ts which compose it are subject to the
same difficulty_But also the general notion of individual sub¬

stance...proves the same thing. Extension is an attribute which
cannot constitute a complete being, no action or change can be
derived from it, it expresses merely the present state, but not at
all the future or the past, .as the notion of a substance should.
When two triangles arc joined, we cannot from this conclude how
the junction came about.

G. III. 97. Wo cannot conceive that resistance should be a
modification of extension.

G. III. 453. Impenetrability is not a consequence of extension;
it presupposes sojnething more. Place is extended, but not im¬
penetrable.

a. n. 233 . You admit that existence and continuity, which
are constituents of the notion of extension, differ formally, and I
demand no more; but in truth that of which the notion is formed
of different formal concepts, is not primitive. It is one of the
primary errors of the Cartesians that they conceived extension as
something primitive and absolute, and as wh.at constitutes substance.

G. II. 169. I do not think that extension .alone can constitute
a substance, since the notion of extension is incomplete; .and I hold
that extension cannot be conceived per se, bat is .a resolvable and
relative notion; for it is resolved into plurality, continuity, and
coexistence or the existence of parts at one and the same time.
Plurality is also contained in number, continuity also in time and
motion, while coexistence is only added in extension.

VII. § 38. Meaning of materia prirna in Leibniz’s Dynamics.

G. II. 171. The resistance of matter contains two things,
impenetrability or antitypia, and resistance or inertia; and in these,
since they are evei 7 where equal in a body, or proportional to its
extension, I place the nature of the passive principle or matter; as,
iu active force, displaying itself variously in motions, I recognize the
primitive entelechy, or so to speak something analogous to a soul,
whose nature consists in a perpetual law of its series of changes,
which it describes uninterruptedly.

G. II. 170. I observed that Des Cartes in his letters, following
the example of Kepler, had recognized inertia everywhere in matter.


THE PHILOSOPHY OF DYNAMICS.


229


This you [d»Voider] deduce from the force which anytliing has of
remaining in its fpj;esent) state, which force does not differ from its
own nature. Thus you judge that the simple concept of extension
suffices even for this phenomenon. ...But it is one thing to retain the
actual state until there is something which changes it, which is done
even by what is in itself indifferent to either, while it is something
other and much more that a thing should not be indifferent, but
have a force, and as it were an inclination, to retain its state and
should resist the cause of change. ...And a world can be imagined, as
at least possible, in which matter at rest would obey a cause of motion
without any resistance ; but such a world would be a more chaos.

G. V. 206 (N. E. 231). I believe that perfect fluidity belongs
only to materia prima^ i.n. in abstraction, and as an original quality,
like rest; but not to materia secunday such as it actually occurs,
invested with its derivative qualitie..s.

G. V. 325 (N. E. 383). It is not so useless as is supposed to
reason about maieria prima in general T’hysic.s, and to determine its
nature, so a.s to know whether it is always uniform, whether it has
any other property besides impenetrability (a.s in fact T have shown,
after Kepler, that it has also what may l)c called inertia) etc., though
it never occurs quite bare.

G. IV. 393 (N. E. 699). 'Fhere is in body something passive
bt'sidcs extomsion, that namely by whicli a body n'sists penetration.

G. IV. 395 (N. E. 701). ™ ^wa/AiKor or power in body is
twofold, pas.sive and active. Passive force propei’ly constitutes matter
or 111 ,* 188 ,'Active force constitutes €i/TcAc;(eiav or form. Passive force
is that resistance by which a body I’csists not only penetr.ation, but
also motion, and in virtue of which another body cannot come into
its place unle.s.s it gives way, while it does not give way except by
somewhat retarding the motion of the impelling body, and thus tries
to persevere in its former state....Thus there are in it two resistances
or masses: the firat is called antitypia or iinpenetraViility, the second,
resistance, or what Kepler calls the natural inertia of bodies.

G. VII. 328. I call antitypia that attribute in virtue of which
matter is in space... .The modification or variety of antitypia consists
in the variety of place.


VII. § 30. Materia secunda.

G. M. VI. 235 (N. E. 671). There is in corporeal things
something besides extension, nay prior to extension, namely the very


S30


THE PHILOSOPHY OF DYNAMICS.


force of nature everywhere implanted by its Author, which consists,
not in the simple faculty with which the schooJs jpeem to have been
content, but is provided, besides, with a conation or effort which
will have its full effect unless impeded by a contrary conation.

G. IV, 470 (D. 70). Corporeal substance never ceases to act,
any more than does spiritual substance.

G. M. VI. 237 (N. E. 673). Because of form, every lK>dy
always acts; and because of matter, every Iwdy always endures and
resists.

G. IV. 513 (D. 122). Not only is a body at thd present
moment of its motion in a place commensurate to it, but it has also
a conation or effort to change its place, so that the succeeding state
follows of itself from the present state by the force of nature; other¬
wise in the present, and also in any moment, a body A which is in
motion would differ in no way from a body B which is at rest.

G. IV. 396 (N. E. 702). Many things compel us to place
active force in bodies, especially that experience which shows that
there are motions in matter, which, though they are attributable
originally to the general cause of things, God, yet are immediately
and specially attributable to the force placed by God in things.
I? or it is nothing to say that God in creation gave bodies a law of
action, unless he gave them, at the same time, something by which
the law was to be observed; otherwise he himself would always
have to procure the observation of the law by extraordinary means.

G. III. 60. There is always conserved in the world the same
quantity of motor action, i e, rightly understood, there is * as much
motor action in the universe in one hour as in any other hour what¬
ever. But in moments themselves it is the same quantity of force
which is conserved. And in fact action is nothing but the exercise
of force, and amounts to the product of the force and the time.

G. IV. 510 (D. 119), That bodies are of themselves inert
is true if it be rightly understood, to this extent namely, that
what is, for some reason, once assumed to be at rest cannot
set itself in motion, and does not allow itself without resistance
to be set in motion by another body j any more than it can of
itself change the degree of velocity or the direction which it once
has; or allow it easily and without resistance to be changed by
another body. And also it must be confessed that extension, or
what is geometrical in body, if taken simply, has nothing in it
which can give rise to action and motion; on the contrary, matter
rather resists motion by a certain naitirnl inertia, as Kepler has well


THE PHILOSOPHY OF DYNAMICS.


231


called it, tliat it is not indifiFerent to motion and rest, as is
generally supphtld,*but needs, in order to move, an active force
proportional to ira size. WherefoiHi I make the very notion of
materia ^rrima, or of mass, which is always the same in a Ijody and
proportional to its size, consist of this very passive force of re¬
sistance (involving l>oth impenetrability and something more); and
hence T show that entirely diflerent laws of motion follow than
if there were in body and in matter itself only impenetrability
together with extension; and that, as there is in matter a natural
inertia ‘opposed to motion, so in body, and what is more in every
substance, there is a natural constancy opposed to change. Jiut
this doctrine does not defend, but rather oppose.s, those who deny
action to things; for just as certain as it is that matter of itself
does not Ijegin motion, so certain is it (as is shown by excellent
experiments on tlie motion communicated by a moving body) that
a body retains of itself the impetus which it lias once acquired, and
that it is stable in its levity, or makes an effort to persevere in
that very series of changes upon which it has entered. As these
activities and entelechies cannot lie modifications of primary mattl^^
or mass, a tiling o.ssentially passive,...it may bo hence inferred that
there must be found in corporeal substance a first entclechy or
TT/xoTor ScKTiKov toT activity; i.a a primitive motor force which,
joined to extension (or what is purely geometrical) and to mass
(or what is purely material) always indeed acts, but nevertheless,
in consequence of the meeting of bodies, is variously modified
througlf efforts and impetus. And it is this same substantial
principle which is called sold in living beings, and substarUiaf
form in others.

VII. § 41. Foi’ce and absolute motion.

0. IV. 400 (N. E. 706). If forces are taken away, motion
itself has nothing real left in it, for from the mere variation of
position we cannot tell where the true motion or cause of variation is.

G. II. 137 (D. 39). As regaids Physics, we must understand
the natura of force, a thing quite diflferent fi*om motion, which is
something more relative.

G. IV. 369 (D. 60). If motion is nothing but change of
contact or immediate vicinity, it will follow that we can never
determine which thing is moving....Thus if there is nothing in
motion but this relative change, it follows that there is no


2S2


THE PHILOSOPHY OF DYNAMICS.


roason in nature for ascribing motion to one things ^ther than
others. The consequence of which will be, thajjj^ere is no real
motion. Thus in order to say that anything moves, we require
not only that it should change its situation relatively to otheip
things, but also that it should contain the cause of change, the
force or action.

G. VII. 403 (D. 269). Motion docs not depend upon being
ol)8erved, but it does depend upon being possible to be observed.
...When there is no change that can Ije observed, there is no
change at all. ...1 find nothing in the eighth definition*of the
Mathematical Principles of Nature.^ nor in the scholium belonging
to it, that prove.s, or can prove, the reality of space in itself. How¬
ever, I grant there is a ditterencc between an absolute true motion
of a body, and a mere relative change of its situation with re.spect
to another body. For when the immediate cause of the motion is in
the body, that body is truly in motion.

G. M. II. 184. As for the difference between absolute and
relative motion, I believe that if motion, or rather the moving
force of lK)dies, is something real, as it scorns we must recognize, it
is necessary that it should have a ...You [Huygens] will not

deny, I believe, that really each [body in impact] lias a certain
degree of motion, or if you will, of force, notwithstanding the equi¬
valence of hypotheses. It is true, I derive hence the consequence
that there is in botlies something other thai\ Geometry can determine
in them. And this is not the least among several reasons which I
use to prove that, besides extension and its variatifjns (wMch are
something purely geometrical), we must recognize something superior,
which is force. Mr Newton recognizes the equivalence of Jiypotheses
in the case of rectilinear motions; but as regards circular motions,
he believes that the eflbrt which revolving bodies make, to recede
from the centre or axis of revolution, makes known their absolute
motion. But I have reasons which make me believe that nothing
breaks the general law of equivalence.

G. II. 91 (1687). What is real in the state called motion
proceeds just as much from coiporeal substance as thought and will
proceed from the mind.

A n. 115 (1687). A corporeal substance gives itself its own
motion, or rather what is real in the motion at each instant, i.e. the
derivative force, of which it is a consequence; for every present
state of a substance is a consequence of its preceding state. ...If God
ever reduces a body to perfect rest, which could only be done by


THE PHILOSOPHY OP DYNAMICS. 233

nliracle, miracle will be required to restore any motion to

it.

486 0). 80; L. 318). As to absolute motion, nothing
^an determine it mathematically, since all ends in relations, with the
result that there is always a perfect equivalence of hypotheses, as in
Astronomy ....Yet it is i-easonable to attribute to bodies real motions,
according to the supposition which explains the phenomena in the
most intelligible way, for this denomination is in harmony with
the notion of activity.

G.*V. 370 (N. E. 440). The infinitesimal analysis has given
us the means of allying Geometry with Physics.

G. M. VI. 247 (N. E. 684). It must be known, to begin with,
that force is indeed something truly real, even in created substances;
but space, time and motion are of the natun* of r.ational entities,
and are true and real, not of themselves, but in so far as they involve
divine attributes—immensity, eternity, operation—or the force of
created substances. Hence, it follows at once that there is no
vacuum in space or time; that motion, moreover, apart from force,...
is in truth nothing else than a change of situation, and thus inotuni,
as far as phenomena are concerned^ consists in a mere rela.tion...At
follows also, from the relative nature of motion, that the action of
bodies on each other^ or i?npact^ is the same, 'provided they approfich
each other with the same ...Meanwhile we speak as the

matter I’ctjuires, for a more suitable find simpler explanation of the
phenomena, precisely as...in the theory of the planets we jnust use
the Cbpernican hypothesis.... For although force is something real
and absolute, nevertheless motion pertains to the class of relative
phenomena, and truth is looked for not so much in phenomena as in
causes.


VII. § 42. Metaphysical grounds for assuming force.

G. III. 45. There is always a perfect equation between the
complete cause and the whole effect. ...Though this axiom is wholly
metaphysical, it is none the less one of the most useful that can
be employed in Physics.

G. III. 48. I have shown that force must not be estimated
by the compound of velocity and size, but by the future effect.
However it seems that force or power is something already real,
while the future effect is not so. Whence it follows that we mu.st


234


THE PHILOSOPHY OF DYNAMICS.


admit iu bodies something diflerent from size and velopity, unless
we are willing to refuse to bodies all power of actangi»^

a. M. VI. 252 (N. E. 689). Since only force, and the effoii
which arises from it, exists at any moment (for motion never trulj^
exists...), and every effort tends in a straight line, it follows that
all motion is rectilinear, or composed of rectilinears.

G. VII. 305 (D. 103; L. 344). Metaphysical laws of cause,
power, activity, are present iu a wonderful way throughout the
whole of nature, and are even superior to the purely geometrical
laws of matter. '

G. IV. 523. As for motion, what is real in it is force or
power, i.e. what there is in the present state that brings wdth it a
change for the future. The rest is only plieuomena and relations.

VII. § 43. Dynamical argument for plurality of cauml

series.

G. V. 158 (N. E. 176). Though it i.s not true that a body [in
impact] hjses as much motion as it give.s, it is always true that it
loses some motion, and that it loses as much force «as it gives.

G. M. VI. 251 (N. E. 688). The passion of every body is
spontaneous, or arise^j from an internal force, though upon occasion
of something external.

G. M. VI. 252 (N. E. 689) (1695). The action of bodies is
never without reaction, and both are equal to each other and directly
contrary. ^

G. M. VI. 230. This diminution of the total force [in a not
periectly elastic impact]...does not derogate from the inviolable
truth of the conservation of the same force in the world. For what
is absorbed by the small parts is not absolutely lost to the universe,
though it is lost for the total force of the impinging bodies.

VII. § 45. Ilis grounds against extended atoms.

G. I. 403. My axiom, that nature never acts by leaps, ...is of
the greatest use in Physics; it destroys atoms, intervals of rest
\<iuietulas\ globes of the second element, and other similar chimeras.

G. M. II. 136. I confess that 1 have difficulty in understanding
the reason of such infrangibility [os that of atoms], and I believe
that for this effect we should have to have recourse to a kind of
perpetual miracle.

G. M. II. 145. There is no absurdity in giving different


THE PHILOSOPHY OF DYNAMICS.


235


tiegrees erf rigidity to ditterent bodies; otherwise we could prove by
feie same reaHkn^^at bodies must have a zei”o or an infinite velocity.
/..There are other inconveniences about atoms. For example, tliey
coul^ not be susceptible of the laws of motion, and the force of two
equal atoms, which impinged directly with equal velocities, would
have to be lost; for it seems that only elasticity makes bodies
rebound.

G. M. II. 156. Matter, according to my hypothesis, would be
divisible everywhere and more or less easily witli a variation which
woultl be insensible in passing from one place to another neighbour¬
ing place; whereas, according to the atoms, wc make a Uuip from
one extreme to the other, and from a perfect incohesion, which is in
the place of contact, we pass to an infinite hardness in all other
places. And these leaps are without example in nature.

G. M. II. 157. There is no last little body, and I conceive that
a particle of matter, however small, is like a whole world, full of
an infinity of still smaller creatures.


VII. § 46. Agaimt the vacamn.

G. II. 475. The infinity of the physical continuum, in the
hypothesis that there are only monads, does not (leptmd so much
on the reason of the best, as on tlie principle of sufficient reason,
because there is no reason for limiting or ending, or for stopping
anywhere.

G. V. 52 (N. E. 53; L. 385). We [Locke and Leibniz] seem
also to differ as regards matter in this, that the author thinks there
must be a vacuum in it for the .sake of motion, because he belicnes
that the small parts of matter are rigid. And I admit that if
matter were composed of such parts, motion in the plenum would be
impossible. ...But this supposition is not by any means granted....
Space must rather be conceived as full of an ultimately fluid matter,
susceptible of all divisions, and even subjected actually to divisions
and subdivisions Of/...Consequently matter has everywhere
some degree of rigidity as well as of fluidity.

G. IV. 395 (N. E. 701). Although some bodies appear denser
than others, yet this happens because their pores are more filled
with matter pertaining to the body, while on the contrary the rarer
bodies have the nature of a sponge, so that another subtler matter
washes through their pores, which is not reckoned with the Ixxly,
and neither follows nor awaits its motion.


236


THE PHILOSOPHY OF DYNAMICS.


G. IVt 368 (D. 59). Not a few of those who defend a*vacuum^
hold space to be a substance, nor can they be refntgji^l^ Cartesiaif
arguments; there is need of other principles for ending this con-^
troversy. ^

G. VII. 356 (D. 240). The more matter there is, the more
(Sod has occasion to exercise his wisdom and power. Which is one
reason, among others, why I maintain that there is no vacuum
at all.

G. VII. 372 (D. 248). The same reason which shows that
extrarnundane space is imaginary, proves that all empty space ’Is an
imaginary thing; for tliey differ only as greater and less. If space
is a property or attribute, it must be the property of some substance.
But what substance will that bounded empty space be an afltection
or property of, which its patrons [Clarke and Newton] suppose to
be between two bodies?..,Extension must be the affection of some¬
thing extended. But if that space be empty, it will be an attribute
without a subject, an extension without anything extended.

G. VII. 377 (D. 253). All tho.se who maintain a vacuum arc
more influenced by imagination than by reason. When I was a
young man, I also gave in to the notion of a vacuum and atoms;
but reason brought me into the right way....T lay it down as a
principle, that every perfection, which G(xl could impart tt) things
without derogating from their other pei-fections, has actually l)een
imparted to them. Now let us fancy a space wholly empty. God
could have placed some matter in it, without derogating in any
respect from all other things : therefore he has actually placed some
matter in that s[)ace; therefore there is no space wholly empty:
therefore all is full.

(J. VII. 396 (D. 261). Absolutely speaking, it appears that
God can make the material uuivei’se flnite in extension; but the
contrary appears more agreeable to his wisdom.


VII. § 47. Against action at a distance.

G. III. 580. We disapprove the method of those [Newton and his
followers] who suppose, like the scholastics formerly, unreasonable
qualiti)^, i.e. primitive qualities which have no natural reason, explic¬
able by the nature of the subject to which this quality is to belong....
As 'we maintain that it [attraction] can only happen in an explicable
manner, i.e. by an impulsion of subtler bodies, we cannot admit that
attraction is a primitive quality essential to matter. ...According to


THE T'HILOSOPHY OF DYNAMICS.


237


hese not only are substances entirely unknown to us,...but

i is even in5fe*^^ble for any one to know them; anti God himself,
/^f tljpir nature be such as they say, would know nothing of them.

G. 11. 399. Tf God caused anything to act immediately at a
distance, he would by that very fact give it multipresence.

G. II. 407. T reject the natural action of a body at a distance,
but not the supernatural.

VJI. § 48. Force as cowf&rt'ing wdividvality.

G. II. 116. Bodies, strictly speaking, are not pushed by others
when there is an impjict, but by their own motion, or by their
elasticity {ressoi't), which again is a motion of their parts. . Every
corporeal mass, great or sm.all, has already in ii all the force whicli
it can ever acquire, but the meeting with other ImkHcs only gives its
determination, or rather thi.s determination »)nly h.appens during the
time of the meeting.

VII. § 49. Primitive and deiivative force.

G. II. 962. Derivative force is the actual j>resent state while
tending to or pre-involving the following stjite, as everything present
is big with the future. But that which persists, in so far as it
involves all that can happen to it, has primitive force, so that
primitive force is, as it were, the law of the sei ics, while derivative
force is the determination which designates a particular term of the
series.

G. M. VI. 238 (N. E. 674). Force is twofold: the one
elementary, which I also call dead^ l)ecause motion does not yet
exist in it, but only a solicitation to motion...; the other, however,
is onlinary force, combined with actual motion, which I call living-

G. III. 457. There are two sorts of force in a body, the one
primitive, which is essential to it (evreXexeta TrptoTi/), and derivative
forces, which depend upon other Ixalies also. And it should be
considered that the derivative or accidental force, which one cannot
refuse to bodies in motion, must be a modification of the primitive
force, as shape is a modification of extension. Accidental forces
could not occur in a substance without essential force, for accidents
are only modifications or limitations, and cannot contain more per¬
fection or reality than the substance.

G. IV. 396 (N. E. 702). Derivative force is what some call


238 THE PHILOSOPHY OF DYNAMICS.

impetus, a conation or tendency, so to speak, to
nate motion, by which primitive force or the princjlptir of action
modified. I have shown that this is not preserved constant ip
same body, but yet, however it be distributed among many, its i
remains constant, and that it differs from motion, whose quantity
is not conserved.

G. IV. 533. In the soul, representations of causes are causes
of representations of effects.

a. in. 636. As for the inertia of matter, as matter itself is
nothing but a phenomenon, though well founded, resmlting from
monads, the same holds of inertia, which is a property of this
phenomenon.

G. II. 92 (1687). Motions being real phenomena rather than
beings, one motion as phenomenon is in my mind the immediate
consequence or effect of another phenomenon, and similarly in the
minds of others, but the state of one sulistance is not the immediate
consequence of the state of another particular substance.

G. III. 623. The laws of motion, being founded in the percep¬
tions of simple substances, come from final causes or causes due to
fitness, which are inimaterial and in each monad.

G. II. 419. The entelechy acts in matter according to the need
of matter, so that the new state of matter is a consequence of the
prior state, according to the laws of nature; but the laws of nature
obtiiin their effect through entelechies. But also the present state
of the entelechy itself follows from its prior state.

G. V. 196 (N. E. 219). As for motion, it is only a ’real
phenomenon, because matter and mass, to which motion belongs,
is not properly speaking a substance. There is, however, an image
of action in motion, as there is an im^e of substance in mass;
and in this respect we can say that a body acts when there is
spontaneity in its change, and mffers when it is pushed or impeded
by another.


VII. § 50. Antimmy of dynamical causation.

G. II. 233. I know not whether it can be said that, when two
equal weights simultaneously pull a body, they have no common
effect, but each separately has half the [total] effect. For we cannot
assign one half of the body which they pull to each weight, but
they act as if undivided.


THE ANALYSIS OF EXTENSION.


239


II. § ^’h '^here must be simple substances, since there are

compounds,

G.** VI. 598 (D. 209; L. 406). A suhstjincc is a being,
'capable of action. It is simple or compound. Simple substance is
that which has no parts. Compound substance is a collection of
simple substances or monads. ...Compounds or bodie-s are pluralities;
and simple substances, live.s, souls, spirits, arc unities. And every¬
where there must be simple substances, for witliout simple substances
there would not lie compound subsbinces; and consequently all
nature is full of life.


VIII. § 52. Kcctemiim, as distinguished from space, is
Leibniz's starting-point.

G. VII. 399 (D. 265). Infinite space is not the immensity of
God; finite space is not the extension of bodies : as time is not their
duration. Things keep their extension, but they do not always keep
their space. Everything has its own extensioji, its own duration;
but it has not its own time, and does not keep its own space.

G. IV. 394 (N. E. 700). As in time we conceive nothing else
than the dispo.sition or .series of variations which can happen in it,
so by space we understand nothing but the possible dispo.sition of
bodies. And so when space is said to be extended, we take this in
the same sense as when time is said to endure, or number to be
numbered; for, in truth, time adds nothing to duration, nor space
to extension, but as successive variations are in time, so in body
those things are diverae Avhich can be simultaneously diffused.

G. V. 116 (N. B. 127). It must not Ims supposed that there
are two extensions, the one abstract, of space, the other concrete,
of body, the concrete being such as it is only through the abstract.

G. VI. 585. Extension, when it is the attribute of space, is the
continuation or diffusion of situation or locality, as the extension of
body is the diffusion of antitypia or materiality.

G. II. 261. You say, we must ask whether there are such
unities in body [a-s mine are], and that, in onler to prove these, T
advocate entelechies. But on the contrary, I appeal to unities in
order to prove the entelechies, although it is also true that, if the
entelechies were otherwise proved, there would have to be true and
real unities as well.


240


THE ANALYSIS OP EXTENSION.


VIII. § 53. Extension means T&peti%i()nv^

*’ i

F. de C. 28 (D. 176). Extension, or, if you prefer it, prirofck ■y
matter, is nothing but a certain indefinite repetition of things in A'
far as they are .similar to each other oi‘ indiscernible. But just a.-
number pre.suppo.ses numbered things, so extension presupposes
things which are repeated, and which have, in addition to common
characteristics, others peculiar to themselves. These accidents,
peculiar to each one, render actual the limits of size and shape,
before only poR.siblc.

G. V. 94 (N. E. 102). I l^elievo that the nlea of extension is
posterior to that of whole and part.

0 . n. 510. Tliat extension would remain if monads were
removed I hold to be no more true tlian that numbers would remain
if things were removed

G. IV. 394 (N. E. 700). Since extension is a continuous
simultaneous repetition,...whenever the same nature is simultane¬
ously diffused through many things, as, in gold, ductility or specific
gravity or yellowness, in milk Avhitenes.s, in body generally resist¬
ance or impenetrability, there is said to lie extension, although it
must be confessed that this continuous diffusion in colour, weight,
ductility, and other similar qualities that have a merely specious homo¬
geneity, is only apparent, and does not occur in very small parts; and
thus the extension of resistance alone, which is difiused throughout
matter, preserves this name with the rigorous investigator. But it is
evident, from these considerations, that extension is not an absolute
predicate, but relative to what is extended or difiused, and thus
cannot be more separated from the nature of what is diffused than
number from what is numbered. ...We now ask : What other nature
is there whose diffusion constitutes body? We have already said
that matter is constituted by the diffusion of resistance; but in our
opinion there is in Ijody something else liesides matter... .This we
say can consist in nothing but ip SwafjitK<S, or in the internal
principle of change and persistence.

VIII. I 54. ffence the essence of a si^stance cannoi he
extensiony since a substance must be a true unity,

G.V.359(N.E.428). It is to be observed that maiter, taken

as a complete Ijeing (ix. secondary matter, as opposed to primary,
which is something purely passive, and consequently incomplete) is


THE ANALYSIS OP EJ^TENSlbN.


241


irohing lapt a collection (a»na«) or vhat results from it, and thati
eJfry real TOllcctiog presupposes simple substances or real unities,
aM when we consider further what belongs to the nature of these
MaI uftities, i.e. perception and its consequences, we are transferred,
mb to speak, into another world, that is, into the intelligible world
of substances, whereas before we wore only among the phenomena
of the senses.

0.11. 269. The notion of extension is relative, or extension is
the extension of something, as we say that multitude or duration is
the multitude or duration of something. But the nature which is
preslipposed as diffused, repeated, continued, is what constitutes the
physical body, and can only be found in the principle of action and
passion, since nothing else is suggested to us by phenomena.

a. II. 135 (D. 38). Body is an aggregate of substances, and
is not a substance properly speaking. It is consequently necessary
that everywhere in body there should be indivisible substances,
ingenerable and incorruptible, liaving something corresponding to
souls.

G . 11 . .*>8 (1686). If body is a substance, and not a mere
phenomenon like the rainbow, nor a being united by accident or by
aggregation like a heap of stones, it cannot consist of extension,
and it is necessary to conceive in it something which wo call a
substantial form, and which corresponds in .some way to a soul.


VIII. ^ 5.5. The three kinds of point. Substances not material.

G. IV. 478 (D. 72; L. 300). At first, when I had freed
myself from the yoke of Aristotle, I took to the vacuum and atoms,
for tliat is tlie view which best satisfies the imagination. But having
got over this, 1 perceived, after much meditation, that it is impos¬
sible to find the principles of a real unity in matter alone, or in that
which is only passive, since everything in it is nothing but a collection
or aggregate of parts ad infinitum. Now a multitude can derive its
reality only from genuine units, which come from elsewhere, and are
quite other than mathematical points, which are only extremities of
the extended, and modifications of ‘which it is certain that the con-
tinuunot cannot be composed. Accordingly, in order to find these real
units, I was constrained to have recourse to a real and animated point,
so ip speak, or to an atom of substance which must contain some
kind of form or active principle, so as to make it a complete being.
It was then necessary to recall, and, as it were, to rehabilitate the


242


THE ANALYSIS OF EXTENSION.

substantial forms, which are so mucli decried now-a-d^», but ima
way which rendered them intelligible, and separated the use to whfch
they should be put from the abuse which they have Suffered.
found, then, that the nature of substantial forms consists ifi for^
and that from this follows something analogous to feeling an«
appetite; and that thus they must be conceived after the manner of
the notion we have of souls.

G. III. 69. Thought, being the action of one thing on itself,
does not occur in shapes and motions, which cannot show the
principle of a truly internal action. *

G. n. 96. I believe that where there are only lieings by
aggregation, there will not even l)e real beings; for every being by
aggregation presupposes beings endowed with a veritable unity,
because it derives its reality only from that of those of which it is
composed, so that it will have none at all if each being of which it

is composed is again a being by aggregation_I agree that in all

corporeal nature there are nothing but machines (which are often
animat(‘cl), but I do not agree that there are only aggregates of
substances, and if there ai'o aggregates of sub.stances, there must be
true substances from which all these aggregates result.

G. II. 97. What is not truly one being {un 6trc) is also not
truly a being (un etre).

G. II. 370. A point is not a certiiin part of matter, nor would
an infinite number of points collected together make an extension.

G. II. 267. A thing which can be divided into several (already
actually existing) is an aggregate of several, and...is iwt one
except mentally, and has no reality but what is borrowed from its
constituents. Hence I inferred that there must be in things indivis-
ible unities, because otherwise there will be in things no true unity,
and no reality not borrowed. Which is absurd. For where there is
no true unity, there is no true multiplicity. And wlmre there is no
reality not borrowed, there will never be any reality, since this
must in the end belong to some subject....But you [de Voider]...
hold that the right conclusion from this is that in the mass of bodies
no indivisible unities can be assigned. I, however, think that the
contrary is to be concluded, namely that we must recur, in bodily
masg, or in constituting corporeal things, to indivisible umties as
prime constituents. Unless indeed you hold the right conclusion to
be, that bodily masses are not themselves indivisible unities^ M^oh
I say, but this is not the question. For bodies are always divisible,
and even actually subdivided, but not so their constituents....


THK LABYRINTH OF THE CONTINUUM.


243


.o.n.‘s6s. From the very fact that the mathematical body
csAnot be resolved into first constituents, we can certainly infer that
i^8 imt r^al, but something mental, designating nothing but the
TOssibility of parts, and not anything actual....And as a numbering
fiumber is not substance without the things numbered, so the mathe¬
matical body, or extension, is not substance without what is active
and passive, or motion. But in real things, i.e. bodies, the parts ai’e
not indefinite (as in space, which is a mental thing), but are
actually assigned in a certain way, since nature institutes actual
divisions and subdivisions according to the varieties of motions, and
althougli these divisions proceed to infinity, yet none the less every¬
thing results from certtiiu [)rimary constituents or real unities, but
infinite in number. But strictly speaking, matter is not composed
of constitutive unities, but results from tlicjii, fur matter or extended
mass is nothing but a phenomenon founded in things, like the
rainbow or the parhelion, and all reality belongs only to unities.
Therefore phenomena can always be divided into lesser phenomena,
which might appear to other subtler animals, and never attain to
least ph^'nomena. In fact substantial unities are not parts, but
foundations, of phenomena.

G. 11. 275. I do not bike away body, but I recur to what it
is, for I show that corporeal mass, which is supposed to have some¬
thing besides simple substances, is not substance, but a pheiiornenon
resulting from simple .substances, which alone have unity and
absolute reality.

IX. § 57. Difficulties about

G. II. 98. The difficulties concerning the composition of the
continuum will never be resolved, so long as extension is considered
as making the substance of bodies.

G. II. 77 (1686). There is no exact and precise figure in
bodies, on account of the actual subdivision of their parts. 8o
that bodies would, no doubt, be something merely imaginary and
apparent, if there were nothing in them but matter and its mo<lifi-
cations.

IX. I 58. Assertion of the actual infinite and denial of

infinite number.

a I. 403. All magnitudes being infinitely divisible, there is
none so small but that we can conceive in it an infinity of divisions,

16—2


244


THE LABYRINTH OF THE CONTINUUM.


which will never be exhausted. But I do not see what barm covijs&
of this, nor what need there is to exhaust thera.'^ f?

G. V. 144 (N. B. 161). Properly speaking, it is true tlM
there are an infinity of things, i.e. that there are always more a
them than can be assigned. But there is r» infinite number, or
line or any other infinite quantity, if these are understood as true
wholes, as it is easy to prove. ...The true infinite exists, strictly
speaking, only in the Absolute, which is anterior to all compo¬
sition, and is not formed by addition of parts.

G. V. 145 (N. £. 163). You [Locke] are mistaken in
wishing to imagine an absolute space which is an infinite whole
composed of parts; there is no such thing, it is a notion which
implies a contradiction, and these infinite wholes, with their opposed
infinitesimals, are only in place in the calculations of geometers,
just like imaginary roots in Algebra.

G. VI. 629. In spite of my Infinitesimal Calculus, T admit no
true infinite number, though T confess that the multitude of things
surpasses every finite number, or rather every number.

G. I. 338. Mons. Des Cartes in his reply to the second objec¬
tions, article two, agrees to the analogy l)etwoen the most perfect
Being and the greatest number, denying that this number implies a
contradiction. It is, however, easy to prove it. For the greatest
number is the sfime as the number of all units. But the number of
all units is the same as the number of all numbers (for any unit
added to the previous ones always makes a new number). But the
number of all numbers implies a contradiction, which I sho^ thus:
To any number there is a corresponding number equal to its double.
Therefore the number of all numbers is not greater than the
number of even numbers, i.e. the whole is not greater than its part.

G. V. 209 (N. E. 234). The idea of the infinite is not formed
b}' extension of finite ideas.

G. II. 305. To {'ass from the ideas of Geometry to the realities
of Physics, 1 hold that matter is actually broken into parts less
than any given part, or that there is no part which is not actually
sulxlivided into others exercising diverse motions.

G. II. 315. There is an actual infinite in the mode of a distri¬
butive whole, not of a collective whole. Thus something can be
enunciated concerning all numbers, but not collectively. So it can
be said that to every even number corresponds its odd number, and
vice rei'sd; but it cannot therefore be accurately said that the multi¬
plicities of odd and even numbers are equal.


THE LABYRINTH OF THE CONTINUUM.


245


\G. M. IV. 91. It is not necessary to make mathematical analy¬
sis depend upon nihtaphysical controversies, nor to make sure that
h’tere^re in nature strictly infinitesimal lines. ...This is why, in
order to avoid these subtleties, I thought that, to render the
reasoning intelligibletto everybody, it sufficed in this to explain the
infinite by the incomparable, i.e. to conceive quantities incomparably
greater or smaller than ours.

G. M. IV. 92. If an adversary wished to contradict our enun-
ciation^ it follows by our calculus that the error will be less than
any error that he can assign.

G. M. IV. 93. It is found that the rules of the finite succeed
in the infinite.


IX. § 59. Guntiiiuiti/ in one seme dented hy Leibniz.

G. IV. 394 (N. E. 700). All repetition...is either discrete, as
in numbered things where the parts of an aggregate are discrimi¬
nated; or continuous, where the parts are indeterminate and can
be assuiiied in infinite ways.

G. II. 379. Space, just like time, is a certain order...w'hich
embraces not only actuals, but possibles also. Hence it is some¬
thing indefinite, like every continuum whose parts aro not ac.tual,
but can be taken arbitrarily, like the parts of unity, or fractions....
Space is .something continuous but ideal, mass is discrete, namely
an actual multitude, or being hy aggregation, but composed of an
infinite number of units. In actuals, single terms are prior to aggre¬
gates, in ideals the whole is prior to the part. The neglect of this
consideration has brought forth the labyrinth of the continuum.

G. II. 475. The mathematical continuum, like numbers, con¬
sists of mere possibility; thus infinity is necessary to it from its
very notion.

G. 11. 278. Matter is not continuous but discrete, and actually
infinitely divided, though no assignable part of space is without
matter. But space, like time, is something not substantial, but
ideal, and consists in possibilities, or in an order of coexistents that
is in some waj' possible. And thus there are no divisions in it but
such as are made by the mind, and the part is posterior to the
whole. In real things, on the contrary, units are prior to the
multitude, and multitudes exist only through units. (The same
holds of changes, which are not really continuous.)

G. II. 282. In actuals there is nothing but discrete quantity,


24G


THE LABYRINTH OF THE CONTINUUM.


f


namely the multitude of monads or simple substances, which ^s
greater than any number whatever in any aggregate whatever tlixt
is sensible or corresponds to phenomena. But continuous'quaijtity is
something ideal, which belongs to possibles, and to actuals considered
as possibles. l?\)r the continuum involves indeterminate parts, while®
in actuals there is nothing indefinite—indeed in them all divisions

which are possible are actual_But the science of continua, {.e. of

possibles, contains eternal truths, which are never violated by aQ^al
phenouiena, since the diderence is always less than any assignable
given difference.

O’, III. 583. Unity is divisible, but is not resolvable; for tlie
fractions which are parts of unity have less simple notions, because
integers (less simple than unity) always enter into the notions of
fractions. Several people who have philosophized, in mathematics,
about the point and unity, have become confused, for Avant of
distinguishing lietween resolution into notions and division into
parts. Parts are not always simpler than the whole, though they
are always less than the whole.

0. IV, 491. Properly speaking, the number ^ in the abstract
is a mere ratio, by no means formed by the composition of other
fractions, though in numbered things there is found to be equality
between two quarters and one half. And Ave may say as much of
the abstract line, composition being only in concretes, or masses of
which these abstract lines mark the relations. And it is thus also
that mathematical points occur, which also are only modalities, i.e.
extremities. And as everything is indefinite in the abstract line,
we take notice in it of everything possible, as in the fractions of a
number, without troubling ourselves concerning the divisions actually
made, which designate these points in a different way. But in sub¬
stantial actual things, the whole is a result or assemblage of simple
substances, or of a multiplicity of real units. And it is the confu¬
sion of the ideal and the actual which has embroiled everything and
produced the labyrinth concerning the composition of the con¬
tinuum. Those who compose a line of points have sought first
elements in ideal things or relations {rapports), otherwise than was
proper; and those who have found that relations such as number,
and space (which comprehends the order or relation of possible
coexistent things), cannot be formed of an assemblage of points, have
been mistaken in denying, for the most part, the first elements of
substantial realities, as if they had no primitive units, or as if there
were no simple substances.


THE LABYRINTH OF THE CONTINUUM. 24*7

. G. v: 142 (N. E. 160). This definition, tliat number is a
m|ltipUoity of unite, applies only to integei*a. The precise distinc¬
tion of idojfcj, in extension, does not depend upon magnitude: for in
4rder to recognize magnitude distinctly, i*ecourse must bo had to
integers, or to other i^umbers known by means of integers, so that it
is necessary to go back from continuous to discrete quantity, in order
to have a distinct knowledge of magnitude.

IX. §*00. In number, space and time, the whole is prior to

the part

G. I. 416 (D. 64). As for indivisibles, when by these are
meant mere extremities of a time or a line, we cannot conceive new
extremities in them, or actual or potential parts. Thus points are
neither large nor small, and no leap is needed to pass them. The
continuum, however, though it has such indivisibles everywhere, is
not composed of them.

G. III. 591. As regaixls the comparison Ik*, tween an instant
Sind unity, J add that unity is part of any number greater than
unity, but an instant is not properly a part of time.

G. II. 279. Extremities of a line and units of matter do not
coincide. Three continuous points in the same straight line cannot
be conceived. But two are conceivable : [namely] the extremity of
one straight lint! and the extremity of another, out of which one
whole is formed. As, in time, are the two instants, the last of life
and tne first of death. One unit is not touched by another, but in
motion there is a perpetual transcreation, in this way: when a
thing is in that condition that, by continuing its changes for an
assignable time, tliere would have to l>e penetration in the next
moment, each point will be in a different place, as the avoidance of
penetration and the order of changes dejnand.

G. M. VII. 18. In either order (of space or of time) [points]
are considered nearer or more remote, according a.s, for the order
of comprehension Ijetween them, more or fewer are required.

G. II. 515. There is continuous extension whenever points are
assumed to be so situated that there are no two between wliich
there is not an intermediate point.

G. II. 300. T agree with you [Des Bosses] that being and one
are convertible terms j and that unity is the beginning of numbers,
if you are considering ratios (ratioties) or priority <jf nature, not if
you are considering magnitude, for we have fractions, which are


248


THE LABYRINTH OF THE CONTINUUM.


certainly less than unity, to infinity. The continuum is‘'infinitely
divisible. And this appears in the straight line,‘>£rom the mere itSot
that its part is similar to the whole. Thus when the wliole be
divided, so can the part, and similarly any part of the part. Points
are not parts of the continuum, but extremities, and there is no®
more a smallest part of a line than a smallest fraction of unity.

G. II. 304. Being and one are convertible terms, but as there
is Being by aggregation, so also there is a unit by aggregation,
although this entity and unity is semi-mental. Numbers, unities,
fractions, have the nature of relations. And so far they can in
some way be called beings. A fraction of unity is no less one being
than unity itself. Nor must it be thought that formal unity is an
aggregate of fractions, for its notion is simple, applying to divisiblcs
and indivisibles, and there is no fraction of indivisibles.

G, VII. 404 (D. 270). As for the objection [Clarke’s] that
space and time are quantities, or rather things endowed with quan¬
tity, and that situation and order are not so; I answer, that order
also has its quantity; there is that in it which goes before, and that
which follows; there is distance or interval, llelative things have
their quantity, as well as absolute ones. For instance, ratios or
proportions in mathematics have their quaixtity, and are measured
by logarithms; and yet they are relations. And thei*eforc, though
time and space consist in relations, yet they have their quantity.


IX. § 62. Summary of tlie argument from the contimimi to

monads.

G. VII. 552. In order to judge by reason whether the soul is
material or immaterial, we must conceive what the soul and matter
are. Everybody agrees that matter has parts, and is consequently
a multiplicity of many substances, as would be a ilock of sheep.
But since every multiplicity presupposes true unities, it is evident
that these unities cannot be matter, otherwise they would in turn
be multiplicities, and by no means true and pure unities, such as
are finally required to make a multiplicity. Thus the unities are
properly substances apart, which are not divisible, nor consequently
perishable. For whatever is divisible has parts, which can be
distinguished even before their separation. However, since we are
concerned with unities of substance, there must be force and per-
'ception in these unities themselves, for otherwise there would be no
force or perception in all that is formed of them.


THE THEORY OF SPACE AND TIME.


249


^IX. § 6S. Sin^e aggregates are ‘phenoinenal, there is not
• really a number of monads.

G. 11. 261. Whatever things are aggregates of many, are not
*one except for the yiind, nor liave any other reality than what is
borrowed, or what belongs to the things of which they are com¬
pounded.

G. 11. 517. Aggregates themselves are nothing but pheno¬
mena,^ for everything exce]>t the component n\onads is tulded by
perception alone, from the very fact of their being siinulhineously
perceived.

G. 11. 304. Instcsul of an infinite number, we ought to say,
there are more than any number can express....It is of the essence
of a number, a line, or any whole, to be terminated. Hence even if
the world wore infinite in inagnitude, it would not be one whole,
nor could God be conceived, with certain of the ancients, as the soul
of the w^orkl, not only because he is the cause of the world, but also
because such a world would not be one body, no?' could be regarded
as an nnimal, nor would have, indeed, any but a verbal unity.


X. § 66. Leibniz's arguments against the reality of space.

G. V. 100 (N. B. 110). Tilings which are uniform and contain
no variety are never anything but abstractions, like time, space,
and the other entities of pure mathematics.

G: Vll. 363 (D. 243). These gentlemen [Newton and Clarke]
maintain...that space is a mil absolute being. But this involves
them in great difficulties; for such a being must needs be eternal
and infinite. Hence some have believed it to be God himself, or
one of his attributes, his immensity. But since space consists of
parts, it is not a thing which can belong to God. As for my own
opinion, I have said, more than once, that 1 hold space to be some¬
thing merely relative, as time is....For space denotes, in terms of
possibility, an order of things which exist at the same time, con¬
sidered as existing together, without inquiring into their particular
manner of existing. And when many things are seen together, one
perceives that order of things among themselves. ...If space was an
absolute being, there would something happen, for wliich it would
be impossible there should be a sufficient reason. Which is against
my Axiom. And I prove it thus. Space is something absolutely
uniform; and without the things placed in it, one point of space docs


250


THE THEORY OF SPACE AND TIME.


4


not absolutely differ in any respect whatsoever from anpther point
of space. Now from hence it follows (supposing space to be sonfe-
thing in itself, besides the order of bodies among themsOlves), that
it is impossible there should be a reason why God, preserving the
same situation of IxMlies among themselves, should have placed them’^
in space after one particular manner, and not otherwise; why every¬
thing was not placed the quite contrary way, for instance by chang¬
ing east into west. But if space is nothing else but that order or
relation j and is nothing at all without bodies, but the possibility of
placing them; then those two states, the one such as it now is, the
other supposed to be the quite contraiy way, would not at all differ
from one another. Their difference, therefore, is only to be found
in our chimerical supposition of tlie reality of space in itself. But
in truth the one would exactly bo the same thing as the other, they
being absolutely indiscernible; and consequently there is no room
to enquire after a reason of the preference of the one to the other.

The case is the same with respect to time. ...The same argument
proves that instants, eon.sidored without the things, are nothing at
all; and that they consist only in the successive order of things,

G. VII. 372 (D. 247). To suppose two things indiscernible,
is to suppose the same thing under two names. And therefore to
suppose that the universe could have ha<l at fir.st another position of
time and place, than that which it actually had; and yet that all
the parts of the universt; should have had the same situation among
thcmselvc.s, as that which they actually had; such a supposition, I
say, is an impossible tiction. *

X. § 67. Leibnizs iheoi'i/ of position.

G. II. 277. The essential order of singular, or relation to
time and place, is to be understood of their relations to the things
contained in time and space, both near and far, which must bo
expressed by any singular, so that in it the universe could be read,
if the reader were infinitely perspicacious.

G. V. 115 (N. E. 128). Time and place are only kinds of
order.

G. II. 347. Position is, without doubt, nothing but a mode of
a thing, like priority or posteriority. A mathematical point itself
is nothing but a mode, namely an extremity. And thus when two
bodies are conceived as temching, so that two mathematical points
are joined, they do not make a new position or whole, which would


THE THEORY OF SPACE AND TIME.


251


be greatef tlian either part, since the conjunction of two extremities
is not greater than "one extremity, any more than two perfect dark¬
nesses are ftarker tlian one.

a V. 140 (N. E. 167). This vacuum which can Iw conceived
•in time indicates, as does in spice, that time and space extend to
possibles as well as existents.

G.V.142 (N.E. 159). If there were a vacuum in space {e.g,
if a^sphere were empty inside) its magnitude could be determined;
but if there were a vacuum in time, i.e. a duration without changes,
it wou*id be impossible to determine its length. Hence it follows
that wo can refute a man who says that two bodie.s, Ixitween which
there is a vacuum, touch...but we cannot refute a man who says
that two worlds, of which one is after the other, toucli a.s regards
duration, so that one necessarily begins wh.cu ilie other stops....
Tf .space were only a line, and if body were immovable, it would not
be possilde cither to determine the length of the vacuum between
two bodies.


G. VII. 400 (D. 265). I will here show how men come to
fonn to themselves the notion of space. They consider that many
things exist at once, and they observe in them a ceirtaiu order of
coexistence, according to which the relation of one thing to amtther
is more or lcs.s simple. This onler i.s their situation or distance.
When it happens that one of those coexistent thing.s changes its
relation to a multitude of otliers, which do not change their rela¬
tions among themselve.s; and that another thing, newly come,
acquires the same I'olation to the others, as the former hadj w'e
then say it is come into the of the fornmr; and this change
we call a motion in that body, wherein is the immediate cause of
the change. And though many, or even all the coexistent things
should'change according to certain known rule.s of direction and
8wiftne.ss; yet one may always determine the relation of situation,
which every coexistent acquires with respect to every other co¬
existent ; and oven that relation which any other coexistent would
have to this, or which this would have to any other, if it had not
changed, or if it had changed any otherwise. And supposing or
feigning that among those coexistent-s there is a sufficient numl)er
of them which have undergone no change; then we may say that
tliose that have such a relation to those fixed coexistents, sis others
had to them before, have now the same place which those others
had. And that which comprehends all those places, is called space.
Which shows that, in order to have an idea of place, and conse-


252


THE THEORY OF SPACE AND TIBIE.


quently of space, it is sufficient to consider these relations, and the
rules of their changes, without needing to fhney ai^ absolute
reality out of the things whose situation we consider; and, ^ give
a kind of definition: 'place is that, which we say is the same to A
and to B, when the relation of the coexistence^f B with C, E, F, G,*
etc., agrees perfectly with the relation of the coexistence, which A
had with the same C, E, F, G, etc., supposing there has been no
cause of change in C, E, F, G, etc. It might be said also, without
entering into any farther particularity, that pliice is that, wjiich is
the same in difierent moments to different existent things, when
their relations of coexistence with certain other existents, which are
supposed to continue fixed from one of those moments to the other,
agree entirely together. And fixed existents are those, in which
there has been no cause of any change of the order of their coexist¬
ence with others; or (which is the same thing) in which there has
been no motion. Lastly apace is that which results from places
taken together. And here it may not be amiss to consider the
difference between place, and the i-elation of situation, which is in
the body that fills up the place. For the place of A and B is the
same j whereas the relation of A to fixed bodies is not precisely and
individually the same as the. relation which B (that comes into its
place) will have to the same fixed bodies; but these relations agree
only. For two different subjects, as A and B, cannot have precisely
the same individual affection; it being impossible that the same
individual accident should be in two subjects, or pass from one

f.

subject to another. But the mind, not contented with an agree¬
ment, looks for an identity', for something that should be truly the
same; and conceives it os being extiinsic to these subjects: and this
is what we here call place and space. But this can only be an ideal
thing; containing a certain order, wherein the mind conceives the
application of relations.

G. II. 271. Unless I am mistaken, the order of singulars is
essential to particular parts of space and time, and from these [the
singulars] universals are abstracted by the mind.

X. § CS. The relation of monads to space a fiindammtal

diffiiCnlty of monadism.

G. II. 305. There is no part of matter which does not contain
monads.

G. II. 112 (1687). Our body must be affected in some way by


THE THEORY OF SPACE AND TIME.


253


the changes! in all others. Now to all motions of our liody corre¬
spond certain more*or less confused perceptions or thoughts of our
soul j-^end^ the soul also will have some thought of all the motions
of the universe.

* G. II. 438. * Be|ween the appearance of bodies to us and their
appearance to God, there is the same kind of diflference as between
a scenograph and an ichnograph. For scenographs are different
according to the situation of the spectator, while the ichnograph, or
geometrical representation, is unique.

G.Vl. 608 (D. 218; L. 220). If simple substances did not
differ in their qualities, there would be no means of perceiving any
change in things. ...Assuming the plenum^ each place would only
receive, in any motion, the equivalent of what it had had, and one
state of things would be indiscernible from finother.

G. V. 24 {N. E. 25). The least improssion reaches every body,
and consequently reaches the one whose motions correspond to the
actions of the soul.


X. § 69. Leibniz's early views on this subject.

G. I. 52 (1671). My proofs [of immortality, and of the nature
of God and the mind] are based on the difficult doctrine of the
point, the instant, indivisibles, and conation; for Just as the actions
of lK)dy consist of motion, so the actions of mind consist of
conation, or, so to speak, the minimum or point of motion; while
mind ^itself consists j>roperly in only a point of space, whereas a
body occupies a place. Which I clearly prove—to speak of it only
popularly—by the fact that the mind must be in the place of
concourse of all the motions which are impressed on us by the
objects f)f sense; for if I am to conclude that a liody presented to
me is gold, I perceive together its lustre, clink, and weight, and
thence conclude that it is gold; so that the mind must be in a
position where all these lines of sight, hearing, and touch meet, and
consequently in a point. If we give the mind a greater place than
a point, it is ah’eady a body, and has parts external to each other;
it is therefore not intimately present to itself, and ficcordingly
cannot reflect on all its parts and actions....But assuming that the
mind does consist in a point, it is indivisible and indestructible....
I almost think that every body (Ldb), whether of men or animals,
vegetables or minerals, has a kernel of its substance, which is
distinguished from the cajmt mortuum....


254


THE xH^EORY OF SPACE AND TIME.


G. I. 54. If now this kernel of substance, consiisting in a
physical point (the proximate instrument, a. id as it were the
vehicle, of the soul, which is constituted in a mathematical ^point),
always remains, it matters little whether all gross matter...is left
over. ^ *

X. § 70. His middle V'mvs.

G. IV. 482 (D. 76 j L. 311) (1695). Only aioms of substance,
i.e. real units absolutely devoid of parts, are the siiurces of actions,
and the absolute first principles of the composition of things, and,
as it were, the ultimate elements in the analysis of substantial
things. They might be called metaphysical points ; they have some¬
thing of the nature of life and they have a kind of perception, and
mathematmd points are their points of view for expressing the
universe. But when corporeal substances are contracted, all their
organs together make but one physical iM>int for us. Thus physical
points are only apparently indivisible. Mathematical points are
exact, but they are only modalities. None but metaphysical or
substantial points (consisting of forms or souls) are exact and real.

G. IV. 484 (D. 78; L. 314) (1695). The organised mass, in
which is the point of view of the soul, is more nearly expressed by
the soul.

G. IV. 512 (D. 122) (1698). Nothing hinders souls, or at
least things analogous to souls, from being everywhere, although the
dominant, and hence intelligent, souls, like those of men, cannot be
everywhere.


X. § 71. His later views.

G. IV. 574 (ca. 1700). It seems that it is more exact to say
that spirits are where they operate immediately than to say...that
they are nowhere.

G. II. 450 (1712). The explanation of all phenomena by
nothing but the mutually conspiring perceptions of monads, setting
aside corporeal substance, I hold to be useful for the fundamental
inspection of things. And in this manner of exposition, space
becomes the order of coexistent phenomena, as time of those that
are successive; and there is no spatial or absolute distance or pro-
pinquity of monads: to say that they are massed together in a


THE THEORY OF SPACE ANIJt TIME.


255


point, ortlisseminated ifl space, is to make use of certain fictions of
our soul, since we tP-ke pleasure in imagining things which can only
be conceived. In this way of looking at things, there is no exten¬
sion 8r composition of the continuum, and all difficulties about
tpoints vanish. *

G. V. 205 (N. K 230) (1704). The schools have three kinds
of ubiety, or ways of existing somewhere. The first is called cit'cum-
scrijotive, which we attribute to bodies that are in space, which are
in it punctatim, so that they are measured according sis points can
be asslfgned to the situated thing corresponding to the points of
.space. The second is definitive, where we can define, i.e. determine,
that the .situated thing is in a certain space, without being able to
lussign precise points or proper places exclusively to what is there.
Tt is thus people judge that the soul is in the body, not lajlieving it
possible to assign an exact point, where is tlu; .soul, or .something of

the soul, without its })eing also in some other point_The thii’d

sort of ubiety is rephtive, which is attributed to God, who fills the
whole universe even more eminently than spirits are in bodies, for
he operates immediately on all creatures by continu.ally producing
them, Y'hcreas finite .spirits cannot exercise any immediate influence
or operation. I know not whether this doctrine of the schools
deserves to bo turned into ridicule, as it seems people endeavour to
do. However wo can always attribute a kind of motion to soiils, at
least in relation to the bodies with which they are united, or in
relation to their manner of perception.

G.*VL 598 (D. 209; L. 408) (1714). There are simple
substances everywhere, separated from each other, in fact (efi
fectivement), by their own actions, which continually change their
relations.

a JII. 623 (1714). Wo must not conceive extension as a
real continuous space, strewn with points. These are fictions proper
to content the imagination, but in which rea.son does not find what
it requires. Nor must we conceive that Monads, like points in a
real space, move, push, or touch e^ch other; it is enough that
phenomena make it seem so, and this appearance partakes of truth
in so far as these phenomena are founded, i.e. agree with each
other.

G. II. 339 (1707). A simple substance, though it has no
extension in itself, yet has position, which is the foundation of
extension, since extension is the simultaneous continuous repetition
of position.


256 THE THEORY OF SPACE AND TIME.

G. II, 370 (1709). I do not think it fitting to consider souls
as in points. Some one might perhaps say thajj they are only in a
place by operation...or rather,...that they are in a pla^a by corre¬
spondence, and are thus in the whole organic body which they
animate. Meanwhile I do not deny a certain real metaphysical)
union between the soul and the organic bodyL .according to which
it could be said that the soul really is in the l)ody.

G. II. 378 (1709). Although the places of monads are desig¬
nated by modifications or terminations of parts of space, yet the
mmiads themselves are not modifications of a continuous*’thing.
Mass and its diffusion I’esult from monads, but not space. For space
...is a certain order, embracing not only actuals but also possibles.

G. II. 436 (1712). We ought not to say of monads, any more
than of points and souls, that they are parts of bodies, that they
touch each other, or that they compose bodies.

G. II. 438 (1712). God sees not only single monads and the
modifications of each monad, but also their relations, and in this
consists the reality of relations and truths.

G. II. 444(1712). Monads i)er se have not even any relative
.situation— i.e. no real one—which extends beyond the order of
phenomena.

G. II. 253 (1703). Monads, though they are not extended,
yet have something of the nature of position in extension, i.e. they
have a certain ordered relation of coexistence to other things,
through the machine which they dominate {cui praesimt). And I
do not think that any finite substances exist separated from every
body, nor consequently are without positioii or order in regard to
the other things which coexist in the universe. Extended things
involve in themselves many things having position, but things
which are simple, though they have no extension, yet must have
position in extension, although it is impossible to designate this
pumtatim as in incomplete phenomena.

G. II. 877 (1704-5). My unities or simple substances are not
diffused,...nor do they constitute a homogeneous whole, for the
homogeneity of matter is obtained only by a mental abstraction,
when we cumsider only things that are passive and therefore incom¬
plete.

X. § 72. Time and change.

G. VII, 373 (D, 249). It is a similar, i.e. impossible, fiction,
to imagine that God might have created the world some millions of


THE THEORY OP SPACE AND TIME,


257


yeam sooifer. Those who agree to fictions of this sort will be
unable to replyto ^hoso who wouhl argue for the etenaity of the
world. Fo]<» since God does nothing without a reason, and since no
reason ^is assignable why he should not have created the world
•conerj- it will follow, pther that he created nothing at all, or that
he produced the world before every assignable time, Lp. that the
world is eternal. But when it is shown that the beginning, what¬
ever it is {qibd qu'il soit)^ is always the same thing, the question
why it was not otherwise ceases.

a Vn. 402 (I). 268). Tt cannot be said that a certain duroh
iton is eternal; but that things which continue always are eternal,
by always gaining new extension. Whatever exists of time and of
duration, being successive, perishes continually; and how can a
thing exist eternally which (to speak exactly) does never exist at
all? For how can a thing exist, whereof no part Joes ever exist?
Nothing of time does ever exist, but instants ; and an instant is not
even itself a part of time.

• G. VII. 408 (D. 274). From extension to duration, non vaJot
eomeqttenfia. Though the extension of matter were unlimited, yet
it would not follow that its duration would l>e also unlimited; nay
even, a parte ante^ it would not follow that it had no beginning.
If it is of the nature of things in the whole to grow unifonnly in
perfection, the universe of creatures must have had a lieginning....
Besides, the world’s having a beginning docs not derogate from the
infinity of its duration a parte pout ; but bounds of the universe
would 4derogate from the infinity of its extension.

G. III. 581. As for succession, where you [Bourguet] seem to
judge. Sir, that one must conceive a fii’st fundamental instant, as
unity is the foundation of numbers, and as the point is also the foun¬
dation oiextension: to this I might answer that the instant is also
the foundation of time, but a.s there is no point in nature which is
fundamental with regard to all other points, and so to speak the
seat of God, so I do not see that it is necessary to conceive a
principal instant. I admit, however, that there is this difference
between instants and points, that one point of the universe has not
the advantage of priority of nature over another, whereas the
preceding instant has, over the succeeding instant, the advantage of
priority not of time only, but also of nature. But it is not neces¬
sary on that account that there should be a first instant. There is
a difierence, in this, between the analysis of necessary things and
that of contingent things. ...Thus the analogy from numbers to

17


H. L.


258


THE THEORY OP SPACE AND TIME.


\


instants does not hold here. Tt is true that the notion df numbers
is resolvable at lost into the notion of unity^ which is no longer
resolvable, and may be considered as the primitive number. But it
does not follow that the notions of the various instants are resolv¬
able at last into a primitive instant. However, I do not venture to
deny that there was a firat instant. Two hypotheses may be formed,
either that nature is always equally perfect, or that it always grows
in perfection. ...[Tn the first case] it is more likely that there is no
beginning. [Tn the second case].. .the matter could still be explained
in two ways, namely by the ordinates of a hyperbola or by those of
a triangle. According to the hypothesis of the hyperbola, there
would be no beginning...but according to the hypothesis of the
triangle, there would have been a beginning....I see no way of
showing demonstratively by pure reason which should be chosen.

G. VII. 415 (D. 281). The author [Clarke] objects here, that
time cannot l)e an order of successive things, because the quantity
of time may l>ecome greater or less, and yet the order of successions
continue the same. I answer, this is not so. For if the time be
greater, there will be more successive and like states interposed;
and if it be less, there will be fewer; seeing there is no vacuum,
nor condensation, nor penetration (if I may so speak) in times, any
more than in places.

G. II. 183. Time is neither more nor less a l)eing of reason
than space. To coexist and to pre- or post-exist, are something
real; they would not be so, I admit, according to the ordinary view
of matter and substance. '

G. V. 139 (N. E. 156). Time is tlio measure of motion, i.e.
uniform motion is the measure of non-uniform motion.


X. § 74. Leibniz held confusedly to an objective courd&t'part

of space and time.

Q, VII. 329. Every primitive enbelechy must have perception.
For every first entelechy has internal variation, according to which
its external actions also vary. But perception is nothing but that
very .representation of external by internal variation. Since, there¬
fore, primitive entelechies are dispersed everywhere throughout
matter—which can easily be shown from the fact that principles of
motion are dmpersed throughout matter—the consequence is, that
souls also are dispersed everywhere throughout matter.


THE NATURE OF MONADS IN GENERAL.


259


G. VI! 405. As soon as we admit that God exists, we must
admit that he exists necessarily. Now tliis privilege does not
belong to tBe three things of which we have been speaking [motion,
matter and space].

• G. VII. 376 (D. 251). God perceives things in himself.
Space is the place or things, and not the phice of God’s ideas.

* XI. § 75. Perception.

G. VI, 699 (D, 209; L. 409). Perceptions in the Monad are
produced one from another according to the laws of appetites or of
the final causes of good and evil, which consist in observable per¬
ceptions, regular or irregular.

G. I. 383 (1686). It is not necessary that what we conceive
of things outside us should be perfectly similaf to them, but that it
should express them, as an ellipse expresses a circle seen obliquely,
so that to each point of the circle a point of the ellipse corresponds,
and vice versd^ according to a ceitain law of relation. For...each
individual substance expresses the universe in its own way, much as
the same town is diversely expressed according to different points of
view.

G. V. 101 (N. E. III). A state without thought in the soul,
and an absolute rest in bcxly, seem to me equally contrary to nature,
and without example in the w'orld. A substance which is once in
action will be so always, for all impx’cssions remain, ainl arc only
mixed %ith other new ones.

G. VI. 576 (D. 187). When Mr Locke declares that he does
not understand how the variety of ideas is compatible with the
simplicit}' of God, it seems to me that ho ought not hence to <lerive
art objecAon to Father Malebranche; for there is no system which
can make such a thing intelligiblo.

G. VL 577 (D. 188). Mr Locke asks whether an indivisible
and unextended substance can have at the same time modifications
which are different and even refer to inconsistent objects. I answer
that it can. What is inconsistent in the same object is not incon-
'Sistent in the representation of difibrent objects, which are conceived
at the same time. For this it is not necessary that there should be
different parts in the soul, as it is not necessary that there should be
different parts in the point, though different angles meet in it.

G. VI. 608 (D. 219; L. 222). I assume as admitted that
evwy created being, and consequently the created Monad, is subject

17—2


260 THE NATURE OP MONADS IN GENERAL. '

to change, and further that this change is continual iif each. It
follows from what has just been said, that tlu natural changes of
the Monads come from an internal principle, since hn external
cause can have no influence upon their inner being. But besides
the principle of the change, there must be.a particular series <Si
changes \un detail de ce qui ohariqe], which constitutes, so to speak,
the specifle nature and variety of the simple substances. This
particular series of changes must involve a multiplicity in the
unit, or in that which is simple. For, as every iiatural change
takes place gradually, something changes and something remains
unchanged; and consequently a simple substance must be aflbeted
and related in many ways, although it has no parts.

0. VI. 609 (D. 220; L. 226). We have in ourselves expe¬
rience of a multiplicity in a simple substance, when we find that
the least thought of which we arc conscious in’s olves variety in its
object. Thus all those who admit tliat the soul is a simple sub¬
stance should admit this multiplicity in the Monad.

G. VI. 327. It is true that the same thing can be represented
diffeiuntly; but there must always be an exact relation between the
representation and the thing, and consequently between difierent
representations of the same thing.

Or. VII. 410 (D. 276). The author [Clarke] speaks as if he
did not understand how, according to my opinion, the soul is a
i*epresentative principle. Which is, as if he had never heard of my
pre-established hai’inony. 1 do not assent tc* the vulgar notions,
that the images of things are conveyed by the organs of sens*, to the
soul. For, it is not conceivable by what passage, or by what means
of conveyance, these images can be carried from the organ to the
soul. This vulgar notion in philosophy is not intelligible, as the
new Cartesians have sufficiently shown. It cannot be iSsplained,
how immaterial substance is affected by matter: and to maintain
an intelligible notion thereupon, is having recourse to the scholastic
chimerical notion of I know not what inexplicable species intm-
tionales, passing from the organs to the soul. Those Cartesians saw
the difficulty, but they could nut explain it. ...But I think 1 have
given the true solution of that enigma.

G. II. 71 (1686). It is the nature of the soul to express what
is happening in bodies, being so created originally that the series of
its thoughts agrees with the series of motions.

G. II. 74 (1686). The nature of every substance involve a
general expi’ession of the whole univei’se, and the nature of the soul


THE NATURE OF MONADS IN GENERAL.


261

involves more particularly a more distinct expression of what is now
happening in relatioll to its body.

a.jiL 576t Perception is, for me, the representation of a
multiplicity in what is simple j and appetite is the tendency from
one perception to auo|her: now these two things are in all Monads,
for otherwise a monad would have no relation to other things. T
do not know. Sir, how you [Bourguet] can derive any Spinozism
fromi this; that is jumping to conclusions rather too fast. On the
contrary, it is just by means of these monads that Spinozism is
destroyed, for there are as many true substances, and, so to speak,
living mirrors of the universe always subsisting, or concentrated
universes, as there are Monads,'whereas according to Spinoza there
is only a single substance. lie would bo right, if there were no
monads; then everything except God would be passing, and would
sink into mere accidents and modifications, since tlicre would not be
in things the basis of substances, wliich consists in the existence of
monads.

* F, de C. 62 (D. 182). [Spinoza] is wrong in thinking that
aifirmation or negation is volition, since volition involves also the
reason of the good.

G. II. 317. A univer-sal is one in many, or the similarity of
many; but when we perceive, many ar<j expimscd in one, namely
the percipient. Yon see how far a])art those are.

G. II. 256. I recognize monads that are active 2 ) 6 r and
in them nothing can be conceived except perception, which in turn
invol'fes action.

XI. § 77. Perception not due to action of the perceived on
• the percipient.

G. IV. 496 (D. 86). T take care not to admit that the soul
does not know bodies, though this knowledge arises without influ¬
ence of the one on the other.

a. TV. 484 (D. 77; L. 313). God at first so created the soul,

or any other real unity, that everything must arise in it from its
own inner nature, with a perfect spontaneity as regards itself, and
yet with a perfect conformity to things outside of it_And accord¬

ingly, since each of these substances accurately repre.sents the whole
universe in its own way and from a certain point of view, and the
perceptions or expressions of external things come into the soul at
their appropriate time, in virtue of its own laws, as in a world by


262


THE NATURE OP MONADS IN GENERAL.


itself, and as if there existed nothing but God and the soul, ...there
will be a perfect agreement between all these sdustances^ which will
have the same result as if they had communication with one another
by a transmission of species or qualities, such as the mass of ordiRaiy
philosophers suppose.

G. VI. 607 (D. 218; L. 219). There is no way of explaining
how a Monad can be altered in quality or internally changed by
any other created thing; since it is impossible to change the place
of anything in it or to conceive in it any internal motion which
could be produced, directed, increased or dimiiiished therein, although
all this is possible in the case of compounds, in which there are
changes among the parts. The monads have no windows, through
which anything could come in or go out. Accidents cannot separate
themselves from substances nor go outside of them, as the “ sensible
species ” of the scholastics used to do. Thus neither substance nor
accident can come into a momid from outside.

G. II. 12 (1686). Every singular substance expresses the
whole universe in its own way, and in its notion arc comprised fill
its events with all their circumstances, and the whole series of
external things.

G. II. 136 (D. 38). Each of these substauces contains in its
nature hyoni confinuationin scriei suamm opn’aiwtum, aiiil all that
has happened and will happen to it. All its actions come from its
own nature, except for its dependence upon God.

G. II. 503. 1 do not believe that a system is possible, in which
Monads act on each other, because there ‘:eems to be no possible
w.iy of explaining such action. I add that an influence is also
superfluous, for why should a monad give to another monad what it
already hasl For this is the very nature of substance, that its
present should be big with the future, and that all thing^ can be
understood by means of one, unless indeed God should miraculously
interfere.

G* IV. 440 (1686). Nothing can happen to us but thoughts
and perceptions, and all our future thoughts and perceptions are
only consequences, though contingent ones, of our previous thoughts
and perceptions, so much so that if I were capable of considering
distinctly all that happens or appears to me at the present time, I
could see in it all that will happen or appear to me for ever; which
would not fail, and would happen to mo just the same, if all that is
outside of me were destroyed, provided only that God and I re¬
mained.


THE NATUEE OF MONADS IN GENERAL. 263

a. i£ •119. Only indivisible substances and their different
states are absolutely real.


XI. § *79. The pre-established harmony.

O'. 11. 58 (1686). Only the hypothesis of the concuinitancu or
agreement of substances inter ae explains everything in a manner
which is conceivable and worthy of God} it is even demonstrative
and inevitable, in niy opinion, according to the proposition which
wo have just established [that in every proposition the notion of the
predicate is contained in that of the subject].

G. I. 382 (1686). 1 believe that every individual substance

expresses the whole universe in its own way, and that its following
state is a consequence (though often a free one) of its precetliug
state, as if there were nothing but God and it in the wm’ld; but as
all substances are a continual production of the s<jvereign Being,
and express the same univoi-sc or the same phenomena, they agree
exactly with each other.

G. VII. 311. Every substance has somet/liing of the infinite,
in so far as it involves its cause, i.e, God, that is, it has some trace
of omniscience and omnipotence; for in the perfect notion of each
individual substance there are contaiiu'd all its predicates, alike
necessary and contingent, past, present, and future; nay each sub¬
stance expresses the whole universe according to its situation and
aspect, in so far as other things .are referred to it ; and hence it is
necessary that some of our perceptions, even if they bo clear, should
be confused, since they involve things which are infinite, as do
our perceptions of colour, heat, etc.

G.JL 68 (1686). The hypothesis of concomitance is a conse¬
quence of the notion which I have of substance. For according to
me the individual notion of a substance involves all that will ever
happen to it.

G. II. 136 (D. 38). Each substance expresses the whole
universe, but some more distinctly than others, especially each in
regard to certain things, and according to its point of view. The
union of soul and body, and even the operation of one substance on
another, consists only in this pei-fect mutual agreement, purposely
established by the order of the first creation, in virtue of which
each substance, following its own laws, falls in with what the others
demand, and the operations of the one thus follow or accompany
the operation or change of the other.


264


SOUL AND BODY.


G. n* 226. Certainly, in my opinion, there is nothing in the
universe of creatures which does not need, for<its perfect concept,
the concept of every other thing in the universe of tliingSj^, since
everything influences everything else, so that if it were taken away
or supposed different, all the things in the world would have been®
different from those that now are.

G. III. 143. It is true there is miracle in my system of pre-
established Harmony, and that God enters into it extraordinarily,
but it is only in the beginning of things, after which everything
goes its own way in the phenomena of nature, according to the haws
of souls and bodies.

G. III. 144. It seems to me that I may say that my hypo¬
thesis (concerning the pre-established Harmony) is not gratuitous,
since I believe I have made it appear that there are only three
possible hypotheses [the injlv/xus physicus, occasionalism, and the
pre-established harmony], and that only mine is at once intelligible
and natural; but it can even be proved a priori.


XII. § 83. The three classes of monads.

G. VI. 600 (D. 211; L, 411). It is well tt) make a distinction
between perception, which is the internal state of the Monad repre¬
senting external things, and upperceptwn, which is the consciousness
or the reflective knowledge of this internal state, and which is not
given to all souls, nor to the same soul at all times. It is for lack
of this distinction that the Cartesians have made the mistake of
ignoring perceptions of which we are not conscious. ...Genuine
reasoning depends upon necessary or eternal truths, such as those
of logic, of number, of geometry, which produce an indubitable
connection of ideas and infallible inferences. The animals in which
these inferences do not appear are called the brtUes ^ but those
which know these necessary truths are properly those which' are
called ratiomU animals, and their souls are called spirits \espHt8\
These souls have the power to perform acts of reflection, and to
consider what is called the ego, substance, soul, spirit, in a word,
immaterial things and truths.

G.-'VI. 604 (D. 215; L. 420). As regards the rational soul
or spirit, there is in it something more than in the monads or
even in mere souls. It is not only a mirror of the universe of
created beings, but also an image of the Deity....It is for this
reason that all spirits, whether of men or genii, entering in virtue


SOUL AND BODY.


265


of reason and of eternal truths into a kind of fellowship with God,
are members of tlfb City of God, i.e. of the most perfect state,
formeij^ anS governed by the greatest and best of Monarchs.

G. VI. 610 (D. 220; L. 230). If we are to give the iiaTiie
•of Soul to everythii^ which has perceptions and appetites in the
general sense whicli 1 have just explained, then all simple substances
or created Monads might be called souls; but as feeling is some¬
thing more than a bare perception, I think it right that the
gener%l name of Monads ()r Entelechiea should suffice for simple
substances which have perception only, and that the name of Souls
should 1)6 given only to those in which perception is more distinct
and accompanied by memory. '

G. IV. 479 (D. 73; L. 303). We must not confound or in¬
differently mix, with other forms or souls, S'pirits or the reasonable
soul, which are of a higher order, ami have incomparably more
perfection than these forms buried in matter—which in my opinion
are to be found everywhere—being like little gcxls in comparison
>ffith those, being made in the image of God, and having in them
some ray of the Divine light. For this reason, God governs
spirits as a prince governs his subjects, and indeed as a father
cares for his children; while, on the other hand, he d()als with
other substances as an engineer works with his machines. Thus
spirits have special laws, which put them above the revolutions
of matter through the very order Avhich God has placed there;
and it may be said that everything else is made only for them,
these^'revolutions themselve.s being arranged for the felicity of the
good and the punishment of the wicked.

G. V. 518 (N. E. 245). The consciousness or feeling of the
JSffO proves a moral or personal identity. And it is by this that 1
distinguish the incessahilitt/ of a brute’s soul from the imniorUdky of
the soul of man: both preserve phys'ical and real identity, but as for
man, it is conformable to the rules of the Divine Providence that
the soul should retain also a moral identity apparent to ourselves, so
as to constitute the same person, capable consequently of feeling
chastisements and rewards.

■ G. V. 219 (N. E. 247). Self, it will be well to

distinguish it from the appearance of Self and from conscious¬
ness. The Self constitutes real and physical identity, and the
appea/rance of Self, accompanied by truth, joins personal identity
to it.

G. TTT- 622. [All monads] have perception...andi ajpetite....


266


SOUL AND BODY.


which is called passuni in animals, and will where perception is an
understanding. *

Gt V. 284 (N. E. 331). It is essential to substances ip act,
to created substances to suffer, to spirits to think, to bodies to
have extension and motion. That is, there aijp sorts or spedes to*^
which an individual cannot (naturally at least) cease to belong,
when it has once belonged to them.

G. V. 290 (N. E. 338). [In man] reason is a fixed attribute,
Ijelonging to each individual, and never lost, though we cannot
always perceive it.

G. VII. 529 (D. 190). You next ask my definition of aoid. I
reply, that soul may be employed in *a bioad and in a strict sense.
Broadly speaking, soul will be the same as life or vital principle,
i.«. the principle of internal action existing in the simple thing or
monad, to winch external action corresponds. And this correspond¬
ence of internal and external, or representation of the external in
the internal, of the composite in the simple, of multiplicity in unity,
really constitutes perception. But in this sense soul is attributed
not only to animals, but also to all other percipient beings. In the
strict sense, soul is employed as a nobler species of life, or sentient
life, where there is not only the faculty of perceiving, but in addition
that of feeling, inasmuch, indeed, as attention and memory are added
to perception. Just as, in turn, mind is a nobler species of soul, i.e.
mind is rational soul, where reason, or ratiocination from universality
of truths, is added to feeling. As, therefore, mind is rational soul,
so soul is sentient life, and life is perceptive principle. ^


XII. § 84. Activity and passivity.

c

G. IV. 486 (D. 79; L. 317). The customary ways of speaking
can still bo quite well preserved [in my system]. For we may say
that the substance whose disposition explains a change in an in¬
telligible way (so that we may hold that it is this substance to
which the others have on this point been adapted from the beginning,
according to the order of the decrees of God) is the substance which,
in respect of this change, we should conceive as acting upon the
others.

G. VI. 615 (D. 225; L. 245). A creature is said to act
outwardly in so far as it has perfection, and to mffet in relation to
another in so far as it is impeHect. Thus action is attributed to a
Monad in so far as it has distinct perceptions, and passion in so far


SOUL AND llODV.


267


aa its perdbptiona are confused. And one created thing is more
perfect than another in this, that there is found in the mure perfect
that \iihich serves to explain & jjriori what tiikes place in the other,
and it is on tliis account that the former is said to act upon the
lattor. But in simp^ substances the influence of one Monad upon
another is only ideal, and it can have its effect only through the me¬
diation of God, in so far as in the idesis of Gud eiie Monad rightly
claims that God, in regulating the others from the beginning of things,
should have regard to it. ...And it is thus that, among creatures,
activities and passivities are mutual. For God, comparing two
simple substances, finds in each reasons which oblige him to adapt
the other to it, and conscqucufly what is active in certain i-espects
is passive from another point of view; (ictive in so far as whnt we
distinctly know in it serves to give a reason for what bikes
place in another, and pasniiv. in so far as the reason for what takes
place in it is to be found in that which is distinctly known in

another.

•

G. IV. 441 (1686). When a change occui’S by which several
substances arc affected (as in fact every cliange affects them all), I
believe we may say that the one whicli theitiby immediately pnssm
to a greater degree of perfection or to a more perfect expi’cssion,
exerts its power, and acts, and that which pa.sses to a less degrees
makes known its feebleness, and sajfflrs. Also 1 hold tliat every
action of a substance which has perception implies some joy, and
every passion some pain.

tf. IL 13 (1686)- 'I'he action of one finite substance on another
consists only in the increase in the degree of its expression joined to
the diminution of that of the other, inasmuch as God has formed
them beforehand so that tliey should agree together.

0. 201(11. K m). 1 do not know whether one can say

that the same lieing is called action in the agent and passion in the
patient, and is thus in two subjects at once, like a relation, or
whether it is not better to say that they are two beings, one in the
agent, the other in the patient.


XII. § 86. Materia pritna as an element in each monad.

a VU. 322 (X. E. 720). Substances haie metaphysical
matter or passive power in so far as they express anything con-
fuaedly, active power in so far as they express anything distinctly.


268


SOUL AND BODY.


a III. 636. As Monads (except the primitive one) are subject
to passions, they are not pure forces; they aVe the foundation,
not only of actions, but also of resistances or passivities, an<J, their
passions are in confused perceptions. It is this which involves
matter or the infinite in number. ^

G. II. 516. A substance acts as much as it can, unless it is
impeded; even a simple substance, however, is impeded, but not
naturally unless internally by itself. And when a monad is said to
be impeded by another, this is to be understood of the representa¬
tion of the other in itself.

G. II. 306. Materia /)n7/*a...[is] the prinntive passive power,
or principle of resistance, which does not consist of extension,
but of what extension needs, and com[>lcment8 the entelechy or
primitive active power, so as to produce the complete substance or
Monad....We hold that such matter, Le. the principle of passion,
persists, and adheres to its own Entelechy.

G. II. 325. Although God could, by his al>solute power,
deprive a created substance of niateria secuuela, yet he cannot
deprive it of inateria prirna; for he would thus make it Actus purus,
such os he alone is,

G. II. 368. [The materia prima of one Monjid] does not
increase niass, or the phenomenon resulting from Monads, any more
than a point increases a line.


XII. § 87. Materia prima the source of finitvde, plarctlity

o/nd matter.

G. VI. 546 (D. 169). God alone is above all matter, since he
is its Author; but creatures free or freed from matter woujd be at
the same time detached from the universal connection, and like
deserters from the general order.

G. II. 324. To remove these [Intelligences] from bodies and
place, is to remove them from the universal connection and order of
the world, which is made by relations to time and place.

G. II. 412. Whoever admits the pre-established Harmony,
cannot but admit also the doctiine of the actual division of matter
into inllnite parts.

G. II. 460. You [Des Boasesj] ask further, why there should
be actually infinitely numerous monads? I answer, for this their
possibility will suffice, since it is better that the works of God should
be as splendid os possible; but the same is required by the order of


SOUL AND BODY.


269


things, otljerwise phenonienta will not correspond to all assignable
percipients. And gndeed in our perceptions, however distinct, we
conceive tliat confused ones are contained to any degree of small¬
ness ;*and thus monads will correspond to these, as to greater and
•more distinct ones.

G. II. 248. [de Voider] desire a necessary connection

between matter (or resistance) and active force, so a.s not to join
them arbitrarily. But the cause of the connection is, that every
substance is active, and every finite substance is pa.ssive, while
resistance is connected with ptvssion. Tlierefore such a conjunction
is deraande/1 by the nature of things.

XII. § 90. First theory of Bold and Body.

G. VI. 539 (D, 163). When I am a;’kcd if these [principles of
life] are substantial forms, I reply by a distinction : for if this term
is taken, as M. Des Cartes takes it, when he maintains...that the
Peasonable soul is the substantial form of man, 1 should answer yes.
But I sliould say no, if any one understood the term as tliose do who
imagine that there is a substantial form of a ])iccc of stone, or of
some other non-organic body; for principles of life belong only to
organic bodies. It is true...that there is no portion of matter in
which there are not numberless organic and animated bodies....But
for all this, it must not be said that each portion of matter is
animated, just as we do not say that a pond full of fish is an
aniniated body, although a fish is so.

G. VI. 643 (D. 167). Not only the soul, but also the same
animal, subsi.sts....What docs not begin to live, does not cease to
live either; and death, like generation, is only the transformation
of th€fsame animal, which is sometimes increased, sometimes di¬
minished. ...The machines of nature being machines even in their
smallest parts, are indestructible, because of the envelopment of a
small machine in a larger one ad infinitum. Thus we are obliged to
maintain at the same time both the pre-existence of the soul as of
the animal, and the substance of the animal as of the soul.

G. VII. 530 (D. 191). To each primitive entelcchy or each
vital principle there is perpetually united a certain natural machine,
which comes to us under the name of organic body: which machine,
although it preserves its form in general, consists in a flux, and is,
like the ship of Theseus, perpetually repaired. And we cannot be
certain that the smallest particle received by us at birth remains


270


SOUL AND BODY.


in our body....Homo animal always remains, although nq, {lartioular
animal ought to lie called everlasting. «

V, 214 (N. E. 240). Organization or cunfiguratiai, without
a subsisteut principle of life, which I call a Monad, would not^suffioe
for the continuance of idem numeroy or the same individual; fore
configuration may remain specifically without^ remaining indmdu>
ally...,Organized bodies, ns well as othera, remain the same only in
appearance. ...But as for Substances, which have in them a true and
real substantial unity..., and a.s for substantial beings, which...are
animated by a certain indivisible spirit, it is right to say that
they remain perfectly the same htdioidufU, through this soul or
spirit, which makes the Ego in those* which think.

G. III. 366. 1 have said, not absolutely, that organism is
e.ssential to matter, but to matter arranged by a sovereign wisdom.

G. II. 100. T admit that the body apart, without the soul, has
only a unity of aggregation, but the reality which remains to it
comes from the parts which comjwse it, and which retain their
substantial unity because of the numberless living bodies which are
enveloped in them. However, though it is possilde for a soul to have
a body composed of parts animated by separate souls, the soul or
form of the whole is not on that account composed of the souls or
forms of the parts.

G. VI. 619 (D. 229; L. 258). It must not be imagined...
that each soul has a quantity or portion of matter l^elonging exclu¬
sively to itself or attached to it for-ever, and that it consequently
owns other inferior living beings. ...For all Ix'dies arc in a perpetual
flux, like rivers. ...There is often metamorphosis in animals, but
never metempsychosis or transmigration of souls; nor are there
.souls entirely separate or disembodied spirits. God alone is com¬
pletely without body.

G. II. 58 (1686)* Each [soul and body] following its laws, and
one acting freely, the other without choice, agrees {se rencontre) in
the same phenomena. The soul, however, is none the less the form
of its body, because it expresses the phenomena of all other bodies
according to their relation to its owiv.

G. VI. 595. I should have been much mistaken if I had
objected to the Cartesians that the agreement which, according to
them, God maintains immediately between the soul and the body,
does not make a veritable union, since assuredly my pre-established
Harmony cannot do so either. ...However £ do not deny that there
is something of this nature; and this would be analogous to presmcey


SOUL AND BODY. 271

of vrhich*hitfierto, as applied to incorporeal things, the notion has
not been sufficiently exf)laincd.

0, Vll 598 (D. 209; L. 408). Each specially in»portant

simpl * substance or Monad, which forms the centre of a compound
isabstance {e.g. of an animal) and the principle of its unity, is
surrounded by a composed of an iiffinity of other Monads,
whicli constitute the particular body of this central Monad..,.This
bodj^ is organic, when it forms a kind of automaton or natural
machine, which is a machine not only as a whole, but also in the
smallest parts of it that can come into observiation.

G. II. 306. It is not to 1)6 thought that an infinitesimal
portion of matter is to be assigned to each eutelochy; there is no
such piece.

G. II. 378. Although there is no absolute necessity for. every
organic body to be animate<l, yet we mu«t judge that God would
not have neglected the opportunity for a soul, since his wisdom
produces as much pciiection as it can.

• G. III. 363. fciimple substance...cannot have extension in it,
for all extension is composite.

G. VII. 468. Our substantial matter has only potential parts,
but the human l>ody is an aggregate.


XI[. § 91. Second theory of Soul ami Body.

G. III. 657 (D. 234). A true substance (such as an animal) is
composed of an immaterial soul and an organic body, and it is the
compound of these two wliich is called unum per ae.

G. IV. 391 (D. 63). Just as all things are full of souls, so
also they are full of organized bodies.

G. V. 309 (N. E. 362). Perfect unity must be reserved for
bodies which are animated, or endowed with primitive entelechios.

G. n. 75 ( 1686 ). Our body in itself, apart from the soul,...
can only bo called one substance improperly, like a machine or a
heap of stones.

G. II. 77 (1686). If I am asked, in particular, what I say of
the sun, the globe of the earth, the moon, trees and similar bodies,
and even beasts, I could not affirm absolutely that they are
animated, or at least that they are substances, or whether they are
merely machines or aggregates of several substances. But at least I
can say that if there are no corporeal substances such os I want, it
follows that bodies will be only true phenomena, like the rainbow....


272


SOUL AND BODY.


We shall never come to anything of which we can say: there is
truly a being,” except when we find animated (machines to which
their soul or substantial form gives a substantial unity independent
of the external union of contact. And if there are none stch, it
follows that except man there would be nothing substantial in thee
visible world. t

G. 11. 371. I do not deny a certain real tmtaphyaical tmion
between the soul and the organic lx>dy..., according to which it
could be said, that the soul really is in the body.... But you see
that I have been speaking, not of the union of the Entelechy or
active principle with materia prima or passive power, but of the
union of the soul, or the Monad itself (resulting from both prin¬
ciples) with mass or with other monads.

G. VII. 602. Every create{l monad is provided with some
organic body....Every mjiss conhuns innumerable monads, for
although every organic bo<ly in nature has its corresponding monad,
yet it contains in its parts other monads similarly provided with their
organic bodies, which are subservient to the primary organic body.*

G. IV. 611 (D. 120). Ho far as by its union with matter [the
suKstantial form] constitutes a substance truly one, or a thing that
is one per se, it forms what I call a monad.

G. II. 118. As for the other difficulty which you [ArnauldJ
make. Sir, namely that the soul joined to matter does not make a
Ixiing truly one, since matter is not truly one in itself, and the soul,
as you judge, gives it only an extrinsic denomination, I answer that
it is the animated substance, to which this matter l)elongs, whjch is
truly one being, and matter taken as more mass is only a pure
phenomenon or well-founded appearance.

G. II. 120. A whole which 1ms a true unity can remain the
same individual, strictly speaking, though it gains or loses parts, as
we experience in ourselves.

G. II. 368. A new entelechy can be created, even if no new
pari of mass is created; for although mass already has unities
everywhere, yet it is always capable of new ones, dominating many
others; as if you were to imagine that God should make an organic
body out of a mass which, as a whole, is inorganic, e.g. a lump of
stone,, and should set its soul over it; for there are os many
entelechies as there are organic bodies.

G. II. 370. Every part of an organic body contains other
entelechies.

G. II. 304. A finction or half of an animal is not one Being


SOUL AND BODY.


273


'per se, be^Sa^se this can only be understood of the animal’s body,
which is not one b^ng per se, but an aggregate, and has an arith-
meticaL butf not a metaphysical unity.

O’, ll. 251. A primitive enteleohy can never arise or be extin-
^ished naturally, and can never be without an organic l)ody.

i

XTT. I 02. The vinculum substantiale.

a. II. 399. Since the bread is really not a substance, • but a
being by aggregatioix or a mhstniiti<Uuui, resulting from innumerable
monads by a certain superaddod union, its substantiality consists in
this union j thus it is not necessary according to you [the Catholics]
that God should alxdish or change those monads, but t)uly that ho
should take away that by means of wliich they produce a new .being,
namely this union; thus the substantiality which consists in it will
cease, though the phenrimenon will remain, arising now not from those
monads, but from sonie divine equivalent substituted for the union
of* those monads. I’hus there \vill really be no substantial subject
present. But wc, who reject transubstantiatiem, have no need of
such tlmories. [This passage prex'cdes the first suggestion of the
'oinculuikx sabstiintiale .]

Or. II. 435. We must say one of two tilings : either Ixxlies are
mere phenomena, and thus extension also is nothing but a pheno¬
menon, monads alone are real, and the union is sujipliod by the
operation of the pereipicuit soul in the phenomenon; or, if faith
leads us to corporeal substanc(;s, this substance will consist in
the reality of the union, which adds something absjilute (and therefore
substantial), though temporary, to the monads which ai-e to be
united. ...Tf this substantial Imnd of monads were absent, all botlies
with all <;heir qualities would be only well-founded plionomena.

G. II. 461. Supernatural matters lieing opposed to philosophy,
we need nothing else than monads and their internal modifications.

G. II. 481. I have changed my mind, so that I think nothing
absurd will follow if we hold the vinculum aubstaniiale also...to be
ingenerable and incorruptible; since indeed I think no corporeal
substance should be admitted except where there is an organic body
with a dominant monad. ...Since, thei*efore, I deny...not only that
the soul, but also that the animal can perish, I shall say that the
vinculum mbstantiale also...cannot arise or cease naturally.

G. II. 516. This vin<^lum suhaUmtiale is naturally, but not
essentially, a bond. For it requires monads, but does not essentially

18


«. JL.


274


soul. AND BODY.


involve tlioni, since it can exist without monads, ant] mo&ads
without it. 0

G. II. 517. W monads alone were sub.stance8, iu would be
lu'CPHSary either that bodies sliould be mere phenomena, or ^hat the
continuum should arise out of points, which is certainly absurds
Tleal continuity cannot arise except from the mbstautiale.

G. II. 520. Alonads alone do not compose the continuum,
since pi>r ne they are destitute of all connection, and each monad is
like a world apart. Jlut in tnntn'ia jrrima (for iiwtervi seenmd^ is an
aj(gregatt*), or in the passive element of a composite substance, is
involved the foundation of continuity, whence the true continuum
springs from juxtaiwsed compoundasubstancps....And in this sense
1 may perhaps have said that extension is a iiio<liiicatiou of matena
primii, or of what is formally non-extended.

XU. § 04. rrefonnation.

G. VII. 531 (D. 192). I hold that the souls, latent in
seminal animalcules from the beginning of things, are not rational
until, by conception, they are destined for human life; but when
they are once made rational and rendered capable of consciousness
and <»f society with (Jwl, 1 think that they never lay aside the
character of citizens in the Republic of (lod.... Death...can i*ender
perceptions coufustsi, but cannot entirely blot them from memory,
the use of whi<‘h returning, rewjirds .and punishments take place.

G. VI. 152. I hold that souls, and simple substances generally,
can only b(*gin by creation, ami end by annihilation; and as the
formation of aniiuati'd organie l>odios <lot‘S not scorn explicable in the
oixier of nature, unless wo suppose an already 'organic prefortnaiion^
I have hence inferred that what we call the generation of afi animal
is only a transformation and augmentation: thus since the same
body was alreazly orgauiaed, it is to be believed that it was
ali-eady animated, and that it had the .same soul....! should believe
that souls which will one day be human, like those of the other
species, have been in the seeds, and in the ancestors up to Adam,
and have consequently existed since the beginning of things, always in
a sort of organized body. ...But it seems proper, for several reasons,
that they should have existed then only as sensitive or animal souls...
and that they remained in that state until the time of the generation
of the man to whom they were to belong, but that then they received
- reason, whether there be a natural method of elevating a sensitive


CONFUSED AND UNCONSCIOUS PERCEPTION.


275


soul to the ’degree of a reasonable soul (wliieh I have difficulty in
conceiving)^ or that (jod gave reason to tliis soul by a special opera¬
tion, 0 %(i£ you will) by a kind of tmnacreation.

^ a. VI. 352. I should prefer to do without inirach' in the
generation of man, t^s of the other animals; and this <'ould be
explained by conceiving that, among the great number of Souls and
Animals, or at least of organic living bodies, which are in the seed,
those souls alone which are destined to attain some day to human
naturetxjntain £he reason whieli will some day appear in them.

G. 111. 565. Tlie <iuestiou always remains whether the basis of
the transfonnation, or the preh)rmod living being, is in the ovary...
or the sperm. ...For I hold that there must always he a preformed
living being, whether plant or animal, which is the basis of the
transformation, and that it must contain the .same doniinani
monad.

G. VI. 543 (D. 167). T am of the opinion of Mr Cudworth...
that the laws of mechanism alone could not form an anintal, where
there is as yet nothing oi’ganized.


XIII. § 9G. UncoHHcious mental states.

G. V. 107 (N. E. 118). What is noticeable must be composed
of parts which are not so. ...It is iin}>ossible f«>r us to think expressly
upon all our thoughts, otherwise, the mind would l eflect upon (sach
reflection to infinity, without over being able to pa.s.s to a new thought.

G.V. 109 (N. E. 120). These .sen.se-i<leas [heat, Ro£tn(*s.s, coldj
are simple in appearance, because, being confused, they do not give
the mind the means of distinguishing their content.s.

G. V. 48 (N. B.*49; L. 373). These insen.sible ptuveiitions
also marx and constitute the same individual, who is cliaractemed
by traces or expressions, which they preserve, of the preceding states
of this individual....It is also by the insensible perceptions that we
explain that admirable pre-established Harmony of the soul and the
body, and even of all inontuls.

G. V. 49 (N. E. 51 ; L. 377). I have also noticed that, in

virtue of insensible variations, two individual things cannot lie
perfectly alike, and that they must always differ more than numeri¬
cally.

G. V. 79 (N. E. 84). PhUahtkes [Locke]: It is very difficult
to conceive that a truth should be in the mind, if the mind has
never thought of this truth. TJieopJtilus [Leibniz]:.,.This reasoning

18—2


276


Leibniz’s theory of knowledge.


proven too much ; for if truths are thoughts, we shall *be deprived,
not only of truths of which we have never thought, but also of those
we have thought of, but are no longer actually thinking ff; and
if truths are not thoughts, but habits and aptitudes, natural or
acquired, nothing hinders there being some ii^us of which we never
have thought and never will think,

a. V. 148 (N. E. 166). We have always an infinity of minute
perceptions without perceiving them. Wc are never without
j}erce 2 ytimiSy but it is necessary that w’e should be often Ivithout
apperceptiinis, namely when there are no perceptions which are
noticed \distia<j'aees\

G. V. 97 (N. E. 105). In order that knowledge, ideas or truths
should be in our mind, it is not necessary that we should have ever
actually thought (jf them ; they are only natural habits, that is to
say, active and passive dispositions and attitudes, and more than a
tabula rasa.


XIV. § 90. Imiate ideas and truths.

G. V. 70 (N. E. 75). 1 agree that we learn innate ideas and
truths, whether by attending to their source, or by verifying them
through experience. Thus J do not make the supposition you
[fjockeJ suppose, as if, in the case of which you speak, we learnt
nothing new. And 1 cannot admit this proposition: Whatever we
litaru is not innate.

G. V. 71 (N. E. 76). Ph .: Is it not po^isible that not only the
terms or woixls which we use, but also the ideas, come to us from
without 1 Th .: It would then be necessary that we should ourselves
be outside of ourselves, for intellectual ideas, or ideas of reflection,
are drawn from our mind: And I should much like to know how
we could have the idea of being, if we w’ere not ourselves Beings,
and did not thus find being in us ?

G. V. 76 (N. E. 80). If [the mind] had only the mere capacity
for receiving knowledge...it would not bo the source of necessary
truths, as I have just shown that it is; for it is incontestable that
the senses do not suffice for showing their necessity.

G. V. 79 (N. E. 84). The proposition, tlw sweet is not the bitter^
is not innate, according to the sense we have given to the terra
imunte truth. For the feelings of sweet and bitter come from the
external senses....But as for the proposition, t/w squcere is not a
circhf we may say that it is innate, for, in considering it, we make a


Leibniz’s raEORY op knowledge. 277

subsumption or application of the principle of contradiction to what
the understanding itself furnishes.

G. V.#100 (N. E. 111). I shall be opposed by this axiom,
odmittUd among philosophers, that nothimj is in the. soul which tlocs
^ot eorm from the semes. But we must except the soul itself and
its affections. NihiJ^ est in intellectUy quod von fuerit in sensn,
excipe : nisi ipse intellectus. Now the soul contains being, substance,
unity, identity, cause, perception, reasoning, and many other notions!
whi^h the senses cannot give.

&.V. 139 (N. E. 156). A succession of perceptions awakes in
us the idea of duration, but does not create it.

G. V. 279 (N. E. 325).^ [Ideas] express only possibilities;
thus, if there had never been a parrici<le,...})arricide would be a
possible crime, and its idea would be real.

G. V. 324 (N. E. 380). 'I ’he purpose of the predicainents is very
useful, and we ought to think ratlier of rectifying than of rejecting
them. Substances, quantities, qualities, actions or passions, and
relations...may suffice, with those formed by their composition.

G. V. 338 (N. E. 400). It is quite true that truth is always
founded in the agi’cement or di.sagreement of ideas, but it is not true
generally that our knowledge of tinith is a perception of this agree¬
ment or disagreement.

G. V. 347 (N. E. 410). As for the primitive truths of fact,
they are iminediaie internal expcri(‘nces of .an immediacy t>f feeling.
And it is luu'e that tlie first truth of the Cartesians or of St.
Augustine occurs: I think, therefore I am, i.e. / am n fhim/ which
thinks. But...it is not only immetliately clear to me that I think,
but it is just as clear to me that 1 huve dif'ereni thuwjhts —Tlius the
Cartesian principle is sound, but is not the only one of its kind.

G. 7. 391 (N. 469). We maj' always say that the projiosi-

tion I e/xist is of the highest evidence, being a pi'oposition wliicii
cannot be px’oved by any other, or an iinme'Liate truth. And to say:
I think, therefw'e I am, is not properly to prove existence by thought,
for to think and to l)e thinking are the same thing ; and to say I am
thinking is already to say I am. You may, however, with some
reason, exclude this proposition from among the Axioms, for it is
a proposition of fact, founded on an immediate experience, and not
a neces.sary proposition, whose necessity is seen in the immediate
agreement (convenance) of the ideas. On the cofatrary, only God
sees how these two terms, / and Hxistence, are connected, i.e. why
I exist.


278


LEIBNIZ’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE.


G. V. 415 (N. E. 499). The immediate apperce]^^^ ^

existence and of our thoughts furnishes us ^e first d poit&rvari
truths or truths of fact, i.e. the jwsi experiences^ as identical proposi¬
tions contain the first d,priori truths or truths of reason....^th are
incapable of being proved, ^d may lje called immediate ; the formeri»
liecause there hi immediacy between the uiiderstanding and its
object, the latter, because there is immediacy between the subject
and tho predicate.

G. VII. 263 (N. E. 716). By the word idea we unders^nd
something which is in our mind; therefore marks impressed upon

the brain are not ideas_But many things arc in our minds— e.g,

thoughts, perceptions, affections—yhich we recognize not to be
ideas, though they cannot occur without ideas. For an idea does no<

consist for us in any act of thought, but in a faculty _There is

nevertheless, in this also, a certain difficulty ; for wc have a remote
faculty of thinking about all things, even those who.se ideas wo are
perhaps destitute of, because we have the faculty of receiving them ;
therefore an idea demands some near faxnlty or facility of thinking ef

a thing. But oven this does not suffice_It is tlierefore necessary

that thei*c should be something in mo which not only leads to the
thing, btit also expresses it. [See XT. g T.').]

G. IV. 357 (D. 48). The first of the ti‘uth.s of reason is the
principle of contradiction. ...The finst truths of fact are as many as
the immediate perceptions.

G. V. 15 (D. 95; N. E. 15). ^or the question whether
there are ideas atid truths born with us, I do not find it al>so\utely
nocessaiy for the beginnings, nor for the practice of the art of
thinking, to decide it....The question of the origin of our ideas and
maxims is not preliminary in philosophy; and ^wc must have made
great progress to solve it well. ^

G. VI. 505 (D. 155). Since the senses and inductions can
never teach us perfectly univei'sal trutiis, nor what is absolutely
necessary, but only what, is, and what is found in particular ex¬
amples, and since we nevertheless know neccssaiy and universal
truths...it follows that we have derived these truths in part from
what is within us.

G. II. 121. 1 agree that tho idea we have of thought is clear,
but not* everything clear is distinct....It is an abuse to wish to
employ confused ideas, however clear, to prove that something
cannot be.

G. m. 479. The soul is innate to itself, so to speak, and


LEIBNIZ’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE.


279


obnsoquenfly existence, substance, unity, sameness, diversity, etc.

are so also. •

G. V. t66 (N. E. 175). Ph .: Bodies do not furni.sh us by
means of the senses with so clear and distinct an idea of active
power as that which we have of it by the reflections wliich we make

on the operations of ifur mind_ Th .: Tliese consid^tions are very

good.

G. V. 340 (N. E. 402). Since Jill belief consists in memory of
past li^, of proofs or of reasons, it is not in our power or in our free
will to believe or not to believe, since memory is not a thing which
depends on our will.

G. V. 66 (N. E. 70). T have always been, as I still am, in
favour of the innate idea of (lod.-.and consequently of other innate
ideas, which cannot come to us from the senses. Now I go still
further, in conformity to the new system, and T even think that all
the thoughts and actions of our soul come from its own nature, and
that it is impossible they should. })o given to it by the stmses. ...But
at present 1 will set aside this investigation, and accommodating
myself to the.received expressions,...] shall examine how wo ought
to say, in my opinion, even in the usual sy.stein (speaking of the
action of bodies on the soul, as the Oupernicaiis, like other men,
.speak, with good foundation, of the motion of the sun) that there
are ideas and prihciples which do not come to us from the senses,
which we find in ii.s without forming them, though the senses give
us occasion to notice them.

G» 112. 659. There is no necessity (it semiis) to take [ideas] as
something which is outside us. Tt is suflicieut to consider ideas as
notions, i.e. as modifications of our soul.

*XIV. I 102. Distinction of sense and intellect.

G. IV. 436 (1686). It can even be [>roved that the notion of
magnitude, of figure and of motion, is not so distinct as is supposed,
and that it involves something imaginary and relative to our per¬
ceptions, as do also (though far more) colour, heat, and other similar
qiualities, concerning which we may doubt whether they really are
found in the nature of things external to us.

G. V. 77 (N. E. 82). The intellectual ideas which are the
soutce of necessary truths do not come from the senses. ...The ideas
which come from the senses are confused, and the truths which
..ddpehd upon them are so also, at least in part; whereas the intellec-.


280


LEIBNIZ’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE.


tual ideas and the truths which depend upon them are diStinct, and
neither have their origin in the senses, though it is true we should
never think without the senses. |

G-. V. 108 (N. E. 119). T distinguish between ideas and
thoughts j for we always have all pure or distinct ideas independentl^f
of the senses; but thoughts always corrospondHo some sensation.

G, V. 117 (N. E. 130). Tt seems that the senses cannot
convince us of the existence of sensible things without the, aid
of reason. Thus 1 should hold that the consideration of ea^stence
comes from reflection.

G. V. 197 (N. E. 220). The senses provide us with the matter
for reflections, and wc should never •3ven think of thought, if we did
not think of .something else, i.e. of the particulars wliich the senses
provide.

G. V. 220 (N. B. 248). Present or immediate memory, or
the recollection of what Inis just happened, i.e. the consciousness
or reflection wliich accompanies inU'rnal action, cannot naturally
deceive; otherwise wc should not even bo sure that we are thinking
of such and such a thing. ...If immediate internal experiences are
not certain, there will be no truth of fact of which we can
be sure.

G. V. 363 (N. E. 432). The ideas of seiKsiblo qualities are
confused, and the powers, which ought to produce them, conseijuontly
also furnish only ideas in which there is an element of confusion;
thus we cannot know the connections of these id#'as otherwise than
by experience, except in so far as they are i-educed to disfiqcbndeas
which accompany them, as has l^een done (for example) in regard to
the colours of the rainbow and prisms.

G. V. 373 (N. E. 445). Our certainty would be small, or
rather nothing, if it had no other foundation for simple ideas but
that which comes from the senses....Ideas are originally in our
mind, and even our thoughts spring from our own nature, without
the other creatures being able to have an immediate influence on the
soul. Moreover the foundation of our certainty in regard to universal
and eternal truths is in the ideas themselves, independently of the
senses, as also pure and intelligible ideas do not depend upon the
senses. ...But the ideas of sensible qualities...(which in fact are only
phantoms) come to us from the senses, i.e. from our confused percep¬
tions. And the foundation of the truth of contingent and particular
things is in success, which shows that the phenomena of sense are
connected rightly, as the intelligible truths demand.


Leibniz’s theory of knowledge.


281


0. vf.499 (S. 149). We may say that sensible qualities are
in fact occult qualities, and that there must certainly be others more
manifest, #vhich could make them explicable. And far from our
understanding only sensible things, they are just what we under-
*8tand least.

G. VI. 500 (D.* 160). However, wc must do the senses this
justice, that besides these occult qualities, they make us know other
mo^e manifest qualities, which furni.sh more distinct notions. These
are those attributed to comrnmi sense, Ixscause there is no external
sense to which they are specially attached and peculiar.,.. Such is

the idea of numbers_It is thus also that we perceive figures_

Though it is true that, to conceive numbers and figures themselves
distinctly, ...we must come to things which the senses cannot
furnish, and which the understanding adds to the senses. •

G. VI. 602 (D. 182). There are therefore three classes of
notions; those which are setmhle only, which ai-e the objects appro¬
priated to each particular sense, those which are tU once sensible and
tntelliyihle, which belong to common sense, and those which are
intdligihle only, whicli are jiecuUar to the understanding.

G. I. 352. The mark of imperfect knowledge, for me, is when
the subject has properties of which we cannot yet give the proof.
Thus geometers, who have not yet been able to prove the properties
of the straight line, which ihtiy have taken as acknowledgiid, have
not yet had a sutliciently distinct idea of it.

G. II. 412. Would tliat incomprehensibility were an attribute
of Gody^ily! We should then have better hope of understanding
nature. But it is too true that there is no part of nature which

we can perfectly understand_No creature however noble can

distinctly perceive vr comprehend an infinity at one time; nay
more, whoever understood one piece of matter, would understand
the whole universe.

XIV. § 103. The quality of ideas.

G. V. 243 (N. E. 273\ 1 have this idea [a distinct one] of

it [a chiliagon], but I cannot have the image of a chiliagon.

G. II. 265. The ways of action of the mind, you say, are
more obscure. I should have thought they were the clearest, and
were almost alone clear and distinct.

G. V. 472 (N. E. 574). God alone has the advantage of
having only intuitive knowledge.


282


LEIBNIZ’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE.


XIV. § 104. Definition,^

G. V. 248 (N. E. 279). When there Ir only an incomplete
idea, the same subject i« susccptiblo of several mutually independent
definitions, ao that we cannot always derive the one from the other^ •
...and then only experience teaches us that fliey all belong to it
together.

G. V. 274 (N. E. 317). The real [definition] shows ^the
possibility of the thing defined, and the noiuiiml definition docs not
do so.

G. V. 275 (N. E, 319). Simple terms cannot have a nominal
definition ; but...when they are simpH* only in relation to us (because
we have not the means of analyzing tlieni in order to reach the'
elementary perceptions of which they are composed), like hot, cold,
yellow, green, they can receive a i*eal definition, which will explain
their cause.

G. V. 300 (N. E. 353). When the question is concerning
fictions and the possibility of things, the transitions from species td
species may be insensible. ..This indeb'rminateness would l)e true
even if we knew larfectly the interior of the creatux’es concerned.
But 1 do not see that it could prevent things from having real
essences independently of the undei standing, or us from knowing
them.

G. IV. 424 (D. 30) (1684). We ha\o a distinction between
)iomin(d definitiont>, which only contain the marks of the thing
w'hich is to l)e distinguished from others, and real defi from
which it appears that the thing is ixossible; and by this Hoblxes is
answered, who held truths to be arbitrary, because they depended on
nominal definitions, not considering that the reaiity of the definition
is not arbitrary, and that not any notions can be conjoined. ^

G. IV. 450 (1686). When [definition] pushes analy.sis until it
reaches prinxitive notions, without presupposing anything whose
possibility requires an d prwH proof, the definition is perfect or
essential.

XIV. § 105. The Characteristica Universalis.

G. V. 460 (N. E. 559). I hold tliat the invention of the form
of syllogisms is one of the most beautiful which the human mind has
made, and even one of the most considerable. It is a kind of
univeraid nuUhemaiiee whose importance is not sufficiently known.


Leibniz’s theory of knowledge.


283


G. V.*461 (N. E. 560). Further it should be known that there
are gwd a8yUogutic^onclusiom...e.g.\ Jesus Christ is God, therefore
themoth^'of Jesus Christ is the mother of (3od,,.If David is the
£ath6i**of Solomon, without doubt Solomon is the son of David. And
these consequences do not fail to be denioimtrablc by truths upon
which common syllo^sms themselves depend.

G. I. 67 ipa, 1672). In Philosophy, I have found a means of
accomplishing in all sciences what Des Cartes and others have done
in Ai^thmetic and Geometry by Algebra and Analysis, by the Ar»
Comhumtoria ...By this all composite notions in the whole world
are reduced to a few simple ones as their Alpliabet; and by the
combination of such an aiphabit a way is made of linding, in time,
by an ordered method, all things with their theorems and whatever
is po.ssible to investigate concerning tliem.

G. III. 216. 1 had considered this msttor .when I was a
young man of nineteen, in my little book Arff‘ Coinbinatoria, and
my opinion is that truly real and philosophic characters must corre¬
spond to the analysis of thoughts. It is tru(‘ that these characters
would presuppose the true philosophy, and it is only now that T
should dare to undertake their construction.

G. M. II. 104. What is In^st and most convenient about my
new calculus [the intinitesinuil calculus] is, that it offers truths
by a kind of analysis, and without any effort of imagination, which
often only succeeds by chance, and that it gives u.s over An'himedes
all the advantages whicli Vieta and Des Cartes hfid given us over
Apuljonucs.

0, vll. 185. [1*^ jiccount of a boyish speculation Leibniz

says] I came uptai this remarkable consideration, namely, that a
certain Alphabet ofmhunittn thoughtH could be invcntetl, and that
from t]|e combinsition of the letters of this alphabet, and from the
analysis of the worfls formed of them, everything couhl be both
discovered and tested. ...At that time I did not sufficiently I'ealizc
the greatness of the matter. But later, the more progress I made
in the knowledge of things, the more confirmed I became in the
resolve to pursue so great a matter.

G, VII. 20. Algebra itself is not the ttue characteristic of
Geometry, but quite another must be found, which T am certain
would be more useful than Algebra for the use of Geometry in the
mechanical sciences. And 1 wonder that this has hitherto been
remarked by no one. For almost all men hold Algebra to be the
true mathematical art of discovery, and as long as they labour


284 PROOFS OP THE EXISTENCE OF GOD.

%

under this prejudice, they will never find the true chara^tlbrs of the
other sciences. *

Qt. VII. 198. The progress of the art of rational|di8Covery
depends in great part upon the art of characteristic (ars chSract&t''
istica). The reason why people usually seek demonstrations only
in tuimlxji-s and lines and things representttl by these is none
other than that tliere arc nut, outside numbers, convenient cha¬
racters corresponding to the notions.


XV. § 106. Fov 7' proofs of the existence of God.

G. VII. 302 (D. 100; L. 33V). Besides the world or the

aggregate of finite things, there is a certain unity which is dominant,
not only as the soul is dominant in me, or rather as the Ego itself
is dominant in my body, but also in a much higher sense. For the
dominai\t unity of the universe not only rules the world but
constnicts or fashions it. It is higher than the world, and so to
speak extrainundane, and is indeed the ultimate reason of things.
For the sufticieut reason of existence cannot be found either in any
particular thing or in the whole aggregate and series of things.
Let us suppose that a book of the elements of Geometry existed
from all eternity, and that in succession one copy of it was made
from another, it is evident that, although we can account for the
present book by the book from whicli it was copied, nevertheless,
going back through as many books as we please, we could never
reach a complete reason for it, because we can always ask Nj^y^such
books have at all times existed, i.e. why books at all, and why
written in this way. What is true of books is also true of the
different states of the world, for, in spite of certain laws of change,
the succeeding state is, in some sort, a copy of that which |jvecedes
it. Therefore, to whatever earlier shite you go back, you never
find in it the complete reason of things, i.e. the mison why there
exists any world, and why this world rather than some other.

You may indeed suppose the world eternal; but as you suppose
only a succession of states, in none of which do you find the
sufficient reason, and as even any number of them does not in the
least holp you to account for them, it is evident that the reason
must be sought • elsewhere. For in eternal things, even though
there be no cause, there must be a reason, which, for permanent
things, is necessity itself or essence j but for the series of changing
things, if it be supposed that they succeed one another from all


PROOIf’S OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD.


285


eternity, tRis reason would be, as we shall presently see, the prevail¬
ing of inclinations,Irhiclt consist not in necessitating reasons...but in
inclipjiig^'ea.sons. From this it is manifest that, even by supposing
the eternity of the world, we cannot escape the ultimate extra¬
-mundane reason of things, i.e. God....Since the ultimate root of all
must be in somethfSig which has metaphysical necessity, and since
the reason of any existing thing is to be found only in an existing
thkig, it follows that there inu.st exist one JJeing who has nietu-
physleal necessity, one Being of whose e.sscnce it is to exist; and
thus there must exist something different from tliat plurality of
beings, tlie world, which, as we ailmitted and showed, has no meta¬
physical necessity. *

G.VL614(D. 224; L. 241). In God is the source, not only

of existences, but also of esseiujes in so far as they are real,-i.e, the
source of what is real in pos.sibility. l‘'ur tlui understanding of
God is the region of eternal truths, or of the id(^as on which they
^depend, and without him there would l)e nothing real in possi¬
bilities, and not only would there be nothing existing, but nothing
would even be possible. For if there is a reality in essemces or
possibilities, or in eternal truths, this reality must needs be founded
in soinotliing existing and actual, and consecjuently in the exist¬
ence of the necessary Being, in whom c.s.sonce involves exi.stence,
or in whom it suflices to be possible in order to be actual. Thus
God alone (or the necessary Being) has this prerogative, that he
must necc.ssarily exist if he be possible. And as nothing can
intAiam with the possibility of that which involves no limits, no
negation, and conso(juently no contradiction, this is sufiicient of
itself to make known the existence of God ci priori. We have
proved it also throflgh the reality of eternal truths.... Wo must not,
however, imagine, a.s some do, that eternal truths, being dependent
upon God, are arbitrary and depend upon liis will....That is only
true of contingent truths, whose j)rinciple is Jitmsn or the choice of
the best, whereas necessary truths depend solely on his understanding,
and are its internal object. Thus God alone is the primary unity
or original simple substance, of which all created or derivative
Monads are products, and have their birth, so to speak, through
continual fulgurations of the Divinity from moment to moment,
limited by the receptivity of the created being, of whose essence it
is to Iiave limits. In God there is Power, which is the source of all,
then Knowledffe, wliose content is the variety of ideas, and finally
which makes changes or products according to the principle


286


PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD.


of the best. These characteristics correspond to what "in created
monads forms the subject or basis [see Mr LatlSi’s note, li. 245], to
the faculty of Perce})tion, and to the faculty of Appetitioili Jut in
God these attributes are absolutely inihnte or perfect; and in the
created Monads...there avt‘ only imitations of these attributes,
according to the degree of perfecthm of the Moftad.


XV. § 107. The ontological argument

G. V. 419 (N. £. 504). [The mitological argument] is not a
paralogism, but an imperfect demonstration, which presupposes
something thsit it was still necessary to prove, to give the argument
mathematical evidence; namely, it is tacitly supposed that this idea
of tho all-great or all-perfect Being is possible, and implies no
contradiction. And it is already something that, by this remark,
it is proved that mpposing (rod to be possible, he eeists, which is the,
privilege of the Divinity alone.. .The other argument of M. Des ^
Cartes—wliich undertakes to prove the Existence of God, because
the idea of hint is in our soul, and must have come from the original
—is still less conclusive.

G. V. 420 (N. E. 506). Alrao.st all the means which have
been employed for proving the existence of God are good, and might
serve their purpose if they were perfected

G. IV. 406 (D. 137). If the nece.ssary Being is possible, he
exists. For the necessary Being and the Being by his esH^i!<‘e*are

one and the same thing_If the Being through Sf‘lf is impossible,

all beings through others aiv so too, since they only are, in the end,
through the Being through self; and thus ;iothing could exist....If
there is no nece.ssary Being, there is in) possible being. *

G. III. 572. 1 agree that the idea of possibles involves neces¬
sarily that {i,e. the idea) of the existence of a being who can produce
the possible. But the idea of possibles does not involve the actual
existence of this being, os it seems, Sir, that you take it, when you
add: “ If there were not such a being, nothing would be possible.”
For it suffices that a being who would produce the thing should be
possible, in order that the thing should be possible. Generally
speaking, in order that a being may be possible, it suffices that its
efficient cause be possible; 1 except the supreme efficient cause,
which must actually exist. But this is for another reason, because
nothing would be possible if the necessary Being did not exist.


PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD.


287


XV? ^ 108. Proof that the idea of God is possible.

G. VII. 261 (^. E. 714) (1676). Thai the most perfect Being
esiistsji^ W call a perfection every simple quality which is positive
and absolute, and exprtisses without any limits whatever it does
express. Now since such a quality is simple, it is also irresolvable
or indefinable^ for otherwise it will either not be one simple quality,
but an aggregate of several, or, if it is one, it will be circumscribed
by ii^iits, and will therefore be conceived by a negation of further
progress, contrary to the hypothesis, for it is assumed to be purely
positive. Hence it i.s not diflicult to show that all perfections are
compatible inter se^ or can be^in the same subject. For let there
be such a proposition as

A and B are incompatible

(understanding by A and B two such simple forms or perfections—
the same holds if several are assumed at once), it is obvious that this
cannot be proved without a resolution of one or bc»th of the terms
•1 and B\ lor otherwise their nature would not enter into the
reasoning, and the incompatibility of any other things could be,
shown jiiRt as well as theirs. But (by hypothesis) they are irre¬
solvable. Therefore this proposition cannot be ]>roved concerning
them.

But it could be proved concerning them if it were true, for it
is not true per se ; but all necessarily true propositions are either
demonstrable, or known per se. Therefore this pn)pt)8ition is not
nece.ssarUy true. In other words, since it is not neces.sary that A
and jjjll^ould not be in the same subject, they can therefore be in
the same subject; and since the reasoning is the same as regai'ds
any other assumed ,4jualitics of the same kind, therefore all perfec¬
tions compatible.

‘There is, therefore, or there can Ije conceived, a subject of all
perfections, or most perfect Being.

Whence it follo-ws also that he exists, for existence is among the
number of the perfections.

I showed this reasoning to D. Spinosa, when I was at the Hague,
and he thought it sound; for as at first he contradicted it, 1 wrote
it down and read him this paper.

SCHOLIUM.

The reasoning of Des Cartes concerning the existence of the
'most perfect Being presupposed that the most perfect Being can be


288 PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD. *

%

conceived, or is possible....But it is asked whether it is iQ t^ur power
to imagine such a Being....


XV. § 109. The cosmological argument.

G. V. 417 (N. B. 500). [T^ocke argues tkat, because we now
exist, therefore something has always existed. Leibniz replies:]
T find ambiguity in it [your argument] if it means that there never
was a time when notfmig existed. I agree to this, and ind/jbd it
follows from the preceding propositions by a purely mathematical
consequence. For if there had ever been nothing, there would have
always been nothing, since nothing iannot produce a Being; conse¬
quently we ourselves should not be, whicli is contrary to the first
truth of experience. But the consequence makes it first appear
that in saying something has existed from all eternity, you mean an
eternal thing. It does not follow, however, in virtue of what you
have advanced so far, that if there has always been something, then
there has always lavn a certtiin thing, i.e. an eternal Being. Fol"
some adversaries will say that 1 have been produced by other things,
and those things by y^t others.

G. IV. 359 (D. 51). That there is some necessary thing is
evident from the fact that contingent things exist.

G. IV. 360 (D. 51). F rom the fact that we now are, it follows
that we shall bo hereafter, unless a reason of change exists. So
that, unless it were established otherwise that w’e could not even
exist except V)y the favour of God, nothing would be jyjpv^d in
favour of the existence of God from our duracion.

«

XV. § 111. The argument from the eternal tmths,

G. VII. 310. A nocessaiy being, if it be possible, exists. This
...makes the transition from essences to existences, from hypothetical
to absolute truths, from ideas to the world... .If there were no eternal
substance, there would Ix'- no eternal truths; thus God is also deduced
hence, who is the root of possibility, for his mind is itself the region
of ideas or truths. But it is very eiToneous to suppose that eternal
truths and the goodness of things depend on the divine will, since
all will presupposes the judgment of the intellect as to goodness,
unless some one by a change of names would transfer all judgment
from the intellect to the will, though even then no one could say
that the will is the cause of truths, since the judgment is not their


PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD.


289


#

causo eitlier. The reason of truths lies in the ideas of things, which
are involved in tho^divine essence itself. And who would dare to
sjy that the truth of God’s existence depends upon the divine will?
G.»vt 226 . We ought not to say, with some Scotists, that
«the eternal truths would subsist, even if there were no under¬
standing, not eveiiglGod’s. For, in my opinion, it is the divine
understanding that makes tlie reality of eternal truths; although
his Will has no part in it. Kvory reality must b(5 founded in some¬
thing^ existent. It is true that an atheist may be a geometer. But
if there were no God, there would he no object of Geometry. And
without God, not only would there be nothing existent, but there
would be nothing possible. ^

G. VII. 190 (1677). A. You hold that this [a certain pro¬
position of Geometry] is true, even though it be not thought by you ?
B, Certainly, before either the geoinet(u-a had proved it, or men
had observed it. A. Therefore you think that truth and false¬
hood are in things, not in thoughts? B. Certainly. A, Ts
anything false? B, Not the thing, I think, but the thought or
proposition about the thing. A. Thus falsity belongs to thoughts,
and not to things ? B. t compelled to say so. A. Then is not
truth also? B. H would seem so, though T doubt whether the
consequence is valid. A. When the (juestion is proposal, and l)eforo
you are sure (»f your opinion, do you not doubt whether a thing
is true or false ? B. Certainly. A. You recognize therefore that
the same subject is capable of truth and falstdiood, since one or
other follows according to the nature of the question ? B. 1 recog¬
nize j^d affirm, that if falsity lielongs to thoughts, not things, so
floes truth also. A. f^ut this contradicts what you said above,
that even what no(jody thinks is true. B. You have puzzled jiie.

A. ^t we must attempt a reconciliation. Do you think that
all thoughts which can occur are actually formed, or, to .speak
more clearly, do you think that all propositions are thought?

B. I do not think so. A. You see then that trutli concerns
propositions or thoughts, but possible ones, so that this at least
is certain, that if any one think.s in one way or in the opposite
way, his thought will be tme or false. [The rest of the dialogue is
concerned in refuting Hobbes’s nominalism.]

XV. § H3. Relation of hi<ml(dge to truth.

G, VI, 230. This pretended fate [that of the necessity of
eternal truths], which governs even the divinity, is nothing else but

19


R. L.


290


PROOFS OP THE EXISTENCE OP GOD.


the very nature of God, his own uiiderKtandiug, whiclt furnishes
rules to his wisdoiu and goodness.

G, VI. 423. Is it by the will of God, for example, or is it
rather by the nature of numlxM’s, that some numbers ar< more
capable than others of l>eing extictly divided in several ways 1 ^

G. II. 125. We may say that creatt'd spirits differ from God
only as the less from the more, the finite from the infinite.

G, IV. 426 (D. 32) (1684). As to the controversy, whether we
st*e all things in G. or have ideas of our own, it must \>e u^er-
stood that, even if we did sfie all things in Cod, it would still be
necessary that we should also have ideas of our own, t.e. not, as it
were, certain little images, but affections or modifications of our
mind, answering to what we should see in God.


XV. I 114. Argument from the pre-established harrtmiy.

G. V. 421 (N. E. 507). These Beings [Monad.s] have received
their nature, both active and passive,... from a general and supreme
cause, for otherwise*,... being independent of each other, they could
never produce that Order, Harmony, and Beauty, which is obseiwed
in nature. But this argument, which appears to have only a moral
certainty, is brought to a perfectly metaphysical necessity, by the
new species of harmony which f have introduced, wdiich is the pie-
cstablished harmony.

F. de C. 70 (D. 184). God jjroduces substances, but not their
actions, in which he only concurs.

G. VII. 365 (D, 245). God is not present to thi^ by
sUuatioUi but by essence ; his presence is manifested by his immediate
ojm'ation,

G. VI. 107. Power is concornefl w’ith Jieing, wisdom or under¬
standing with the true, and will with the good.

G. VI. 167. [God’s] goodness led him antecedently to create
and produce all possible good; but his ivisdom iitade choice of it,
and was the cause of his choosing the best consequently ; and finally
Ids poioer gave him tlic means of actually executing the great design
which he had formed.

G. rV. 440 (1686). God alone (from whom all individuals
continually emanate, and who sees tlie universe, not only as they
see it, but also quite differently from all of them) is the cause of
this corrospondeuee of their phenomena, and causes what is private
to one to 1)0 public to all; otherwi.se there would Iw no connection.


LEIBNIZ’S ETHICS.


291


§

(J. IV.*533. In order that ail tiction should be not inirnculous,
it is not sufficient tl^t it shtmld conform to a genei'al law. For if
this law were not founded in the nature of things, pei’petual miracles
would Be raquired to execute it....Thus it is not enough that (4od
should order the liody to obey the soul, and the soul to have
perception of what ]|appens in the body; he must give them a
means of duin^so, and I have explained tliis means.

G. VII. 390 (D. 255), God, being moved bj'' his supi'emo
reasol\ to choose, among many possible series of things or worlds,
that in which free creatures should take such or such resolutions,
though not without his concourse, has thereby rendered every
event certain and determincd^oncs* for all , without derogating
thereby from the liberty of those creatures: that simple <locn'e of
choice not at all changing, hut only actualizing, their fixiO natures,
which he saw in hi.s ideas.

G. Vn. 358 (D. 242). If G<jd is obliged to mend the course
of nature from time to time, it must be done «*ither supernalurally
or naturally. If it be dune smiernaturally, we niu.st have rtsjourse
to miracles to explain natural things, which is reducing an hypo¬
thesis w/ obmrdvtn ; for t'verything may easily be accounted for by
miraclas. But if it bo done naturally, then God will not ho
intfiliufenfia gupmtnunilajia : he will be compiehended under the
nature of things; that is, he ^\ill be the soul of the world.

XV. § 117. f/od’s goodnenH.

G. JPiI. 399 (D. 264). t have still other reasons against this
Htran^imagination, that space is a property of God. If it In* so,
space ))clongs to the essence of God. But space has parts: therefoix*
there would be parts*in the essence of God. Spcctatum admiasi.

G. Vll. 415 (D. 281). The immensity and eternity of God
would subsist, though there were no creiitures; but those attribute's
would have no dependence either upon times or places... .These*
attributes signify only that God would be present and coexistent
with all the things that should exist.

XVI. § 118. Freedom and de^minism.

G. VI. 29. There are two famous labyrinths, where our reason
very often goes astray; one is concerned with the great question
of the free and the necessary, especially in tlie production and origin
of evil.


292


Leibniz’s ethics.


G. VI. 411. If the will detenniues itself without, iJhere being
anything, either in the person choosing, or jn the object chosen,
which can lead to the choice, there will be neither cause nor reai^u
in this election: and as moral evil consists in bad choic^ this is to
admit that moral evil has no source at all. Thus by the rules of
good metaphysics, there should he no mora^ evil in nature; and
also, by the same reason, there would be no moral good either, and
all morality would bo destroyed.

G. VI. 380 (D. 197). The neces,sity which is contr|iJry to
morality, which ought to be avoided, and would make punishment
unjust, is an insurmountable necessity, which would make all
opposition useless, even if we wisl)od with all our hearts to avoid
the necessary action, and though w'e made all pt>ssible eflForts to this
end. Now it is evident that this is not applicable to voluntary
actions; since wo should not do them unless we wislied it. Also
their prevision and prodeterminatiou is not absolute, but presupposes
the will: if it is certoin we shall do them, it is no less certain that
we shall wish to do theni. •

G. 11. 419. T should not say that in Aflam, or in any one
else, there was a moral necessity of sinning, but only this: that the
inclination to sin prevailed in him, and that thus there was a
certain predetermination, but no necessity. T recognize that there
is a moral necessity in God to do the best, and in confirmed spirits
to act well. And in general I prefer to interpret the words thus,
lost anything should follow whicli would sound bad.

G. V. 163 (N, E. 182). It seems to me that, properly^pe^king,
though volitions are contingent, necessity should not be opp’. sed to
volition, but to contingency...and th:it necessity must not be
confounded with determination, for there is no less connection or
determination in thoughts than in motions....And not oi?ly con¬
tingent truths are not necessary, but also their connections are not
always of an absolute necessity...; physical things even have some¬
thing moral and voluntary in relation to God, since the laws of
motion have no other necessity than that of the best.

G. V. 166 (N. £. 184). [The advocates of free will] demand
(at least several do so) the absurd and the impossible, in desiring a
liberty of equilibrium, which is absolutely imaginary and impracti¬
cable,. and would not even serve their purpose if it were possible
for them to have it, i.e. that they should have liberty to will against
all the impressions which may come from the understanding, which
would destroy true lilierty, and reason also.


LEIBNIZ’S ETHICS.


293


G. V. 1*67 (N. ill 187). Wo do not will to will, but we will
to do; and if we willed to will, we should will to will to will, and
this would ^o to infinity.

G. IV. 362 (D. 54). To ask whether there is freedom in our
>s411, is the same as asking whether there is will in our will. Frefj
and voluntary igean tHe same thing.

G. VII. 419 (D. 285). All the natural powers of spirits arc
subject to moral laws.

G.Vl. 130. The reason which ]\l. l)es Cartes has alleged, for
proving the independence of our free actions by a pretended lively
internal feeling, has no force. We e.innot propeirly feel our inde¬
pendence, and we do not alwa}^ perceive the often imperceptible
causes upon which our resolution depends.

G. VI. 421. Not only free creatures arc active, but also all
other substance.s, and natures composed ot' substances, liciusts are
not free, and yet they do not fail to have active soul.s.

G. I. 331 (1679). Whatever act.s, is free in so far us it acts.

" G. VI. 122. There is contingency in a thousand actions of
nature; but when there is no judgment in the agent, there is no
liberty.


XVI. § 119. Psf/choloffy of volition and pleasure.

G. V. 149 (N. E. 167). The Good is what is proper to
produce and inoi case pleasure in us, or to diminish aiul abridge
some pii.V’. ^vil i.s proper to pvoduci‘ or increase pain iu us, or
to dimlfiish some pleasure. 77/. I am also of this opinion.

G. V. 171 (N. E. 190). l would not have it believed...that
we must abandon those ancient axioms, that the will follow's the
* greatest^ 0 (xl, or flies the greatest evil, which it feels. The source
of the little application to the truly good comes, in great part, from
the fact that, in the affairs and occasions where the seusca scarcely
act, most of our thoughts are .surd (sourden), so to speak,...i.e. void
of perception and feeling, and consisting in the bare employment of
symbols....Now such knowledge cannot move us; we need something
lively (vif) in older to feel emotion.

G. V. 173 (N. E. 193). We must, once for all, make this law
for ourselves: henceforth to await and to follow the conclusions of
reason, once understood, though only perceived in the sequel usually
by surd thoughts, and destitute' of sensible attractions.

G. V. 176 (N. B. 194). Uneasiness is essential to the felicity


294


LKIBNIZ’S ETHICS.


of creatures, which never consists in complete possoauon, which
would make them insensible and stupid, but iif a continual and un^
interrupted progress to greater goods. ^ ^ •

G-. VII. 73 (D. 130). Pleasure or delight is a sense of per¬
fection, i.e. a senso*of something which helps or assists some power.''’'

a. V. 179 (N. E. 200). In the inoinent^f cou|bai, there is no
lunger time to use artifices; all that then strikes us weighs in the
Imlance, and helps to form a compound direction, almost as in
Mechanics. ^

O’. VI. 386 (D. 202). answer to the proposition that he
who cannot fail to cliooso the best is not fn^:] It is rather true
lilHjrty, and the most pei’fect, to bd'abh*. to use one’s free will in the
best way, and alway.s to use this power without being turned aside
either by external force or by internal passions.

G. V. 179 (N. E. 201). T do not know whether the greatest
pleasure is possible; T should rather think that it can grow
infinitely.

G. V. 180 (N. E. 201). Although pleasure cannot receive a
nominal definition, any more than light or colour, yet it can, like
them, i-eceive a causal definition, and I believe that, at bottom,
plea.suro is a feeling of perfection and pain a feeling of imperfection,
provided they are sufficiently ivmarkable for us to be able to
perceive them.

G. VI. 266. Pr<»perly sjx'aking, pm-ception is not enough to
cause misery, if it is not ac(joinpanied by reflection. The same is
true of felicity....Wo cannot reasonably doubt that thei’e pain in
animals: but it seems that their plea.sarts and pains arei; not as
lively as in man, they are not susceptible either of the sorrow
{(•hagj'iii) whicli accompanies pain, or of the joy which accompanies
pleasure. «


XVI, § 120. Sin.

G. IV. 300 (D. 9) (cai. 1680). Immortality without memory
is quite useless to murals; for it desti-oys all reward and all
punishment.

G. VI. 118. Moral evil is so great an evil as it is only because
it is a source of physical evils.

G. VL141. There is a kind of justice, and a certain sort of
rewards and punishments, which appears inapplicable to those who
act from an absolute necessity, if there were any such. Tliis is the


Leibniz’s etuics.


296


kind of jusisioe which ha« not for its object amendment, or example,
or oven the reparation of evil. This justice i.s founded only in
fitness, wj^ich demand.s a certain satisfaction as the €‘xpiaiion of a
bad action.

, G.TV. 454 (1686). It depends upon the soul to guaid against
tl»e surprises ^f ap{)lhrances by a firm will to make reflections, and
neither to act nor to judge, in certain circumstances, without great
and, mature de1il)eration.

■ (!fcVn.92. Virtue is an unchangt'ablo precept of the mind,

and a perpetual renewing of the same, by which wc are a.s it woii)
driven to perform what we believe to be good.,..Since our will is
not drawn to obtain or avoid afiything, exce[)t as the understanding
presents it to the will as soniething good or bad, it will suiflce that
wo should always judge rightly, in order to our always- acting
rightly.

G. VII. 99. The cliief ruhs of our life i.s, that we should always,
as far as possible, exactly df) or Iwive undone what not the passions,
r>ut the understanding, shows to be the most useful or the most
harmful; and that when we have d<uie this, wo should then, however
it turiio out, account ourselves happy.

XVI. § 121. Meaning of good and evil; three hinds of each.

G. VII. 74 (D. 130). J "ho pei'fectioii of the universe, or
harmony of things, does not allow all minds to be equally jKirfect.
Thoijuestion why God has given tn one nnnd moie pcifoction tlian
to another is among senseless (iue.stions.

G. VI. 376 (D. 194). It must be admitted that there is evil
in this world which G(xl has nuwle, and that it was possibh; to
make ft world without evil, or even tfj create no world at all...; hut
...the better part is not always that M’hich tends to avoid evil, since
it may be that the evil is accompanied by a greater g(X)d.

IV. 427 (1686). We mu.st know what a perfection is, and
here is a sufficiently certain mark of one: forms or natures which
are not capable of the last degree, are not perfections, as for
example the nature of numbei’ or figure. For the greatest of all
numbers (or the number of all numbers), as well as the greatest
of all figures, imply a contradiction; but the gimtest knowledge
.and omnipotence do not involve impossibility.

G. vn. 303 (D. 101 ; L. 340). Perfection is nothing but

quantity of essence.


296


LEIBNJZ’S ETHICS.


Ipi

G. III. 33. Tiic ultimate origin of evil must not bo sought in
the divine will, but in the original impcrfectiorf of creatures, which
is contained ideally in the eternal truths constituting tlw internal
object of the divine intellect, so that evil could not be excluded from
the best possible system of things.

0, Vir. 194 (««• 1677?). Absolutely firSt truths are, among
truths of reason, those which ai’e identical, and among truths of
fact this, from which all experiments can be proved ^jr^orit
naun‘]y : Er^rj/ihimj possible demands that it should exists and ^enco
will exist unless something else prevents it, which also demands
that it should exist and is incompatible with the fonner j and hence
it follows that that combination of things always exists by which
the greatest possible number of things exists; as, if we assume
At E, Cy D to be equal as regards essence, i.e. equally perfect, or
equally demanding existence, and if we assume that D is incom¬
patible with A and with Ji, while A is compatible with any except
Dy and similarly as regards B and C ; it follow.s that the combina¬
tion ABVy excluding Dy will exist; for if we wish D to exist, it
can only coexist with (7, and hence the combination CD will exist,
which is more imperfect than the combination AJiC. And hence
it is obvious that things exist in the most perfect way. This
proposition, that everything possible demands that it should exist,
can be proved it posteriori, assuming that something exists; for
either all things exist, ajid then every pi>s8ible so demands existence
that it actually exists; or some things do not exist, and then a
reason must be given why some things exist rather than others.
Hut this cannot bo given otherwise thai» fix^m a geimral r^ on of
essence or possibility, assuming that the possible demands existence
in its own nature, and indeed in proportion *to its possibility or
according to the degree of its essence. Unless in the very iiAture of
Essence there were some inclination to exist, nothing would exist; for
to say that some essences have this inclination and others not, is
to say something without a reason*, since existence seems to be
referred generally to every essence in the .same way. But it is as
yet unknown to men, whence arises the incoiuposaibility of diverse
things, or how it can happen that diverse easeuces are opposed to

* Leibnis remarks in the margin: If existence wore anything other than
what is doniandod by essence {ennentiae exigentia), it would follow that it itself
would liave a certain essence, or would add something new tu things, concerning
which it might again be asked, whether this essence exists, and why this rather
than another.


Leibniz’s ethics. 297

each othSo) Hcoiiig that all puiely positive terms sotmi to Ixj com¬
patible inter se, •

♦ G. 195 (ca. 1677?). The Good is ^hat contributes to
pei-fecJlitfi. But i^orj'ectwn is what involve.s tlie most of essence.


XVI. § 122. Metaphysical evil the source of the oth&r
' *\ two kinds.

G. VI. 162. 0 1 x 1 concurs in moral and physical (‘vil, and in
both in a moral and in a ]jjliy.sical manner; man also concurs
morally and physically in a fn^e and active way, which rendci’S him
blatneworthy and punishable.

G. VI. 237. It might Im>, said that the whole series of things
to infinity may be the best that is possible, although what exists
thmughont the universe in each part of time is not the best. It
«would be possible, therefore, for the univ(ii*se to go always from
better to better, if the nature of things were such that it is not
permitted to attain the best all at once. But these are problems
concerning which it is difficult for us to judge,

G. VI. 378 (D. 196). (lod is infinite, and the Devil is limited;

the goixl can and does go to infinity, whereas evil has its bounds.

G. II. 317. Vice is not a potentiality of acting, but a hindrance
to the potentiality of acting.

0

4

XVI. § 123. Connection with the doctrine of analytic
• judynients.

0

G. V. 242 (N. E. 272). If any one wishwl to write as a
matheniatician in Metaphysics and Morals, nothing would hinder
him from doing so with rigour.

G. V. 18 (D. 98; N. E. 17). I strongly approve of Mr. Locke’s
doctrine concerning the demonstrability of moral truths.

G. II. 578 (D. 128). The felicity of God does not compose a
part of our happiness, but the whole.

G. II. 581 (D. 129). To love truly and disinterestedly is
nothing else than to be led to find pleasure in the perfections or the
felicity of the object... .This love has properly for its object sub¬
stances capable of felicity.


298


LEIBNIZ’S ETHICS.


XVI. § 124. The kingdoms of nature ^nd of grace.

■ Gr, IV. 480 (D. 73; L. 304). Spirits have special ^hief?
put them above the I’cvolutions of matter thi^ough the VOTy order
which God lias placed there; and it may lie said that everything else ^
is made only for them, these revtdutions themse^es b^iig arranged ‘
for the felicity of the g«K>d and the punishment of the wicked.

G. VI. 168. I agree that the happiness of intelligent creatures^
is the piincipal part of God’s designs, for they most resemble him;
but I do not see how it can be proved that this is his sole aim. It
is true that the kiiigduui of nature must be helpful to the kingdom
of grace; but as everything is connected in God’s great design, we
must believe that the kingdom of grace is also in some way fitted
to the kingdom of nature, in such a manner that this keeps the
greatest order and beauty, so as to l■endor the whole composed of
both the most perfect possible.

G. IV. 462 (168C), Felicity is to persons what perfection is to ^
iKjings. And if the first principle of the existence of the physical
world is the decree giving it as much perfection as possible, the
first design of the moral world or City of God, which is the noblest
part of the universe, must bo to distribute through it the greatest
possible felicity.

G. IV. 391 (D. 63). Nature has, as it were, an empire within

an empire, and so to speak a double kingdom, of reason and of

necessity, or of forms and of particles of matter.

G. VI. 621 (D. 231 J L. 266), Among other differences wh»!ch
exist between ordinary souls and minds [espHte]...there is also^s;
that souls in general are living mirrors or images of the universe
of creat<id things, but that minds are also imagdb of the Deity or

Author of nature himself, capable of knowing the system of* the

universe, and to some extent of imitating it....It is this that enables
minds to enter into a kind of fellowship with God, and brings it
about that in relation to them he is not only what an inventor is
to his machine (which is the relation of God to other created things)
but also what a prince is to his subjects, and even what a father is
to his children. Whence it is easy to conclude that the totality
of all minds must compose the City of God, i.e. the most perfect
State that is possible, under the most perfect of Monarchs. This
City of God, this truly universal monarchy, i.s a moral world in the
natural world, and is the most exidted and the most divine among
the works of God; and it is in it that the glmy of God really


LEIBNIZ’S ETHICS.


299


consists, for he would have no glory were not his greatness and his
goodness known Aid admired by minds. It is also in relation to
•this dimne City that God properly has goodness, while his wisdom
and nls power are manifested everyivhere. As we have shown
above that there is a perfect haniiony between the two realms in
nature, the^ne oftethcicnt, the other of tinal causes, we should here
notice also another harmony, lietween the physical realm of nature
ajid the moral realm of grace, i.e. between God considered as Architect
of\he machine of the universe and God considered as Monarch of
the divine City of Spirits. A result of this harmony is that things
lead to grace by the very ways of nature, and that this globe, for
instance, must be destroyed %nd renewed by natural niesns at the
very time when the government of spirits recpiires it, for the
punishment of some and the reward of others. It may also be
said that (Jod as Architect satisfies in all respects God as Lawgiver,
and thus that sins must bear their, penalty w’ith them, through the
order of nature, and even in virtue of tlie mechanical structure
of things; and similarly that noble actions will attain their rewaixJs
by ways which, in relation to bodies, arc mecbjinical, although this
cannot and ought not always to happen immediately.


NoU U) § 105. Many (juotatiojis relative to this subject (some
from unpublishcfl MS.) are given by Peano, “ Formules <le Logique
Mathematique,” li^vue de AfafMmntlqueit^ T. vii. No. 1.


INDEX TO APPENDIX


Pii«e

Parai;ni|)Ii


Pimo

Punigrapli

52

69

G. II.

100

90

54

69


112

68

57

105


115

41

6H

37


110

48

3»1

118


118

91 •

338

58


119

77

352

102


120

91

372

19, 33


121

99

382

79


125

113

383

75


131

23

381

11


135

54

403

45, 58


136

77, 79

415

60


137

41


168

27

12

17, 77


109

18, 37

13

84


170

38

37

17


171 ,

38

30

13


181

15

40

13, 14


182

27

43

17


183

72

45

17


193

27

4C

8


226

79

40

• 15


233

10, 37, 50

54

17


240

10

56

15


248

87

68

54, 79, 90


249

16, 23

68

79


260

10

71

37, 75


251

91

74

75


252

35

76

91


253

71

76

17


256

75

77

17, 67, 91


258

22

91

41


261

52, 63

92

49


262

49

96

56


263

19

97

66


264

18

98

67


265

103


I


302

G. II.


INDEX TO APPENDIX.


I’amgraph


Pa«c

FaragmpL

267

66

G. II.

520

92

208

56


51^

123

269

54


581

123 ,

271

17, 67


275

56

G. III.

33

121

277

67, 71


46

42

278

59


48

«12

279

60


52

27

282

59


51

13

300

60


60

39

304

60, 63, 91


69

56

305

68, 68


97

37

.306

86, 90


143

79

316

68

V

144

79

317

75, 122


216

105

324

87


247

17

325

86


356

90

339

71


363

90

347

67


400

11, 13, 31

356

90


443

11

368

86, 91


453

37

370

65, 71, 91


457

49

371

91


179

99

378

71, 90


566

94

379

59


572

107

399

47, 92


673

29

407

47


675

75

412

87, 102


580

47

419

* 49, 118


581

72

423

15


582

26

424

16


583

59

435

92


691

60

436

71


622

83

438

68, 71


629

49, 71

444

71


636

49, 86 «

450

71


645

18

467

17


667

86, 91

468

17


659

99

460

87


461

92

G. IV.

286

36

476

46, 59


300

120

481

92


344

15

486

10


367

11, 99

603

77


859

109

510

68


860

109

615

60


862

118

616

33, 86, 92


364

17

617

63, 92


368

46


INDEX TO APPENDIX.


303


a. IV.


G. V.


1


• Page

PanKniph


Pai^muh

*369

41

G. V.

48

96

391

«1, 124


49

27, 96

393

38


52

46

F 394

52, 53, 59


(>6

99

395

38, 46


70

IK)

396

39. 49


71

99

40^

tl


76

99

406

107


77

102

424

104


79

96, 99

426

113


92

11

427

121


94

.53

432

17


96

17

436

102


97

96

437

13 •


100

18, 23,

438

14


101

75

440

77, 114


107

96 .

441

84


108

102

450

104


109

96

454

120


11.5

52, 67

462

124


117

102

469

17, 18


129

10

470

39


lt7

17

478

55


139

72, 99

479

18, 83


140

67

480

124


142

59, 67

482

70


144

68

484

70, 77


145

58

486

41, 84


148

00

491

59


149

119

495

77


1.56

99

497

36


1.58

43

507

18


163

118

608

18


165

118

509

«18


167

118

510

39


171

119

511

91


173

119

512

70


175

119

513

89


179

119

523

42


180

119

533

49. 114


196

49

574

71


197

102

582

22


200

18


201

84

15

99


.202

25

18

123


205

33, 71

21

11


206

88

24

68


209

58

46

18


210

10


304


INDEX TO APPENDIX,


G. V.


G. VI.


Pagp

Paragraph


Page

^Paragrag>h

213

23

G. VI.

123

Id

214

90


rao

118

218

83


141

120

219

83


152

94

220

102


162

122 ^

242

123


167

114

243

103


f68

124

248

104


226

111

268

26


230

113

271

17, 104


237

122

275

33, 101


206

119

279

99


319

13

284

83


323

11

20^

29


327

76

290

83


350

17

300

104


352

91

309

91


376

121

321

99


378

122

325

38


380

118

338

9J)


385

119

310

99


405

71

312

11


411

118

343

11


421

118

347

11, 99


423

113

355

33


493

17

359

51


499

102

363

102


500

102

370

41


502

102

373

102


505

99

877

10


539

90

378

10


540

36

391

99


543

90, 94

115

99


516

87

117

109


.'5'’6

75

419

107


577

75

420

107


581

16

421

114


582

16

428

13


585

16, 62

455

27


595

90

460

105


598

61, 71, 90

461

105


699

75

472

103


600

83

473

27


604

83


607

77

29

118


608

68, 76

107

114


609

76

118

120


610

83

122

118


612

n


INDEX TO APPENDIX.


305


0. VI.


G. VII.


L.


I’lige

PaniRiuph


PaKo

Paragraph

*614

106

G.

VII.

399

62, 117

615

^4


100

67

619

90


402

72

621

124


403

41

629

58


401

60


f05


407

23

V


408

72

73

119


410

75

74

121


415

72, 117

92

120


119

15, 118

99

120 ,


468

90

185

105


501

35

190

111


502

91

191

121


529

83

195

121


530

90

198

105


,531

91

199

It


55-*

62

200

26


261

108

6.

M. 11.

101

105

263

99


136

15

302

106


115

45

303

121


156

45

305

12


15?

15

309

11, 26


181

41

310

111


311

79

G.

M. IV.

91

58

320

33


92

58

322*

86


93

58

328

38


329

7t

G.

M. VI.

230

43

355

11


235

39

356

16


237

3!1

358

111


238

49

363

• 66


217

11

361

15


251

13

365

111


252

42, 43

372

23, 46, 66


373

72

6.

M. VII.

18

60

371

14


376

71

F.

de C.

21

26

377

46


28

53

389

31


62

75

390

114


70

111

393

23


396

46


20


INDEX.


Abstraction is falsiiication, 110
Action, at a distance, 01, Oil, ‘iiiO:

and reaction, 80, 85, 234
Activity, deiinition of, 11, 45; neces¬
sary to substance, 44, 49 n, 215,
217, 230: and passivity, 46, 139,
142, 266: and time, 11, 51
Aggre(;atcs semi-mental, 13, 115,110,
248

Algebra, Universal, 170
Animals, 141
Animal spirits, 140
Anselm, 172

Antitypia, 78, 226, 228, 229
Apperception, 141, 155, 166, 264, 276
Appetition, belongs to all Monads,
131, 259, 261: detined, 133,260
A priori, not synonymous witli neces¬
sary, 23

Aristotle, indncnce on Leibniz, 6,104,
241

Arithmetic, analytic or synthetic ? 19,
21, 24, 207

Amauld, 6, 7, 8, 44 n, 213
Ars Comhinatoria, 283
Atoms, and impact, 90, 235; Leibniz's
reasons against, 92, 103, 234, 241:
of substance, 101, 254
Attributes, 212
Axioms, 167, 169, 200

Berkeley, 70, 72, 166
Body, of Christ, 161: demands unities,
103: different senses of, 76: mathe¬
matical, 106, 243: organic, 76, 126,
140,147,26911.


R jscovich, 91
Boyle, 6

Bradley, 50 «, 60,177
Bruno, 187

Calculus, inlinitcsimal, 6, 233
Cortesianism, influence on Leibniz, 6,
123: and substance, 10: and theory
of impact, 64

Causality, uccessaiy, 38: and sufticicut
reason, 30, 36

Causal laws, as constituting unity of
substance, 47; contingent, 27, 29,
377i: final, 38, 210: and mutual
independence of monads, 48: some
such laws necessary, 67; synthetic,
16

Causation, autonomy of, 96, 98, 136,
238

Causes, equal to effects, 81, 85, 233;

final, 4, 34,133, 143,191, 201
Change, continuity of, 83, 127, 245
Characterisitica Universalis, 16u, 282
Choice, of God, 35, 37: and sufficient
reason, 36

City of God, 141, 201, 298
Clarke, 112,119,138
Clocks, illustration of, 136
Cogito, 166, 277
Compatibility, 18, 20,174,287
Composition, only in concretes, 112
Compossibility, 20 n, 66, 67, 223
Compound, presupposes simple, 100,
103

Connection, two kinds of, 209
Constraint, 193 71


INDEX.


Contingency# subsists for God, G2:

not itself contingent| 2G; and in-
^ finite complexity, 60, 221
Continiy^m of cases, G4, 222: de-
finitioiJxtf, 111, 245: of forms, 64,
169. 223: purely ideal. 111, 245:
three kinds of, 63, ^: law of, 63,
222, 234; an® point of view, 65;
spatio-temporal, 63

<^OTllinunm,71, 100,108,152, 213, 245
Contradiction, only applies to complex
ideas, 20, 287 : law of, 22,flG6,207
Cosmological argument, 175, 288
Creation, 128, 185,258 * •

Death, 155

Definition, implies complexity, 18,282:

real and nominal, 168, 208, 282
De Pniicipio InilivUlui, 0
Dos Bosses, 151

IDes Carles, and simile of clocks, 136:
his cofiito, 166; and Dynamics, 77,
81, 82, 226, 228: and Ethics, 198:
and existence of external world, 73:
and ontological argument, 172, 286:
and quality of ideas, 167: and re¬
lation of mind to matter, 81, 139;
and substance, 41: and theory of
knowledge, 179

Determination, is it negation ? 186
Determinism, and Dynamics, 81;

Lmbnix’s, 192, 193 m
D ialeclic, 110
Dillmaiin, 150 ^

Dimensions, three necessary, 21, 207
Dincou^ de MHaphysitjue, 3, 7, 8
Discreteness, defined, 111, 245
Distance, distinguished from length,
112, 127

Dreams, bow distinguished from true
perceptions, 225

Dynamics, and contingency, 29, 80,
209: and Leibniz’s inctaphysius, 89,
96,125, 217: and relative position,
121: subjective theoiy of, 97: three
types of, 90

Ego, a substance, 4, 42, 215: and
time, 128, 215


3or

Elasticity, and atoms, 90; and im¬
pact, 89, 94: and monadism, 90
Empirical, 21

Entelechy, 104, 129, 144, 150, 217.

226, 228, 258
Epistemology, 160
Erdmann, 2, 117, 154, 188
Essences, exist in the mind of God,
178 : and necessity, 26
Eternal truths, hypothetical, 18, 26,
177, 208: do not cause knowledge
of themselves, 134: proof of God
from, 177, 288
Ether, 90

Ethics, Loilmiz’s, 191, 291
Eugene, Priuee, In
Evil, contained in best possible world,
198, 201, 295: three kinds of, 197,
295: a limitation, 189, 201, 297;
and pain, 293

Existence, an idea of reflection, 162;
a mark of contingency, 26: a pre¬
dicate, 27,174, 185: not a predicate,
296 m; not contained in subject, 9,
27

Expression, defined, 132
Extension, presupposes nuilerin prhnn,
145: jdicnonientU, 103: means re¬
petition, 102, 210: distinguished
from space, 101, 239: prior to space?
126: presupposes substances, 102;
not unanalyzub1(>, 228

Felicity, 195, 298
B’ischer, Kuno, 147

Fluid, all-pervading, 89, 90: motion
of, 93 «, 94

Force, centres of, 91: conservation of,
230, 234, 238: and continuity of
motion, 87, 230, 233: derivative,
79, 95, 237 : and doctrine of monads,
87: as entelechy, 95, 231, 237, 242:
prior to extension, 81, 229: and
impact, 89,233,237: and independ¬
ence of substances, 81, 94, 97, 98:
and individuality, 94: required by
inertia, 83, 230: and Leibniz’s
philosophy, 80: measure of, 77, 81;
passive, 78, 229, 231: primitive, 79,


808


INDEX.


95, 287: its roality, 107, 232, 233:
and relativity of motion, R4, 66,
231

Form, as force, 05, 133, 230; uub-
Btantial, 150, 151, 153n, 242, 2G0
Fractious, not sums of parts, 111,
246

Freedom, and contingency, 69, 192,
211, 292: defined, 191: and deter¬
minism, 191, 291: and final cansen,
149

Gassendi, 6, 70, 91
Genas and species, 17
Geometry, 21, 206, 283
Gerhardt, 1», 2
Geulincx, 81, 136

God, his goodness ueccbsary? 39,177:
his goodness proved, 189: called a
monad, 187: has no jioint of view,
146: possibility of, 19, 173, 287:
proofs of. 123, 172, 284
Good, and existence, 34: tluce kiudb
of, 197: and pleasme, 195, 293:
and Ileality, 201

Gravitation, rejected by Leibniz, N9,
91, 236

Hegel, 109,110, 188
Hobbes, 6, 21, 70,195 h, 208
Huygens, 6, 85, 91, 92

Ideas, defined, 278: innate, 161, 165,
276: need not resemble their ob¬
jects, 133: possible, 19: quality nt,
167, 281: of sense, 161,166: simple,
18

Identity, moral, 141
Immortality, 141, 265, 294
Impact, 79, 89, 91, 94
Impenetrability, 78, 146, 231
Inoessability, 141, 265
Inconsistencies, two kinds in Leibnix,
3; in his premisses, 117: due to
theology, 188

Indifference of equilibrium, 156,193,
292

Indisoernible substances inconceivable,
67


Indiscemiblcs, identity af,*stated, 54,
219: prove^, 56, 57, 219: and
idurality of substances, 58: and ex¬
tension, 103: and spaccH^d time,
56, 119 \

Individual, involves contingency, 26: *
and infinitybCl: relation to species,
62

Indivisibles, two kinds of. 111
Inertia, 78, 80, 83,146, 228, 230,^8 ^
Infinite, actual, 109,129 n, 243: aggi'e-
gatc n(Ai a whole, 109, 244: number,
109», 110, 214: true, 109, 244
14,flujruH phijsicu'i, 137
Instants, not parts of time, 111, 114,
120, 247, 257

Instincts, innate, 195, 206
Intellect, intimate to itself, 162

Justice, vindictive, 291

«

Kant, his a priori, 23, 157, 163: and
centres of force, 91: and forms of
intuition, 102; and measure of
force, 77: and theory of knowledge,
162,16.3: and ontological argument,
26, 174, 188: and perception, 133:
and theory of relations, 14: and
absolute space, 119: and subjec¬
tivity of space, 71, 99: and syn¬
thetic propositions, 16, 22 : ^ and
things lU themselves, 15, 133 ,
Kepler, 228, 229

Knowledge, cle^r and obscure, 167 :
distinct and confused, 168: ade¬
quate and inadequate, 168S sym¬
bolical and intuitive, 168: inuate,
134: not caused by what is known,
134: theory of, 160

Latta, 100

Limitation, internal, 145
Line, not composed of ports, 112
Locke, 93 n, 147,155,160,194, 288
Logic, symbolic, 170
Lotxe, 67 n, 91, 118,135, 138

Machine, organic, 144, 148, 269
Malebranohe, 6, 41, 137,184, 212


INI>EX.


309


Maas, 78* 79, 243: discrete bnt in¬
finitely divided, 10^ 245
Materia prima defined, 76, 78, 79,
: distinct from extension,
80, extended, 102: and pas¬
sivity, 139, 144, 226, 267: and sin,
196,198 ^

Materia seevnSb, 76, 80, 144, 226,229,
240


Materialism, 70, 71, 123
Matter, a datum for Leibnis, 70: its
essence not extension, tI. 140, 227:
its existence, 72: its constituents
not material, 105,248: iftctaphysifal,
145: cannot act on mind, 135:
different senses of, 75, 226: and
ideality of space, 74: appearance of
substances, 107
Maxwell, 83
Memory, 141

Mind (see Spirits): consists in a i)oint,
123, 253

Miracle, only one required by Leibnix,
137, 264, 291: in generation, 151,
274

Momentum, 81, 226, 227

Monad, defined, 100, 226: dominant,

140, 141, 147, 254: and imteria
privujt, 144, 267: mirrors the uni¬
verse, 131, 137, 262: has position,

^125 : how related to space, 122, 129,

and the continuum, 71,
108: and God, lj[2, 185 : and inde¬
pendence of substances, 136: and
s^ce, 118, 122, 126: and time, 128
Monads, bare, 141: three classes of,

141, 264: mutually independent,
134, 135, 262: common qualities
of, 131: distinguished by internal
qualities, 131

Monadology, 1 n, 3
Monan Manadum, 187
Morals, demonstrable, 297
Motion, and continnity, 82, 87, 127:
and force, 83: phenomenal, 238:
and point of view, 156 : relativity
of, 84: and relativity of position,
86


252

Ik^onadism,


Nature and Grace, 201, 298: Prin¬
ciples of, 1

Necessity, meaning of, 23; three kinds
of, 69, 223, 292
Neiv Khmys, 134, 161
Newton, 6 n, 85, 91, 112, 119, 232
Number, relational, 14, 116: infinite,
109 «, 110

Occasionalism, 81, 132,136,1^0
One, prior to fractious, ill, 246: only
number which is a predicate, 115
Ontological argument, 172, 28(S

Pantheism, in Leibniz, 183, 186
Passion, spontaneous, 95, 145 and
pain, 195

Passivity, 46, 139, 140, 144??, 192
Pearson, Karl, 123

Perception, defined, 116, 130, 269,
261: distinct and confused, 140,
144, 110, 155: infinitely complex,
147, 157 : minute, 157: belongs to
all monads, 131, 259, 261: not
caused by object, 132, 133, 164, 225,
260, 261: and simnltaneity, 130:
its trustworthiness a premiss for
Leibniz, 4, 75, 131, 225: nneon-
sciouB, 147, 156, 275, 276
Perfection, and clearness of perception,
141, 143, 266: defined, 174, 189,
200, 287, 295: and existence, 34,
73, 189, 108, 296: and pleasure,
194, 294

Phenomena, always divisible, 106
Place, defined, 121, 252: and point
of view, 113
Plato, 6, 7, 197 if

Pleasure and Pain, 142, 194, 201 it,
267, 293

Plenum, motion in, 93 n, 97, 129, 235
Points, mathematical, 103, 104, 113,
114, 123, 241, 254: metaphysical,
104, 121, 241, 254: physical, 105,
123, 143, 153, 254: not parts of
space, 111, 114, 120: of view, 113,
122, 124, 146,155, 186, 254
Possible, requires possible cause, 26,
36 n (see Worlds)


310


INDEX.


PredioamentB, 162, 277
Predicate (eeo Subject).

Predicates, contingent, 10, 28, 29
Pre-established harmony, and Dy-
nafhics, 81: and perception, 133,
13G, 263: proof of God from, 183,290
Pre-formation, 154, 274
Premisses, Leibniz’s, 4
Presence, kinds of, 124, 290: in a
volume, 125, 153

Propositions, analysis of, 8 : analytic,
4, 10, 16, 22 : dichotomy of, 30:
existential, 25, 29, 177, 182: iden¬
tical, 19: necessary and contingent,
4, 9, 16, 33, 197«, 207, 208: syn¬
thetic, 10, 16, 21

Psychical disposition, 157, 164, 166
Psydiology, 160

Quantity, infinite, 115 : intensive and
extensive, 114: applies to orders,
lliH, 248

Ratio, 12, 111, 114n, 248
Reason (sec Sufficient): inclining, 32,
38, 176 : belongs to spirits, 141
Relations, merely ideal? 13, 14, 130:

two kinds of, 206
Resistance, 78, 228, 229, 240

Scholasticism, 6
Self-consciousness, 141,162
Sensation, 135, 143,158
Series, causal, 48, 97, 98, 135
Simultaneity, 52, 130
Sin, 196, 292, 294
Situation, defined, 120
Solipsism, reasons against, 70, 224
Soul and Body, 137, 139. 147, 205,
269 ffi

Souls, each a world apart, 10, 43, 205:
defined, 141, 265: in points? 122,
124, 253 ff.: always think, 155
Space, not an absolute being, 118,
249: not au attribute, 119, 249:
its existence contingent, 130, 259:
three kinds of, 130: and Leibniz’s
logic, 118: its relation to mouads,
122, 25217,: relational tiieory of,


113,251: relational the^ essential
to Monadiam^^llO: subjective? 122,
126, 129: not a substance, 119:
two theoiicB of, 112: sam^n all
possible worlds, 126,129
Species, involves only necessary truths,
26,209 ^

Spinoza, and acuvity,€4n, 94 n: and
geometrical method, 170 : infiuenco
on Leibniz, 5, 6, 139, 287: «ad
limitation, 145: and metaphysical
perfection, 19771; and monism, 126,
179: and relation of mind to matter,
136, *140: and pleasure-pain,
19571: and substance, 41: and suf¬
ficient reason, 337i

Spirits, defined, 141, 264; ends in
themselves, 143, 201, 298: never
disembodied, 147
Spontaneity, 193
Statics, 81
Stein, 13671, 15471

Subject, and predicate, every propo¬
sition contains, 4, 9, 12; contains
predicate, 9, 17, 33, 205, 210, 214,
216: defined by its predicates? 28,
48, 49, 59, 220

Substance, corporeal, 77, 106, 144,
151, 226: definition of, 4, 10, 42,
212, 213, 239: objections to 126;
has infinite number of predicates,
60, 213, 231: must be analogous *to
soui, 105: involves all Us stiCtes,
10, 43, 133, 213^: and time, 42, 50,
217, 21i): unextonded, 105, 227
Sufficient Reason, 10, 27, 31, 32,B209:
actual and possible distinguished,
36, 143 7t: two principles of, 30, 35,
36: relation to law of contradiction,
35, 36, 211
Syllogism, 170, 282

Tabvla rasa, 158
TModicee, 1, 22

Time, not a j^l being, 50, 120, 129,
250, 257; and contingency, 26, 29:
distinguished from duration, 239:
its existence contingent, 30: three
kinds of, 130: past, logically prior


INDEX.


311


4o 128,157: a plenum, 12,,

138, 258: its properties necessary,
SO, 129: relational *i.heory of, 120,
* 127, 250, 258: consists of relations
of pHicates, 128: and substance,
50 ^ /

Transubstantiation, 78 n, 151
Truths, of fact^66, ^7 : innate, 157,
161, 276; of reason, 166, 207: their
^lation to knowledge, 181, 289

Ubiety, 124, 255 |

Uneasiness, ^94, 293
Unity, necessary to reivliH', 103, 1^,
239, 241, 242

Vntim per Ml’, 150, 226, 271

Vacuum, and atoms, 93: proof of, 77;j,
227: reasons against, 73, 92, 235
Van Hcluiont, 188«


Vinculum nubitluntiale, 151, 273

Virtue, 196, 295

Vis Viva, 81, 82, 96, 237

Volition, law of, 29, 37,133,143,196,
259, 261, 293

Wcisiuann, 154

Whole, only applicable to indivisible,
115: prior to ports in ideals, 111,
112, 245: subsequent to parts in
actuals, 111, 245

Wolff, 58«, 110«

World, external, its existonuc only
])rubable, 72, 7-1, 167, 224: known
confusedly, U»2

Worlds, possible, correspond to possible
designs of Uod, 36, 210: described,
68

Wmidt, Hi


CambiiHgt:

rftlN'fBD BY J. AND C. F. CBAY,
AT THS ONIYUBBIXY FBBHS.
