Why I Am Not a Christian (Bertrand Russell, 1927)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/bertrand-russell-why-i-am-not-a-christian_202102). The famous 1927 lecture demolishing the traditional arguments for God's existence.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Why I Am Not A Christian http://www .positiveatheism.org/hist/russell0 .htm


1 of 11


Little Blue Book No. 1372
Edited by E. Haldeman-Julius


Why | am Not a Christian


Bertrand Russell
[March 6, 1927]
[HTML by Cliff Walker, April 27, 1998]


e Index: Historical Writings (Russell)

e Home to Positive Atheism

e Go to Bertrand Russell Society Home Page
e Mentioned in: Why | Am A Rationalist

e Excerpted in: Atheist Centre (India) Souvenir


Haldeman-Julius Publications
Girard, Kansas
Copyright, 1929,


By Haldeman-Jullius Company
Printed in the United States of America


Why | Am Not a Christian


An Examination of the God-Idea and Christianity


[The lecture that is here presented was delivered at the Battersea Town Hall under the
auspices of the South London Branch of the National Secular Society, England. It should be
added that the editor is willing to share full responsibility with the Hon. Bertrand Russell in that
he is in accord with the political and other opinions expressed.]| [The previous statement was
included in the original, and is not made by Positive Atheism.]


As your chairman has told you, the subject about which | am going to
speak to you tonight is "Why | Am Not a Christian." Perhaps it would be
as well, first of all, to try to make out what one means by the word
"Christian." It is used in these days in a very loose sense by a great
many people. Some people mean no more by it than a person who
attempts to live a good life. In that sense | suppose there would be
Christians in all sects and creeds; but | do not think that that is the
proper sense of the word, if only because it would imply that all the
people who are not Christians -- all the Buddhists, Confucians,
Mohammedans, and so on -- are not trying to live a good life. | do not
mean by a Christian any person who tries to live decently according to
his lights. | think that you must have a certain amount of definite belief before you have a right
to call yourself a Christian. The word does not have quite such a full-blooded meaning now as
it had in the times of St. Augustine and St. Thomas Aquinas. In those days, if a man said that
he was a Christian it was known what he meant. You accepted a whole collection of creeds
which were set out with great precision, and every single syllable of those creeds you believed
with the whole strength of your convictions.


11/18/08 11:29 PM


Why I Am Not A Christian http://www.positiveatheism.org/hist/russell0 .htm


2 of 11


What is a Christian?


Nowadays it is not quite that. We have to be a little more vague in our meaning of Christianity. |
think, however, that there are two different items which are quite essential to anyone calling
himself a Christian. The first is one of a dogmatic nature -- namely, that you must believe in
God and immortality. If you do not believe in those two things, | do not think that you can
properly call yourself a Christian. Then, further than that, as the name implies, you must have
some kind of belief about Christ. The Mohammedans, for instance, also believe in God and
immortality, and yet they would not call themselves Christians. | think you must have at the
very lowest the belief that Christ was, if not divine, at least the best and wisest of men. If you
are not going to believe that much about Christ, | do not think that you have any right to call
yourself a Christian. Of course, there is another sense which you find in Whitaker's Almanack
and in geography books, where the population of the world is said to be divided into Christians,
Mohammedans, Buddhists, fetish worshipers, and so on; but in that sense we are all
Christians. The geography books counts us all in, but that is a purely geographical sense,
which | suppose we can ignore. Therefore | take it that when | tell you why | am not a Christian
| have to tell you two different things: first, why | do not believe in God and in immortality; and,
secondly, why | do not think that Christ was the best and wisest of men, although | grant him a
very high degree of moral goodness.


But for the successful efforts of unbelievers in the past, | could not take so elastic a definition
of Christianity as that. As | said before, in the olden days it had a much more full-blooded
sense. For instance, it included the belief in hell. Belief in eternal hell fire was an essential item
of Christian belief until pretty recent times. In this country, as you know, it ceased to be an
essential item because of a decision of the Privy Council, and from that decision the
Archbishop of Canterbury and the Archbishop of York dissented; but in this country our religion
is settled by Act of Parliament, and therefore the Privy Council was able to override their
Graces and hell was no longer necessary to a Christian. Consequently | shall not insist that a
Christian must believe in hell.


The Existence Of God


To come to this question of the existence of God, it is a large and serious question, and if |
were to attempt to deal with it in any adequate manner | should have to keep you here until
Kingdom Come, so that you will have to excuse me if | deal with it in a somewhat summary
fashion. You know, of course, that the Catholic Church has laid it down as a dogma that the
existence of God can be proved by the unaided reason. This is a somewhat curious dogma,
but it is one of their dogmas. They had to introduce it because at one time the Freethinkers
adopted the habit of saying that there were such and such arguments which mere reason
might urge against the existence of God, but of course they knew as a matter of faith that God
did exist. The arguments and the reasons were set out at great length, and the Catholic
Church felt that they must stop it. Therefore they laid it down that the existence of God can be
proved by the unaided reason, and they had to set up what they considered were arguments
to prove it. There are, of course, a number of them, but | shall take only a few.


The First Cause Argument


11/18/08 11:29 PM


Why I Am Not A Christian http://www.positiveatheism.org/hist/russell0 htm


Perhaps the simplest and easiest to understand is the argument of the First Cause. It is
maintained that everything we see in this world has a cause, and as you go back in the chain
of causes further and further you must come to a First Cause, and to that First Cause you give
the name of God. That argument, | suppose, does not carry very much weight nowadays,
because, in the first place, cause is not quite what it used to be. The philosophers and the men
of science have got going on cause, and it has not anything like the vitality that it used to have;
but apart from that, you can see that the argument that there must be a First Cause is one that
cannot have any validity. | may say that when | was a young man, and was debating these
questions very seriously in my mind, | for a long time accepted the argument of the First
Cause, until one day, at the age of eighteen, | read John Stuart Mill's Autobiography, and |
there found this sentence: "My father taught me that the question, Who made me? cannot be
answered, since it immediately suggests the further question, Who made God?" That very
simple sentence showed me, as | still think, the fallacy in the argument of the First Cause. If
everything must have a cause, then God must have a cause. If there can be anything without a
cause, it may just as well be the world as God, so that there cannot be any validity in that
argument. It is exactly of the same nature as the Hindu's view, that the world rested upon an
elephant, and the elephant rested upon a tortoise; and when they said, "How about the
tortoise?" the Indian said, "Suppose we change the subject." The argument is really no better
than that. There is no reason why the world could not have come into being without a cause;
nor, on the other hand, is there any reason why it should not have always existed. There is no
reason to suppose that the world had a beginning at all. The idea that things must have a
beginning is really due to the poverty of our imagination. Therefore, perhaps, | need not waste
any more time upon the argument about the First Cause.


The Natural-Law Argument


Then there is a very common argument from Natural Law. That was a favorite argument all
through the eighteenth century, especially under the influence of Sir Isaac Newton and his
cosmogony. People observed the planets going around the sun according to the law of
gravitation, and they thought that God had given a behest to these planets to move in that
particular fashion, and that was why they did so. That was, of course, a convenient and simple
explanation that saved them the trouble of looking any further for any explanation of the law of
gravitation. Nowadays we explain the law of gravitation in a somewhat complicated fashion
that Einstein has introduced. | do not propose to give you a lecture on the law of gravitation, as
interpreted by Einstein, because that again would take some time; at any rate, you no longer
have the sort of Natural Law that you had in the Newtonian system, where, for some reason
that nobody could understand, nature behaved in a uniform fashion. We now find that a great
many things we thought were Natural Laws are really human conventions. You know that even
in the remotest depth of stellar space there are still three feet to a yard. That is, no doubt, a
very remarkable fact, but you would hardly call it a law of nature. And a great many things that
have been regarded as laws of nature are of that kind. On the other hand, where you can get
down to any knowledge of what atoms actually do, you will find that they are much less subject
to law than people thought, and that the laws at which you arrive are statistical averages of just
the sort that would emerge from chance. There is, as we all know, a law that if you throw dice
you will get double sixes only about once in thirty-six times, and we do not regard that as
evidence that the fall of the dice is regulated by design; on the contrary, if the double sixes
came every time we should think that there was design. The laws of nature are of that sort as


3 of 11 11/18/08 11:29 PM


Why I Am Not A Christian http://www.positiveatheism.org/hist/russell0 htm


4 of 11


regards to a great many of them. They are statistical averages such as would emerge from the
laws of chance; and that makes the whole business of natural law much less impressive than it
formerly was. Quite apart from that, which represents the momentary state of science that may
change tomorrow, the whole idea that natural laws imply a law-giver is due to a confusion
between natural and human laws. Human laws are behests commanding you to behave a
certain way, in which way you may choose to behave, or you may choose not to behave; but
natural laws are a description of how things do in fact behave, and, being a mere description of
what they in fact do, you cannot argue that there must be somebody who told them to do that,
because even supposing that there were you are then faced with the question, Why did God
issue just those natural laws and no others? If you say that he did it simply from his own good
pleasure, and without any reason, you then find that there is something which is not subject to
law, and so your train of natural law is interrupted. If you say, as more orthodox theologians do,
that in all the laws which God issues he had a reason for giving those laws rather than others
-- the reason, of course, being to create the best universe, although you would never think it to
look at it -- if there was a reason for the laws which God gave, then God himself was subject to
law, and therefore you do not get any advantage by introducing God as an intermediary. You
really have a law outside and anterior to the divine edicts, and God does not serve your
purpose, because he is not the ultimate law-giver. In short, this whole argument from natural
law no longer has anything like the strength that it used to have. | am traveling on in time in my
review of these arguments. The arguments that are used for the existence of God change their
character as time goes on. They were at first hard intellectual arguments embodying certain
quite definite fallacies. As we come to modern times they become less respectable
intellectually and more and more affected by a kind of moralizing vagueness.


The Argument From Design


The next step in the process brings us to the argument from design. You all know the
argument from design: everything in the world is made just so that we can manage to live in
the world, and if the world was ever so little different we could not manage to live in it. That is
the argument from design. It sometimes takes a rather curious form; for instance, it is argued
that rabbits have white tails in order to be easy to shoot. | do not know how rabbits would view
that application. It is an easy argument to parody. You all know Voltaire's remark, that
obviously the nose was designed to be such as to fit spectacles. That sort of parody has
turned out to be not nearly so wide of the mark as it might have seemed in the eighteenth
century, because since the time of Darwin we understand much better why living creatures are
adapted to their environment. It is not that their environment was made to be suitable to them,
but that they grew to be suitable to it, and that is the basis of adaptation. There is no evidence
of design about it.


When you come to look into this argument from design, it is a most astonishing thing that
people can believe that this world, with all the things that are in it, with all its defects, should be
the best that omnipotence and omniscience have been able to produce in millions of years. |
really cannot believe it. Do you think that, if you were granted omnipotence and omniscience
and millions of years in which to perfect your world, you could produce nothing better than the
Ku Klux Klan, the Fascisti, and Mr. Winston Churchill? Really | am not much impressed with
the people who say: "Look at me: | am such a splendid product that there must have been
design in the universe." | am not very much impressed by the splendor of those people.


11/18/08 11:29 PM


Why I Am Not A Christian http://www.positiveatheism.org/hist/russell0 htm


5 of 11


Moreover, if you accept the ordinary laws of science, you have to suppose that human life and
life in general on this planet will die out in due course: it is merely a flash in the pan; itis a
stage in the decay of the solar system; at a certain stage of decay you get the sort of
conditions and temperature and so forth which are suitable to protoplasm, and there is life for a
short time in the life of the whole solar system. You see in the moon the sort of thing to which
the earth is tending -- something dead, cold, and lifeless.


| am told that that sort of view is depressing, and people will sometimes tell you that if they
believed that they would not be able to go on living. Do not believe it; it is all nonsense.
Nobody really worries much about what is going to happen millions of years hence. Even if
they think they are worrying much about that, they are really deceiving themselves. They are
worried about something much more mundane, or it may merely be a bad digestion; but
nobody is really seriously rendered unhappy by the thought of something that is going to
happen in this world millions and millions of years hence. Therefore, although it is of course a
gloomy view to suppose that life will die out -- at least | suppose we may say so, although
sometimes when | contemplate the things that people do with their lives | think it is almost a
consolation -- it is not such as to render life miserable. It merely makes you turn your attention
to other things.


The Moral Arguments For Deity


Now we reach one stage further in what | shall call the intellectual descent that the Theists
have made in their argumentations, and we come to what are called the moral arguments for
the existence of God. You all know, of course, that there used to be in the old days three
intellectual arguments for the existence of God, all of which were disposed of by Immanuel
Kant in the Critique of Pure Reason; but no sooner had he disposed of those arguments than
he invented a new one, a moral argument, and that quite convinced him. He was like many
people: in intellectual matters he was skeptical, but in moral matters he believed implicitly in
the maxims that he had imbibed at his mother's knee. That illustrates what the psycho-analysts
so much emphasize -- the immensely stronger hold upon us that our very early associations
have than those of later times.


Kant, as | say, invented a new moral argument for the existence of God, and that in varying
forms was extremely popular during the nineteenth century. It has all sorts of forms. One form
is to say that there would be no right and wrong unless God existed. | am not for the moment
concerned with whether there is a difference between right and wrong, or whether there is not:
that is another question. The point | am concerned with is that, if you are quite sure there is a
difference between right and wrong, then you are then in this situation: is that difference due to
God's fiat or is it not? If it is due to God's fiat, then for God himself there is no difference
between right and wrong, and it is no longer a significant statement to say that God is good. If
you are going to say, as theologians do, that God is good, you must then say that right and
wrong have some meaning which is independent of God's fiat, because God's fiats are good
and not bad independently of the mere fact that he made them. If you are going to say that,
you will then have to say that it is not only through God that right and wrong came into being,
but that they are in their essence logically anterior to God. You could, of course, if you liked,
say that there was a superior deity who gave orders to the God who made this world, or could
take up the line that some of the agnostics ["Gnostics" -- CW] took up -- a line which | often


11/18/08 11:29 PM


Why I Am Not A Christian http://www.positiveatheism.org/hist/russell0 htm


6 of 11


thought was a very plausible one -- that as a matter of fact this world that we know was made
by the Devil ata moment when God was not looking. There is a good deal to be said for that,
and | am not concerned to refute it.


The Argument For The Remedying Of Injustice


Then there is another very curious form of moral argument, which is this: they say that the
existence of God is required in order to bring justice into the world. In the part of the universe
that we know there is a great injustice, and often the good suffer, and often the wicked prosper,
and one hardly knows which of those is the more annoying; but if you are going to have justice
in the universe as a whole you have to suppose a future life to redress the balance of life here
on earth, and so they say that there must be a God, and that there must be Heaven and Hell in
order that in the long run there may be justice. That is a very curious argument. If you looked
at the matter from a scientific point of view, you would say, "After all, | only know this world. |
do not know about the rest of the universe, but so far as one can argue at all on probabilities
one would say that probably this world is a fair sample, and if there is injustice here then the
odds are that there is injustice elsewhere also." Supposing you got a crate of oranges that you
opened, and you found all the top layer of oranges bad, you would not argue: "The underneath
ones must be good, so as to redress the balance." You would say: "Probably the whole lot is a
bad consignment;" and that is really what a scientific person would argue about the universe.
He would say: "Here we find in this world a great deal of injustice, and so far as that goes that
is a reason for supposing that justice does not rule in the world; and therefore so far as it goes
it affords a moral argument against deity and not in favor of one." Of course | know that the
sort of intellectual arguments that | have been talking to you about is not really what moves
people. What really moves people to believe in God is not any intellectual argument at all.
Most people believe in God because they have been taught from early infancy to do it, and
that is the main reason.


Then | think that the next most powerful reason is the wish for safety, a sort of feeling that
there is a big brother who will look after you. That plays a very profound part in influencing
people's desire for a belief in God.


The Character Of Christ


| now want to say a few words upon a topic which | often think is not quite sufficiently dealt with
by Rationalists, and that is the question whether Christ was the best and the wisest of men. It
is generally taken for granted that we should all agree that that was so. | do not myself. | think
that there are a good many points upon which | agree with Christ a great deal more than the
professing Christians do. | do not know that | could go with Him all the way, but | could go with
Him much further than most professing Christians can. You will remember that He said: "Resist
not evil, but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also." That is
not a new precept or a new principle. It was used by Lao-Tse and Buddha some 500 or 600
years before Christ, but it is not a principle which as a matter of fact Christians accept. | have
no doubt that the present Prime Minister, for instance, is a most sincere Christian, but | should
not advise any of you to go and smite him on one cheek. | think you might find that he thought
this text was intended in a figurative sense.


11/18/08 11:29 PM


Why I Am Not A Christian http://www.positiveatheism.org/hist/russell0 htm


7 of 11


Then there is another point which | consider excellent. You will remember that Christ said,
"Judge not lest ye be judged." That principle | do not think you would find was popular in the
law courts of Christian countries. | have known in my time quite a number of judges who were
very earnest Christians, and they none of them felt that they were acting contrary to Christian
principles in what they did. Then Christ says, "Give to him that asketh of thee, and from him
that would borrow of thee turn thou not away." This is a very good principle. Your chairman has
reminded you that we are not here to talk politics, but | cannot help observing that the last
general election was fought on the question of how desirable it was to turn away from him that
would borrow of thee, so that one must assume that the liberals and conservatives of this
country are composed of people who do not agree with the teaching of Christ, because they
certainly did very emphatically turn away on that occasion.


Then there is one other maxim of Christ which | think has a great deal in it, but | do not find
that it is very popular among some of our Christian friends. He says, "If thou wilt be perfect, go
and sell that which thou hast, and give to the poor." That is a very excellent maxim, but, as |
say, it is not much practiced. All these, | think, are good maxims, although they are a little
difficult to live up to. | do not profess to live up to them myself; but then, after all, | am not by
way of doing so, and it is not quite the same thing as for a Christian.


Defects In Christ's Teaching


Having granted the excellence of these maxims, | come to certain points in which | do not
believe that one can grant either the superlative wisdom or the superlative goodness of Christ
as depicted in the Gospels; and here | may say that one is not concerned with the historical
question. Historically, it is quite doubtful whether Christ ever existed at all, and if He did we do
not know anything about Him, so that | am not concerned with the historical question, which is
a very difficult one. | am concerned with Christ as He appears in the Gospels, taking the
Gospel narrative as it stands, and there one does find some things that do not seem to be very
wise. For one thing, he certainly thought his second coming would occur in clouds of glory
before the death of all the people who were living at that time. There are a great many texts
that prove that. He says, for instance: "Ye shall not have gone over the cities of Israel till the
Son of Man be come." Then He says: "There are some standing here which shall not taste
death till the Son of Man comes into His kingdom"; and there are a lot of places where it is
quite clear that He believed His second coming would happen during the lifetime of many then
living. That was the belief of his earlier followers, and it was the basis of a good deal of His
moral teaching. When He said, "Take no thought for the morrow," and things of that sort, it was
very largely because He thought the second coming was going to be very soon, and that all
ordinary mundane affairs did not count. | have, as a matter of fact, known some Christians who
did believe the second coming was imminent. | knew a parson who frightened his congregation
terribly by telling them that the second coming was very imminent indeed, but they were much
consoled when they found that he was planting trees in his garden. The early Christians really
did believe it, and they did abstain from such things as planting trees in their gardens, because
they did accept from Christ the belief that the second coming was imminent. In this respect
clearly He was not so wise as some other people have been, and he certainly was not
superlatively wise.


11/18/08 11:29 PM


Why I Am Not A Christian http://www.positiveatheism.org/hist/russell0 .htm


8 of 11


The Moral Problem


Then you come to moral questions. There is one very serious defect to my mind in Christ's
moral character, and that is that He believed in hell. | do not myself feel that any person that is
really profoundly humane can believe in everlasting punishment. Christ certainly as depicted in
the Gospels did believe in everlasting punishment, and one does find repeatedly a vindictive
fury against those people who would not listen to His preaching -- an attitude which is not
uncommon with preachers, but which does somewhat detract from superlative excellence. You
do not, for instance, find that attitude in Socrates. You find him quite bland and urbane toward
the people who would not listen to him; and it is, to my mind, far more worthy of a sage to take
that line than to take the line of indignation. You probably all remember the sorts of things that
Socrates was saying when he was dying, and the sort of things that he generally did say to
people who did not agree with him.


You will find that in the Gospels Christ said: "Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye
escape the damnation of hell." That was said to people who did not like His preaching. It is not
really to my mind quite the best tone, and there are a great many of these things about hell.
There is, of course, the familiar text about the sin against the Holy Ghost: "Whosoever
speaketh against the Holy Ghost it shall not be forgiven him neither in this world nor in the
world to come." That text has caused an unspeakable amount of misery in the world, for all
sorts of people have imagined that they have committed the sin against the Holy Ghost, and
thought that it would not be forgiven them either in this world or in the world to come. | really
do not think that a person with a proper degree of kindliness in his nature would have put fears
and terrors of this sort into the world.


Then Christ says, "The Son of Man shall send forth His angels, and they shall gather out of His
kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity, and shall cast them into a furnace of
fire; there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth"; and He goes on about the wailing and
gnashing of teeth. It comes in one verse after another, and it is quite manifest to the reader
that there is a certain pleasure in contemplating wailing and gnashing of teeth, or else it would
not occur so often. Then you all, of course, remember about the sheep and the goats; how at
the second coming He is going to divide the sheep from the goats, and He is going to say to
the goats: "Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire." He continues: "And these shall go
away into everlasting fire." Then He says again, "If thy hand offend thee, cut it off; it is better
for thee to enter into life maimed, than having two hands to go into hell, into the fire that never
shall be quenched, where the worm dieth not and the fire is not quenched." He repeats that
again and again also. | must say that | think all this doctrine, that hell-fire is a punishment for
sin, is a doctrine of cruelty. It is a doctrine that put cruelty into the world, and gave the world
generations of cruel torture; and the Christ of the Gospels, if you could take Him as his
chroniclers represent Him, would certainly have to be considered partly responsible for that.


There are other things of less importance. There is the instance of the Gadarene swine, where
it certainly was not very kind to the pigs to put the devils into them and make them rush down
the hill into the sea. You must remember that He was omnipotent, and He could have made
the devils simply go away; but He chose to send them into the pigs. Then there is the curious
story of the fig-tree, which always rather puzzled me. You remember what happened about the
fig-tree. "He was hungry; and seeing a fig-tree afar off having leaves, He came if haply He
might find anything thereon; and when he came to it He found nothing but leaves, for the time


11/18/08 11:29 PM


Why I Am Not A Christian http://www.positiveatheism.org/hist/russell0 htm


9 of 11


of figs was not yet. And Jesus answered and said unto it: 'No man eat fruit of thee hereafter for
ever'.... and Peter.... saith unto Him: 'Master, behold the fig-tree which thou cursedst is
withered away." This is a very curious story, because it was not the right time of year for figs,
and you really could not blame the tree. | cannot myself feel that either in the matter of wisdom
or in the matter of virtue Christ stands quite as high as some other people known to History. |
think | should put Buddha and Socrates above Him in those respects.


The Emotional Factor


As | said before, | do not think that the real reason that people accept religion has anything to
do with argumentation. They accept religion on emotional grounds. One is often told that it is a
very wrong thing to attack religion, because religion makes men virtuous. So | am told; | have
not noticed it. You know, of course, the parody of that argument in Samuel Butler's book,
Erewhon Revisited. You will remember that in Erewhon there is a certain Higgs who arrives in
a remote country, and after spending some time there he escapes from that country ina
balloon. Twenty years later he comes back to that country and finds a new religion in which he
is worshipped under the name of the "Sun Child"; and it is said that he ascended into heaven.
He finds that the feast of the Ascension is about to be celebrated, and he hears Professors
Hanky and Panky say to each other that they never set eyes on the man Higgs, and they hope
they never will; but they are the High Priests of the religion of the Sun Child. He is very
indignant, and he comes up to them, and he says: "| am going to expose all this humbug and
tell the people of Erewhon that it was only I, the man Higgs, and | went up in a balloon." He
was told, "You must not do that, because all the morals of this country are bound round this
myth, and if they once know that you did not ascend into heaven they will all become wicked";
and so he is persuaded of that and he goes quietly away.


That is the idea -- that we should all be wicked if we did not hold to the Christian religion. It
seems to me that the people who have held to it have been for the most part extremely
wicked. You find this curious fact, that the more intense has been the religion of any period and
the more profound has been the dogmatic belief, the greater has been the cruelty and the
worse has been the state of affairs. In the so-called Ages of faith, when men really did believe
the Christian religion in all its completeness, there was the Inquisition, with all its tortures; there
were millions of unfortunate women burned as witches; and there was every kind of cruelty
practiced upon all sorts of people in the name of religion.


You find as you look around the world that every single bit of progress of humane feeling,
every improvement in the criminal law, every step toward the diminution of war, every step
toward better treatment of the colored races, or ever mitigation of slavery, every moral
progress that there has been in the world, has been consistently opposed by the organized
churches of the world. | say quite deliberately that the Christian religion, as organized in its
churches, has been and still is the principal enemy of moral progress in the world.


How The Churches Have Retarded Progress


You may think that | am going too far when | say that that is still so, | do not think that | am.
Take one fact. You will bear with me if | mention it. It is not a pleasant fact, but the churches
compel one to mention facts that are not pleasant. Supposing that in this world that we live in


11/18/08 11:29 PM


Why I Am Not A Christian http://www.positiveatheism.org/hist/russell0 htm


10 of 11


today an inexperienced girl is married to a syphilitic man, in that case the Catholic Church
says, "This is an indissoluble sacrament. You must stay together for life," and no steps of any
sort must be taken by that woman to prevent herself from giving birth to syphilitic children. This
is what the Catholic church says. | say that that is fiendish cruelty, and nobody whose natural
sympathies have not been warped by dogma, or whose moral nature was not absolutely dead
to all sense of suffering, could maintain that it is right and proper that that state of things
should continue.


That is only an example. There are a great many ways in which at the present moment the
church, by its insistence upon what it chooses to call morality, inflicts upon all sorts of people
undeserved and unnecessary suffering. And of course, as we know, it is in its major part an
opponent still of progress and improvement in all the ways that diminish suffering in the world,
because it has chosen to label as morality a certain narrow set of rules of conduct which have
nothing to do with human happiness; and when you say that this or that ought to be done
because it would make for human happiness, they think that has nothing to do with the matter
at all. "What has human happiness to do with morals? The object of morals is not to make


people happy."


Fear, The Foundation Of Religion


Religion is based, | think, primarily and mainly upon fear. It is partly the terror of the unknown
and partly, as | have said, the wish to feel that you have a kind of elder brother who will stand
by you in all your troubles and disputes. Fear is the basis of the whole thing -- fear of the
mysterious, fear of defeat, fear of death. Fear is the parent of cruelty, and therefore it is no
wonder if cruelty and religion have gone hand-in-hand. It is because fear is at the basis of
those two things. In this world we can now begin a little to understand things, and a little to
master them by the help of science, which has forced its way step by step against the
Christian religion, against the churches, and against the opposition of all the old precepts.
Science can help us to get over this craven fear in which mankind has lived for so many
generations. Science can teach us, and | think our own hearts can teach us, no longer to look
around for imaginary supports, no longer to invent allies in the sky, but rather to look to our
own efforts here below to make this world a fit place to live in, instead of the sort of place that
the churches in all these centuries have made it.


What We Must Do


We want to stand upon our own feet and look fair and square at the world -- its good facts, its
bad facts, its beauties, and its ugliness; see the world as it is and be not afraid of it. Conquer
the world by intelligence and not merely by being slavishly subdued by the terror that comes
from it. The whole conception of a God is a conception derived from the ancient oriental
despotisms. It is a conception quite unworthy of free men. When you hear people in church
debasing themselves and saying that they are miserable sinners, and all the rest of it, it seems
contemptible and not worthy of self-respecting human beings. We ought to stand up and look
the world frankly in the face. We ought to make the best we can of the world, and if it is not so
good as we wish, after all it will still be better than what these others have made of it in all
these ages. A good world needs knowledge, kindliness, and courage; it does not need a


11/18/08 11:29 PM


Why I Am Not A Christian http://www. positiveatheism.org/hist/russell0 htm


regretful hankering after the past or a fettering of the free intelligence by the words uttered long
ago by ignorant men. It needs a fearless outlook and a free intelligence. It needs hope for the
future, not looking back all the time toward a past that is dead, which we trust will be far
surpassed by the future that our intelligence can create.


e Index: Historical Writings (Russell)
e Home to Positive Atheism


11 of 11 11/18/08 11:29 PM


THE
CHEMICAL WEDDING
OF CHRISTIAN
Re REUTZ,


If you enjoy our free ebooks,


to offset website costs.


Loved this book?
Other books that may be interesting to you:


John Yarker : 'The Anglo Saxon Chronicle"
Originally compiled on the orders of King Alfred the Great approximately A.D. 890 and


E: subsequently maintained and added to by generations of anonymous scribes until the middle


of the 12th Century. The original language is Anglo-Saxon Old English but later entries are
essentially Middle English in tone. Translation by Rev. James Ingram London 1823 with
additional readings from the translation of Dr. J.A. Giles London 1847. The... >>read more<<


Anonymous : ''Pentagram Meaning And History"
The pentagram has long been associated with mystery and magic. It is the simplest form of
star shape that can be drawn unicursally - with a single line - hence it is sometimes called the
Endless Knot. Other names are the Goblins Cross the Pentalpha the Witchs Foot the Devils
Star and the Seal of Solomon more correctly attributed to the hexagram.It has long been
believed to be a potent protection against evil and demons hence... >>read more<<


Benjamin Rowe : ''Chymical Wedding Of Christian Rosenkreutz"
The Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz originally published in German in 1616.
This edition derives from an English translation published in 1690. No part of this document is
copyrighted or copyrightable in any domain. Adobe Acrobat edition prepared by Benjamin
Rowe October 2000. Typeset in Bembo.


Max Heindel : "Ancient And Modern Initiation"
Within the pages of this little volume are to be found some of the most priceless gems
belonging to the deepest phases of the Christian religion. These gems are the result of the
spiritual investigations of that inspired and illumined Seer Max Heindel the authorized
messenger of the Elder Brothers of the Rose Cross who are working to disseminate throughout
the Western World the deeper spiritual meanings which are both... >>read more<<
