The Analysis of Mind (Bertrand Russell, 1921)
==========================================================
Neutral monism's founding text; a landmark of early philosophy of mind. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (jstor-2939425).


STOP



Early Journal Content on JSTOR, Free to Anyone in the World

This article is one of nearly 500,000 scholarly works digitized and made freely available to everyone in
the world by JSTOR.

Known as the Early Journal Content, this set of works include research articles, news, letters, and other
writings published in more than 200 of the oldest leading academic journals. The works date from the
mid-seventeenth to the early twentieth centuries.

We encourage people to read and share the Early Journal Content openly and to tell others that this
resource exists. People may post this content online or redistribute in any way for non-commercial
purposes.

Read more about Early Journal Content at http://about.jstor.org/participate-jstor/individuals/early-
journal-content .



JSTOR is a digital library of academic journals, books, and primary source objects. JSTOR helps people
discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content through a powerful research and teaching
platform, and preserves this content for future generations. JSTOR is part of ITHAKA, a not-for-profit
organization that also includes Ithaka S+R and Portico. For more information about JSTOR, please
contact support@jstor.org.



Vol. XIX., No. 24 November 23, 1922

The Journal of Philosophy



DR. SCHILLER'S ANALYSIS OF THE ANALYSIS OF MIND

DR. SCHILLER'S article dealing with me in this Journal (Vol.
XIX, No. 11) is a model of philosophical discussion: the
points which he discusses are fundamental, and the divergences be-
tween him and me which he notes concern vital problems. He and
I are agreed, I think, that it is impossible to produce logical argu-
ments on either side of the questions which divide us. Philosophies
which differ radically necessarily involve different logics, and there-
fore can not be proved or refuted by logic without question-begging.
Accordingly, the remarks which I shall have to make will be of the
nature of rhetoric rather than logic.

Dr. Schiller begins by deploring my atavistic tendency to return
to Hume. To this I plead guilty at once. I regard the whole
romantic movement, beginning with Rousseau and Kant, and cul-
minating in pragmatism and futurism, as a regrettable aberration.
I should take " back to the 18th century " as a battle-cry, if I could
entertain any hope that others would rally to it. What I object to
about the intervening period is summed up in Lord Tennyson's

" noble " words:

But like a man in wrath, the heart
Stood up and answered: I have felt.

I dislike the heart as an inspirer of beliefs; I much prefer the
spleen. I take comfort in Freud 's work, because it shows what we
are to think of the heart, which, he says, makes us desire the death
of our parents, and therefore dream that they are dead, with a hypo-
critical sorrow in our very dreams. The heart is the cause of the
anti-rational philosophy that begins with Kant and leads up to the
"will to believe." The heart is the inspirer of atrocities against
negroes, the late war, and the starvation of Russia. (See McDou-
gall's Social Psychology, which attributes actions of this kind to
"the tender emotion.") People who believe in the heart agree with
Dr. Schiller's dislike of "abstract analysis in search of the 'simple'
and elemental, conducted from the standpoint of an extraneous ob-
server." Why I like them I do not know, though probably any

645



646 JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY

"extraneous observer" could tell me. But I can suggest reasons
which might lead other people to believe in them.

I begin with the question of the "extraneous observer." For
reasons, some of which I have set forth in The Analysis of Mind,
I hold self-knowledge to be very precarious and deceptive. What
little I know about myself I owe to the observations of candid
friends. The greater reliability of external observation is shown
by the usual scientific tests — power of prediction, etc. The whole
method of psycho-analysis is a vindication of the trained outside
observer. Dr. Schiller, of course, is not advocating old-fashioned
introspection, which makes one 's ego an object and tries to duplicate
it into observer and observed. He is advocating what he calls
"activist psychology," according to which activity is the funda-
mental thing. Now it may be that I am an unusually lazy person,
but the fact is that I know nothing of "activity." I observe
that my body moves in various ways, but so do other bodies, living
and dead. I observe that when my body moves there are certain
sensations, and sometimes before it moves there are other sensations
which may be called "tension" or "strain." Sometimes also the
movement is preceded by images of it, particularly in the case of a
difficult movement, such as a high dive. That is to say, I can dis-
cover various correlations of perceptions of bodily movements with
other perceptions of bodily states, or with images, before, after, or
at the same time as, the perceptions of the bodily movements. But
I am utterly at a loss to recognize this "activity" which is supposed
to be the very essence of life. I am forced to conclude that I am
not really alive.

As for "abstract analysis in search of the 'simple' and 'ele-
mental, ' ' ' that is a more important matter. To begin with, ' ' simple' '
must not be taken in an absolute sense ; "simpler" would be a better
word. Of course, I should be glad to reach the absolutely simple,
but I do not believe that that is within human capacity. What I do
maintain is that, whenever anything is complex, our knowledge is
advanced by discovering constituents of it, even if these constituents
themselves are still complex. It is customary in philosophy to speak
ill of "abstraction," and to use as laudatory epithets such phrases
as "concrete fulness," "the richness of the living flux" etc., gen-
erally supported by the opinion of Mephistopheles on the relation of
theory to life. For my part, I am regretfully compelled to differ
with Mephistopheles on this point. And even if I did not, theory
is the business of philosophy, and if theory is bad, it is better to give
up being a philosopher. Modern philosophers have not the courage
of their profession, and try to make their systems ape real life



DR. SCHILLER'S ANALYSIS 647

till they become indistinguishable from jazzing. Meanwhile science
pursues a quite different course. The more it advances, the more
abstract and analytical it becomes; and the more abstract and
analytical it becomes, the more it is able to increase our knowledge
of the world. Philosophy, to save its face, has invented a theory
that scientific knowledge is not real knowledge, but that there is
an extra superfine brand of knowledge to be obtained in philosophy,
not by observation of the world, but by giving way to our wishes —
particularly the wish to think that we can know without taking
trouble. This is to my mind a complete delusion. I do not believe
that there is any way of obtaining knowledge except the scientific
way. Some of the problems with which philosophy has concerned
itself can be solved by scientific methods; others can not. Those
which can not are insoluble.

I do not doubt that the difference between those who like analysis
and those who dislike it is temperamental. I can not prove that
analysis is the right method except by using analysis, which would
beg the question — I will not even deny that the mystics (as one
may call the opponents of analysis) might have had the best of it in
practice. But in arguing with a pragmatist it is permissible to
point to the extraordinary fruitfulness of science, which uses anal-
ysis, as against the sterility of philosophy, which rejects it. Nay
more, as against such an opponent it is permissible to point out that
analysis enables us to produce the necessaries of life and defeat
competitors — which ought, on pragmatist grounds, to be the ultimate
test of truth. I therefore make no apology for using analytic meth-
ods. If they have dropped out of philosophy since Kant introduced
the "practical reason," so much the worse for philosophy. I
respect Descartes, Leibniz, Locke, Berkeley, and Hume, all of whom
employed the analytic method. I do not believe that Kant or
Hegel or Nietzsche or the more modern anti-rationalists have con-
tributed anything that deserves to be remembered.

I pass by the question of the relation of Kant to Hume, as of
merely historical interest, remarking only that, whatever may have
been Kant's intellectual debt to Hume, the difference between their
temperaments and desires was very great. The next point of im-
portance in Dr. Schiller's paper concerns the relations between
psychic elements. He says of me: "This psychological analysis as-
sumes that it can start with an indefinite plurality of entities or
facts, out of which psychic structures can be built. . . . Bussell, for
example, may sometimes be found to declare that his 'main thesis'
is that 'all psychic phenomena are built up out of sensations and
images alone.' Actually these structures do require (and employ)



648 JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY

a minimum of mortar, both in Hume and in Russell. This is intro-
duced under the names of 'association,' 'causality,' 'memory,' 'ex-
pectation,' and sundry 'relations,' such as 'meaning.' But their
presence and activity are so little emphasized that they are even
verbally denied, as in the passage just quoted."

This passage shows a misunderstanding which is truly aston-
ishing. If I said "the walls of my house are built of bricks and
mortar alone," should I be supposed to be asserting or implying
that my walls were indistinguishable from a heap of separate bricks
and a puddle of mortar? It is obvious that the bricks in the wall
have a structure, that the structure consists of relations between
the bricks, that these relations are given empirically in whatever
sense the bricks are given, and that the relations are something
other than the materials of which the walls are built. Similarly in
the passage which Dr. Schiller quotes, I did not suggest or imply
that sensations and images would constitute all psychic phenomena
without suitable relations, any more than that bricks and mortar
would constitute a house while they remained in haphazard heaps.
And so far from not emphasizing the relations required, the discus-
sion of them forms a large part of the book. In fact, it will be
seen from the last two pages of the book that these relations are
what I regard as giving mind its character, for I say that mind
consists chiefly in number and complexity of habits, and habits are
obviously constituted by relations. I do, however, most strenuously
deny that the relations which I observe, whether in the mental or
the physical world, are a priori principles of synthesis in the Kan-
tian sense. When I look at a wall, I perceive parts with spatial rela-
tions; so I do when I contemplate a complex visual image. Rela-
tions and terms are given together, and are alike empirical. Not
of course all relations, or all terms — some are inferred, but the in-
ference would be impossible unless some were empirical data.

Dr. Schiller continues: "The plurality, which common-sense,
Hume, and Russell, all treat as a datum, is not present in the
original experience, and is at best a construction resulting from a
course of philosophic reflection." This statement seems to me to be
an instance of a very common fallacy in psychology, namely the
assumption that nothing is happening in a man's mind except what
he is aware of. This assumption is often supported by an appeal
to James's remarks on the "psychologist's fallacy," but in fact such
support is illusory. James argues, very correctly, that a given
situation will not have precisely the same effect upon a layman as
upon a psychologist, because the psychologist has trained himself
to a certain kind of reaction. I am willing to believe that, before



DR. SCHILLER'S ANALYSIS 649

James's time, there were psychologists who committed this fallacy,
but since his time it is the opposite fallacy that has become com-
mon. It is now constantly assumed that if a savage, a baby, or a
monkey has an experience which he or it does not discriminate into
related parts, then the experience in question does not consist of
related parts. It would be exactly as valid to argue that because
Newton's apple did not know it was falling, therefore it was not
falling, and the theory of gravitation may be dismissed as an ex-
ample of the "psychologist's fallacy."

The notion that a savage or an animal is the best judge as to
the general nature of his own mental processes is not held in any
other context. Even in civilized and highly educated people, psy-
cho-analysts detect all kinds of processes of which they are uncon-
scious. Nevertheless, when a savage shows that he is muddle-
headed as to the muddle in his head, it is assumed that we ought
to learn to be equally muddle-headed, and that no clear account
of his muddle is possible. This favoritism seems to indicate a
bias in favor of muddle. For my part, I regard muddle as a
phenomenon like another. I see no more reason to be muddled in
investigating a muddle than to be muddled in investigating any-
thing else. One might as well maintain that a theory of wind
ought to blow one away, or that a theory of undulation ought to
make one seasick. Savages are muddled as to what is going on,
whether inside them or outside them, and their account is not to be
accepted. Therefore, when Dr. Schiller says "the plurality . . .
is not present in the original experience," he is misled by the
ambiguity of the word "experience." I should say: "The plural-
ity is present in the original occurrence, but is not experienced."
I should add that, however sophisticated we become, most of what
happens to us is not experienced by us; in regard to most of the
occurrences of our lives, we are as unconscious as Newton's apple.

The next point to be considered concerns Dr. Schiller's state-
ment that my "method is not concerned with the actual course of
mental development, but with an ideal description of its products.
It takes an adult mind and rearranges its contents in a systematic
and esthetically pleasing order." This statement seems to me partly
true and partly false. I deny that I am not concerned with the
actual course of mental development, and also that I take an adult
mind in the sense intended. I admit that I rearrange the contents
in a systematic and esthetically [or logically] pleasing order, but
then that is the very business of science. As for taking an adult
mind, I begin with Thorndike's animals in cages, which may have
been adult animals, but were not "adult minds" in the sense re-



650 JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY

quired for Dr. Schiller's point. I have tried throughout to take
account of whatever can be learnt about infant and animal psy-
chology. It is partly for this reason that I have been concerned to
praise behaviorism, which has adopted the only method by which
infant and animal psychology can be made scientific. But when I
had (as I thought) exhausted what could be learnt by behavior ist
methods, and felt obliged to call in the aid of introspection, I was
compelled to have recourse to the adult mind, because unfortunately
I am adult. Dr. Schiller appears to possess some mysterious
method, other than behaviorism, by which he can ascertain what
goes on in the minds of infants and animals, and he implies that it
is more like what goes on in his mind than like what goes on in
mine. As for that, I must take his word for it. But even then I
am not obliged to admit that they have true beliefs as to what goes
on in their own minds.

What Dr. Schiller is really objecting to is, I suppose, that my
method is not historical or evolutionary. I have, it is true, dis-
cussed the process of learning somewhat fully, but I am equally
interested in processes which are not progressive. I think the inter-
est in development which came in with evolution is a barrier to the
elementary understanding of the simpler facts upon which any
solid science must be built. Laplace's Meccmique Celeste presup-
posed Galileo, Kepler, and Newton, who treated the solar system
as a stable adult. Similarly there will be no beginning of a genu-
ine science of psychology so long as people are obsessed by such
complex facts as growth and progress. I know it is customary to
treat life as essentially progressive. But this seems to be a sheer
mistake. If a census could be taken of all the organisms now liv-
ing, I have no doubt that an immense majority would be found to
be unicellular, and to have made no appreciable progress since the
origin of life. And to the remainder, decay is quite as natural as
growth. Yet Dr. Schiller does not reproach me with having paid
too little attention to senility.

Some of Dr. Schiller's criticisms are quite beyond my compre-
hension. He says, as an objection to me, "a biologically possible
analysis can not start from anything less than the whole process
involved in an act, viz., a response to stimulation which is salutary,
or harmful, and is selected accordingly." Who would suppose,
reading this, that this is the very thing I do start from? It is the
same thing that I have called a "behavior-cycle," and I have put
it at the beginning, as being characteristic of living organisms. I
observe, however, (a) that a process of this kind is complex, and
therefore susceptible of logical analysis; (6) that when we come



CRITICAL REALISM 651

to the more elaborate processes which we are aware of carrying
out, we find need of elements which it does not seem necessary to
assume in order to account for the responses of an amoeba; (o) that
"response to stimulation," as we ourselves experience it, often in-
volves something that may be called, in some sense, awareness of
the stimulus, and thus lands us with the problem of perception and
even of memory.

1 have only one more subject to discuss, namely the subject. It
is surprising to find Dr. Schiller sticking up for the old-fashioned
soul, and quoting with disapproval the remarks about the ghost of
the subject, which once was the full-blooded soul, which I adapted
from William James. 1 He does not apparently notice that the re-
mark to which he objects is a paraphrase of James's, but his at-
titude shows that he is less in agreement with James than is com-
monly supposed. The background of their thoughts is very dif-
ferent. James's mind was a battle-ground of medical materialism
and the mysticism suggested by Swedenborg. His learned self was
scientific and his emotional self cosmic; neither led him to attach
great value to the ego. On the other hand, Dr. Schiller's learned
self is primarily hellenic. He is fond of claiming affinity with
Protagoras, who would hardly have suited James. Idealism is to
him what James called a "live option"; at one time he collaborated
in a work called Personal Idealism. It seems to follow that the
parts of James's work with which I sympathize most are those with
which he sympathizes least. This case of the soul is one of them.
On this question I can safely leave the argument to James's Ameri-
can successors, from whom I have learnt many of the doctrines
advocated in The Analysis of Mind.

Bektband Russell.
London.

CRITICAL REALISM AND THE EXTERNAL WORLD l

ESSAYS in Critical Realism is offered as a new solution of an
old epistemological problem. Its authors, a group of phi-
losophers who differ on many important metaphysical points, have
here united upon certain matters connected with a theory of knowl-
edge. This theory of knowledge, it is hoped, will enable us all to
satisfy our natural cravings to be realists. "An honest man . . .
is a realist at heart." 2 It is maintained that, if non-realistic phi-

i See the quotation from him in Analysis of Mind, p. 22.
i Bead at the meeting of the Western Division of the American Philosoph-
ical Association, at Lincoln, April 14, 1922.

2 P. 184 (Mr. Santayana). Unless otherwise stated the references are to
Essays in Critical Bealism. The name of the author quoted will in each ease
be noted.



