Sceptical Essays (Bertrand Russell, 1928)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/bwb_S0-BXD-651). Essays applying rational scepticism to religion, morals, politics, and everyday belief.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ACPL ITEM |
DISCARDED |


a Seow? Gee? Beree B Nee? fee Dee FO


Ss 8 &


FORT WAYNE & ALLEN CO., INDe


eeceemeeenewesowscennenscncessocesecnececerascceueecesseseroors


PUBLIC LIBRARY
Fort Wayne and Allen County, Ind.


EXTRACTS FROM RULES
a A fine of two cents a da
~\\ shall be paid on each vol-
ume not returned when
book is due. Injuries


romptly notify the
‘Liprarian of change
of residence under
penalty of forfeit-
ure of card.


EXTRACT FROM
STATE LAW
Whoever shall wilful-
ly or mischievously,
cut, mark, mutilate, write
in or upon, or otherwise
deface any book, magazine,
newspaper, or other property
of any library organized under
the laws of this state, shall be
fined not less than ten dollars
nor more than one hundred
dollars.


Acme Library Card Pocket
KEEP YOUR CARD IN THIS POCKET


LIBRARY BUREAU CAT. NO, 1165


a


ANNEX


DO NOT REMOVE
CARDS FROM POCneT


M. L


~ ACPL ITEM
ig > DISCARDED


SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


By
BERTRAND RUSSELL


W-W:NORTON & COMPANY, INC.
70 Fifth Avenue, New York


Copyright, 1928,
BERTRAND RUSSELL


PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
FOR THE PUBLISHERS BY THE VAN REES PRESS


Vo


‘Aimer et ‘penser: cest la veritable


vie des esprits. SaaS 4
VoLTAIRE.


ew Po


CHAPTER


CONTENTS


INTRODUCTION: ON THE VALUE OF SCEP-
TICISM


DREAMS AND Facts. . . .

Is ScIENCE SUPERSTITIOUS? .

Can MEN BE RATIONAL? ..
PHILOSOPHY IN THE TWENTIETH CENTURY
MACHINES AND THE EMOTIONS .
BEHAVIORISM AND VALUES .


EASTERN AND WESTERN IDEALS oF HaAppt-
MPR N/a satya tS


Tue Harm THat Goop Men Do .

THE RECRUDESCENCE OF PURITANISM .
Tue NEED FOR POLITICAL SCEPTICISM .
FREE THOUGHT AND OFFICIAL PROPAGANDA
FREEDOM IN SOCIETY


FREEDOM VERSUS AUTHORITY IN EpDuUCA-
TION


PsycHOLOGY AND POLITICs .

Tue DANGER OF CREED WaRS. .. .

Some Prospects: CHEERFUL AND OTHER-
Sy UREA SEL PS Lae st ERY Re he


PAGE


SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


I


INTRODUCTION: ON THE VALUE OF
SCEPTICISM


I wisH to propose for the reader’s favorable considera-
tion a doctrine which may, I fear, appear wildly paradoxical
and subversive. ‘The doctrine in question is this: that it
is undesirable to believe a proposition when there is no
ground whatever for supposing it true. I must, of course,
admit that if such an opinion became common it would com-
pletely transform our social life and our political system;
since both are at present faultless, this must weigh against
it. I am also aware (what is more serious) that it would
tend to diminish the incomes of clairvoyants, bookmakers,
bishops and others who live on the irrational hopes of those
who have done nothing to deserve good fortune here or
hereafter. In spite of these grave arguments, I maintain
that a case can be made out for my paradox, and I shall
try to set it forth.

First of all, I wish to guard myself against being thought
to take up an extreme position. I ama British Whig, with
a British love of compromise and moderation. A story is
told of Pyrrho, the founder of Pyrrhonism (which was the
old name for scepticism). He maintained that we never
know enough to be sure that one course of action is wiser
than another. In his youth, when he was taking his con-


stitutional one afternoon, he saw his teacher in philosophy
II


12 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


(from whom he had imbibed his principles) with his head
stuck in a ditch, unable to get out. After contemplating
him for some time, he walked on, maintaining that there
was no sufficient ground for thinking he would do any
good by pulling the old man out. Others, less sceptical,
effected a rescue, and blamed Pyrrho for his heartlessness.
But his teacher, true to his principles, praised him for his
consistency. Now I do not advocate such heroic scepticism
as that. I am prepared to admit the ordinary beliefs of
common sense, in practice if not in theory. I am prepared
to admit any well-established result of science, not as cer-
tainly true, but as sufficiently probable to afford a basis for
rational action. If it is announced that there is to be an
eclipse of the moon on such-and-such a date, I think it worth
while to look and see whether it is taking place. Pyrrho
would have thought otherwise. On this ground I feel jus-
tified in claiming that I advocate a middle position.

There are matters about which those who have investi-
gated them are agreed; the dates of eclipses may serve as
an illustration. There are other matters about which ex-
perts are not agreed. Even when the experts all agree, they
may well be mistaken. Einstein’s view as to the magnitude
of the deflection of light by gravitation would have been
rejected by all experts twenty years ago, yet it proved to be
right. Nevertheless, the opinion of experts when it is unani-
mous, must be accepted by non-experts as more likely to
be right than the opposite opinion. The scepticism that I
advocate amounts only to this: (1) that when the experts
are agreed, the opposite opinion cannot be held to be cer-
tain; (2) that when they are not agreed, no opinion can
be regarded as certain by a non-expert; and (3) that when


INTRODUCTION 13


they all hold that no sufficient grounds for a positive opin-
ion exist, the ordinary man would do well to suspend his
judgment.

These propositions may seem mild, yet, if accepted, they
would absolutely revolutionize human life.

The opinions for which people are willing to fight and
persecute all belong to one of the three classes which this
scepticism condemns. When there are rational grounds
for an opinion, people are content to set them forth and
wait for them to operate. In such cases, people do not
hold their opinions with passion; they hold them calmly, and
set forth their reasons quietly. The opinions that are held
with passion are always those for which no good ground
exists; indeed the passion is the measure of the holder’s lack
of rational conviction. Opinions in politics and religion
are almost always held passionately. Except in China, a
man is thought a poor creature unless he has strong opinions
on such matters; people hate sceptics far more than they
hate the passionate advocates of opinions hostile to their
own. It is thought that the claims of practical life demand
opinions on such questions, and that, if we become more ra-
tional, social existence would be impossible. I believe the
opposite of this, and will try to make it clear why I have
this belief.

Take the question of England’s unemployment in the
years after 1920. One party held that it was due to the
wickedness of trade unions, another that it was due to the
confusion on the Continent. A third party, while admitting
that these causes played a part, attributed most of the trou-
ble to the policy of the Bank of England in trying to increase
the value of the pound sterling. This third party, I am given


yee SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


to understand, contained most of the experts, but no one else.
Politicians do not find any attractions in a view which does
not end itself to party declamation, and ordinary mortals
prefer views which attribute misfortune to the machinations
of their enemies. Consequently people fight for and against
quite irrelevant measures, while the few who have a ra- ~
tional opinion are not listened to because they do not min-
ister to any one’s passions. To produce converts, it would
have been necessary to persuade people that the Bank of
England is wicked. ‘To convert Labor, it would have
been necessary to show that the directors of the Bank of
England are hostile to trade unionism; to convert the
Bishop of London, it would have been necessary to show
that they are “immoral.’’ It would be thought to follow
that their views on currency are mistaken.

Let us take another illustration. It is often said that
socialism is contrary to human nature, and this assertion
is denied by socialists with the same heat with which it is
made by their opponents. ‘The late Dr. Rivers, whose
death cannot be sufficiently deplored, discussed this question
in a lecture at University College, published in his post-
humous book on Psychology and Politics. This is the only
discussion of this topic known to me that can lay claim to be
scientific. It sets forth certain anthropological data which
show that socialism is not contrary to human nature in
Melanesia; it then points out that we do not know whether
human nature is the same in Melanesia as in Europe; and
it concludes that the only way of finding out whether social-
-ism is contrary to European human nature is to try it. It is
interesting that on the basis of this conclusion he was will-
ing to become a Labor candidate. But he would certainly


INTRODUCTION 15


not have added to the heat and passion in which political
controversies are usually enveloped.

I will now venture on a topic which people find even more
difficult in treating dispassionately, namely, marriage cus-
toms. The bulk of the population of every country is per-
- suaded that all marriage customs other than its own are
immoral, and that those who combat this view only do so
in order to justify their own loose lives. In India the
remarriage of widows is traditionally regarded as a thing
too horrible to contemplate. In Catholic countries divorce
is thought very wicked, but some failure of conjugal fidelity
is tolerated, at least in men. In America divorce is easy,
but extra-conjugal relations are condemned with the utmost
severity. Mohammedans believe in polygamy, which we
think degrading. All these differing opinions are held with
extreme vehemence, and very cruel persecutions are inflicted
upon those who contravene them. Yet no one in any of the
various countries makes the slightest attempt to show that
the custom of his own country contributes more to human
happiness than the custom of others.

When we open any scientific treatise on the subject, such
as (for example) Westermarck’s History of Human Mar-
riage, we find an atmosphere extraordinarily different from
that of popular prejudice. We find that every kind of
custom has existed, many of them such as we should have
supposed repugnant to human nature. We think we can
understand polygamy, as a custom forced upon women by
male oppressors. But what are we to say of the Tibetan
custom, according to which one woman has several hus- »


bands? Yet travelers in Tibet assure us that family life


there is at least as harmonious asin Europe. A little of such


16 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


reading must soon reduce any candid person to complete
scepticism, since there seem to be no data enabling us to say
that one marriage custom is better or worse than another.
Almost all involve cruelty and intolerance towards offenders
against the local code, but otherwise they have nothing in
common. It seems that sin is geographical. From this con-
clusion it is only a small step to the further conclusion that
the notion of ‘‘sin’’ is illusory, and that the cruelty habitually
practiced in punishing it is unnecessary. It is just this con-
clusion which is so unwelcome to many minds, since the |
infliction of cruelty with a good conscience is a delight to ©
moralists. That is why they invented Hell.

Nationalism is of course an extreme example of fervent
belief concerning doubtful matters. I think it may be safely
said that any scientific historian, writing now a history of
the Great War, is bound to make statements which, if made
during the war, would have exposed him to imprisonment in
every one of the belligerent countries on both sides. Again,
with the exception of China, there is no country where
people tolerate the truth about themselves; at ordinary
times the truth is ‘only thought ill-mannered, but in war-
time it is thought criminal. Opposing systems of violent
belief are built up, the falsehood of which is evident from
the fact that they are only believed by those who share
the same national bias. But the application of reason to
these systems of belief is thought as wicked as the applica-
tion of reason to religious dogmas was formerly thought.
When people are challenged as to why scepticism in such
matters should be wicked, the only answer is that myths
help to win wars, so that a rational nation would be killed
rather than kill. The view that there is something shame-


INTRODUCTION 17


ful in saving one’s skin by wholesale slander of foreigners
is one which, so far as I know, has hitherto found no sup-
porters among professional moralists outside the ranks of
the Quakers. If it is suggested that a rational nation would
find ways of keeping out of wars altogether, the answer
is usually mere abuse.

What would be the effect of a spread of rational scepti-
cism? E{uman events spring from passions, which generate
systems of attendant myths. Psycho-analysts have studied
the individual manifestations of this process in lunatics,

‘certified and uncertified. A man who has suffered some

_ humiliation invents a theory that he is King of England,
and develops all kinds of ingenious explanations of the fact
that he is not treated with that respect which his exalted
position demands. In this case, his delusion is one with
which his neighbors do not sympathize, so they lock him up.

_ But if, instead of asserting only his own greatness, he asserts
the greatness of his nation or his class or his creed, he wins
hosts of adherents, and becomes a political or religious
leader, even if, to the impartial outsider, his views seem just
as absurd as those found in asylums. In this way a collec-
tive insanity grows up, which follows laws very similar to
those of individual insanity. Every one knows that it is
dangerous to dispute with a lunatic who thinks he is King

- of England; but as he is isolated, he can be overpow-
ered. When a whole nation shares a delusion, its anger is
of the same kind as that of an individual lunatic if its pre-
tentions are disputed, but nothing short of war can compel
it to submit to reason.

The part played by intellectual factors in human be-
havior is a matter as to which there is much disagreement


18 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


among psychologists. There are two quite distinct ques-
tions: (1) how far are beliefs operative as causes of ac-
tions? (2) how far are beliefs derived from logically ade-
quate evidence, or capable of being so derived? On both
questions psychologists are agreed in giving a much smaller
place to the intellectual factors than the plain man would
give, but within this general agreement there is room for
considerable differences of degree. Let us take the two
questions in succession.


\/


(1) How far are beliefs operative.as causes of action? |
Let us not discuss the question theoretically, but let us take —


an ordinary day of an ordinary man’s life. He begins by


getting up in the morning, probably from force of habit, —


without the intervention of any belief. He eats his break-
fast, catches his train, reads his newspaper, and goes to his |
office, all from force of habit. There was a time in the past —
when he formed these habits, and in the choice of the office, —


at least, belief played a part. He probably believed, at the |


time, that the job offered him there was as good as he was
likely to get. In most men, belief plays a part in the origi-


nal choice of a career, and therefore, derivatively, in all |


that is entailed by this choice.


At the office, if he is an underling, he may continue to act —


merely from habit, without active volition, and without


the explicit intervention of belief. It might be thought


that, if he adds up columns of figures, he believes the arith-
metical rules which he employs. But that would be an
error; these rules are mere habits of his body, like those


of a tennis player. They were acquired in youth, not from
an intellectual belief that they corresponded to the truth, |
but to please the schoolmaster, just as a dog learns to sit.


INTRODUCTION 19


on its hind legs and beg for food. I do not say that all
education is of this sort, but certainly most learning of
the three R’s is.

If, however, our friend is a partner or director, he may
be called upon during his day to make difficult decisions of
policy. In these decisions it is probable that belief will
play a part. He believes that some things will go up and
others will go down, that so-and-so is a sound man, and
such-and-such on the verge of bankruptcy. On these beliefs
he acts. It is just because he is called upon to act on be-
liefs rather than mere habits that he is considered such a
much greater man than a mere clerk, and is able to get so
much more money—provided his beliefs are true.

In his home-life there will be much the same proportion
of occasions when belief is a cause of action. At ordinary
times his behavior to his wife and children will be governed
_by habit, or by instinct modified by habit. On great occa-
sions—when he proposes marriage, when he decides what
school to send his son to, or when he finds reason to suspect
his wife of unfaithfulness—he cannot be guided wholly by
habit. In proposing marriage, he may be guided by mere
instinct, or he may be influenced by the belief that the lady
is rich. If he is guided by instinct, he no doubt believes that
the lady possesses every virtue, and this may seem to him to
be a cause of his action, but in fact it is merely another
effect of the instinct which alone suffices to account for his
action. In choosing a school for his son, he probably pro-
ceeds in much the same way as in making difficult business
decisions; here belief usually plays an important part. If
evidence comes into his possession showing that his wife has
been unfaithful, his behavior is likely to be merely instinc-


20 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


tive, but the instinct is set in operation by a belief, which
is the first cause of everything that follows.

Thus although beliefs are not directly responsible for
more than a small part of our actions, the actions for which
they are responsible are among the most important, and
largely determine the general structure of our lives. In
particular, our religious and political actions are associated
with beliefs.

(2) I come now to our second question, which is itself
twofold: (a) how far are beliefs in fact based upon evi-
dence? (b) how far is it possible or desirable that they
should be?

(a) The extent to which beliefs are based upon evidence
is very much less than believers suppose. Take the kind
of action which is most nearly rational: the investment of
money by a rich City man. You will often find that his
view (say) on the question whether the French franc will go
up or down depends upon his political sympathies, and yet


is so strongly held that he is prepared to risk his money on |


it. In bankruptcies it often appears that some sentimental


factor was the original cause of ruin. Political opinions are |


hardly ever based upon evidence, except in the case of civil |
servants, who are forbidden to give utterance to them. |
There are of course exceptions. In the tariff reform con-—
troversy which began twenty-five years ago, most manu- |
facturers supported the side that would increase their own |
incomes, showing that their opinions were really based on


evidence, however little their utterances would have led one |


to suppose so. We have here a complication. Freudians |
73 : sae + . |
have accustomed us to “rationalizing,” i.e., the process of in- |


venting what seem to ourselves rational grounds for a


INTRODUCTION a


decision or opinion that is in fact quite irrational. But
there is, especially in English-speaking countries, a converse
process which may be called ‘‘rrationalizing.” A shrewd
man will sum up, more or less subconsciously, the pros and
cons of a question from a selfish point of view. (Unselfish
considerations seldom weigh subconsciously except where
one’s children are concerned.) Having come to a sound
_ egoistic decision by the help of the unconscious, a man pro-
ceeds to invent, or adopt from others, a set of high-sound-
ing phrases showing how he is pursuing the public good at
immense personal sacrifice. Anybody who believes that
these phrases give his real reasons must suppose him quite
incapable of judging evidence, since the supposed public
good is not going to result from his action. In this case a
man appears less rational than he is; what is still more curi-
ous, the irrational part of him is conscious and the rational
part unconscious. It is this trait in our characters that has
made the English and Americans so successful.

Shrewdness, when it is genuine, belongs more to the un-
conscious than to the conscious part of our nature. It is,
I suppose, the main quality required for success in business.
From a moral point of view, it is a humble quality, since it
is always selfish; yet it suffices to keep men from the worst
crimes. If the Germans had had it, they would not have
adopted the unlimited submarine campaign. If the French
had had it, they would not have behaved as they did in the
Ruhr. If Napoleon had had it, he would not have gone to
war again after the Treaty of Amiens. It may be laid
down as a general rule to which there are few exceptions
that, when people are mistaken as to what is to their own
interest, the course that they believe to be wise is more


22 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


harmful to others than the course that really is wise.
Therefore anything that makes people better judges of their
own interest does good. There are innumerable examples of
men making fortunes because, on moral grounds, they did
something which they believed to be contrary to their own
interests. For instance, among early Quakers there were
a number of shopkeepers who adopted the practice of ask-
ing no more for their goods than they were willing to ac-
cept, instead of bargaining with each customer, as every-
body else did. They adopted this practice because they held
it to be a lie to ask more than they would take. But the
convenience to customers was so great that everybody came
to their shops, and they grew rich. (1 forget where I read
this, but if my memory serves me it was in some reliable
source.) The same policy might have been adopted from
shrewdness, but in fact no one was sufficiently shrewd. Our
unconscious is more malevolent than it pays us to be; there-
fore the people who do most completely what is in fact to
their interest are those who deliberately, on moral grounds,
do what they believe to be against their interest. Next
to them come the people who try to think out rationally
and consciously what is to their own interest, eliminating as
far as possible the influence of passion. Third come the
people who have instinctive shrewdness. Last of all come


the people whose malevolence overbalances their shrewd-


ness, making them pursue the ruin of others in ways that
lead to their own ruin. This last class embraces 90 per
cent of the population of Europe.

I may seem to have digressed somewhat from my topic,
but it was necessary to disentangle unconscious reason
which is called shrewdness, from the conscious variety;


INTRODUCTION 23


The ordinary methods of education have practically no ef-
fect upon the unconscious, so that shrewdness cannot be
taught by our present technique. Morality, also, except
where it consists of mere habit, seems incapable of being
taught by present methods; at any rate, I have never noticed
any beneficent effect upon those who are exposed to fre-
quent exhortations. Therefore on our present lines any de-
liberate improvement must be brought about by intellectual
means. We do not know how to teach people to be shrewd
or virtuous, but we do know, within limits, how to teach
them to be rational: it is only necessary to reverse the prac-
tice of education authorities in every particular. We may
hereafter learn to create virtue by manipulating the ductless
glands and stimulating or restraining their secretions. But
for the present it is easier to create rationality than virtue
—meaning by “‘rationality” a scientific habit of mind in
forecasting the effects of our actions.

(b) This brings me to the question: How far could or
should men’s actions be rational? Let us take “should”
first. There are very definite limits, to my mind, within
which rationality should be confined; some of the most im-
portant departments of life are ruined by the invasion
of reason. Leibniz in his old age told a correspondent that
he had only once asked a lady to marry him, and that was
when he was fifty. ‘‘Fortunately,” he added, “the lady
asked time to consider. This gave me also time to consider,
and I withdrew the offer.” Doubtless his conduct was very
rational, but I cannot say that I admire it.

__ Shakespeare puts “the lunatic, the lover, and the poet”
together, as being “‘of imagination all compact.” ‘The prob-
lem is to keep the lover and the poet, without the lunatic.


awed


24 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


I will give an illustration. In 1919 I saw The Trojan
Women acted at the Old Vic. There is an unbearably
pathetic scene where Astyanax is put to death by the Greeks
for fear he should grow up into a second Hector. There
was hardly a dry eye in the theater, and the audience found
the cruelty of the Greeks in the play hardly credible. Yet
those very people who wept were, at that very moment,


_ practicing that very cruelty on a scale which the imagination


of Euripides could have never contemplated. They had
lately voted (most of them) for a Government which pro-
longed the blockade of Germany after the armistice, and im-
posed the blockade of Russia. It was known that these
blockades caused the death of immense numbers of children,
but it was felt desirable to diminish the population of enemy
countries: the children, like Astyanax, might grow up to
emulate their fathers. Euripides the poet awakened the
lover in the imagination of the audience; but lover and poet
were forgotten at the door of the theater, and the lunatic
(in the shape of the homicidal maniac) controlled the po-
litical actions of these men and women who thought them-
selves kind and virtuous.

Is it possible to preserve the lover and the poet without
preserving the lunatic? In each of us all three exist in
varying degrees. Are they so bound up together that when
the one is brought under control the others perish? I do
not believe it. I believe there is in each of us a certain en-
ergy which must find vent in actions not inspired by reason,
but may find vent in art, in passionate love, or in passionate
hate, according to circumstances. Respectability, regular-
ity, and routine—the whole cast-iron discipline of a modern
industrial society—have atrophied the artistic impulse, and


INTRODUCTION 25


imprisoned love so that it can no longer be generous and
free and creative, but must be either stuffy or furtive. Con-
trol has been applied to the very things which should be
free, while envy, cruelty, and hate sprawl at large with the
blessing of nearly the whole bench of Bishops. Our in-
stinctive apparatus consists of two parts—the one tending
to further our own life and that of our descendants, the
other tending to thwart the lives of supposed rivals. The
first includes the joy of life, and love, and art, which is psy-
chologically an offshoot of love. The second includes com-
petition, patriotism, and war. Conventional morality does
everything to suppress the first and encourage the second.
True morality would do the exact opposite. Our dealings
with those whom we love may be safely left to instinct; it
is our dealings with those whom we hate that ought to be
brought under the dominion of reason. In the modern
world, those whom we effectively hate are distant groups,
especially foreign nations. We conceive them abstractly,
and deceive ourselves into the belief that acts which are
really embodiments of hatred are done from love of jus-
- tice or some such lofty motive. Only a large measure of
scepticism can tear away the veils which hide this truth from
us. Having achieved that, we could begin to build a new
morality, not based on envy and restriction, but on the wish
for a full life and the realization that other human beings
are a help and not a hindrance when once the madness of
envy has been cured. This is not a Utopian hope; it was
partially realized in Elizabethan England. It could be
realized to-morrow if men would learn to pursue their own
happiness rather than the misery of others. This is no im-
_ possibly austere morality, yet its adoption would turn our
earth into a paradise.


ihe Z
ts i


II
DREAMS AND FACTS


I


Tue influence of our wishes upon our beliefs is a matter
of common knowledge and observation, yet the nature of
this influence is very generally misconceived. It is customary
to suppose that the bulk of our beliefs are derived from
some rational ground, and that desire is only an occasional
disturbing force. The exact opposite of this would be
nearer the truth: the great mass of beliefs by which we are
supported in our daily life is merely the bodying forth of
desire, corrected here and there, at isolated points, by the
rude shock of fact. Man is essentially a dreamer, wakened
sometimes for a moment by some peculiarly obtrusive ele-


ment in the outer world, but lapsing again quickly into the —


happy somnolence of imagination. Freud has shown how
largely our dreams at night are the pictured fulfillment of
our wishes; he has, with an equal measure of truth, said the
same of day-dreams; and he might have included the day-
dreams which we call beliefs.

There are three ways by which this non-rational origin
of our convictions can be demonstrated: there is the way


of psycho-analysis, which, starting from an understanding |


of the insane and the hysterical, gradually makes it plain
how little, in essence, these victims of malady differ from


ordinary healthy people; then there is the way of the scep-
26


DREAMS AND FACTS 27


tical philosopher, showing how feeble is the rational evi-
dence for even our most cherished beliefs; and finally there
is the way of common observation of men. It is only the
last of these three that I propose to consider.

The lowest savages, as they have become known through
the labors of anthropologists, are not found groping in con-
scious ignorance amid phenomena that they are aware of
not understanding. On the contrary, they have innumer-
able beliefs, so firmly held as to control all their more im-
portant actions. They believe that by eating the flesh of
an animal or a warrior it is possible to acquire the virtues
possessed by the victim when alive. Many of them believe
that to pronounce the name of their chief is such sac-
rilege as to bring instant death; they even go so far as to
alter all words in which his name occurs as one of the
syllables; for example, if we had a king named John, we
should speak of a jonquil as (say) a George-quil, and of a
dungeon as a dun-george. When they advance to agricul-
ture, and weather becomes important for the food supply,
they believe that magical incantations or the kindling of
small fires will cause rain to come or the sun to burn brightly.
They believe that when a man is slain his blood, or ghost,
pursues the slayer to obtain vengeance, but can be misled by
a simple disguise such as painting the face red or putting on
mourning.t The first half of this belief has obviously origi-
nated from those who feared murder, the second from those
who had committed it.

Nor are irrational beliefs confined to savages. A great

majority of the human race have religious opinions dif-


1See the chapter on “The Mark of Cain” in Frazer’s Folk-Lore in the
Old Testament.


28 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


ferent from our own, and therefore groundless. People
interested in politics, with the exception of politicians, have
passionate convictions upon innumerable questions which
must appear incapable of rational decision to any unpreju-
diced person. Voluntary workers in a contested election al-
. ways believe that their side will win, no matter what reason
Dy there may be for expecting defeat. There can be no doubt
‘that, in the autumn of 1914, the immense majority of the
German nation felt absolutely certain of victory for Ger-
many. In this case fact has intruded and dispelled the
dream. But if, by some means, all non-German historians
could be prevented from writing during the next hundred
years, the dream would reinstate itself: the early triumphs
would be remembered, while the ultimate disaster would h*
forgotten.

Politeness is the practice of respecting that part of a
man’s beliefs which is specially concerned with his own
merits or those of his group. Every man, wherever he goes,
is encompassed by a cloud of comforting convictions, which
move with him like flies on a summer day. Some of these
convictions are personal to himself: they tell him of his
virtues and excellencies, the affection of his friends and the
respect of his acquaintances, the rosy prospects of his career,
and his unflagging energy in spite of delicate health. Next
come convictions of the superior excellence of his family:
how his father had that unbending rectitude which is now
so rare, and brought up his children with a strictness beyond
what is to be found among modern parents; how his sons
are carrying all before them in school games, and his daugh-
ter is not the sort of girl to make an imprudent marriage.
Then there are beliefs about his class, which, according to


DREAMS AND FACTS 29


his station, is the best socially, or the most intelligent, or
the most deserving morally, of the classes in the community
—though all are agreed that the first of these merits is
more desirable than the second, and the second than the
third. Concerning his nation, also, almost every man cher-
ishes comfortable delusions. ‘Foreign nations, I am sorry
to say, do as they do do.” So said Mr. Podsnap, giving
expression, in these words, to one of the deepest sentiments
of the human heart. Finally we come to the theories that
exalt mankind in general, either absolutely or in compari-
son with the “brute creation.” Men have souls, though
animals have not; Man is the “rational animal’; any pe-
culiarly cruel or unnatural action is called “brutal” or
“‘bestial’” (although such actions are in fact distinctively
human )*; God made Man in His own image, and the wel-
fare of Man is the ultimate purpose of the universe.

We have thus a hierarchy of comforting beliefs: those
private to the individual, those which he shares with his
family, those common to his class or his nation, and finally
those that are equally delightful to all mankind. If we
desire good relations with a man, we must respect these be-
liefs; we do not, therefore, speak of a man to his face as
we should behind his back. The difference increases as his
remoteness from ourselves grows greater. In speaking to
a brother, we have no need of conscious politeness as re-
gards his parents. The need of politeness is at its maxi-
mum in speaking with foreigners, and is so irksome as to be
paralyzing to those who are only accustomed to compa-
triots. I remember once suggesting to an untraveled Ameri-
can that possibly there were a few small points in which


1 Compare Mark Twain’s Mysterious Stranger.


30 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


the British Constitution compared favorably with that of
the United States. He instantly fell into a towering pas-
sion; having never heard such an opinion before, he could
not imagine that any one seriously entertained it. We had
both failed in politeness, and the result was disaster.

But the results of failure in politeness, however bad
from the point of view of a social occasion, are admirable
from the point of view of dispelling myths. There are two
ways in which our natural beliefs are corrected: one the con-
tact with fact, as when we mistake a poisonous fungus for
a mushroom and suffer pain in consequence; the other,
when our beliefs conflict, not directly with objective fact,
but with the opposite beliefs of other men. One man thinks
it lawful to eat pork, but not beef; another, beef but not
pork. The usual result of this difference of opinion has
been bloodshed; but gradually there is beginning to be a
rationalist opinion that perhaps neither is really sinful.
Modesty, the correlative of politeness, consists in pretend-
ing not to think better of ourselves and our belongings than
of the man we are speaking to and his belongings. It is
only in China that this art is thoroughly understood. I
am told that, if you ask a Chinese mandarin after the health
of his wife and children, he will reply: “That contemptible
slut and her verminous brood are, as your Magnificence
deigns to be informed, in the enjoyment of rude health.” *

But such elaboration demands a dignified and leisurely
existence; it is impossible in the swift but important contacts
of business or politics. Step by step, relations with other
human beings dispel the myths of all but the most success-


1™his was written before I came to know Chi
Ree Ping wake tae Ce) na. It would not be true


DREAMS AND FACTS 31


ful. Personal conceit is dispelled by brothers, family con-
ceit by schoolfellows, class conceit by politics, national con-
ceit by defeat in war or commerce. But human conceit re-
mains, and in this region, so far as the effect of social inter-
course is concerned, the myth-making faculty has free play.
Against this form of delusion, a partial corrective is found
in Science ; but the corrective can never be more than partial,
for without some credulity Science itself would crumble and
collapse.


II


Men’s personal and group dreams may be ludicrous but
their collective human dreams, to us who cannot pass out-
side the circle of humanity, are pathetic. The universe as
astronomy reveals it is very vast. How much there may be
beyond what our telescopes show we cannot tell; but what
we can know is of unimaginable immensity. In the visible
world, the Milky Way is a tiny fragment; within this
fragment, the solar system is an infinitesimal speck, and of
this speck our planet is a microscopic dot. On this dot
tiny lumps of impure carbon and water, of complicated
structure, with somewhat unusual physical and chemical
_ properties, crawl about for a few years, until they are dis-
solved again into the elements of which they are com-
pounded. They divide their time between labor designed to
postpone the moment of dissolution for themselves and
frantic struggles to hasten it for others of their kind.
Natural convulsions periodically destroy some thousands
or millions of them, and disease prematurely sweeps away
many more. These events are considered to be misfortunes;
but when men succeed in inflicting similar destruction by


32 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


their own efforts, they rejoice, and give thanks to God. In
the life of the solar system the period during which the ex-
“stence of man will have been physically possible is a minute
portion of the whole; but there is some reason to hope that
even before this period is ended man will have set a term
to his own existence by his efforts at mutual annihilation.
Such is man’s life viewed from the outside.

But such a view of life, we are told, is intolerable, and ,
would destroy the instinctive energy by which men persist.
The way of escape that they have found is through religion
and philosophy. However alien and indifferent the outer
world may seem, we are assured by our comforters that
there is harmony beneath the apparent conflict. All the
long development from the original nebula is supposed to
lead up to man as the culmination of the process. Hamlet
is a very well-known play, yet few readers would have any -
recollection of the part of the ‘‘First Sailor,” which consists
of the four words: “God bless you, sir.’ But suppose a
society of men whose sole business in life was to act this
part; suppose them isolated from contact with the Hamlets,
Horatios, and even Guildensterns: would they not invent
systems of literary criticism according to which the four
words of the “First Sailor’ were the kernel of the whole
drama? Would they not punish with ignominy or exile any
one of their number who should suggest that other parts
were possibly of equal importance? And the life of man-
kind takes up a much smaller proportion of the universe
than the ‘First Sailor’s” speech does of Hamlet, but we can-
not listen behind the scenes to the rest of the play, and we
know very little of its characters or plot.

When we think of mankind, we think primarily of our-


DREAMS AND FACTS 33


self as its representative; we therefore think well of man-
kind, and consider its preservation important. Mr. Jones,
the Nonconformist grocer, is sure that he deserves eternal
life, and that a universe which refused it to him would be
intolerably bad. But when he thinks of Mr. Robinson, his
Anglican competitor, who mixes sand with his sugar and is
lax about Sunday, he feels that the universe might well carry
charity too far. To complete his happiness, there is need
of hell-fire for Mr. Robinson; in this way the cosmic im-
portance of man is preserved, but the vital distinction be-
tween friends and enemies is not obliterated by a weak uni-
versal benevolence. Mr. Robinson holds the same view
with the parts inverted, and general happiness results.

In the days before Copernicus there was no need of
philosophic subtlety to maintain the anthropocentric view of
the world. The heavens visibly revolved about the earth,
and on the earth man had dominion over all the beasts of
the field. But when the earth lost its central position, man,
too, was deposed from his eminence, and it became neces-
sary to invent a metaphysic to correct the “crudities” of sci-
ence. ‘This task was achieved by those who are called
“idealists,” who maintain that the world of matter is unreal
appearance, while the reality is Mind or Spirit—transcend-
ing the mind or spirit of the philosopher as he transcends
common men. So far from there being no place like home,
these thinkers assure us that every place is like home.
In all our best, that is, in all those tasks which we share
with the philosopher in question, we are at one with the
universe. Hegel assures us that the universe resembles the
Prussian State of his day; his English followers consider
it more analogous to a bi-cameral plutocratic democracy.


34 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


‘The reasons offered for these views are carefully camou-
flaged so as to conceal even from their authors the connec-
tion with human wishes: they are derived, nominally, from
such dry sources as logic and the analysis of propositions.
But the influence of wishes is shown by the fallacies com-
mitted, which all tend in one direction. When a man adds
up an account, he is much more likely to make a mistake in»
his favor than to his detriment; and when a man reasons,
he is more apt to incur fallacies which favor his wishes
than such as thwart them. And so it comes that, in the
study of nominally abstract thinkers, it is their mistakes
that give the key to their personality.

Many may contend that, even if the systems men have
invented are untrue, they are harmless and comforting, and
should be left undisturbed. But they are in fact not harm-
less, and the comfort they bring is dearly bought by the pre-
ventable misery which they lead men to tolerate. The evils
of life spring partly from natural causes, partly from men’s
hostility to each other. In former times, competition and
war were necessary for the securing of food, which could
only be obtained by the victors. Now, owing to the mastery
of natural forces which science has begun to give, there
would be more comfort and happiness for all if all devoted
themselves to the conquest of Nature rather than of each
other. The representation of Nature as a friend, and
sometimes as even an ally in our struggles with other men,
obscures the true position of man in the world, and diverts
his energies from the pursuit of scientific power, which is
the only fight that can bring long-continued well-being to
the human race.


Apart from all utilitarian arguments, the search for a


423126


DREAMS AND FACTS 35


_happiness based upon untrue beliefs is neither very noble
nor very glorious. There is a stark joy in the unflinching
perception of our true place in the world, and a more vivid
drama than any that is possible to those who hide behind
the enclosing walls of myth. There are “perilous seas” in
the world of thought, which can only be sailed by those
who are willing to face their own physical powerlessness.
And, above all, there is liberation from the tyranny of
Fear, which blots out the light of day and keeps men grovel-
ing and cruel. No man is liberated from fear who dare
not see his place in the world as it is; no man can achieve
the greatness of which he is capable until he has allowed
himself to see his own littleness.


III
IS SCIENCE SUPERSTITIOUS?


Mope_RN life is built on science in two respects. On the one
hand, we all depend upon scientific inventions and discov-
eries for our daily bread and for our comforts and amuse-
ments. On the other hand, certain habits of mind, con-
nected with a scientific outlook, have spread gradually
during the past three centuries from a few men of genius
to large sections of the population. These two operations
of science are bound up together when we consider suffi-
ciently long periods, but either might exist without the other
for several centuries. Until near the end of the eighteenth
century this scientific habit of mind did not greatly affect
daily life, since it had not led to the great inventions that
revolutionized industrial technique. On the other hand,
the manner of life produced by science can be taken over by
populations which have only certain practical rudiments of
scientific knowledge; such populations can make and utilize
machines invented elsewhere, and can even make minor im-
provements in them. If the collective intelligence of man-
kind were to degenerate, the kind of technique and daily
life which science has produced would nevertheless survive,
in all probability, for many generations. But it would not
survive forever, because, if seriously disturbed by a
cataclysm, it could not be reconstructed.

The scientific outlook, therefore, is a matter of impor-
tance to mankind either for good or evil. But the scientific

36


IS SCIENCE SUPERSTITIOUS? 37


outlook itself is twofold, like the artistic outlook. ‘The cre-
ator and the appreciator are different people and require
quite different habits of mind. The scientific creator, like
every other, is apt to be inspired by passions to which he
gives an intellectualist expression amounting to an undemon-
strated faith, without which he would probably achieve
little. The appreciator does not need this kind of faith;
he can see things in proportion and make necessary reserva-
tions, and may regard the creator as a crude and barbaric
person in comparison with himself. As civilization becomes
more diffused and more traditional, there is a tendency for
the habits of mind of the appreciator to conquer those who
might be creators, with the result that the civilization in
question becomes Byzantine and retrospective. Something
of this sort seems to be beginning to happen in science. The
simple faith which upheld the pioneers is decaying at the
center. Outlying nations, such as the Russians, the Japanese,
and the Young Chinese, still welcome science with seven-
teenth-century fervor; so do the bulk of the populations
of Western nations. But the high priests begin to weary
of the worship to which they are officially dedicated.
The pious young Luther reverenced a free-thinking Pope,
who allowed oxen to be sacrificed to Jupiter on the Capitol
to promote his recovery from illness. So in our day those
remote from centers of culture have a reverence for science
which its augurs no longer feel. The “‘scientific” material-
ism of the Bolsheviks, like early German Protestantism, is
an attempt to preserve the old piety in a form which both
friends and foes believe to be new. But their fiery belief
in the verbal inspiration of Newton has only accelerated
the spread of scientific scepticism among the “bourgeois”


38 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


scientists of the West. Science, as an activity recognized
and encouraged by the State, has become politically con-
servative, except where, as in Tennessee, the State has
remained pre-scientific. The fundamental faith of most men
of science in the present day is not in the importance of
preserving the status quo. Consequently they are very will-
ing to claim for science no more than its due, and to concede
much of the claims of other conservative forces, such as
religion.

They are faced, however, with a great difficulty. While
the men of science are in the main conservative, science is
still the chief agent of rapid change in the world. The
emotions produced by the change in Asia, in Africa, and
among the industrial populations of Europe are often dis-
pleasing to those who have a conservative outlook. Hence
arises a hesitation as to the value of science which has
contributed to the scepticism of the High Priests. If it
stood alone, it might be unimportant. But it is reénforced
by genuine intellectual difficulties which, if they prove insu-
perable, are likely to bring the era of scientific discovery
to a close. I do not mean that this will happen suddenly.
Russia and Asia may continue for another century to enter-
tain the scientific faith which the West is losing. But
sooner or later, if the logical case against this faith is
irrefutable, it will convince men who, for whatever reason,
may be momentarily weary; and, once convinced, they will
find it impossible to recapture the old glad confidence. The
case against the scientific credo deserves, therefore, to be
examined with all care.

When I speak of the scientific credo, I am not speaking
merely of what is logically implied in the view that, in the


IS SCIENCE SUPERSTITIOUS? 39


main, science is true; I am speaking of something more
enthusiastic and less rational—namely, the system of beliefs
and emotions which lead a man to become a great scientific
discoverer. The question is: Can such beliefs and emotions
survive among men who have the intellectual powers with-
out which scientific discovery is impossible ?

Two very interesting recent books will help us to see the
nature of the problem. The books I mean are: Burtt’s
Metaphysical Foundations of Modern Science (1924) and
Whitehead’s Science and the Modern World (1926). Each
of these criticizes the system of ideas which the modern
world owes to Copernicus, Kepler, Galileo, and Newton—
the former almost wholly from an historical standpoint,
the latter both historically and logically. Dr. Whitehead’s
book is the more important, because it is not merely critical,
but constructive, and aims at supplying an intellectually
satisfying basis for future science, which is to be at the same
time emotionally satisfying to the extra-scientific aspirations
of mankind. I cannot accept the logical arguments ad-
vanced by Dr. Whitehead in favor of what may be called
the pleasant parts of his theory: while admitting the need
of an intellectual reconstruction of scientific concepts, I in-
cline to the view that the new concepts will be just as dis-
agreeable to our non-intellectual emotions as the old ones,
and will therefore be accepted only by those who have a
strong emotional bias in favor of science. But let us see
what the argument is.

There is, to begin with, the historical aspect. ‘There can
be no living science,” says Dr. Whitehead, “unless there is
a widespread instinctive conviction in the existence of an
order of things, and, in particular, of an order of Nature.”


40 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


Science could only have been created by men who already
had this belief, and therefore the original sources of the
belief must have been pre-scientific. Other elements. also
went to make up the complex mentality required for the rise
of science. The Greek view of life, he maintains, was pre-
dominantly dramatic, and therefore tended to emphasize
the end rather than the beginning: this was a drawback
from the point of view of science. On the other hand,
Greek tragedy contributed the idea of Fate, which facili-
tated the view that events are rendered necessary by natural
laws. ‘‘Fate in Greek Tragedy becomes the order of Nature
in modern thought.”’ The necessitarian view was reénforced
by Roman law. The Roman Government, unlike the Ori-
ental despot, acted (in theory at least) not arbitrarily, but
in accordance with rules previously laid down. Similarly,
Christianity conceived God as acting in accordance with
laws, though they were laws which God Himself had made.
All this facilitated the rise of the conception of Natural
Law, which is one essential ingredient in scientific mentality.

The non-scientific beliefs which inspired the work of six-
teenth- and seventeenth-century pioneers are admirably set
forth by Dr. Burtt, with the aid of many little-known
original sources. It appears, for example, that Kepler’s
inspiration was, in part, a sort of Zoroastrian sun-worship
which he adopted at a critical period of his youth. “It was
primarily by such considerations as the deification of the sun
and its proper placing at the center of the universe that
Kepler in the years of his adolescent fervor and warm
imagination was induced to accept the new system.”
Throughout the Renaissance there is a certain hostility to_
Christianity, based primarily upon admiration for Pagan


IS SCIENCE SUPERSTITIOUS? 41


_ antiquity; it did not dare to express itself openly as a rule,
but led, for example, to a revival of astrology, which the
Church condemned as involving physical determinism. The
revolt against Christianity was associated with superstition
quite as much as with science—sometimes, as in Kepler’s
case, with both in intimate union.

But there is another ingredient, equally essential, but
absent in the Middle Ages, and not common in antiquity—
namely, an interest in “irreducible and stubborn facts.”
Curiosity about facts is found before the Renaissance in in-
_ dividuals—for example, the Emperor Frederick II and
Roger Bacon; but at the Renaissance it suddenly becomes
common among intelligent people. In Montaigne one finds
it without the interest in Natural Law; consequently Mon-
taigne was not a man of science. A peculiar blend of general
and particular interests is involved in the pursuit of science;
the particular is studied in the hope that it may throw light
upon the general. In the Middle Ages it was thought that,
theoretically, the particular could be deduced from general
principles; in the Renaissance these general principles fell
into disrepute, and the passion for historical antiquity pro-
duced a strong interest in particular occurrences. This inter-
est, operating upon minds trained by the Greek, Roman, and
scholastic traditions, produced at last the mental atmosphere
which made Kepler and Galileo possible. But naturally
something of this atmosphere surrounds their work, and
has traveled with it down to their present-day successors.
“Science has never shaken off its origin in the historical
revolt of the later Renaissance. It has remained predomi-
nantly an anti-rationalistic movement, based upon a naive
faith. What reasoning it has wanted has been borrowed


42 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


from mathematics, which is a surviving relic of Greek ra-
tionalism, following the deductive method. Science repudi-
ates philosophy. In other words, it has never cared to
justify its faith or to explain its meaning, and has remained ~
blandly indifferent to its refutation by Hume.”

Can science survive when we separate it from the super-
stitions which nourished its infancy? ‘The indifference of
science to philosophy has been due, of course, to its amazing
success; it has increased the sense of human power, and has
therefore been on the whole agreeable, in spite of its oc-
casional conflicts with theological orthodoxy. But in quite
recent times science has been driven by its own problems
to take an interest in philosophy. This is especially true of —
the theory of relativity, with its merging of space and time
into the single space-time order of events. But it is true
also of the theory of quanta, with its apparent need of dis-
continuous motion. Also, in another sphere, physiology
and bio-chemistry are making inroads on psychology which
threaten philosophy in a vital spot; Dr. Watson’s Behay-
iorism is the spear-head of this attack, which, while it in-
volves the opposite of respect for philosophic tradition,
nevertheless necessarily rests upon a new philosophy of its
own. For such reasons science and philosophy can no —
longer preserve an armed neutrality, but must be either
friends or foes. They cannot be friends unless science can
pass the examination which philosophy must set as to its
premises. If they cannot be friends, they can only destroy
each other; it is no longer possible that either alone can
remain master of the field.

Dr. Whitehead offers two things, with a view to the
philosophical justification of science. On the one hand, he ~


IS SCIENCE SUPERSTITIOUS? 43


presents certain new concepts, by means of which the physics
of relativity and quanta can be built up in a way which is
more satisfying intellectually than any that results from
piecemeal amendments to the old conception of solid mat-
ter. This part of his work, though not yet developed with
the fullness that we may hope to see, lies within science as
broadly conceived, and is capable of justification by the
usual methods which lead us to prefer one theoretical inter-
pretation of a set of facts to another. It is technically diffi-
cult, and I shall say no more about it. From our present
point of view, the important aspect of Dr. Whitehead’s
work is its more philosophical portion. He not only offers
us a better science, but a philosophy which is to make that
science rational, in a sense in which traditional science has
not been rational since the time of Hume. This philosophy
is, in the main, very similar to that of Bergson. The diff-
culty which I feel here is that, in so far as Dr. Whitehead’s
new concepts can be embodied in formule which can be
submitted to the ordinary scientific or logical tests, they do
not seem to involve his philosophy; his philosophy, there-
fore, must be accepted on its intrinsic merits. We must not
accept it merely on the ground that, if true, it justifies
science, for the question at issue is whether science can be
justified. We must examine directly whether it seems to us
to be true in fact; and here we find ourselves beset with all
the old perplexities.

I will take only one point, but it is a crucial one. Berg-
son, as every one knows, regards the past as surviving in
memory, and also holds that nothing is ever really forgot-
ten; on these points it would seem that Dr. Whitehead
agrees with him. Now this is all very well as a poetic way


44. SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


of speaking, but it cannot (I should have thought) be ac-
cepted as a scientifically accurate way of stating the facts.
If I recollect some past event—say my arrival in China—
it is a mere figure of speech to say that I am arriving in
China over again. Certain words or images occur when I
recollect, and are related to what I am recollecting, both
casually and by a certain similarity, often little more than a
similarity of logical structure. The scientific problem of
the relation of a recollection to a past event remains intact,
even if we choose to say that the recollection consists of a
survival of the past event. For, if we say this, we must nev-
ertheless admit that the event has changed in the interval,
and we shall be faced with the scientific problem of finding
the laws according to which it changes. Whether we call —
the recollection a new event or the old event greatly changed
can make no difference to the scientific problem.

The great scandals in the philosophy of science ever
since the time of Hume have been causality and induction.
We all believe in both, but Hume made it appear that our
belief is a blind faith for which no rational ground can be
assigned. Dr. Whitehead believes that his philosophy af-
fords an answer to Hume. So did Kant. I find myself
unable to accept either answer. And yet, in common with
every one else, I cannot help believing that there must be
an answer. ‘This state of affairs is profoundly unsatisfac-
tory, and becomes more so as science becomes more en-
tangled with philosophy. We must hope that an answer
will be found; but I am quite unable to believe that it has
been found.

Science as it exists at present is partly agreeable, partly
disagreeable. It is agreeable through the power which it


IS SCIENCE SUPERSTITIOUS? 45


gives us of manipulating our environment, and to a small
but important minority it is agreeable because it affords
intellectual satisfactions. It is disagreeable because, how-
ever we may seek to disguise the fact, it assumes a deter-
minism which involves, theoretically, the power of predicting
human actions; in this respect it seems to lessen human
power. Naturally people wish to keep the pleasant aspect
of science without the unpleasant aspect; but so far the
attempts to do so have broken down. If we emphasize the
fact that our belief in causality and induction is irrational,
we must infer that we do not know science to be true, and
that it may at any moment cease to give us the control over
the environment for the sake of which we like it. This
alternative, however, is purely theoretical; it is not one
which a modern man can adopt in practice. If, on the other
hand, we admit the claims of scientific method, we cannot
avoid the conclusion that causality and induction are appli-
cable to human volitions as much as to anything else. All
that has happened during the twentieth century in physics,
physiology, and psychology goes to strengthen this conclu-
sion. The outcome seems to be that, though the rational
justification of science is theoretically inadequate, there is
no method of securing what is pleasant in science without
what is unpleasant. We can do so, of course, by refusing
to face the logic of the situation; but, if so, we shall dry
up the impulse to scientific discovery at its source, which is
the desire to understand the world. It is to be hoped that
the future will offer some more satisfactory solution of this
tangled problem.


IV
CAN MEN BE RATIONAL?


I aM in the habit of thinking of myself as a Rationalist; and
a Rationalist, I suppose, must be one who wishes men to be
rational. But in these days rationality has received many
hard knocks, so that it is difficult to know what one means
by it, or whether, if that were known, it is something which
human beings can achieve. The question of the definition
of rationality has two sides, theoretical and practical: what
is a rational opinion? and what is rational conduct? Prag-
matism emphasizes the irrationality of opinion, and psycho-
analysis emphasizes the irrationality of conduct. Both have
led many people to the view that there is no such thing as
an ideal of rationality to which opinion and conduct might
with advantage conform. It would seem to follow that, if
you and I hold different opinions, it is useless to appeal to
argument, or to seek the arbitrament of an impartial out-
sider; there is nothing for us to do but to fight it out, oy the
methods of rhetoric, advertisement, or warfare, accgrding
to the degree of our financial and military strength. I be-
lieve such an outlook to be very dangerous, and, in the long
run, fatal to civilization. I shall, therefore, endeavor to
show that the ideal of rationality remains unaffected by the
ideas that have been thought fatal to it, and that it retains
all the importance it was formerly believed to have as a
guide to thought and life.

To begin with rationality in opinion: I should define it
merely as the habit of taking account of all relevant evi-

46


CAN MEN BE RATIONAL? 47


dence in arriving at a belief. Where certainty is unattain-
able, a rational man will give most weight to the most
probable opinion, while retaining others, which have an
appreciable probability, in his mind as hypotheses which sub-
sequent evidence may show to be preferable. This, of
course, assumes that it is possible in many cases to ascertain
facts and probabilities by an objective method—i.e., a
method which will lead any two careful people to the same
result. ‘This is often questioned. It is said by many that
the only function of intellect is to facilitate the satisfaction
of the individual’s desires and needs. ‘The Plebs Text-
Books Committee, in their Outline of Psychology (p. 68),
say: “The intellect is above all things an instrument of par-
tiality. Its function is to secure that those actions which
are beneficial’to the individual or the species shall be per-
formed, and that those actions which are less beneficial shall
be inhibited.” (Italics in the original.)

But the same authors, in the same book (p. 123), state,
again in italics: “The faith of the Marxian differs pro-
foundly from religious faith; the latter is based only on
desire and tradition; the former is grounded on the scientific
analysis of objective reality.” ‘This seems inconsistent with
what they say about the intellect, unless, indeed, they mean
to suggest that it is not intellect which has led them to adopt
the Marxian faith. In any case, since they admit that “scien-
tific analysis of objective reality” is possible, they must
admit that it is possible to have opinions which are rational
‘in an objective sense.

More erudite authors who advocate an irrationalist point
of view, such as the pragmatist philosophers, are not to be
caught out so easily. They maintain that there is no such


48 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


thing as objective fact to which our opinions must conform
if they are to be true. For them opinions are merely
weapons in the struggle for existence, and those which help
a man to survive are to be called “true.” This view was
prevalent in Japan in the sixth century A.D., when Buddhism
first reached that country. The Government, being in doubt
as to the truth of the new religion, ordered one of the court-
iers to adopt it experimentally; if he prospered more than
the others, the religion was to be adopted universally. This
is the method (with modifications to suit modern times)
which the pragmatists advocate in regard to all religious
controversies; and yet I have not heard of any who have
announced their conversion to the Jewish faith, although it
seems to lead to prosperity more rapidly than any other.
In spite of the pragmatist’s definition of ‘‘truth,” how-
ever, he has always, in ordinary life, a quite different stand-
ard for the less refined questions which arise in practical
affairs. A pragmatist on a jury in a murder case will weigh
the evidence exactly as any other man will, whereas if he
adopted his professed criterion he ought to consider whom
among the population it would be most profitable to hang.
That man would be, by definition, guilty of the murder,
since belief in his guilt would be more useful, and therefore
more “true,” than belief in the guilt of any one else. I am
afraid such practical pragmatism does sometimes occur; I
have heard of ‘“‘frame-ups” in America and Russia which an-
swered to this description. But in such cases all possible
efforts after concealment are made, and if they fail there is
a scandal. This effort after concealment shows that even
policemen believe in objective truth in the case of a criminal
trial, It is this kind of objective truth—a very mundane


CAN MEN BE RATIONAL? 49


_and pedestrian affair—that is sought in science. It is this
kind also that is sought in religion so long as people hope
to find it. It is only when people have given up the hope
of proving that religion is true in a straightforward sense
that they set to work to prove that it is “true” in some
new-fangled sense. It may be laid down broadly that irra-
tionalism, i.e., disbelief in objective fact, arises almost
always from the desire to assert something for which there
is no evidence, or to deny something for which there is very
good evidence. But the belief in objective fact always per-
sists as regards particular practical questions, such as invest-
ments or engaging servants. And if fact can be made the
test of the truth of our beliefs anywhere, it should be the
test everywhere, leading to agnosticism wherever it cannot
be applied.

The above considerations are, of course, very inadequate
to their theme. The question of the objectivity of fact has
been rendered difficult by the obfuscations of philosophers,
with which I have attempted to deal elsewhere in a more
thoroughgoing fashion. For the present I shall assume
that there are facts, that some facts can be known, and that
in regard to certain others a degree of probability can be
ascertained in relation to facts which can be known. Our
beliefs are, however, often contrary to fact; even when we
only hold that something is probable on the evidence, it may
be that we ought to hold it to be improbable on the same
evidence. ‘The theoretical part of rationality, then, will
consist in basing our beliefs as regards matters of fact upon
evidence rather than upon wishes, prejudices, or traditions.
According to the subject-matter, a rational man will be the
same as one who is judicial or one who is scientific.


50 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


There are some who think that psycho-analysis has shown
the impossibility of being rational in our beliefs, by pointing
out the strange and almost lunatic origin of many people’s
cherished convictions. I have a very high respect for
psycho-analysis, and I believe that it can be enormously
useful. But the popular mind has somewhat lost sight of
the purpose which has mainly inspired Freud and his fol-
lowers. Their method is primarily one of therapeutics, a
way of curing hysteria and various kinds of insanity. Dur-
ing the war psycho-analysis proved to be far the most potent
treatment for war-neuroses. Rivers’s Instinct and the Un-
conscious, which is largely based upon experience of “shell-
shock” patients, gives a beautiful analysis of the morbid
effects of fear when it cannot be straightforwardly indulged.
These effects, of course, are largely non-intellectual; they
include various kinds of paralysis, and all sorts of ap-
parently physical ailments. With these, for the moment,
we are not concerned; it is intellectual derangements that
form our theme. It is found that many of the delusions of
lunatics result from instinctive obstructions, and can be
cured by purely mental means—i.e., by making the patient
bring to mind facts of which he had repressed the memory.
This kind of treatment, and the outlook which inspires it,
pre-suppose an ideal of sanity, from which the patient has
departed, and to which he.is to be brought back by making
him conscious of all the relevant facts, including those
which he most wishes to forget. This is the exact opposite
of that lazy acquiescence in irrationality which is sometimes
urged by those who only know that psycho-analysis has
shown the prevalence of irrational beliefs, and who forget
or ignore that its purpose is to diminish this prevalence by
a definite method of medical treatment. ‘A closely similar


CAN MEN BE RATIONAL? 51


method can cure the irrationalities of those who are not
recognized lunatics, provided they will submit to treatment
by a practitioner free from their delusions. Presidents,
Cabinet Ministers, and Eminent Persons, however, seldom
fulfill this condition, and therefore remain uncured.

So far we have been considering only the theoretical side
of rationality. The practical side, to which we must now
turn our attention, is more difficult. Differences of opinion
on practical questions spring from two sources: first, differ-
ences between the desires of the disputants; secondly, dif-
ferences in their estimates of the means for realizing their
desires. Differences of the second kind are really theoreti-
cal, and only derivatively practical. For example, some
authorities hold that our first line of defense should consist
of battleships, others that it should consist of airplanes.
Here there is no difference as regards the end proposed,
namely, national defense, but only as to the means. The
argument can therefor be conducted in a purely scientific
manner, since the disagreement which causes the dispute is
only as to facts, present or future, certain or probable. To
all such cases the kind of rationality which I called theoreti-
cal applies, in spite of the fact that a practical issue is in-
volved.

There is, however, in many cases which appear to come
under this head a complication which is very important in
‘practice. A man who desires to act in a certain way will
persuade himself that by so acting he will achieve some
end which he considers good, even when, if he had no such
desire, he would see no reason for such a belief. And he
will judge quite differently as to matters of fact and as to
probabilities from the way in which a man with contrary
desires will judge. Gamblers, as every one knows, are full


$2 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


of irrational beliefs as to systems which must lead them to
win in the long run. People who take an interest in politics
persuade themselves that the leaders of their party would
never be guilty of the knavish tricks practiced by opposing
politicians. Men who like administration think that it is
good for the populace to be treated like a herd of sheep,
men who like tobacco say that it soothes the nerves, and
men who like alcohol say that it stimulates wit. The bias
produced by such causes falsifies men’s judgments as to facts
in a way which is very hard to avoid. Even a learned scien-
tific article about the effects of alcohol on the nervous sys-
tem will generally betray by internal evidence whether the
author is or is not a teetotaler; in either case he has a tend-
ency to see the facts in the way that would justify his own
practice. In politics and religion such considerations be-
come very important. Most men think that in framing their
political opinions they are actuated by desire for the public
good; but nine times out of ten a man’s politics can be pre-
dicted from the way in which he makes his living. This has
led some people to maintain, and many more to believe prac-
tically, that in such matters it is impossible to be objective,
and that no method is possible except a tug-of-war between
classes with opposite bias.

It is just in such matters, however, that psycho-analysis
is particularly useful, since it enables men to become aware
of a bias which has hitherto been unconscious. It gives a
technique for seeing ourselves as others see us, and a reason
for supposing that this view of ourselves is less unjust than
we are inclined to think. Combined with a training in the
scientific outlook, this method could, if it were widely
taught, enable people to be infinitely more rational than


CAN MEN BE RATIONAL? 53


_ they are at present as regards all their beliefs about mat-
ters of fact, and about the probable effect of any proposed
action. And if men did not disagree about such matters,
the disagreements which might survive would almost cer-
tainly be found capable of amicable adjustment.

There remains, however, a residuum which cannot be
treated by purely intellectual methods. The desires of one
man do not by any means harmonize completely with those
of another. Two competitors on the Stock Exchange might
be in complete agreement as to what would be the effect
of this or that action, but this would not produce practical
harmony, since each wishes to grow rich at the expense of
the other. Yet even here rationality is capable of prevent-
ing most of the harm that might otherwise occur. We call
a man irrational when he acts in a passion, when‘he cuts
off his nose to spite his face. He is irrational because he
forgets that, by indulging the desire which he happens to
feel most strongly at the moment, he will thwart other de-
sires which in the long run are more important to him.
If men were rational, they would take a more correct view
of their own interest than they do at present; and if all
men acted from enlightened self-interest the world would
be a paradise in comparison with what it is. I do not main-
tain that there is nothing better than self-interest as a
motive to action; but I do maintain that self-interest, like
altruism, is better when it is enlightened than when it is
unenlightened. In an ordered community it is very rarely
to a man’s interest to do anything which is very harmful
to others. The less rational a man is, the oftener he will
fail to perceive how what injures others also injures him,
because hatred or envy will blind him. Therefore, al-


54 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


though I do not pretend that enlightened self-interest is
the highest morality, I do maintain that, if it became com-
mon, it would make the world an immeasurably better place
than it is.

Rationality in practice may be defined as the habit of
remembering all our relevant desires, and not only the one
which happens at the moment to be strongest. Like ration-
ality in opinion, it is a matter of degree. Complete ration-
ality is no doubt an unattainable ideal, but so long as we
continue to classify some men as lunatics it is clear that we
think some men more rational than others. I believe that
all solid progress in the world consists of an increase in
rationality, both practical and theoretical. To preach an
altruistic morality appears to me somewhat useless, because
it will appeal only to those who already have altruistic de-
sires. But to preach rationality is somewhat different, since
rationality helps us to realize our own desires on the whole,
whatever they may be. A man is rational in proportion
as his intelligence informs and controls his desires. I be-
lieve that the control of our acts by our intelligence is ulti-
mately what is of most importance, and what alone will
make social life remain possible as science increases the
means at our disposal for injuring each other. Education,
the press, politics, religion—in a word, all the great forces
in the world—are at present on the side of irrationality;
they are in the hands of men who flatter King Demos in
order to lead him astray. The remedy does not lie in any-
thing heroically cataclysmic, but in the efforts of individuals —
towards a more sane and balanced view of our relations to
our neighbors and to the world. It is to intelligence, in-
creasingly widespread, that we must look for the solution
of the ills from which our world is suffering.


V
PHILOSOPHY IN THE TWENTIETH CENTURY


EVER since the end of the Middle Ages philosophy has
steadily declined in social and political importance. William
of Ockham, one of the greatest of medieval philosophers,
was hired by the Kaiser to write pamphlets against the
Pope; in those days many burning questions were bound up
with disputes in the schools. The advances of philosophy
in the seventeenth century were more or less connected with
political opposition to the Catholic Church; Malebranche,
it is true, was a priest, but priests are not now allowed to
accept his philosophy. The disciples of Locke in eighteenth-
century France, and the Benthamites in nineteenth-century
England, were for the most part extreme Radicals in poli-
tics, and created the modern bourgeois liberal outlook. But
the correlation between philosophical and political opinions
grows less definite as we advance. Hume was a Tory in
politics, though an extreme Radical in philosophy. Only
in Russia, which remained medieval till the Revolution, has
any clear connection of philosophy and politics survived.
Bolsheviks are materialists, while Whites are idealists. In
Tibet the connection is even closer; the second official in the
State is called the ‘‘metaphysician in chief.” Elsewhere
philosophy is no longer held in such high esteem.
Academic philosophy, throughout the twentieth century,
has been mainly divided into three groups. The first con-
sists of the adherents of the classical German philosophy,
55


56 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


usually Kant, but sometimes Hegel. The second consists
of the pragmatists and Bergson. The third consists of those
who attach themselves to the sciences, believing that phi-
losophy has no special brand of truth and no peculiar
method of arriving at it; these men, for convenience, may be
called realists, though in fact there are many among them to
whom this name is not strictly applicable. The distinction
between the different schools is not sharp, and individuals
belong partly to one, partly to another. William James may
be regarded as almost the founder of both realism and
pragmatism. Dr. Whitehead’s recent books employ the
methods of realists in defense of a more or less Bergsonian
metaphysic. Many philosophers, not without a consider-
able show of reason, regard Einstein’s doctrines as afford-
ing a scientific basis for Kant’s belief in the subjectivity of
time and space. The distinctions in fact are thus less clear
than the distinctions in logic. Nevertheless the distinctions
in logic are useful as affording a framework for the classifi-
cation of opinions.

German idealism, throughout the twentieth century, has
been on the defensive. The new books that have been rec-
ognized as important by others than professors have repre-
sented newer schools, and a person who judged by book
reviews might imagine that these schools had now the upper
hand. But in fact most teachers of philosophy, in Germany,
France, and Great Britain, though perhaps not America, -
still adhere to the classical tradition. It is certainly much
easier for a young man to get a post if he belongs to this
party than if he does not. Its opponents made an attempt
to show that it shared the wickedness of everything Ger-
man, and was in some way responsible for the invasion of


PHILOSOPHY IN THE 20TH CENTURY 59


Belgium.*' But its adherents were too eminent and re-
spectable for this line of attack to be successful. Two of
them, Emile Boutroux and Bernard Bosanquet, were until
their deaths the official spokesmen of French and British
philosophy respectively at international congresses. Reli-
‘gion and conservatism look mainly to this school for defense
against heresy and revolution. They have the strength and
weakness of those who stand for the status quo: the strength
that comes of tradition, and the weakness that comes of
lack of fresh thought.

In the English-speaking world, this position was only ac-
quired just before the beginning of the twentieth century.
I began the serious study of philosophy in the year 1893,
the year which saw the publication of Mr. Bradley’s 4p-
pearance and Reality. Mr. Bradley was one of those who
had had to fight to win proper recognition of German philos-
ophy in England, and his attitude was very far from that of
one who defends a traditional orthodoxy. To me, as to most
of my contemporaries, his Logic and his Appearance and
Reality made a profound appeal. I still regard these books
with the greatest respect, though I have long ceased to
agree with their doctrines.

The outlook of Hegelianism is characterized by the be-
lief that logic alone can tell us a great deal about the real
world. Mr. Bradley shares this belief; he contends that
the world as it seems to be is self-contradictory, and there-
fore illusory, while the real world, since it must be logically
self-consistent, is bound to have certain characteristics of a
surprising kind. It cannot be in time and space, it cannot
contain a variety of interrelated things, it cannot contain


1See e.g. Santayana’s Egotism in German Philosophy.


58 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


separate selves, or even that degree of division between
subject and object which is involved in knowing. It consists
therefore of a single Absolute, timelessly engaged in some-
thing more analogous to feeling than to thinking or willing.
Our sublunary world is all illusion, and what seems to hap-
pen in it does not really matter. This doctrine ought to
destroy morality, but morality is temperamental and defies
logic. Hegelians in fact urge as their basic moral principle
that we ought to behave as if the Hegelian philosophy were
true; but they do not notice that if it were true it would
not matter how we behave.

The attack upon this philosophy came from two sides.
On the one side were the logicians, who pointed to fallacies
in Hegel, and contended that relations and plurality, space
and time, are in fact not self-contradictory. On the other
side were those who disliked the regimentation and orderli-
ness involved in a world created by logic; of these the chief
were William James and Bergson. The two lines of attack
were not logically inconsistent, except in some of their ac-
cidental manifestations, but they were temperamentally dif-
ferent, and were inspired by different kinds of knowledge.
Moreover their appeal was quite different; the appeal of
the one was academic, that of the other was human. The
academic appeal argued that Hegelianism was false: the
human appeal argued that it was disagreeable. Naturally
the latter had more popular success.

In the English-speaking world, the greatest influence in
the overthrow of German idealism was William James—
not as he appears in his Psychology, but as he came to be
known through the series of small books which were pub-
lished in the last years of his life and after his death. In_


PHILOSOPHY IN THE 20TH CENTURY 59


an article published in Mind so long ago as 1884, reprinted
in the posthumous volume Essays in Radical Empiricism,
he sets out his temperamental bias with extraordinary
charm :—


Since we are in the main not sceptics, we might go on and frankly con-
fess to each other the motives for our several faiths. I frankly confess
mine—I cannot but think that at bottom they are of an esthetic and not
of a logical sort. The “through-and-through” universe seems to suffocate
me with its infallible impeccable all-pervasiveness. Its necessity, with no
possibilities; its relations, with no subjects, make me feel as if I had
entered into a contract with no reserved rights, or rather as if I had to
live in a large seaside boarding-house with no private bedroom in which
I might take refuge from the society of the place. I am distinctly aware,
moreover, that the old quarrel of sinner and pharisee has something to
do with the matter. Certainly, to my personal knowledge, all Hegelians are
not prigs, but I somehow feel as if all prigs ought to end, if developed, by
becoming Hegelians. There is a story of two clergymen asked by mis-
take to conduct the same funeral. One came first and had got no further
than “I am the Resurrection and the Life” when the other entered. “J am
the Resurrection and the Life,” cried the latter. The “through-and-through”
philosophy, as it actually exists, reminds many of us of that clergyman. It
seems too buttoned-up and white-chokered and clean-shaven a thing to speak
for the vast slow-breathing unconscious Kosmos with its dread abysses and
its unknown tides,


I think it may be wagered that no one except William
James has ever lived who would have thought of compar-
ing Hegelianism to a seaside boarding-house. In 1884
this article had no effect, because Hegelianism was still on
the up-grade, and philosophers had not learnt to admit that
their temperaments had anything to do with their opinions.
In 1912 (the date of the reprint) the atmosphere had
changed through many causes—among others the influence
of William James upon his pupils. I cannot claim to have


1Pp. 276-8,


60 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


known him more than superficially except from his writ-
ings, but it seems to me that one may distinguish three
strands in his nature, all of which contributed to form his
outlook. Last in time but first in its philosophical mani-
festations was the influence of his training in physiology
and medicine, which gave him a scientific and slightly ma-
terialistic bias as compared to purely literary philosophers
who derived their inspiration from Plato, Aristotle, and
Hegel. This strand dominates his Psychology except in a

few crucial passages, such as his discussion of free will.
The second element in his philosophical make-up was a mys-
tical and’religious bias inherited from his father and shared
with his brother. This inspired the Will to Believe and his
interest in psychical research. Thirdly, there was an at-
tempt, made with all the earnestness of a New England
conscience, to exterminate the natural fastidiousness which
he also shared with his brother, and replace it by democratic
sentiment ala Walt Whitman. The fastidiousness is visible
in the above quotation, where he expresses horror of a

boarding-house with no private bedroom (which Whitman
would have loved). The wish to be democratic is visible
in the claim that he is a sinner, not a pharisee. Certainly
he was not a pharisee, but he probably committed as few
sins as any man who ever lived. On this point he fell short

of his usual modesty. .
The best people usually owe their excellence to a combina-
tion of qualities which might have been supposed incom-
patible, and so it was in the case of James, whose im-
portance was greater than was thought by most of his
contemporaries. He advocated pragmatism as a method
of presenting religious hopes as scientific hypotheses, and he —


PHILOSOPHY IN THE 20TH CENTURY 61


adopted the revolutionary view that there is no such thing
as “consciousness,” as a way of overcoming the opposition
between mind and matter without giving predominance to
either. In these two parts of his philosophy he had differ-
ent allies: Schiller and Bergson as regards the former, the
new realists as regards the latter. Only Dewey, among
eminent men, was with him on both issues. The two parts
have different histories and affiliations, and must be con-
sidered separately.

James’s Will to Believe dates from 1897; his Pragma-
tism from 1907. Schiller’s Humanism and Dewey’s Studies
in Logical Theory both date from 1903. Throughout the
early years of the twentieth century the philosophical world
was excited about pragmatism; then Bergson outbid it in
appealing to the same tastes. The three founders of prag-
matism differ greatly inter se; we may distinguish James,
Schiller, and Dewey as respectively its religious, literary,
and scientific protagonists—for, though James was many-
sided, it was chiefly his religious side which found an outlet
in pragmatism. But let us ignore these differences and try
to present the doctrine as a unity.

The basis of the doctrine is a certain kind of scepticism.
Traditional philosophy professed to be able to prove the
fundamental doctrines of religion; its opponents professed
to be able to disprove them, or at least, like Spencer, to
prove that they could not be proved. It seemed, however,
that if they could not be proved, they also could not be dis-
proved. And this appeared to be the case with many doc-
trines which such men as Spencer regarded as unshakable:
causality, the reign of law, the general trustworthiness of
memory, the validity of induction, and so on. All these,


62 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


from a purely rational point of view, should be embraced
in the agnostic’s suspense of judgment, since, so far as we
can see, they are radically incapable of proof or disproof.
James argued that, as practical men, we cannot remain in
doubt on these issues if we are to survive. We must assume, ©
for instance, that the sort of food which has nourished us
in the past will not poison us in the future. Sometimes
we are mistaken, and die. The test of a belief is not con-
formity with “fact,” since we can never reach the facts
concerned; the test is its success in promoting life and the
achievement of our desires. From this point of view, as
James tried to show in The Varieties of Religious Experi-
ence, religious beliefs often pass the test, and are therefore
to be called “true.” It is in no other sense—so he contends
—that the most accredited theories of science can be called
“true” : they work in practice, and that is all we know about
it.

As applied to the general hypotheses of science and reli-
gion, there is a great deal to be said for this view. Given
a careful definition of what is meant by “working,” and a
proviso that the cases concerned are those where we do not
really know the truth, there is no need to quarrel with the
doctrine in this region. But let us take humbler examples,
where real truth is not so hard to obtain. Suppose you see
a flash of lightning, you may expect to hear thunder, or you
may judge that the flash was too distant for the thunder to
be audible, or you may not think about the matter at all.
This last is usually the most sensible course, but let us sup-
pose that you adopt one of the other two. When you hear
the thunder, your belief is verified or refuted, not by any
advantage or disadvantage it has brought you, but by a


PHILOSOPHY IN THE 20TH CENTURY 63


“fact,” the sensation of hearing thunder. Pragmatists at-
tend mainly to beliefs which are incapable of being verified
by any facts that come within our experience. Most of our
everyday beliefs about mundane affairs—e.g., that so-and-
so’s address is such-and-such—are capable of verification
within our experience, and in these cases the pragamtist’s cri-
terion is unnecessary. In many cases, like the above instance
of the thunder, it is quite inapplicable, since the true belief
has no practical advantage over the false one, and neither
is as advantageous as thinking about something else. It is
a common defect of philosophers to like “grand” examples
rather than such as come from ordinary daily life.
Although pragmatism may not contain ultimate philo-
sophical truth, it has certain important merits. First, it
realizes that the truth that we can attain to is merely human
truth, fallible and changeable like everything human. What
lies outside the cycle of human occurrences is not truth, but
fact (of certain kinds). Truth is a property of beliefs, and
beliefs are psychical events. Moreover their relation to
facts does not have the schematic simplicity which logic as-
sumes; to have pointed this out is a second merit in prag-
matism. Beliefs are vague and complex, pointing not to
one precise fact, but to several vague regions of fact. Be-
liefs, therefore, unlike the schematic propositions of logic,
are not sharply opposed as true or false, but are a blur of
truth and falsehood; they are of varying shades of gray,
never white or black. People who speak with reverence of
the “Truth” would do better to speak about Fact, and to
realize that the reverend qualities to which they pay homage
are not to be found in human beliefs. There are practical
as well as theoretical advantages in this, since people per-


64 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


secute each other because they believe that they know the
“Truth.” Speaking psycho-analytically, it may be laid down
that any “great ideal” which people mention with awe is
really an excuse for inflicting pain on their enemies. Good
wine needs no bush, and good morals need no bated breath.

In practice, however, pragmatism has a more sinister
side. The truth, it says, is what pays in the way of beliefs.
Now a belief may be made to pay through the operation of
the criminal law. In the seventeenth century, Catholicism
paid in Catholic countries and Protestantism in Protestant
countries. Energetic people can manufacture “‘truth” by
getting hold of the Government and persecuting opinions
other than their own. ‘These consequences flow from an ex-
aggeration into which pragmatism has fallen. Granted that, —
as pragmatists point out, truth is a matter of degree, and
is a property of purely human occurrences, namely beliefs,
it still does not follow that the degree of truth possessed
by a belief depends upon purely human conditions. In in-
creasing the degree of truth in our beliefs, we are approxi-
mating to an ideal, and the ideal is determined by Fact,
which is only within our control to a certain very limited ex-
tent, as regards some of ‘the minor circumstances on or
near the surface of a certain planet. The theory of the
pragmatist is derived from the practice of the advertiser,
who, by saying repeatedly that his pills are worth a dollar
a box, makes people willing to give a quarter a box for them,
and thus makes his assertion more nearly true than if it had
been made with less confidence. Such instances of man-
made truth are interesting, but their scope is very limited.
By exaggerating their scope, people become involved in an
orgy of propaganda, which is ultimately brought to an ab-


PHILOSOPHY IN THE 20TH CENTURY 65


Tupt end by hard facts in the shape of war, pestilence, and
famine. The recent history of Europe is an object-lesson
of the falsehood of pragmatism in this form.

It is a curious thing that Bergson should have been hailed
as an ally by the pragmatists, since, on the face of it, his
philosophy is the exact antithesis to theirs. While pragma-
tists teach that utility is the test of truth, Bergson teaches,
on the contrary, that our intellect, having been fashioned
by practical needs, ignores all the aspects of the world which
it does not pay to notice, and is in fact an obstacle to the ap-
prehension of truth. We have, he thinks, a faculty called
“intuition” which we can use if we take the trouble, and
which will enable us to know, in theory at least, everything
past and present, though apparently not the future. But
since it would be inconvenient to be troubled with so much
knowledge, we have developed a brain, the function of which
is to forget. But for the brain, we should remember every-
thing; owing to its sieve-like operations, we usually remem-
ber only what is useful, and that all wrong. Utility, for
Bergson, is the source of error, while truth is arrived at
by a mystic contemplation from which all thought of prac-
tical advantage is absent. Nevertheless Bergson, like the
pragmatists, prefers action to reason, Othello to Hamlet;
he thinks it better to kill Desdemona by intuition than to
let the King live because of intellect. It is this that makes
pragmatists regard him as an ally.

Bergson’s Données Immédiates de la Conscience was
published in 1889, and his Matiére et Mémoire in 1896.
But his great reputation began with L’Evolution Créatrice,
published in 1907—not that this book was better than the
others, but that it contained less argument and more rhet-


66 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


oric, so that it had more persuasive effect. This book con-
tains, from beginning to end, no argument, and therefore
no bad argument; it contains merely a poetical picture ap-
pealing to the fancy. There is nothing in it to help us to
a conclusion as to whether the philosophy which it advocates
is true or false; this question, which might be thought not
unimportant, Bergson has left to others. But according
to his own theories he is right in this, since truth is to be
attained by intuition, not by intellect, and is therefore not
a matter of argument.

A great part of Bergson’s philosophy is merely tradi-
tional mysticism expressed in slightly novel language. The
doctrine of interpenetration, according to which different
things are not really separate, but are merely so conceived
by the analytic intellect, is to be found in every mystic,
eastern or western, from Parmenides to Mr. Bradley. Berg-
son has given an air of novelty to this doctrine by means of
two devices. First, he connects “‘intuition’”’ with the instincts
of animals; he suggests that intuition is what enables the
solitary wasp Ammophila to sting the larva in which it lays
its eggs exactly so as to paralyze it without killing it.
(The instance is unfortunate, since Dr. and Mrs. Peckham
have shown that this poor wasp is no more unerring than
a mere man of science with his blundering intellect.) This
gives a flavor of modern science to his doctrines,.and en-
ables him to adduce zodlogical instances which make the un-
wary think that his views are based upon the latest results
of biological research. Secondly, he gives the name “space”
to the separateness of things as they appear to the analytic
intellect, and the name “time” or “duration” to their inter-
penetration as revealed to intuition, This enables him to say


PHILOSOPHY IN THE 20TH CENTURY 67


many new things about ‘“‘space” and “time,” which sound
very profound and original when they are supposed to be
about what is ordinarily meant by those words. “Matter,”
being that which is in “space,” is of course a fiction created
by the intellect, and is seen to be such as soon as we place
ourselves at the point of view of intuition.

In this part of his philosophy, apart from phraseology,
Bergson has added nothing to Plotinus. The invention of
the phraseology certainly shows great ability, but it is that
of the company-promoter rather than the philosopher. It
is not this part of his philosophy, however, which has won
him his wide popularity. He owes that to his doctrine of
the élan vital and real becoming. His great and remark-
able innovation is to have combined mysticism with a belief
in the reality of time and progress. It is worth while to see
how he achieved this feat.

Traditional mysticism has been contemplative, convinced
of the unreality of time, and essentially a lazy man’s
philosophy. The psychological prelude to the mystic illu-
mination is the ‘“‘dark night of the soul,” which arises when
a man is hopelessly balked in his practical activities, or for
some reason suddenly loses interest in them. Activity be-
ing thus ruled out, he takes to contemplation. It is a law
of our being that, whenever it is in any way possible, we
adopt such beliefs as will preserve our self-respect. Psycho-
analytic literature is full of grotesque examples of this law.
Accordingly the man who has been driven to contemplation
presently discovers that contemplation is the true end of
life, and that the real world is hidden from those who are
immersed in mundane activities. From this basis the re-
maining doctrines of traditional mysticism can be deduced.


68 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


Lao-Tze, perhaps the first of the great mystics, wrote his
book (so tradition avers) at a custom-house while he was
waiting to have his baggage examined ;* and, as might be
expected, it is full of the doctrine that action is futile.

But Bergson sought to adapt mysticism to those who be-
lieve in activity and “life,” who believe in the reality of
progress and are in no way disillusioned about our existence
here below. The mystic is usually a temperamentally active
man forced into inaction; the vitalist is a temperamentally
inactive man with a romantic admiration for action. Before
1914 the world was full of such people, “Heartbreak
House” people. Their temperamental basis is boredom
and scepticism, leading to love of excitement and longing
for an irrational faith—a faith which they found ultimately
in the belief that it was their duty to make other people
kill each other. But in 1907 they had not this outlet, and
Bergson provided a good substitute.

Bergson’s view is sometimes expressed in language which
might mislead, because things which he regards as illusory
are occasionally mentioned in a way which suggests that
they are real. But when we avoid these possibilities of mis-
understanding, I think his doctrine of time is as follows:
Time is not a series of separate moments or events, but a
continuous growth, in which the future cannot be foreseen
because it is genuinely new and therefore unimaginable.
Everything that really happens persists, like the successive
rings in the growth of atree. (This is not his illustration. )
Thus the world is perpetually growing fuller and richer.
Everything that has happened persists in the pure memory


1The chief ar


: gument against this tradition is that the book is not very
ong.


PHILOSOPHY IN THE 20TH CENTURY 69


of intuition, as opposed to the pseudo-memory of the brain.
This persistence is “‘duration,’’ while the impulse to new
creation is the élan vital. To recover the pure memory
of intuition is a matter of self-discipline. We are not told
how to do it, but one suspects something not unlike the prac-
tices of Yogis.

If one might venture to apply to Bergson’s philosophy
so vulgar a thing as logic, certain difficulties would appear
in this philosophy of change. Bergson is never tired of
pouring scorn upon the mathematician for regarding time
as a series, whose parts are mutually external. But if there
is indeed genuine novelty in the world, as he insists (and
without this feature his philosophy loses its attractive qual-
ities), and if whatever really comes into the world persists
(which is the simple essence of his doctrine of duration),
_ then the sum-total of existence at any earlier time is part
~ of the sum-total at any later time. Total states of the world
at various times form a series in virtue of this relation of
whole and part, and this series has all the properties that
the mathematician wants and that Bergson professes to
have banished. If the new elements which are added in
later states of the world are not external to the old ele-
ments, there is no genuine novelty, creative evolution has
created nothing, and we are back in the system of Plotinus.
Of course Bergson’s answer to this dilemma is that what
happens is “growth,” in which everything changes and yet
remains the same. This conception, however, is a mystery,
which the profane cannot hope to fathom. At bottom,
Bergson’s appeal is to mystical faith, not to reason; but
into the regions where faith is above logic we cannot fol-
low him.


70 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


Meanwhile, from many directions, a philosophy grew up
which is often described as “realism,” but is really char-
acterized by analysis as a method and pluralism as a meta-
physic. It is not necessarily realistic, since it is, in some
forms, compatible with Berkleian idealism. It is not com-
patible with Kantian or Hegelian idealism, because it re-
jects the logic upon which those systems are based. It
tends more and more to the adoption and development of
James’s view, that the fundamental stuff of the world is
neither mental nor material, but something simpler and more
fundamental, out of which both mind and matter are con-
structed.

In the nineties, James was almost the only eminent fig-
ure, except among the very old, that stood out against
German idealism. Schiller and Dewey had not yet begun
to make themselves felt, and even James was regarded as a
psychologist who need not be taken very seriously in
philosophy. But with the year 1900 a revolt against Ger-
man idealism began, not from a pragmatist point of view,
but from a severely technical standpoint. In Germany,
apart from the admirable works of Frege (which begin in
1879, but were not read until recent years), Husserl’s
Logische Untersuchungen, a monumental work published in
1900, soon began to exert a great effect, Meinong’s Ueber
Annahmen (1902) and Gegenstandstheorie und Psychol- .
ogie (1904) were influential in the same direction. In
England, G, E. Moore and I began to advocate similar.
views. His article on The Nature of Judgment was pub-
lished in 1899; his Principia Ethica in 1903. My Philos-
ophy of Leibniz appeared in 1900, and Principles of Mathe-
matics in 1903. In France, the same kind of philosophy


PHILOSOPHY IN THE 20TH CENTURY 71


‘was vigorously championed by Couturat. In America,
William James’s radical empiricism (without his pragma-
tism) was blended with the new logic to produce a radically
new philosophy, that of the New Realists, somewhat later
in date, but more revolutionary, than the European works
mentioned above, although Mach’s Analyse der Empfind-
ungen had anticipated part of its teaching.

The new philosophy which was thus inaugurated has not
yet reached a final form, and is still in some respects imma-
ture. Moreover, there is a very considerable measure of

disagreement among its various advocates. It is in parts
somewhat abstruse. For these reasons, it is impossible to
do more than set forth some of its salient features.

The first characteristic of the new philosophy is that it
abandons the claim to a special philosophic method or a
peculiar brand of knowledge to be obtained by its means.
It regards philosophy as essentially one with science, differ-
ing from the special sciences merely by the generality of its
problems, and by the fact that it is concerned with the for-
mation of hypotheses where empirical evidence is still lack-
ing. It conceives that all knowledge is scientific knowledge,
to be ascertained and proved by the methods of science. It
does not aim, as previous philosophy has usually done, at
statements about the universe as a whole, nor at the con-

‘struction of a comprehensive system. It believes, on the
basis of its logic, that there is no reason to deny the ap-
parently piecemeal and higgledy-piggledy nature of the
world. It does not regard the world as “organic,” in the
sense that, from any part adequately understood, the whole
could be inferred as the skeleton of an extinct monster can
be inferred from a single bone. In particular, it does not


72 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


attempt, as German idealism did, to deduce the nature of
the world as a whole from the nature of knowledge. It
regards knowledge as a natural fact like another, with no
mystic significance and no cosmic importance.

The new philosophy had originally three main sources:
theory of knowledge, logic, and the principles of mathemat-
ics. Ever since Kant, knowledge had been conceived as an
interaction, in which the thing known was modified by our
knowledge of it, and therefore always had certain charac-
teristics due to our knowledge. It was also held (though
not by Kant) to be logically impossible for a thing to exist
without being known. Therefore the properties acquired
through being known were properties which everything must
have. In this way, it was contended, we can discover a
great deal about the real world by merely studying the con-
ditions of knowledge. The new philosophy maintained, on
the contrary, that knowledge, as a rule, makes no difference
to what is known, and that there is not the slightest reason
why there should not be things which are not known to
any mind. Consequently theory of knowledge ceases to be
a magic key to open the door to the mysteries of the uni-
verse, and we are thrown back upon the plodding investi-
gations of science.

In logic, similarly, atomism replaced the “organic” view.
It had been maintained that everything is affected in its
intrinsic nature by its relations to everything else, so that —
a thorough knowledge of one thing would involve a thor-
ough knowledge of the whole universe. The new logic
maintained that the intrinsic character of a thing does not
logically enable us to deduce its relations to other things.
An example will make the point clear. Leibniz maintains .


PHILOSOPHY IN THE 20TH CENTURY 73


somewhere (and in this he agrees with modern idealists)
that if a man is in Europe and his wife dies in India, there
is an intrinsic change in the man at the moment of his wife’s
death. Common sense would say that there is no intrinsic
change in the man until he hears of his bereavement. This
view is adopted by the new philosophy; its consequences
are more far-reaching than they might appear to be at first
sight.

The principles of mathematics have always had an im-
portant relation to philosophy. Mathematics apparently
contains a priori knowledge of a high degree of certainty,
and most philosophy aspires to a priori knowledge. Ever
since Zeno the Eleatic, philosophers of an idealistic caste
have sought to throw discredit on mathematics by manu-
facturing contradictions which were designed to show that
mathematicians had not arrived at real metaphysical truth,
and that the philosophers were able to supply a better
brand. There is a great deal of this in Kant, and still more
in Hegel. During the nineteenth century, the mathemati-
cians destroyed this part of Kant’s philosophy. Lobatchev-
ski, by inventing non-Euclidean geometry, undermined the
mathematical argument of Kant’s transcendental esthetic.
Weierstrass proved that continuity does not involve infin-
itesimals; George Cantor invented a theory of continuity
and a theory of infinity which did away with all the old
paradoxes upon which philosophers had battened. Frege
showed that arithmetic follows from logic, which Kant had
denied. All these results were obtained by ordinary mathe-
- matical methods, and were as indubitable as the multiplica-
tion table. Philosophers met the situation by not reading
the authors concerned. Only the new philosophy assimi-


74 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


lated the new results, and thereby won an easy argumenta-
tive victory over the partisans of continued ignorance.

The new philosophy is not merely critical. It is construc-
tive, but as science is constructive, bit by bit and tenta-
tively. It has a special technical method of construction,
namely, mathematical logic, a new branch of mathematics,
much more akin to philosophy than any of the traditional
branches. Mathematical logic makes it possible, as it never
was before, to see what is the outcome, for philosophy, of
a given body of scientific doctrine, what entities must be as-
sumed, and what relations between them. The philosophy
of mathematics and physics has made immense advances
by the help of this method; part of the outcome for physics
has been set forth by Dr. Whitehead in three recent works.*
There is reason to hope that the method will prove equally
fruitful in other fields, but it is too technical to be set forth
here.

A good deal of modern pluralist philosophy has been in-
spired by the logical analysis of propositions. At first this
method was applied with too much respect for grammar;
Meinong, for example, maintained that, since we can say
truly “the round square does not exist,” there must be such
an object as the round square, although it must be a non-
existent object. The present writer was at first not exempt
from this kind of reasoning, but discovered in 1905 how
to escape from it by means of the theory of “descriptions,”
from which it appears that the round square is not men-
tioned when we say “the round square does not exist.” It


1The Principles of Natural Knowledge, 1919; The Concept of Nature,


1920; The Principle of Relativit ; i i
Sane pee f Relativity, 1922. All published by the Cambridge


oR


PHILOSOPHY IN THE 20TH CENTURY 75


may seem absurd to spend time on such a ridiculous topic
as the round square, but such topics often afford the best
tests of logical theories. Most logical theories are con-
demned by the fact that they lead to absurdities; therefore
the logician must be aware of absurdities and on the look-
out for them. Many laboratory experiments would seem
trivial to any one who did not know their relevance, and
absurdities are the experiments of the logician.

From preoccupation with the logical analysis of propo-
sitions, the new philosophy had at first a strong tincture of
Platonic and medieval realism; it regarded abstracts as hay-
ing the same kind of existence that concretes have. From
this view, as its logic perfected itself, it became gradually
more free. What remains is not such as to shock common
sense.

Although pure mathematics was more concerned than
any other science in the first beginnings of the new philos-
ophy, the most important influence in the present day is
physics. This has come about chiefly through the work of
Einstein, which has fundamentally altered our notions of
space, time, and matter. This is not the place for an ex-
planation of the theory of relativity, but a few words on
some of its philosophical consequences are unavoidable.

Two specially important items in the theory of relativity,
from the philosophical point of view, are: (1) that there is
not a single all-embracing time in which all the events in
the universe have their place; (2) that the conventional or
subjective part in our observation of physical phenomena,
though much greater than was formerly supposed, can be
eliminated by means of a certain mathematical method.


76 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


known as the tensor calculus. I shall say nothing on this
latter topic, as it is intolerably technical.

As regards time, it must be understood, to begin with,
that we are not dealing with a philosophical speculation,
but with a theory necessitated by* experimental results and
embodied in mathematical formule. There is the same sort
of difference between the two as there is between the theories
of Montesquieu and the American Constitution. What
emerges is this: that while the events that happen to a given
piece of matter have a definite time-order from the point
of view of an observer who shares its motion, events which
happen to pieces of matter in different places have not
always a definite time-order. To be precise: if a light-
signal is sent from the earth to the sun, and reflected back
to the earth, it will return to the earth about sixteen min-
utes after it was sent out. The events which happen on
the earth during those sixteen minutes are neither earlier
nor later than the arrival of the light-signal at the sun.
If we imagine observers moving in all possible ways with
respect to the earth and the sun, observing the events on
the earth during those sixteen minutes, and also the arrival
of the light-signal at the sun; if we assume that all these
observers allow for the velocity of light and employ per-
fectly accurate chronometers; then some of these observers
will judge any given event on earth during those sixteen
minutes to be earlier than the arrival of the light-signal at
the sun, some will judge it to be simultaneous, and some will
judge it tobe later. All are equally right or equally wrong.
From the impersonal standpoint of physics, the events on —
earth during those sixteen minutes are neither earlier nor
later than the arrival of the light-signal at the sun, nor yet


PHILOSOPHY IN THE 20TH CENTURY 77


simultaneous with it. We cannot say that an event A in
one piece of matter is definitely earlier than an event B in
another unless light can travel from A to B, starting when
the earlier event happens (according to A’s time), and ar-
riving before the later event happens (according to B’s
time). Otherwise the apparent time-order of the two
events will vary according to the observer, and will there-
fore not represent any physical fact.

If velocities comparable with that of light were common
in our experience, it is probable that the physical world
would have seemed too complicated to be tackled by scien-
tific methods, so that we should have been content with
medicine-men down to the present day. But if physics had
been discovered, it would have had to be the physics of
Einstein, because Newtonian physics would have been obvi-
ously inapplicable. TRadio-active substances send out par-
ticles which move very nearly with the velocity of light, and
the behavior of these particles would be unintelligible with-
out the new physics of relativity. There is no doubt that
the old physics is faulty, and from a philosophical point of
view it is no excuse to say that the fault is ‘only a little
one.” We have to make up our minds to the fact that,
within certain limits, there is no definite time-order between
events which happen in different places. This is the fact
which has led to the introduction of the single manifold
called “space-time” instead of the two separate manifolds
called “space” and “time.” The time that we have been
regarding as cosmic is really “local time,” a time bound up
with the motion of the earth, with as little claim to uni-
versality as that of a ship which does not alter its clocks in
crossing the Atlantic.


78 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


When we consider the part that time plays in all our
common notions, it becomes evident that our outlook would
be profoundly changed if we really imaginatively realized
what the physicists have done. Take the notion of “prog-
ress’: if the time-order is arbitrary, there will be progress
or retrogression according to the convention adopted in
measuring time. ‘The notion of distance in space is of
course also affected: two observers who employ every pos-
sible device for ensuring accuracy will arrive at different
estimates of the distance between two places, if the observ-
ers are in rapid relative motion. It is obvious that the very
idea of distance has become vague, because distance must be
between material things, not points of empty space (which
are fictions) ; and it must be the distance at a given time,
because the distance between any two bodies is continually
changing; and a given time is a subjective notion, depend-
ent upon the way the observer is traveling. We can no
longer speak of a body at a given time, but must speak
simply of an event. Between two events there is, quite in-—
dependently of any observer, a certain relation called the
“interval” between them. This interval will be differently
analyzed by different observers into a spatial and a temporal
component, but this analysis has no objective validity. The
interval is an objective physical fact, but its separation into
spatial and temporal elements is not.

It is obvious that our old comfortable notion of “solid
matter” cannot survive. A piece of matter is nothing but
a series of events obeying certain laws. The conception of
matter arose at a time when philosophers had no doubts as
to the validity of the conception of “substance.” Matter
was substance which was in space and time, mind was sub-


aie


PHILOSOPHY IN THE 20TH CENTURY 79


stance which was in time only. The notion of substance
grew more shadowy in metaphysics as time went on, but
it survived in physics because it did no harm—until rela-
tivity was invented. Substance, traditionally, was a notion
compounded of two elements. First, a substance had the
logical property that it could only occur as subject in a
proposition, not as predicate. Secondly, it was something
that persisted through time, or, in the case of God, was
outside time altogether. These two properties had no neces-
sary connection, but this was not perceived because physics
taught that bits of matter are immortal and theology taught
that the soul is immortal. Both, therefore, were thought
to have both the characteristics of substance. Now, how-
ever, physics compels us to regard evanescent events as
substances in the logical sense, i.e. as subjects which cannot


be predicates. A piece of matter, which we took to be a


single persistent entity, is really a string of entities, like
the apparently persistent objects in a cinema. And there
is no reason why we should not say the same of a mind:
the persistent ego seems as fictitious as the permanent atom.
Both are only strings of events having certain interesting
relations to each other.

Modern physics enables us to give body to the suggestion
of Mach and James, that the “stuff” of the mental and
physical worlds is the same. ‘Solid matter” was obviously
very different from thoughts and also from the persistent
ego. But if matter and the ego are both only convenient
aggregations of events, it is much less difficult to imagine
them composed out of the same materials. Moreover,
what has hitherto seemed one of the most marked peculiari-
ties of mind, namely subjectivity, or the possession of a point


80 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


of view, has now invaded physics, and is found not to in-
volve mind: photographic cameras in different places may
photograph the ‘“‘same” event, but they will photograph it
differently. Even chronometers and measuring-rods become
subjective in modern physics; what they directly record is
not a physical fact, but their relation to a physical fact.
Thus physics and psychology have approached each other,
and the old dualism of mind and matter has broken down.

It is perhaps worth while to point out that modern
physics knows nothing of “force” in the old or popular
sense of that word. We used to think that the sun exerted
a “force” on the earth. Now we think that space-time, in
the neighborhood of the sun, is so shaped that the earth
finds it less trouble to move as it does than in any other
way. The great principle of modern physics is the “‘prin-
ciple of least action,” that in going from one place to
another a body always chooses the route which involves
least action. (Action is a technical term, but its meaning
need not concern us at present.) Newspapers and certain
writers who wish to be thought forceful are fond of the
word “dynamic.” There is nothing “dynamic” in dynamics,
which, on the contrary, finds everything deducible from a
law of universal laziness. And there is no such thing as
one body “controlling” the movements of another. The
universe of modern science is much more like that of Lao-
Tze than that of those who prate of “great laws” and
“natural forces.”

The modern philosophy of pluralism and realism has, in
some ways, less to offer than earlier philosophies. In the
Middle Ages philosophy was the handmaid of theology;
to this day they come under one heading in booksellers’


PHILOSOPHY IN THE 20TH CENTURY 81


catalogues. It has been generally regarded as the business
of philosophy to prove the great truths of religion. The
new realism does not profess to be able to prove them, or
even to disprove them. It aims only at clarifying the fun-
damental ideas of the sciences, and synthesizing the different
sciences in a single comprehensive view of that fragment
of the world that science has succeeded in exploring. It
does not know what lies beyond; it possesses no talisman
for transforming ignorance into knowledge. It offers in-
tellectual delights to those who value them, but it does not
attempt to flatter human conceit as most philosophies do.
If it is dry and technical, it lays the blame on the universe,
which has chosen to work in a mathematical way rather than
as poets or mystics might have desired. Perhaps this is
regrettable, but a mathematician can hardly be expected to
regret it.


VI
MACHINES AND THE EMOTIONS


Witt machines destroy emotions, or will emotions destroy
machines? This question was suggested long ago by Samuel
Butler in Erewhon, but it is growing more and more actual
as the empire of machinery is enlarged.

At first sight, it is not obvious why there should be any
opposition between machines and emotions. Every normal
boy loves machines; the bigger and more powerful they are,
the more he loves them. Nations which have a long tradi-
tion of artistic excellence, like the Japanese, are captivated
by Western mechanical methods as soon as they come across
them, and long only to imitate us as quickly as possible.
Nothing annoys an educated and traveled Asiatic so much >
as to hear praise of “the wisdom of the East” or the tradi- -
tional virtues of Asiatic civilization. He feels as a boy
would feel who was told to play with dolls instead of toy
automobiles. And like a boy, he would prefer a real auto-—
mobile to a toy one, not realizing that it may run over him.

In the West, when machinery was new, there was the
same delight in it, except on the part of a few poets and
esthetes. The nineteenth century considered itself superior
to its predecessors chiefly because of its mechanical prog-—
ress. Peacock, in its early years, makes fun of the “steam
intellect society,” because he is a literary man, to whom the -
Greek and Latin authors represent civilization; but he is


conscious of being out of touch with the prevailing tenden-
82


MACHINES AND THE EMOTIONS 83


cies of his time. Rousseau’s disciples with the return to
Nature, the Lake Poets with their medievalism, William
Morris with his News from Nowhere (a country where it
is always June and everybody is engaged in haymaking),
all represent a purely sentimental and essentially reactionary
opposition to machinery. Samuel Butler was the first man
to apprehend intellectually the non-sentimental case against
machines, but in him it may have been no more than a jeu
@esprit—certainly it was not a deeply held conviction.
Since his day numbers of people in the most mechanized
nations have been tending to adopt in earnest a view simi-
lar to that of the Erewhonians; this view, that is to say, has
been latent or explicit in the attitude of many rebels against
existing industrial methods.

Machines are worshiped because they are beautiful, and
valued because they confer power; they are hated because
they are hideous, and loathed because they impose slavery.
Do not let us suppose that one of these attitudes is “right”
and the other “‘wrong,” any more than it would be right to
maintain that men have heads but wrong to maintain that
they have feet, though we can easily imagine Lilliputians
disputing this question concerning Gulliver. A machine is
like a Djinn in the Arabian Nights: beautiful and beneficent
to its master, but hideous and terrible to his enemies. But
in our day nothing is allowed to show itself with such naked
simplicity. The master of the machine, it is true, lives at a
distance from it, where he cannot hear its noise or see its
unsightly heaps of slag or smell its noxious fumes; if he
ever sees it, the occasion is before it is installed in use, when
he can admire its force or its delicate precision without
being troubled by dust and heat. But when he is challenged


84 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


to consider the machine from the point of view of those who
have to live with it and work it, he has a ready answer.
He can point out that, owing to its operations, these men
can purchase more goods—often vastly more—than their
great-grandfathers could. It follows that they must be
happier than their ereat-grandfathers—if we are to accept
an assumption which is made by almost every one.

The assumption is, that the possession of material com-
modities is what makes men happy. It is thought that a
man who has two rooms and two beds and two loaves must
be twice as happy as a man who has one room and one bed
and one loaf. In a word, it is thought that happiness is
proportional to income. A few people, not always quite
sincerely, challenge this idea in the name of religion or
morality; but they are glad if they increase their income
by the eloquence of their preaching. It is not from a moral
or religious point of view that I wish to challenge it; it is
from the point of view of psychology and observation of
life. If happiness is proportional to income, the case for
machinery is unanswerable; if not, the whole question re-
mains to be examined.

Men have physical needs, and they have emotions. While
physical needs are unsatisfied, they take first place; but
when they are satisfied, emotions unconnected with them
become important in deciding whether a man is to be happy
or unhappy. In modern industrial communities there are
many men, women, and children whose bare physical needs
are not adequately supplied; as regards them, I do not
deny that the first requisite for happiness is an increase of
income. But they are a minority, and it would not be diffi-
cult to give the bare necessaries of life to all of them.


MACHINES AND THE EMOTIONS 85


It is not of them that I wish to speak, but of those who have
more than is necessary to support existence—not only those
who have much more, but also those who have only a little
more.

Why do we, in fact, almost all of us, desire to increase
our incomes? It may seem, at first sight, as though ma-
terial goods were what we desire. But, in fact, we desire
these mainly in order to impress our neighbors. When a
man moves into a larger house in a more genteel quarter,
he reflects that “‘better” people will call on his wife, and
some unprosperous cronies of former days can be dropped.
When he sends his son to a good school or an expensive
university, he consoles himself for the heavy fees by
thoughts of the social kudos to be gained. In every big
city, whether of Europe or of America, houses in some
districts are more expensive than equally good houses in
other districts, merely because they are more fashionable.
One of the most powerful of all our passions is the desire
to be admired and respected. As things stand, admiration
and respect are given to the man who seems to be rich.
This is the chief reason why people wish to be rich. The
actual goods purchased by their money play quite a sec-

ondary part. Take, for example, a millionaire who can-
not tell one picture from another, but has acquired a gallery
of old masters by the help of experts. The only pleasure
“he derives from his pictures is the thought that others know
how much they have cost; he would derive more direct
enjoyment from sentimental chromos out of Christmas num-
bers, but he would not obtain the same satisfaction for his
vanity.

All this might be different, and has been different in many


86 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


pale, aaa OM


societies. In aristocratic epochs, men have been admired
for their birth. In some circles in Paris, men are admired


for their artistic or literary excellence, strange as it may


seem. Ina German university, a man may actually be ad-


mired for his learning. In India saints are admired; in
China, sages. The study of these differing societies shows
the correctness of our analysis, for in all of them we find a
large percentage of men who are indifferent to money so
long as they have enough to keep alive on, but are keenly
desirous of the merits by which, in their environment, re-
spect is to be won.

The importance of these facts lies in this, that the mod-
ern desire for wealth is not inherent in human nature, and
could be destroyed by different social institutions. If, by
law, we all had exactly the same income, we should have to
seek some other way of being superior to our neighbors,
and most of our present craving for material possessions


would cease. Moreover, since this craving is in the nature


of a competition, it only brings happiness when we out-
distance a rival, to whom it brings correlative pain. A


general increase of wealth gives no competitive advantage, —


and therefore brings no competitive happiness. There is,
of course, some pleasure derived from the actual enjoyment
of goods purchased, but, as we have seen, this is a very
small part of what makes us desire wealth. And in so far
as our desire is competitive, no increase of human happi-


ness as a whole comes from increase of wealth, whether


general or particular.


If we are to argue that machinery increases happiness,


therefore, the increase of material prosperity which it brings


cannot weigh very heavily in its favor, except in so far as_


MACHINES AND THE EMOTIONS 87


it may be used to prevent absolute destitution. But there
is no inherent reason why it should be so used. Destitu-
tion can be prevented without machinery where the popu-
lation is stationary; of this France may serve as an example,
since there is very little destitution and much less machinery
than in America, England, or pre-war Germany. Con-
versely, there may be much destitution where there is much
machinery; of this we have examples in the industrial areas
_ of England a hundred years ago and of Japan at the present
day. The prevention of destitution does not depend upon
machines, but upon quite other factors—partly density of
- population, and partly political conditions. And apart from
_ prevention of destitution, the value of increasing wealth is
not very great.

Meanwhile, machines deprive us of two things which are
certainly important ingredients of human happiness, namely,
spontaneity and variety. Machines have their own pace, and
their own insistent demands: a man who has an expensive
plant must keep it working. The great trouble with the
machine, from the point of view of the emotions, is its
regularity. And, of course, conversely, the great objection
to the emotions, from the point of view of the machine, is
their irregularity. As the machine dominates the thoughts
of people who consider themselves “serious,” the highest
_ praise they can give to a man is to suggest that he has the
qualities of a machine—that he is reliable, punctual, exact,
etc. And an “irregular” life has come to be synonymous
‘with a bad life. Against this point of view Bergson’s
philosophy was a protest—not, to my mind, wholly sound
from an intellectual point of view, but inspired by a whole-


88 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


some dread of seeing men turned more and more into ma- —


chines.


In life, as opposed to thought, the rebellion of our in-


stincts against enslavement to mechanism has hitherto taken


a most unfortunate direction. The impulse to war has —


always existed since men took to living in societies, but it
did not, in the past, have the same intensity or virulence
as it has in our day. In the eighteenth century, England
and France had innumerable wars, and contended for the
hegemony of the world; but they liked and respected each
other the whole time. Officer prisoners joined in the social
life of their captors, and were honored guests at their din-
ner-parties. At the beginning of our war with Holland in
1665, a man came home from Africa with atrocity stories
about the Dutch there; we [the British] persuaded our-
selves that his story was false, punished him, and published
the Dutch denial. In the late war we should have knighted
him, and imprisoned any one who threw doubt on his vera-
city. The greater ferocity of modern war is attributable
to machines, which operate in three different ways. First,


they make it possible to have larger armies. Secondly, they —


facilitate a cheap Press, which flourishes by appealing to


men’s baser passions. Thirdly—and this is the point that —


concerns us—they starve the anarchic, spontaneous side of


human nature, which works underground, producing an —


obscure discontent, to which the thought of war appeals as
affording possible relief. It is a mistake to attribute a vast
upheaval like the late war merely to the machinations of


politicians. In Russia, perhaps, such an explanation would —


have been adequate; that is one reason why Russia fought
half-heartedly, and made a revolution to secure peace. But


Nee EE TT


MACHINES AND THE EMOTIONS 89


in England, Germany, and the United States (in 1917),
no Government could have withstood the popular demand
for war. A popular demand of this sort must have an in-
stinctive basis, and for my part I believe that the modern
increase in warlike instinct is attributable to the dissatisfac-
tion (mostly unconscious) caused by the regularity, mo-
notony, and tameness of modern life.

It is obvious that we cannot deal with this situation by
abolishing machinery. Such a measure would be reactionary,
and is in any case impracticable. The only way of avoiding
the evils at present associated with machinery is to provide
breaks in the monotony, with every encouragement to high
adventure during the intervals. Many men would cease
‘to desire war if they had opportunities to risk their lives
in Alpine climbing; one of the ablest and most vigorous
workers for peace that it has been my good fortune to
know habitually spent his summer climbing the most danger-
ous peaks in the Alps. If every working man had a month
in the year during which, if he chose, he could be taught
to work an aeroplane, or encouraged to hunt for sapphires
in the Sahara, or otherwise enabled to engage in some dan-
gerous and exciting pursuit involving quick personal initia-
tive, the popular love of war would become confined to
women and invalids. I confess I know no method of mak-
ing these classes pacific, but I am convinced that a scientific
psychology would find a method if it undertook the task in
earnest.

Machines have altered our way of life, but not our in-
stincts. Consequently there is maladjustment. The whole
psychology of the emotions and instincts is as yet in its
infancy; a beginning has been made by psycho-analysis, but


90 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


only a beginning. What we may accept from psycho-

analysis is the fact that people will, in action, pursue various |
ends which they do not consciously desire, and will have an |
attendant set of quite irrational beliefs which enable them —
to pursue these ends without knowing that they are doing ~


so. But orthodox psycho-analysis has unduly simplified our


unconscious purposes, which are numerous, and differ from —


one person to another. It is to be hoped that social and
political phenomena will soon come to be understood from
this point of view, and will thus throw light on average
human nature.

Moral self-control, and external prohibition of harmful
acts, are not adequate methods of dealing with our anarchic
instincts. The reason they are inadequate is that these
instincts are capable of as many disguises as the Devil in


medieval legend, and some of these disguises deceive even |


the elect. The only adequate method is to discover what _


are the needs of our instinctive nature, and then to search


for the least harmful way of satisfying them. Since spon- |


taneity is what is most thwarted by machines, the only thing
that can be provided is opportunity; the use made of oppor-
tunity must be left to the initiative of the individual. No


doubt considerable expense would be involved; but it would .
not be comparable to the expense of war. Understanding
of human nature must be the basis of any real improve-


ment in human life. Science has done wonders in mastering


the laws of the physical world, but our own nature is much :
less understood, as yet, than the nature of stars and elec-
trons. When science learns to understand human nature, —


it will be able to bring a happiness into our lives which
machines and the physical sciences have failed to create.


dull ei
ty isk


ee >


i, *


VII
BEHAVIORISM AND VALUES


In an American learned periodical I once found the
statement that there is only one behaviorist in the world,
namely Dr. Watson. I should have said there are as many
as there are modern-minded men. This is not to say that
behaviorists are common in universities, nor yet that I am
myself a behaviorist—for, ever since the year in which I
saw Russia and China, I have realized that I am not up
to date. Objective self-criticism, however, compels me to
admit that it would be better if I were. In this essay I
want to set forth certain difficulties which are felt by per-
sons like myself, who, while accepting what is modern in
science, have difficulty in divesting themselves of medieval-
ism as regards what is worth living for. I want to ask, not
only what is the logical bearing of behaviorism upon values,
but what is likely to be its effect upon ordinary men and
women if widely accepted in a necessarily crude form. It
has not yet become a craze, like psycho-analysis; but if it


_ ever does, its popular form will no doubt differ greatly from


Dr. Watson’s teaching—as greatly as popular Freudianism


does from Freud.


The popular version of behaviorism will, I imagine, be
something like this: In old days there was supposed to be
a thing called the mind, which was capable of three types
of activity—feeling, knowing, and willing. Now, it has been
ascertained that there is no such thing as the mind, but

91


92 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


only the body. All our activities consist of bodily processes.
“Feeling” consists of visceral occurrences, particularly such


A


as are connected with the glands. “Knowing” consists of


movements of the larynx. “Willing” consists of all other
movements depending upon striped muscles. When, re-
cently, a famous intellectual married a famous dancer, there
were some who expressed doubt as to their congruity. But
from a behaviorist standpoint such a doubt was misplaced:
she had cultivated the muscles of legs and arms, he the
muscles of the larynx, so that both were acrobats, though be-
longing to different branches of the profession. Since the
only thing we can do is to move our bodies, the popular
votaries of the creed are likely to infer that we ought to
move them as much as possible. At this point difficulties will
arise as regards relativity. Should the different parts of the
body move relatively to each other? Or should the body as
a whole move relatively to the vehicle in which it finds itself ?
Or is motion relative to the earth the criterion of virtue?
The ideal man on the first view is the acrobat; on the sec-
ond, the man who runs up an escalator which is coming
down; on the third, the man who spends his life in an
aéroplane. It is not easy to see on what principle the re-
sulting controversies are to be decided, but on the whole I
back the aéronauts.

When we consider the conceptions of human excellence
which dominate the most powerful sections of the most


powerful countries, we are led to the conclusion that be- |


haviorism merely supplies a theoretical justification for what


is already believed. The acrobat should be the ideal of —


those who believe in physical culture and hold that a nation’s
manhood depends upon its athletics, which is the prevalent


BEHAVIORISM AND VALUES 93


view in the British governing class. The man who went up
a descending escalator should be the beau idéal of the mus-
cular Christians, who regard the development of muscle as
the ultimate good, provided it can be divorced from pleas-
ure. This is the view which the Y.M.C.A. endeavors to
inculcate in China, and which our rulers regard as appropri-
ate to all subject races and classes. The aéronaut represents
a more aristocratic ideal, reserved for those who exercise
mechanical power. But, over and above all these, there is
a supreme conception, which suggests Aristotle’s unmoved
mover; it is that of the ruler at rest in the center, while all
else revolves round him at varying rates, thus securing for
him the absolute maximum of relative motion. This role is
reserved for our supermen, especially financiers.

Now there is a quite different conception of human ex-
cellence which has come down to us from Greece and the
Middle Ages, but is being gradually displaced by the
outlook due to the domination of machines over the imagi-
nation. I believe this older outlook to be logically
reconcilable with behaviorism, but not psychologically in the
behavior of the average citizen. In this older outlook, feel-
ing and knowing are considered as important as doing; art
and contemplation are thought to be as admirable as alter-
ing the positions in space of large quantities of matter. The
Cherubim love God and the Seraphim contemplate Him,
and in this consists their supreme excellence. The whole
ideal is static. It is true that in heaven hymns are sung
and harps are played, but they are the same hymns every
day, and no improvement in the construction of harps is
tolerated. Such an existence bores the modern man. One
reason why theology has lost its hold is that it has failed to


94 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


provide progressive machinery in heaven, though Milton
provided it in hell.

It may be laid down that every ethical system is based
upon a certain non sequitur. The philosopher first invents a
false theory as to the nature of things, and ‘then deduces
that wicked actions are those which show that his theory
is false. To begin with the traditional Christian: he argues
that, since everything always obeys the will of God, wicked-
ness consists in disobedience to the will of God. We then
come on to the Hegelian, who argues that the universe con-
sists of parts which harmonize in a perfect organism, and
therefore wickedness consists of behavior which diminishes
the harmony—though it is difficult to see how such behavior
is possible, since complete harmony is metaphysically neces-
sary. Bergson, writing for a French public, holds a threat
over those whose acts refute him which is even more ter-
rible than moral condemnation—I mean, the threat of ridi-
cule. He shows that human beings never behave mechani-
cally, and then, in his book on Laughter, he argues that
what makes us laugh is to see a person behaving mechani-
cally—. e. you are ridiculous when you do something that
shows Bergson’s philosophy to be false, and only then.
: These examples have, I hope, made it plain that a meta-
physic can never have ethical consequences except in virtue
of its falsehood: if it were true, the acts which it defines as
sin would be impossible. :

Applying these remarks to behaviorism, I deduce that if,
and in so far as, it has ethical consequences, it must be false,
while conversely, if it is true, it can have no bearing on
conduct. Applying this test to popular behaviorism (though
not to the strictly scientific form), I find several evidences


RCA hed iy, SoC eS ee


BEHAVIORISM AND VALUES 95


of falsehood. In the first place, almost all its votaries
would lose all interest in it if they thought it had no ethical
consequences. Now at this point it is necessary to draw a
distinction. A true doctrine may have practical conse-
quences, though it cannot have ethical consequences. If you
attempt to extract things from an automatic machine by


_ means of one coin, when it is constructed to require two,


the truth has a practical consequence, namely that you must
offer it another coin. But no one would call this conse-
quence “ethical”; it merely has to do with how to realize
your desires. Similarly, behaviorism, as developed in Dr.
Watson’s book with that title, has undoubtedly all sorts of
important practical consequences, particularly in education.
If you want a child to learn to behave in a certain way, you
will often be wise if you follow Dr. Watson’s advice rather
than (say) Freud’s. But this is a scientific matter, not an
ethical matter; ethics only come in when it is said that
action ought to have certain ends in view, or (alternatively)
that certain actions can be classified as good or bad inde-
pendently of their consequences.

Now I find that behaviorism does tend, however illogi-
cally, to have an ethic in the proper sense of the word. The
argument seems to be: since the only thing we can do is to
cause matter to move, we ought to move as much matter as
possible; consequently art and thought are valuable only in
so far as they stimulate the motions of matter. This, how-


- ever, is too metaphysical a criterion for daily life; the prac-


tical criterion is income. ‘Take the following from Dr.


Watson:


In my opinion, one of the most important elements in the judging of
personality, character and ability, is the history of the individual’s yearly


96 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


achievements. We can measure this objectively by the length of time the
individual stayed in his various positions and the yearly increases he re-
ceived in his earnings... . If the individual is a writer, we should want
to draw a curve of the prices he gets for his stories year by year. If from
our leading magazines he receives the same average price per word for his —
stories at 30 that he received at 24, the chances are he is a hack writer,
and will never do anything but that.


Applying this criterion to Buddha, Christ, and Mahomet, ©
to Milton and Blake, we see that it involves an interesting
readjustment in our estimates of the values of personalities.
In addition to points already noted, there are two ethical
maxims implicit in this passage. One is that excellence must
be easily measureable, the other that it must consist in con-
formity to law. These are both natural consequences of
the attempt to deduce ethics from a system based upon
physics. For my part, the ethic suggested by the above
passage from Dr. Watson is not one that I can ac-
cept. I cannot believe that virtue is proportional to
income, nor yet that it is wicked to have difficulty in
conforming to the herd. . Doubtless my views on these
matters are biased, since I am poor and a crank; but
although I recognize this fact, they remain my views none
the less.

I will now take another aspect of behaviorism, namely its’
views on education. Here I cannot cite Dr. Watson, whose
views on the subject, so far as they appear in his works,
seem to me excellent. But he does not deal with the later
parts of education, and it is there that my doubts are strong-
est. t will take a book which, while not explicitly behavior-
istic, is, in fact, largely inspired by the outlook with which
behaviorism is connected, I mean: The Child: His Nature


BEHAVIORISM AND VALUES 97


and His Needs.‘ This is a book for which, in the main, I
have the highest respect, because its psychology is admir-
able; but its ethics and esthetics seem to me more open to
criticism. To illustrate the esthetic lack, I take the follow-


ing passage (p. 384):


Twenty-five years ago pupils learned ‘*to spell from ten to fifteen thou-
sand words; but as a result of investigations carried on during the past
two decades, it has been found that the typical graduate of a high school
does not need in his school work, and will not need in later life, to spell
more than three thousand words at the outside, unless he engages in somé j
technical pursuit, when it may be necessary for him to master a special
and technical vocabulary. The typical American in his correspondence and
in his writing for the newspaper rarely employs more than fifteen hundred
different words; many of us never use more than half this number. In
view of these facts, the course in spelling in the schools to-day is being
constructed on the principle that the words that will actually be used in
daily life should be mastered so that they can be spelled automatically,
and the technical and unusual words that were formerly taught but will
probably never be used are being eliminated. Not a single word is being
retained in present-day spelling courses on the theory that it will be valu-
able in the training of memory.


In the last sentence we have a perfectly sound appeal to
psychology in refutation of a former argument in favor of
memorizing. It appears that memorizing does not train
the memory; therefore nothing should be memorized on
any ground except that just that fact should be known.
That granted, let us examine the other implications of the
_ above passage.

In the first place, there is no point whatever in being
able to spell anything. Shakespeare and Milton could not
spell; Marie Corelli and Alfred Austen could. Spelling

1Prepared under the editorial supervision of M. V. O’Shea, Professor


of Education in the University of Wisconsin. A contribution of the
Children’s Foundation.


98 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


is thought desirable partly for snobbish reasons, as an easy
way of distinguishing the “educated” from the “unedu-
cated”; partly, like correct clothes, as a part of herd domi-
nation; partly because the devotee of natural law feels pain
in the spectacle of any sphere in which individual liberty
remains. If it is thought that print, at least, ought to be
spelled conventionally, it is always possible to keep readers
for the purpose.

In the second place, the written language, except in China,
is representative of the spoken language, in which resides
the whole esthetic quality of literature. In the days when
men retained the feeling that language could and should be
beautiful, they were careless of spelling, but careful of
pronunciation. Now, even persons of university educa-
tion do not know how to pronounce any but the common-
est words, and are consequently unable to scan a great deal
of poetry. Apart from professional students of literature,
there is probably hardly a single person under forty in
America who can scan—


Scattering unbeholden
Its aérial hue.


Instead of being taught to spell, children ought to be taught
to read aloud, if any care for esthetic considerations existed
in education. Formerly the pater-familias read the Bible
aloud, which served admirably for this purpose; but now
this practice has become almost extinct.

Not only is it important to know pronunciation, but it is
also desirable esthetically to have a large vocabulary.
Those who know only fifteen hundred words will be unable
to express themselves with either precision or beauty except


BEHAVIORISM AND VALUES 99


on simple topics and by rare good luck. About half the
population of America at the present time spends as much
time on its education as Shakespeare spent, but its vocabu-


lary is hardly a tenth of his. Yet his must have been in-


telligible to the ordinary citizen of his time, since it was
used in plays which had to be a commercial success. The
modern view is that a man has enough command of language
if he can make himself understood; the older view was that
both in speech and in writing he should be able to give
esthetic pleasure.

What is the conclusion for a person who, like the present
writer, accepts, for practical purposes, the scientific part of


_ behaviorism, while rejecting the supposed ethical and es-


thetic consequences? I have the highest ‘admiration for Dr.
Watson, and consider his books enormously important. I
consider that, at the present time, physics is the most im-


portant of theoretical pursuits, and industrialism is the most


important sociological phenomenon. Nevertheless, I can-
not cease to admire “useless’’ knowledge, and art which has
no purpose except to give delight. The problem is not logi-
cal; for, as we have seen, if behaviorism is true it can have


no bearing upon questions of value, except in the subordi-
_ nate way of helping to show what means to use for a given


*.*


end. ‘The problem is, in a broad sense, political: given
that the bulk of mankind are certain to commit fallacies,
is it better that they should deduce false conclusions from


true premises or true conclusions from false premises? A
question of this sort is insoluble. The only true solution


seems to be that ordinary men and women should be taught


logic, so as to be able to refrain from drawing conclusions
which only seem to follow. When it is said, for example,


100 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


that the French are “‘logical,’” what is meant is that, when
they accept a premise, they also accept everything that a
person totally destitute of logical subtlety would errone-
ously suppose to follow from the premise. This is a most
undesirable quality, from which, on the whole, the English-
speaking nations have, in the past, been more free than any
others. But there are signs that, if they are to remain free
in this respect, they will require more philosophy and logic
than they have had in the past. Logic was, formerly, the
art of drawing inferences; it has now become the art of
abstaining from inferences, since it has appeared that the
inferences we feel naturally inclined to make are hardly ever
valid. I conclude, therefore, that logic ought to be taught
in schools with a view to teaching people not to reason.
For, if they reason, they will almost certainly reason
wrongly.


be


Vill
EASTERN AND WESTERN IDEALS OF HAPPINESS


_ Everysopy knows Wells’s Time Machine, which enabled its


possessor to travel backwards or forwards in time, and see
for himself what the past was like and what the future will
be. But people do not always realize that a great deal of
the advantages of Wells’s device can be secured by traveling


about the world at the present day. A European who goes


to New York and Chicago sees the future, the future to
which Europe is likely to come if it escapes economic dis-
aster. On the other hand, when he goes to Asia he sees
the past. In India, I am told, he can see the Middle Ages;
in China he can see the eighteenth century. If George
Washington were to return to earth, the country which he
created would puzzle him dreadfully. He would feel a lit-
tle less strange in England, still less strange in France;
but he would not feel really at home until he reached China.
There, for the first time in his ghostly wanderings, he
would find men who still believe in “life, liberty, and the


_ pursuit of happiness,” and who conceive these things more


or less as Americans of the War of Independence con-
ceived them. And I think it would not be long before he
became President of the Chinese Republic.

Western civilization embraces North and South America,
Europe excluding Russia, and the British self-governing
dominions. In this civilization the United States leads the
van; all the characteristics that distinguish the West from


the East are most marked and farthest developed in Amer-
ror


102 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


- tea. We are accustomed to take progress for granted: to


F when


assume without hesitation that the changes which have hap-


pened during the last hundred years were unquestionably
for the better, and that further changes for the better are
sure to follow indefinitely. On the Continent of Europe,
the war and its consequences have administered a blow to
this confident belief, and men have begun to look back to
the time before 1914 as a golden age, not likely to recur
for centuries. In England there has been much less of this
shock to optimism, and in America still less. For those
of us who have been accustomed to take progress for
granted, it is especially interesting to visit a country like
China, which has remained where we were one hundred and
fifty years ago, and to ask ourselves whether, on the bal-
ance, the changes which have happened to us have brought
any real improvement.

The civilization of China, as every one knows, is based
upon the teaching of Confucius, who flourished five hundred


years before Christ. Like the Greeks and Romans, he did


not think of human society as naturally progressive; on the


contrary, he believed that in remote antiquity rulers had
been wise, and the people had been happy to a degree which -


the degenerate present could admire but hardly achieve.
This, of course, was a delusion. But the practical result
was that Confucius, like other teachers of antiquity, aimed
at creating a stable society, maintaining a certain level of ex-
cellence, but not always striving after new successes. In this


he was more successful than any other man who ever lived.


His personality has been stamped on Chinese civilization.


from his day to our own. During his lifetime the Chinese


occupied only a small part of present-day China, and were


a ae


IDEALS OF HAPPINESS 103


divided into a number of warring states. During the next
three hundred years they established themselves throughout
what is now China proper, and founded an empire exceeding
in territory and population any other that existed until the
last fifty years. In spite of barbarian invasions, Mongol
and Manchu dynasties, and occasional longer or shorter
periods of chaos and civil war, the Confucian system sur-
vived, bringing with it art and literature and a civilized
way of life. It is only in our own day, through contact
with the West and with the westernized Japanese, that this
system has begun to break down.

A system which has had this extraordinary power of sur-
vival must have great merits, and certainly deserves our
respect and consideration. It is not a religion, as we under-
stand the word, because it is not associated with the super-
natural or with mystical beliefs. It is a purely ethical
system, but its ethics, unlike those of Christianity, are not
too exalted for ordinary men to practice. In essence, what
Confucius teaches is something very like the old-fashioned
ideal of a “‘gentleman”’ as it existed in the eighteenth cen-


tury. One of his sayings will illustrate this (1 quote from


Lionel Giles’s Sayings of Confucius) :


The true gentleman is never contentious. If a spirit of rivalry is any-
where unavoidable, it is at a shooting-match. Yet even here he courteously
salutes his opponents before taking up his position, and again when, having
lost, he retires to drink the forfeit-cup. So that even when competing he


remains a true gentleman.


He speaks much, as a moral teacher is bound to do, about
duty and virtue and such matters, but he never exacts any-
thing contrary to nature and the natural affections. ‘This
is shown in the following conversation:


104 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


The Duke of She addressed Confucius, saying: We have an upright man
in our country. His father stole a sheep, and the son bore witness against
him—In our country, Confucius replied, uprightness is something different
from this. A father hides the guilt of his son, and a son hides the guilt ©
of his father. It is in such conduct that true uprightness is to be found.

Confucius was in all things moderate, even in virtue. He ~
did not believe that we ought to return good for evil. He
was asked on one occasion: “How do you regard the prin-
ciple of returning good for evil?” And he replied: “What,
then, is to be the return for good? Rather should you re-
turn justice for injustice, and good for good.” The principle
of returning good for evil was being taught in his day in
China by the Taoists, whose teaching is much more akin
to that of Christianity than is the teaching of Confucius.
The founder of Taoism, Lao-Tze (supposed to have been
an older contemporary of Confucius), says: ““To the good
I would be good; to the not-good I would also be good,
in order to make them good. With the faithful I would
keep faith; with the unfaithful I would also keep faith,
in order that they may become faithful. Even if a man is
bad, how can it be right to cast him off? Requite injury with
kindness.” Some of Lao-Tze’s words are amazingly like
parts of the Sermon on the Mount. For instance, he says:

He that humbles himself shall be preserved entire. He that bends shall


be made straight. He that is empty shall be filled. He that is worn out
shall be renewed. He who has little shall succeed. He who has much


shall go astray.

It is characteristic of China that it was not Lao-Tze but
Confucius who became the recognized national sage. Tao-_
ism has survived, but chiefly as magic and among the un-
educated. Its doctrines have appeared visionary to the
practical men who administered the empire, while the doc- |


IDEALS OF HAPPINESS 105


trines of Confucius were eminently calculated to avoid fric-
_ tion. Lao-Tze preached a doctrine of inaction: “The

empire,” he says, “has ever been won by letting things take
their course. He who must always be doing is unfit to
‘obtain the empire.” But Chinese governors naturally pre-
ferred the Confucian maxims of self-control, benevolence,
and courtesy, combined, as they were, with a great emphasis
upon the good that could be done by wise government.
It never occurred to the Chinese, as it has to all modern
white nations, to have one system of ethics in theory and
another in practice. I do not mean that they always live
up to their own theories, but that they attempt to do so and
are expected to do so, whereas there are large parts of
the Christian ethic which are universally admitted to be too
good for this wicked world.

We have, in fact, two kinds of morality side by side:
one which we preach but do not practice, and another which
we practice but seldom preach. Christianity, like all reli-
gions except Mormonism, is Asiatic in origin; it had in the
early centuries that emphasis on individualism and other-
worldliness which is characteristic of Asiatic mysticism.
From this point of view, the doctrine of non-resistance was
intelligible. But when Christianity became the nominal reli-
gion of energetic European princes, it was found necessary
to maintain that some texts were not to be taken literally,
while others, such as “render unto Cesar the things that are
Cesar’s,” acquired great popularity. In our own day,
under the influence of competitive industrialism, the slight-
est approach to non-resistance is despised, and men are ex-
pected to be able to keep their end up. In practice, our
effective morality is that of material success achieved by


106 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


means of a struggle; and this applies to nations as well as
to individuals. Anything else seems to us soft and foolish.

The Chinese do not adopt either our theoretical or our
practical ethic. They admit in theory that there are occa-—
sions when it is proper to fight, and in practice that these
occasions are rare; whereas we hold in theory that there
are no occasions when it is proper to fight and in practice
that such occasions are very frequent. The Chinese some- —
times fight, but are not a combative race, and do not greatly
admire success in war or in business. Traditionally, they —
admire learning more than anything else; next to that, and
usually in combination with it, they admire urbanity and
courtesy. For ages past, administrative posts have been
awarded in China on the results of competitive examina- —
tions. As there has been no hereditary aristocracy for two
thousand years—with the sole exception of the family of
Confucius, the head of which is a Duke—learning has
drawn to itself the kind of respect which, in feudal Europe,
was given to powerful nobles, as well as the respect which
it inspired on its own account. The old learning, however,
was very narrow, consisting merely in an uncritical study —
of the Chinese classics and their recognized commentators.
Under the influence of the West, it has come to be known
that geography, economics, geology, chemistry, and so on,
are of more practical use than the moralizings of former
ages. Young China—that is to say, the students who have
been educated on European lines—recognize modern needs, —
and have perhaps hardly enough respect for the old tradi-
tion. Nevertheless, even the most modern, with few ex-
ceptions, retain the traditional virtues of moderation,
politeness, and a pacific temper. ‘Whether these virtues will _


Ft fe |


7
ie


IDEALS OF HAPPINESS 107


survive a few more decades of Western and Japanese tui-


- tion is perhaps doubtful.


If I were to try to sum up in a phrase the main difference


between the Chinese and ourselves, I should say that they,


in the main, aim at enjoyment, while we, in the main, aim
at power. We like power over our fellow-men, and we like
power over Nature. For the sake of the former we have
built up strong states, and for the sake of the latter we


_ have built up Science. The Chinese are too lazy and too


good-natured for such pursuits. To say that they are lazy
is, however, only true in a certain sense. They are not lazy
in the way that Russians are, that is to say, they will work
hard for their living. Employers of labor find them ex-
traordinarily industrious. But they will not work, as Amer-
icans and Western Europeans do, simply because they would
be bored if they did not work, nor do they love hustle for
its own sake. When they have enough to live on, they live
on it, instead of trying to augment it by hard work. They


have an infinite capacity for leisurely amusements—going
to the theater, talking while they drink tea, admiring the
_ Chinese art of earlier times, or walking i in beautiful scenery.


To our way of thinking, there is something unduly mild
about such a way of spending one’s life; we respect more


aman who goes to his office every day, even if all that he


does in his office is harmful. ;
Living in the East has, perhaps, a corrupting influence


2 upon a white man, but I must confess that, since I came to
_ know China, I have regarded laziness as one of the best


i


qualities of which men in the mass are capable. We achieve


certain things by being energetic, but it may be questioned


whether, on the balance, the things that we achieve are of


108 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


any value. We develop wonderful skill in manufacture,
part of which we devote to making ships, automobiles, tele-
phones, and other means of living luxuriously at high pres-
sure, while another part is devoted to making guns, poison
gases, and aeroplanes for the purpose of killing each other
wholesale. We have a first-class system of administration
and taxation, part of which is devoted to education, sanita-
tion, and such useful objects, while the rest is devoted to
war. In England at the present day most of the national
revenue is spent on past and future wars and only the resi- —
due on useful objects. On the Continent, in most countries,
the proportion is even worse. We have a police system of
unexampled efficiency, part of which is devoted to the de-
tection and prevention of crime and part to imprisoning
anybody who has any new constructive political ideas. In
China, until recently, they had none of these things. Industry
was too inefficient to produce either automobiles or bombs;
the State too inefficient to educate its own citizens or to
kill those of other countries; the police too inefficient to catch
either bandits or Bolsheviks. The result was that in China,
as compared to any white man’s country, there was free-
dom for all, and a degree of diffused happiness which was —
amazing in view of the poverty of all but a tiny minority.
Comparing the actual outlook of the average Chinese
with that of the average Western, two differences strike
one: first, that the Chinese do not admire activity unless it
serves some useful purpose; secondly, that they do not re-
gard morality as consisting in checking our own impulses
and interfering with those of others. The first of these
differences has been already discussed, but the second is
perhaps equally important. Professor Giles, the eminent


IDEALS OF HAPPINESS 109


Chinese scholar, at the end of his Gifford Lectures on ‘“‘Con-
fucianism and its Rivals,” maintains that the chief obstacle
to the success of Christian missions in China has been the
doctrine of original sin. The traditional doctrine of ortho-
dox Christianity—still preached by most Christian mission-
aries in the Far East—is that we are all born wicked, so
wicked as to deserve eternal punishment. The Chinese
might have no difficulty in accepting this doctrine if it ap-
plied only to white men, but when they are told that their
own parents and grandparents are in hell-fire they grow in-
dignant. Confucius taught that men are born good, and
that if they become wicked, that is through the force of _
evil example or corrupting manners. This difference from
traditional Western orthodoxy has a profound influence on
the outlook of the Chinese. ,
Among ourselves, the people who are regarded as moral
luminaries are those who forego ordinary pleasures them-
selves and find compensation in interfering with the pleas-
ures of others. There is an element of the busybody in our
conception of virtue: unless a man makes himself a nuisance
to a great many people, we do not think he can be an ex-
ceptionally good man. This attitude comes from our notion
of Sin. It leads not only to interference with freedom, but
also to hypocrisy, since the conventional standard is too
difficult for most people to live up to. In China this is not
the case. Moral precepts are positive rather than negative.
A man is expected to be respectful to his parents, kind to
his children, generous to his poor relations, and courteous
to all. These are not very difficult duties, but most men ac-
tually fulfill them, and the result is perhaps better than that
of our higher standard, from which most people fall short.


110 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


Another result of the absence of the notion of Sin is
that men are much more willing to submit their differences
to argument and reason than they are in the West. Among
ourselves, differences of opinion quickly become questions of
“principle”: each side thinks that the other side is wicked,
and that any yielding to it involves sharing in its guilt. This
makes our disputes bitter, and involves in practice a great
readiness to appeal to force. In China, although there
were military men who were ready to appeal to force, no
one took them seriously, not even their own soldiers. They
fought battles which were nearly bloodless, and they did
much less harm than we should expect from our experience
of the fiercer conflicts of the West. The great bulk of the
population, including the civil administration, went about
its business as though these generals and their armies did
not exist. In ordinary life, disputes are usually adjusted
by the friendly mediation of some third party. Compro-
mise is the accepted principle, because it is necessary to save
the face of both parties. Saving face, though in some forms
it makes foreigners smile, is a most valuable national insti-
tution, making social and political life far less ruthless than
it is with us. |

There is one serious defect, and only one, in the Chinese
system, and that is, that it does not enable China to resist.
more pugnacious nations. If the whole world were like
China, the whole world could be happy; but so long as
others are warlike and energetic, the Chinese, now that they
are no longer isolated, will be compelled to copy our vices
to some degree if they are to preserve their national inde-


pendence. But let us not flatter ourselves that this imita-
tion will be an improvement. i


IX
THE HARM THAT GOOD MEN DO


I


A HUNDRED years ago there lived a philosopher named
Jeremy Bentham, who was universally recognized to be a
very wicked man. I remember to this day the first time that
I came across his name when I was a boy. It was in a
‘statement by the Rev. Sydney Smith to the effect that Ben-
tham thought people ought to make soup of their dead
grandmothers. This practice appeared to me as undesir-
able from a culinary as from a moral point of view, and I


‘therefore conceived a bad opinion of Bentham. Long after-,—~


wards, I discovered that the statement was one of those
reckless lies in which respectable people are wont to in-
dulge in the interests of virtue. I also discovered what was
the really serious charge against him. It was no less than
this: that he defined a “good” man as a man who does good. |


This definition, as the rexder-wilt perceive at once if he is


a kind action is not virtuous if it springs from affection for |


ea “only_if-it is inspired by the moraltaw,
which is, of course, just as likely to inspire unkind actions. |


‘We know that the exercise of virtue should be its own re- “
ward, and it seems to follow that the enduring of it on the
part of the patient should be its own punishment. Kant,


ie SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


therefore, is a more sublime moralist than Bentham, and
has the suffrages of all those who tell us that they love
virtue for its own sake.

~j It is true that Bentham fulfilled his own definition of a

. good man: he di cheood. The forty middle years of
the nineteenth century in England were years of incredibly
rapid progress, materially, intellectually, and morally. At
the beginning of the period comes the Reform Act, which
made Parliament representative of the middle-class, not,
as before, of the aristocracy. This Act was the most diffi-
cult of the steps towards democracy in England, and was
quickly followed by other important reforms, such as the
abolition of slavery:in Jamaica. At the beginning of the
period the penalty for petty theft was death by hanging;
very soon the death penalty was confined to those who were
guilty of murder or high treason. The Corn Laws, which
made food so dear as to cause atrocious poverty, were abol-
ished in 1846. Compulsory education was introduced in
i870. It is the fashion to decry the Victorians, but I wish
our age had half as good a record as theirs. This, however,
is beside the point. My point is that a very large propor-
tion of the progress during those years must be attributed
to the influence of Bentham. There can be no doubt that
nine-tenths of the people living in England in the latter
part of last century were happier than they would have
been if he had never lived. So shallow was his philosophy
that he would have regarded this as a vindication of his
activities. We, in our more enlightened age, can see that
such a view is preposterous; but it may fortify us to review


the grounds for rejecting a groveling utilitarianism such
as that of Bentham.


THE HARM THAT GOOD MEN DO 4&3


II


We all know what we mean by a “good” man. The
ideally good man does not drink or smoke, avoids bad lan-
guage, converses in the presence of men only exactly as he

_ would if there were ladies present, attends church regularly,
‘and holds the correct opinions on all subjects. He has a
wholesome horror of wrongdoing, and realizes that it is
our painful duty to castigate Sin. He has a still greater
horror of wrong thinking, and considers it the business of
the authorities to safeguard the young against those who
question the wisdom of the views generally accepted by mid-

_dle-aged successful citizens. Apart from his professional

duties, at which he is assiduous, he spends much time in
good works: he may encourage patriotism and military
training; he may promote industry, sobriety, and virtue
among wage-earners and their children by seeing to it that
failures in these respects receive due punishment; he may
be a trustee of a university and prevent an ill-judged re-
spect for learning from allowing the employment of pro-

‘fessors with subversive ideas. Above all, of course, his
“morals,” in the narrow sense, must be irreproachable,

It may be doubted whether a “good” man, in the above

: _ sense, does, on the average, any “more good than. a “bad”

“man. I mean by a “bad” man the contrary of what we

have been describing. A “bad” man is one who is known

‘to smoke and to drink occasionally, and even to say a bad
word when some one treads on his toe. His conversation
is not always such as could be printed, and he sometimes .
"spends fine Sundays out-of-doors instead of at church. Some
of his opinions are subversive; for instance, he may think


x
114 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


that if you desire peace you should prepare for peace, not
for war. Towards wrongdoing he takes a scientific atti-
tude, such as he would take towards his motor-car if it mis-
behaved; he argues that sermons and prison will no more
cure vice than mend a broken tire. In the matter of wrong
thinking he is even more perverse. He maintains that what
is called “wrong thinking” is simply thinking, and what is
called “right thinking” is repeating words like a parrot;
this gives him a sympathy with all sorts of undesirable
cranks. His activities outside his working hours may con-
sist merely in enjoyment, or, worse still, in stirring up dis-
content with preventable evils which do not interfere with
the comfort of the men in power. And it is even possible
that in the matter of “morals” he may not conceal his lapses
as carefully as a truly virtuous man would do, defending
himself by the perverse contention that itis bette
~honest than to pretend to set a good example. A man who
fails in any or several of these respects will be thought ill
of by the average respectable citizen, and will not be
allowed to hold any position conferring authority, such as
that of a judge, a magistrate, or a schoolmaster. Such posi-
tions are open only to ‘‘good”’ men. .

This whole state of affairs is more or less modern. It
existed in England during the brief reign of the Puritans
in the time of Cromwell, and by them it was transplanted
to America. It did not reappear in force in England till
after the French Revolution, when it was thought to be a
good method of combating Jacobinism (i.e., what we should
now call Bolshevism). The life of Wordsworth illustrates
the change. In his youth he sympathized with the French
Revolution, went to France, wrote good poetry, and had


THE HARM THAT GOOD MEN DO .s11s5


a natural daughter. At this period he was a “bad” man.
Then he became “good,” abandoned his daughter, adopted
correct principles, and wrote bad poetry. Coleridge went
through a similar change: when he was wicked he wrote
Kubla Khan, and when he was good he wrote theology.

It is difficult to think of any instance of a poet who was
“good” at the times when he was writing good poetry.
“Dante was deported for subversive propaganda; Shake-
speare, to judge by the Sonnets, would not have been al-
lowed by American immigration officers to land in New
York. It is of the essence of a “good” man that he sup-
ports the Government; therefore, Milton was good during

the reign of Cromwell, and bad before and after; but it
was before and after that he wrote his poetry—in fact
most of it was written after he had narrowly escaped hang-
ing as a Bolshevik. Donne was virtuous after he became
Dean of St. Paul’s, but all his poems were written before
that time, and on account of them his appointment caused
a scandal. Swinburne was wicked in his youth, when he
wrote Songs Before Sunrise in praise of those who fought
for freedom; he was virtuous in his old age, when he wrote
savage attacks on the Boers for defending their liberty
against wanton aggression. It is needless to multiply ex-
amples; enough has been said to suggest that the standards
of virtue now prevalent are incompatible with the produc-
tion of good poetry.

In other directions the same thing is true. We all know

ppt Galileo and Darwin were bad men; Spinoza was
‘thought dreadfully wicked until a hundred years after his
death; Descartes went abroad for fear of persecution. Al-
most all the Renaissance artists were bad men. To come


116 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


to humbler matters, those who object to preventable mor-
tality are necessarily wicked. I lived in a part of London
which is partly very rich, partly very poor; the infant death-
rate is abnormally high, and the rich, by corruption and —
intimidation, control the local government. They use their
power to cut down the expenditure on infant welfare and
public health and to engage a medical officer at less than
the standard rate on condition that he gives only half his
time to the work. No one can win the respect of the im-
portant local people unless he considers that good dinners
for the rich are more important than life for the children
of the poor. The corresponding thing is true in every part
of the world with which I am acquainted. This suggests that
we may simplify our account of what constitutes a good


man: a.good men is one whose opinions and acvies
__pleasing to the holders of power.
Ul


It has been painful to have to dwell upon the bad men
who, in the past, have unfortunately achieved eminence. —
Let us turn to the more agreeable contemplation of the
virtuous. “oe

A typically virtuous man was George III. When Piety
wanted him to emancipate the Catholics (who at that time
were not allowed to vote), he would not agree, on the
ground that to do so would be contrary to his coronation
oath. He righteously refused to be misled by the argument
that it would do good to emancipate them; the question, for
him, was not whether it would do good, but whether it was

right” in the abstract. His interference in politics was
largely responsible for the régime which caused America to


THE HARM THAT GOOD MEN DO 117


claim independence; but his interference was always dic-
tated by the most lofty motives. The same may be said
of the ex-Kaiser, a deeply religious man, sincerely con-
vinced, until his fall, that God was on his side, and (so
far as I know) wholly free from personal vices. Yet it
would be hard to name any man of our time who has done
more to cause human misery.

Among politicians good men have their uses, the chief
of which is to afford a smoke-screen behind which others
can carry on their activities unsuspected. A good man
will never suspect his friends of shady actions: this is part
of his goodness. A good man will never be suspected by
the public of using his goodness to screen villains: this is
part of his utility. It is clear that this combination of quali-
ties makes a good man extremely desirable wherever a
somewhat narrow-minded public objects to the transference
of public funds into the hands of the deserving rich. 1 am
told—though far be it from me to endorse this statement
—-that at a not very distant period in history there was an
American President who was a good man and served this
purpose. In England, Whittaker Wright, at the height

of his fame, surrounded himself with blameless peers,
whose virtue made them incapable of understanding his
arithmetic, or of knowing that they did not.

Another of the uses of good men is that any undesirables
can be kept out of politics by means of scandals. Ninety-
nine men out of a hundred commit breaches of the moral _
. Jay, bat-in-generat this-fact-does not become public. And
when in the ninety-ninth case it becomes known in relation
to any individual, the one man im the hundred who is gen-
uinely innocent expresses genuine horror, whilé the other


So ere pee


ent et pe heed
ero atarnahnenicensre acne
rahe eninatreptsaerartncetieegn eer


118 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


rem


ninety-eight are compelled to follow suit for fear of being ©


_Suspected. ~ When, therefore, any man of obnoxious opin-
ions ventures into politics, it is only necessary for those who
have the preservation of our ancient institutions at heart
to keep track of his private activities until they discover
something which, if exposed, will ruin his political career.
They then have three courses open to them: to make the
facts known and cause him to disappear in a cloud of ob-
loquy ; or to compel him to retire into private life by threats
of exposure; or to derive for themselves a comfortable in-
come by means of blackmail. Of these three courses the
first two protect the public, while the third protects those
who protect the public. All three, therefore, are to be
commended, and all three are only rendered possible
through the existence of good men.

Consider, again, such a matter as venereal disease: it is
known that this can be almost entirely prevented by suit-
able precautions taken in advance, but owing to the activi-
ties of good men this knowledge is disseminated as little
as possible, and all kinds of obstacles are placed in the way
of its utilization. Consequently sin still secures its ‘“‘nat-
ural” punishment, and the children are still punished for
the sins of the fathers, in accordance with Biblical precept.
How dreadful it would be if this were otherwise, for, if
sin were no longer punished, there might be people so
abandoned as to pretend that it was no longer sin, and if


the punishment did not fall also upon-the innocent, it would


not seem so dreadful. How grateful we ought to be, there- _


fore, to those good men who ensure that the stern laws
of retribution decreed by Nature during- our days -of


ignorance can still be made to operate in spite of the im-


THE HARM THAT GOOD MEN DO 119


pious knowledge rashly acquired by scientists. All right-
thinking people know that a bad act is bad quite regardless
Sf the question whether it causes any suffering or not, but
since_men_are-not-all-capable-of-being-.guided by the pure
moral law, it is highly desirable that suffering should-follaw
from sin in order to secure virtue. Men must be kept in
ignorance of all ways of escaping the penalties which were
incurred by sinful actions in pre-scientific ages. I shudder
when I think how much we should all know about the pres-
ervation of mental and physical health if it were not for
the protection against this dangerous knowledge which our
good men so kindly provide.

Another way in which good men can be useful is by get-
ting themselyes murdered. Germany acquired the province
‘of Shantung in China by having the good fortune. to have
two missionaries murdered there. The Archduke who was
murdered at Sarajevo was, I believe a good man; and how
grateful we ought to be to him! If he had not died as
he did, we might not have had the war, ‘and then the world
would not have been made safe for democracy, nor would
militarism have been overthrown, nor should we be now
enjoying military despotisms in Spain, Italy, Hungary, Bul-
garia, and Russia.

To speak seriously: the standards of “goodness” which
are generally recognized by public opinion are not those
-which_ are calculated _to make the world a happier place.

“This is due to a variety of causes, of which the chief is


an


tradition, -and-the-next-most powerful is the unjust power
of dominant classes.. Primitive morality seems to have de-
veloped out of the notion of taboo; that is to say, it was


originally purely superstitious, and forbade certain per-


120 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


fectly harmless acts (such as eating out of the chief’s dish)
on the supposed ground that they produced disaster by
magical means. In this way there came to be prohibitions,
which continued to have authority over people’s feelings
when the supposed reasons for them were forgotten. A
considerable part of current morals is still of this sort:
certain kinds of conduct produce emotions of horror, quite
regardless of the question whether they have bad effects
or not. In many cases the conduct which inspires horror is
in fact harmful; if this were not the case, the need for a
revision of our moral standards would be more generally
recognized. Murder, for example, can obviously not be
tolerated in a civilized society; yet the origin of the prohi-
bition of murder is purely superstitious. It was thought
that the murdered man’s blood (or, later, his ghost) de-
manded vengeance, and might punish not only the guilty
man, but any one who showed him kindness. The super-
stitious character of the prohibition of murder is shown


ee


.


se


THE HARM THAT GOOD MEN DO 12!
Our current ethic is a curious _mixture_of _superstition,


and rationalism. Murder is an ancient crime, and we view
% : — Saba aiy: - !
it through a mist of age-long horror. Forgery is a modern
e 5 « comamecatn es Mba wane mene, boy. Laid
crime, and we view it rationally. We punish forgers, but
we do not feel them strange beings set apart, as we do mur-
derers. And we still think in social practice, whatever we
may hold in theory, that virtue consists in not doing rather
than in doing. The man who abstains from certain acts


° . i: = ee ga NRE = : eee
labeled “sin” is a_good man, even though he never does


a


anything to further the-welfare of others. This, of course,


any country where a man who has a genuine love for his
neighbor can long avoid obloquy. In Paris, just before the
outbreak of the war, Jean Jaurés, the best citizen of France,
was murdered; the murderer was acquitted, on the ground
that he had performed a public service. This case was
peculiarly dramatic, but the same sort of thing happens
everywhere.

Those who defend traditional morality will sometimes
admit that it is not perfect, but contend that any criticism
will make all morality crumble. This will not be the case
if the criticism is based upon something positive and con-
structive, but only if it is conducted with a view to noth-


122 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


ing more than momentary pleasure. To return to_Ben-


.
ES lags


tham: he advocated, as the bagis of morals, “the, greatest
happiness of the greatest number.” A man who acts upon —


‘this principlté-wil-have~a much more arduous life than a


man who merely obeys conventional precepts. He will nec-


essarily make himself the champion of the oppressed, and
so incur the enmity of the great. He will proclaim facts
which the powers that be wish to conceal; he will deny


falsehoods designed to alienate sympathy from those who —


need it. Such a mode of life does not lead to a collapse
of genuine morality. Official morality has always been
oppressive and negative: it has said “thou shalt not,” and
has not troubled to investigate the effect of activities not


forbidden by the code. Against this kind of morality all


the great mystics and religious teachers have protested in


vain: their followers ignored their most explicit pronounce-
ments. It seems unlikely, therefore, that any large-scale
improvements will come through their methods.


world whose institutions are based upon hatred and_injus-
tic€ is not the one most likely to produce happiness. The
late war taught this tesson to a few, and would have taught
it to many more if it had ended in a draw. We need a
morality based upon love of life, upon pleasure in. growth
and positive achievement, not upon repression and prohi-
bition. A man should-be-regarded as “good” if he is happy,
expansive, generous, and glad when_others are happy’; if
so, a few peccadillos should be regarded as of little im-
portance. .But a man who acquires a fortune by cruelty
and exploitation should be regarded as at present we regard


THE HARM THAT GOOD MEN DO - 123


what is called an “immoral’’ man; and he should be so re-
garded even if he goes-to-church regularly and gives a por=>
tian” ‘of his ill-gotten-gains t to public objects. “To borimmg this”
about, it is only necessary to instill a rational attitude to-
wards ethical questions, instead of the mixture of super-
stition and oppression which still passes muster as ‘“‘virtue”’
among important personages. The power of reason is
thought small in these days, but I remain an unrepentant
rationalist. Reason may be a small force, but it is con-
stant, and works always in one direction, while the forces
of unreason destroy one another in futile strife. There-
fore every orgy of unreason in the end strengthens the
friends 6f reason, and shows afresh that they are the only
true _true_friends « of of humanity.


X
THE RECRUDESCENCE OF PURITANISM


Durinc the war, the holders of power in all countries
found it necessary to bribe the populations into codperation —
by unusual concessions. Wage-earners were allowed a liv-
ing wage, Hindoos were told that they were men and
brothers, women were given the vote, and young people
were allowed to enjoy those innocent pleasures of which the
old, in the name of morality, always wish to rob them. The
war being won, the victors set to work to deprive their
tools of the advantages temporarily conceded. Wage-
earners were worsted by the issue of the coal strikes in 1921
and 1926; Hindoos have been put in their place by various
decisions; women, though they could not be deprived of
the vote, have been ousted from posts when they married,
in spite of an Act of Parliament saying that this should not
be done. All these issues are “political”—that is to say,
there are organized bodies of voters representing the inter-
ests of the classes concerned in England, and organized
bodies of resisters in India. But no organized body repre-
sents the point of view of those who believe that a man or
woman ought to be free in regard to enjoyments which do
not damage other people, so that the Puritans have met
with no serious opposition, and their tyranny has not been
regarded as raising a political issue.
We may define a Puritan as a man who holds that cer-
tain kinds of acts, even if they have no visible bad effects
124,


RECRUDESCENCE OF PURITANISM 125


upon others than the agent, are inherently sinful, and, being
sinful, ought to be prevented by whatever means is most
effectual—the criminal law if possible, and, if not that, then
public opinion backed by economic pressure. This view is
of respectable antiquity; indeed, it was probably responsible
for the origin of criminal law. But originally it was recon-
ciled with a utilitarian basis of legislation by the belief that
certain crimes roused the anger of the gods against com-
munities which tolerated them, and were therefore socially
harmful. This point of view is embodied in the story of
Sodom and Gomorrah. Those who believe this story can
justify, on utilitarian grounds, the existing laws against the
crimes which led to the destruction of those cities. But
nowadays even Puritans seldom adopt this point of view.
Not even the Bishop of London has suggested that the
earthquake in Tokyo was due to any peculiar wickedness
of its inhabitants. The laws in question can, therefore, only
be justified by the theory of vindictive punishment, which
holds that certain sins, though they may not injure any one
except the sinner, are so heinous as to make it our duty to
inflict pain upon the delinquent. This point of view, under
the influence of Benthamism, lost its hold during the nine-
teenth century. But in recent years, with the general decay
‘of Liberalism, it has regained lost ground, and has begun
to threaten a new tyranny as oppressive as any in the
Middle Ages.

It is from America that the new movement derives most
of its force; it is one consequence of the fact that America
was the sole victor in the war. The career of Puritanism
has been curious. It held brief power in England in the
seventeenth century, but so disgusted the mass of ordinary


76 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS :


citizens that they have never again allowed it to control
the Government. The Puritans, persecuted in England,
colonized New England, and subsequently the Middle
West. The American Civil War was a continuation of the
English Civil War, the Southern States having been mainly
colonized by opponents of the Puritans. But unlike the
English Civil War, it led to a permanent victory of the
Puritan Party. The result is that the greatest Power in
the world is controlled by men who inherit the outlook of
Cromwell’s Ironsides. .
It would be unfair to point out the drawbacks of Puritan-
ism without acknowledging its services to mankind. In
England, in the seventeenth century and until modern times,
it has stood for democracy against royal and aristocratic
tyranny. In America, it stood for emancipation of the
slaves, and did much to make America the champion of
democracy throughout the world. These are great services
to mankind, but they belong to the past. The problem of
the present is not so much political democracy as the com-
bination of order with liberty for minorities. This problem
requires a different outlook from that of Puritanism; it re-
quires tolerance and breadth of sympathy rather than moral
fervor. Breadth of sympathy has never been a strong point
with the Puritans. 4
I will not say anything about the most noteworthy vic-
tory of Puritanism, namely, Prohibition in America. In an
case, opponents of Prohibition cannot well make their oppo-
sition a matter of principle, since most of them would favor
the prohibition of cocaine, which raises exactly the saul
questions of principle. t
The practical objection to Puritanism, as to every form


*
4
v

.
t


RECRUDESCENCE OF PURITANISM 127


of fanaticism, is that it singles out certain evils as so much
worse than others that they must be suppressed at all costs.
The fanatic fails to recognize that the suppression of a real
evil, if carried out too drastically, produces other evils
which are even greater. We may illustrate by the law
against obscene publications. No one denies that pleasure
in obscenity is base, or that those who minister to it do
harm. But when the law steps in to suppress it, much that
is highly desirable is suppressed at the same time. A few
years ago, certain pictures by an eminent Dutch artist were
sent through the post to an English purchaser. ‘The Post
Office officials, after enjoying a thorough inspection of
them, concluded that they were obscene. (Appreciation of
artistic merits is not expected of Civil Servants). ‘They
therefore destroyed them, and the purchaser had no re-
dress. The law gives power to the Post Office to destroy
anything sent through the post that the officials consider
obscene, and from their decision there is no appeal.

A more important example of the evils resulting f-om
Puritan legislation arises in connection with birth control.
It is obvious that ‘‘obscenity’” is not a term capable of
exact legal definition; in the practice of the Courts, it means
“anything that shocks the magistrate.” Now an average
magistrate is not shocked by information about birth con-
trol if it is given in an expensive book which uses long words
and roundabout phrases, but is shocked if it is given in a
cheap pamphlet using plain language that uneducated peo-
ple can understand. Consequently it is at present illegal in
England to give information on birth control to wage-
earners, though it is legal to give it to educated people.
Yet it is wage-earners above all to whom the information


128 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


is important. It should be noted that the law takes no
account whatever of the purpose of a publication, except
in a few recognized cases such as medical text-books. The
sole question to be considered is: If this publication fell
‘ato the hands of a nasty-minded boy, could it give him
pleasure? If so, it must be destroyed, whatever the social
importance of the information it contains. The harm done
by the enforced ignorance which results is incalculable. Des-
titution, chronic illness among women, the birth of diseased
children, overpopulation and war are regarded by our Puri-
tan lawgivers as smaller evils than the hypothetical pleasure
of a few foolish boys.

The law as it exists is thought to be not sufficiently dras-
tic. Under the auspices of the League of Nations, an In-
ternational Conference on Obscene Publications, as re-
ported in The Times of September 17, 1923, recommended
a tightening-up of the law in the United States and in all
the countries belonging to the League of Nations. The
British delegate was apparently the most zealous in this
good work.

Another matter which has been made the basis for far-
reaching legislation is the white-slave traffic. The real evil
here is very grave, and is quite a proper matter for the
criminal law. The real evil is that ignorant young women
are enticed by false promises into a condition of semi-
slavery in which their health is exposed to the gravest dan-
gers. It is essentially a Labor question, to be dealt with on
the lines of the Factory Acts and the Truck Acts. But it
has been made the excuse for gross interference with per-
sonal liberty in cases where the peculiar evils of the white:
slave traffic are entirely absent. Some years ago a casé


RECRUDESCENCE OF PURITANISM 12g


was reported in the English papers in which a man had
fallen in love with a prostitute and married her. After
they had lived together happily for some time, she decided
_to go back to her old profession. There was no evidence
that he suggested her doing so, or in any way approved of
her action, but he did not at once quarrel with her and turn
her out of doors. For this crime he was flogged and thrown
into prison. He suffered this punishment under a law
which was then recent, and which is still on the statute-book.

In America, under a similar law, though it is not illegal
to keep a mistress, it is illegal to travel with her from one
“State to another; a New Yorker may take his mistress to
Brooklyn but not to Jersey City. The difference of moral
turpitude between these two actions is not obvious to the
plain man.

On this matter, also, the League of Nations is endeav-
oring to secure more severe legislation. Some time ago,
the Canadian delegate on the League of Nations Commis-
‘sion suggested that no woman, however old, should be
allowed to travel on a steamer unless accompanied by her
husband or by one of her parents. This proposal was
‘not adopted, but it illustrates the direction in which we are
‘moving. It is, of course, obvious that such measures turn
: all women into “white slaves’; women cannot have any
‘freedom without a risk that some will use it for purposes
of ‘Gmmorality.” The only logical goal of these reformers
is the purdah.

There is another more general argument against the
Puritan outlook. Human nature being what it is, people
j will insist upon getting some pleasure out of life. For
|rough practical purposes, pleasures may be divided into


130 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


those that have their primary basis in the senses, and those
that are mainly of the mind. The traditional moralist
praises the latter at the expense of the former; or rather,
he tolerates the latter because he does not recognize them
as pleasures. His classification is, of course, not scien-
tifically defensible, and in many cases he is himself in doubt.
Do the pleasures of art belong to the senses or to the mind?
If he is really stern, he will condemn art in toto, like Plato
and the Fathers; if he is more or less latitudinarian, he
will tolerate art if it has a “spiritual purpose,” which gen-
erally means that it is bad art. This is Tolstoy’s view.
Marriage is another difficult case. The stricter moralists
regard it as regrettable; the less strict praise it on the
eround that it is generally unpleasant, especially when they
succeed in making it indissoluble.

This, however, is not my point. My point is that the
pleasures which remain possible after the Puritan has done
his utmost are more harmful than those that he condemns.
Next to enjoying ourselves, the next greatest pleasure con-
sists in preventing others from enjoying themselves, or,
more generally, in the acquisition of power. Consequently
those who live under the dominion of Puritanism become ex-
ceedingly desirous of power. Now love of power does far
more harm than love of drink or any of the other vices
against which Puritans protest. Of course, in virtuous peo-
ple love of power camouflages itself as love of doing good,
but this makes very little difference to its social effects. It
merely means that we punish our victims for being wicked,
instead of for being our enemies. In either case, tyranny
and war result. Moral indignation is one of the most
harmful forces in the modern world, the more so as it can


RECRUDESCENCE OF PURITANISM 131


always be diverted to sinister uses by those who control
_ propaganda. ,

Economic and political organization has inevitably in-
creased wich the growth of industrialism, and is bound to
increase still further unless industrialism collapses. The
earth becomes more crowded, and our dependence upon our
“neighbors becomes more intimate. In these circumstances
life cannot remain tolerable unless we learn to let each other
alone in all matters that are not of immediate and obvious
‘concern to the community. We must learn to respect each
other’s privacy, and not to impose our moral standards
‘upon each other. The Puritan imagines that his moral
standard is the moral standard; he does not realize that
other ages and other countries, and even other groups in
his own country, have moral standards different from his,
to which they have as good a right as he has to his. Un-
fortunately, the love of power which is the natural outcome
of Puritan self-denial makes the Puritan more executive
than other people, and makes it difficult for others to resist
him. Let us hope that a broader education and a wider
‘knowledge of mankind may gradually weaken the ardor of
our too virtuous masters.


XI
THE NEED FOR POLITICAL SCEPTICISM +


OnE of the peculiarities of the English-speaking world is its
immense interest and belief in political parties. A very
large percentage of English-speaking people really believe
that the ills from which they suffer would be cured if a
certain political party were in power. ‘That is a reason
for the swing of the pendulum. A man votes for one party
and remains miserable; he concludes that it was the other
party that was to bring the millennium. By the time he is
disenchanted with all parties, he is an old man on the verge
of death; his sons retain the belief of his youth, and the
see-saw goes on.

I want to suggest that, if we are to do any good in poli-
tics, we must view political questions in quite a different
way. A party which is to obtain power must, in a democ-
racy, make an appeal to which the majority of the nation
responds. For reasons which will appear in the course of
the argument, an appeal which is widely successful, with the
existing democracy, can hardly fail to be harmful. There-
fore no important political party is likely to have a useful
program, and if useful measures are to be passed, it must be
by means of some other machinery than party government.
How to combine any such machinery with democracy: is
one of the most urgent problems of our time.

There are at present two very different kinds of special-


* Presidential Address to the Students’ Union of the London School of
Economics and Political Science, October 10, 1923.


132


NEED FOR POLITICAL SCEPTICISM 133
.


ists in political questions. On the one hand there are the
practical politicians of all parties; on the other hand there
are the experts, mainly civil servants, but also economists,
financiers, scientific medical men, etc. Each of these two
classes has a special kind of skill. The skill of the politician
consists in guessing what people can be brought to think
advantageous to themselves; the skill of the expert consists
in inculcating what really is advantageous, provided people
can be brought to think so. (The proviso is essential, be-
cause measures which arouse serious resentment are seldom
advantageous, whatever merits they may have otherwise. )
The power of the politician, in a democracy, depends upon
his adopting the opinions which seem right to the average
man. It is useless to urge that politicians ought to be high-
minded enough to advocate what enlightened opinion con-
siders good, because if they do they are swept aside for
others. Moreover, the intuitive skill that they require in
forecasting opinion does not imply any skill whatever in
forming their own opinions, so that many of the ablest
‘(from a party-political point of view) will be in a position
to advocate, quite honestly, measures which the majority
think good, but which experts know to be bad. There is
therefore no point in moral exhortations to politicians to
“be disinterested, except in the crude sense of not taking
bribes.

Wherever party politics exist, the appeal of a politician
is primarily to a section, while his opponents appeal to an
opposite section. His success depends upon turning his sec-
tion into a majority. A measure which appeals to all
sections equally will presumably be common ground between
the parties, and will therefore be useless to the party poli-


;
134 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


tician. Consequently he concentrates attention upon those
measures which are disliked by the section which forms the
nucleus of his opponents’ supporters. Moreover, a meas-
ure, however admirable, is useless to the politician unless
he can give reasons for it which will appear convincing to
the average man when set forth in a platform speech. We
have thus two conditions which must be fulfilled by the
measures on which party politicians lay stress: (1) they
must seem to favor a section of the nation; (2) the argu-
ments for them must be of the utmost simplicity. Of course
this does not apply to a time of war, because then the party
conflict is suspended in favor of conflict with the external
enemy. In war, the arts of the politician are expended on
neutrals, who correspond to the doubtful voter in ordinary
politics. The late war showed that, as we should have ex-
pected, democracy affords an admirable training for the
business of appealing to neutrals. That was one of the
main reasons why democracy won the war. It is true it lost
the peace; but that is another question. }

The special skill of the politician consists in knowing
what passions can be most easily aroused, and how to pre-
vent them, when aroused, from being harmful to himself
and his associates. There is a Gresham’s law in politics as”
in currency; a man who aims at nobler ends than these will
be driven out, except in those rare moments (chiefly revo-
lutions) when idealism finds itself in alliance with some
powerful movement of selfish passion. Moreover, since
politicians are divided into rival groups, they aim at sim-
ilarly dividing the nation, unless they have the good fortune
tp unite it in war against some other nation. They live by

noise and fury, signifying nothing.” They cannot pay at-


NEED FOR POLITICAL SCEPTICISM 135


tention to anything difficult to explain, or to anything not
involving division (either between nations or within the
nation), or to anything that would diminish the power of
politicians as a class.

_ The expert is a curiously different type. As a rule, he is
-a man who does not aim at political power. His natural
reaction to a political problem is to inquire what would be
beneficial rather than what would be popular. In certain
directions, he has exceptional technical knowledge. If he is
a civil servant or the head of a big business, he has consid-
erable experience of individual men, and may be a shrewd
judge as to how they will act. All these are favorable cir-
cumstances, which entitle his opinion on his specialty to con-
siderable respect.

He has, however, as a rule, certain correlative defects.
His knowledge being specialized, he probably overestimates
the importance of his department. If you went successively
to a scientific dentist, a scientific oculist, a heart specialist,

a lung specialist, a nerve specialist, and so on, they would
each give you admirable advice as to how to prevent their
particular kind of ailment. If you followed the advice of
all, you would find your whole twenty-four hours consumed
in preserving your health, and no time left to make any use
of your health. The same sort of thing may easily hap-
‘pen with political experts; if all are attended to, there will
‘be no time for the nation to live its ordinary life.

A second defect of the able civil servant results from his
having to use the method of persuasion behind the scenes.
He will either greatly overestimate the possibility of per-
suading people to be reasonable, or he will prefer hole-and-
corner methods, by which politicians are induced to pass


136 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


crucial measures without knowing what they are doing. As
a rule, he will make the former mistake when he is young
and the latter when he is middle-aged.

A third defect of the expert, if regarded as one who is to
have executive power, is that he is no judge of popular pas-
sions. He usually understands a committee very well, but
he seldom understands a mob. Having discovered some
measure which all well-informed persons of good will at
once see to be desirable, he does not realize that, if it is
publicly advocated, certain powerful people who think it
will damage themselves can stir up popular feeling to the
point where any advocate of the measure in question will
be lynched. In America, the magnates, it is said, set de-
tectives on to any man they dislike, and presently, if he is
not exceptionally astute, maneuver him into a compromis-
ing situation. He must then either change his politics or
be denounced throughout the Press as an immoral man.
In England, these methods are not yet so well developed,
but they probably will be before long. Even where there
is nothing sinister, popular passions are often such as to
astonish the unwary. Everybody wishes the Government
to cut down expenditure in general, but any particular econ-
omy is always unpopular, because it throws individuals out
of work, and they win sympathy. In China, in the eleventh
century, there was a civil servant, Wang An Shih, who, hav-
ing converted the Emperor, set to work to introduce Social-
ism. In a rash moment, however, he offended the literati
(the Northcliffe Press of that time), was hurled from
power, and has been held up to obloquy by every subsequent
Chinese historian until modern times.

A fourth defect is connected with this, namely, that ex-


NEED FOR POLITICAL SCEPTICISM = 137


perts are apt to undervalue the importance of consent to
administrative measures, and to ignore the difficulty of
administering an unpopular law. Medical men could, if
they had power, devise means which would stamp out in-
fectious diseases, provided their laws were obeyed; but if
their laws went much ahead of public opinion, they would
be evaded. The ease of administration during the war was
due to the fact that people would submit to a great deal
in order to win the war, whereas ordinary peace legislation
has no object making such a strong appeal.

Hardly any expert allows enough for sheer laziness and
indifference. We take some trouble to avoid dangers which
are obvious, but very little to avoid those only visible to
the expert. We think we like money, and daylight saving
‘saves us many millions a year; yet we never adopted it until
we were driven to it as a war-measure. We love our habits
more than our income, often more than our life. This
seems incredible to a person who has reflected upon the
‘harmfulness of some of our habits.

Probably most experts do not realize that, if they had
executive power, their impulses towards tyranny would de-
velop, and they would cease to be the amiable and high-
minded men they are at present. Very few people are able
to discount the effect of circumstances upon their own char-
acters.

For all these reasons, we cannot escape from the evils
of our present politicians by simply handing over the power
to civil servants. Nevertheless it seems imperative, in our
increasingly complex society, that experts should acquire
more influence than they have at present. There is at
present a violent conflict between instinctive passions and


a


138 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


industrial needs. Our environment, both human and mate-
rial, has been suddenly changed by industrialism. Our in-/
stincts have presumably not changed, and almost nothing
has been done to adapt our habits of thought to the altered)
circumstances. Unwise people who keep beavers in their
libraries find that, when wet weather is coming, the beavers”
build dams out of books, because they used to live on the
banks of streams. We are almost equally ill-adapted to
our new surroundings. Our education still teaches us to
admire the qualities that were biologically useful in the
Homeric age, regardless of the fact that they are now
harmful and ridiculous. ‘The instinctive appeal of every
successful political movement is to envy, rivalry, or hate,
‘never to the need for codperation. ‘This is inherent in our
present political methods, and in conformity with pre-indus-
trial habits. Only a deliberate effort can change men’s”
habits of thought in this respect.

It is a natural propensity to attribute misfortune to some
ene’s malignity. When prices rise, it is due to the profit-
eer; when wages fall, it is due to the capitalist. Why the
capitalist is ineffective when wages rise, and the profiteer
when prices fall, the man in the street does not inquire.
Nor does he notice that wages and prices rise and fall to-
gether. If he is a capitalist, he wants wages to fall and
prices to rise; if he is a wage-earner, he wants the opposite.
When a currency expert tries to explain that profiteers and —
trade unions and ordinary employers have very little to
do with the matter, he irritates everybody, like the man
who threw doubt on German atrocities. We do not like
to be robbed of an enemy; we want some one to hate when
we suffer. It is so depressing to think that we suffer because


ERNE =


NEED FOR POLITICAL SCEPTICISM — 139


we are fools; yet, taking mankind in the mass, that is the


truth. For this reason, no political party can acquire any


driving force except through hatred; it must hold up some
one to obloquy. If so-and-so’s wickedness is the sole cause
of our misery, let us punish so-and-so and we shall be
happy. The supreme example of this kind of political


thought was the Treaty of Versailles. Yet most people are


only seeking some new scapegoat to replace the Germans.

I will illustrate the point by contrasting two books advo-
cating international Socialism, Marx’s Capital and Salter’s
Allied Shipping Control. (No doubt Sir Arthur Salter
does not call himself an international socialist, but he is
one none the less.) We may take these two books as rep-
resenting the politician’s and the civil servant’s methods,
respectively, of advocating economic change. Marx’s ob-
ject was to create a political party which should ultimately
overwhelm all others; Salter’s object is to influence admin-
‘strators within the existing system, and to modify public
opinion by arguments based upon the general advantage.
Marx proves conclusively that under capitalism wage-
earners have suffered terrible privations. He does not
prove, and does not attempt to prove, that they will suffer
less under Communism; that is an assumption implicit in
his style and in the ordering of his chapters. Any reader


who starts with a proletarian class bias will find himself


sharing this assumption as he reads, and will never notice
that it is not proved. Again: Marx emphatically repudi-
ates ethical considerations as having nothing to do with
social development, which is supposed to proceed by inex-
orable economic laws, just as in Ricardo and Malthus. But
Ricardo and Malthus thought that the inexorable laws


140 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


inexorably brought happiness to their class along with mis-
ery to wage-earners; while Marx, like Tertullian, had an
apocalyptic vision of a future in which his class would enjoy
the circuses while the bourgeois would lie howling. Al-
though Marx professed to regard men as neither good
nor bad, but merely embodiments of economic forces, he
did in fact represent the bourgeois as wicked, and set to
work to stimulate a fiery hatred of him in the wage-earner.
Marx’s Capital is in essence, like the Bryce Report, a col-
lection of atrocity stories designed to stimulate martial
ardor against the enemy.’ Very naturally, it also stimulates
the martial ardor of the enemy. It thus brings about the
class-war which it prophesies. It is through the stimulation
of hatred that Marx has proved such a tremendous political
force, and through the fact that he has successfully repre-
sented capitalists as objects of moral abhorrence.

In Salter’s Allied Shipping Control we find a diametri-
cally opposite spirit. Salter has the advantage, which Marx
had not, of having been for some time concerned in admin-
istering a system of international Socialism. This system
was brought about, not by the desire to kill capitalists, but
by the desire to kill Germans. As, however, the Germans
were irrelevant to economic issues, they are in the back-
ground in Salter’s book. The economic problem was ex-
actly the same as if the soldiers and munition-workers and
those who supplied the raw materials of munitions had been
kept in idleness and the remainder of the population had
had to do all the work. Or, alternatively, as if it had been


1 The theoretical part of Capital is analogous to our talk about a “war
to end war,” a “war for small nations,” a “war for democracy,” etc, Its
sole purpose is to make the reader feel that the hatred stirred ‘up in him
is righteous indignation, and may be indulged with benefit to mankind.


NEED FOR POLITICAL SCEPTICISM = 141


suddenly decreed that everybody was to do only half as
much work as hitherto. War experience has given us a
technical solution of this problem, but not a psychological
solution, because it has not shown how to provide a stimulus
to codperation in peace-time as powerful as hatred and fear
of the Germans during the years of war.

Salter says (p. 19):


There is probably no task at this moment which more deserves the at-
tention of professional economists who will approach the problem in a
purely scientific spirit, without bias either for or against the principle of
State control, than an investigation of the actual results of the war period.
The prima facie facts with which they would start are indeed so striking
as to constitute at least a challenge to the normal economic system. It is
true that several factors contributed to the results... . An unbiased pro-
fessional inquiry would assign full weight to these and other factors, but
would probably find much still to the credit of the new methods of organi-
zation. ‘The success of these methods under the conditions of the war is
indeed beyond reasonable dispute. At a moderate estimate, and allowing
for the production of persons who were idle before the war, between half
and two-thirds of the productive capacity of the country was withdrawn
into combatant or other war service. And yet throughout the war Great
Britain sustained the whole of her military effort and maintained her
civilian population at a standard of life which was never intolerably low,
and for some periods and for some classes was perhaps as comfortable as
in time of peace. She did this without, on balance, drawing any aid from
other countries. She imported, on borrowed money, less from America than
she supplied, on loaned money, to her Allies. She therefore maintained
the whole of the current consumption both of her war effort and of her
civilian population with a mere remnant of her productive power by means
of current production.


Discussing the ordinary commercial system of peace-time,
he says:


It was thus of the essence of the peace economic system that it was
under no deliberate direction and control. By the exacting criterion of war
conditions, however, this system proved to be, at least for those conditions,
seriously inadequate and defective. By the new standards it was blind and


142 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


it was wasteful. It produced too little, it produced the wrong things. and
it distributed them to the wrong people (p. 17).


The system which was gradually built up under the stress
of war became, in 1918, in all essentials a complete inter-
national Socialism. The Allied Governments jointly were
the sole buyer of food and raw material, and the sole judge
as to what should be imported, not only into their own coun-
tries, but even into those of European neutrals. ‘They con-
trolled production absolutely, because they controlled raw
material, and could ration factories as they chose. As re-
gards food they even controlled retail distribution. ‘They
fixed prices as well as quantities. ‘Their power was exer-
cised mainly through the Allied Maritime Transport Coun-
cil, which, in the end, controlled nearly all the world’s avail-
able shipping, and was consequently able to dictate the con-
ditions of import and export. The system was thus, in all
essentials, one of international Socialism, applied primarily
to foreign trade, the very matter which causes the greatest
difficulties to political socialists.

The odd thing about this system is that it was introduced
without antagonizing the capitalists. It was a necessary
feature of wartime politics that at all costs no important
section of the population must be antagonized. For in-
stance, at the time of greatest stringency in the shipping
position, it was argued that munitions must be cut down
rather than food, for fear of discontent in the civilian popu-
lation. To have alienated the capitalists would have been
very dangerous, and in fact the whole transformation was
carried out without serious friction. The attitude was not:
Such-and-such classes of men are wicked and must be pun-
ished. The attitude was: The peace-time system was in- —


NEED FOR POLITICAL SCEPTICISM 143


efficient, and a new system must be established with a min-
‘imum of hardship to all concerned. Under the stress of
national danger, consent to measures which the Government
considered necessary was not so difficult to obtain as it
would be at ordinary times. But even at ordinary times
consent would be less difficult if measures were presented
from an administrative point of view rather than from that
of class-antagonism.

It would appear from the administrative experience of
the war that most of the advantages hoped from Socialism
can be obtained by Government control of raw materials,
foreign trade, and banking. This point of view has been
developed by Lloyd’s valuable book on Stabilization.* It
may be taken as a definite advance in the scientific analysis
of the problem, which we owe to the experimentation forced
upon civil servants by the war.

One of the most interesting things, from a practical point
of view, in Sir Arthur Salter’s book is his analysis of the
method of international codperation which was found to
work best in practice. It was not the custom for each coun-
try separately to consider each question, and then employ
diplomatic representatives to secure as much as possible in
bargaining with other Powers. The plan adopted was for
each question to have its separate international committee
of experts, so that the conflicts were not between nations,
but between commodities. The wheat commission would
fight the coal commission, and so on; but the recommenda-
tions of each were the result of deliberation between ex-
i pert representatives of the different Allies. The position,
in fact, was almost one of international syndicalism, except


1 George Allen and Unwin, 1923.


144 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


for the paramount authority of the Supreme War Council.
The moral is that any successful internationalism must
organize separate functions internationally, and not merely
have one supreme international body to adjust the claims of
conflicting purely national bodies.

Any person reading Salter’s book can see at once that
such an international government as existed among the
Allies during the war would increase the material, mental,
and moral welfare of almost the whole population of the
globe, if it could be established universally in time of peace.
It would not injure business men; indeed, they could easily
be promised in perpetuity, as a pension, their average profits
for the last three years. It would prevent unemployment,
fear of war, destitution, shortage, and overproduction. |
The argument and the method are set forth in Mr. Lloyd’s
book. Yet, in spite of these obvious and universal advan-
tages, the prospect of anything of the sort is, if possible,
even more remote than the establishment of universal revo-
lutionary Socialism. The dificulty of revolutionary Social-
ism is that it rouses too much opposition; the difficulty of
the civil servant’s Socialism is that it wins too little support.
Opposition to a political measure is roused by the fear that
oneself will be damaged; support is won by the hope (usu-
ally subconscious) that one’s enemies will be damaged. —
Therefore a policy that injures no one wins no support, and
a policy that wins much support also rouses fierce oppo-
sition. 3

Industrialism has created a new necessity for world- |
wide coéperation and a new facility for injuring each other
by hostility. But the only kind of appeal that wins any
instinctive response in party politics is an appeal to hostile


NEED FOR POLITICAL SCEPTICISM 145


feeling; the men who perceive the need of codperation are
powerless. Until education has been directed for a genera-
tion into new channels, and the Press has abandoned incite-
ments to hatred, only harmful policies have any chance of
being adopted in practice by our present political methods.
But there is no obvious means of altering education and
the Press until our political system is altered. From this
dilemma there is no issue by means of ordinary action, at
any rate for a long time to come. The best that can be
hoped, it seems to me, is that we should, as many of us as
possible, become political sceptics, rigidly abstaining from
belief in the various attractive party programs that are
put before us from time to time. Many quite sensible peo-
ple, from Mr. H. G. Wells downward, believed that the
late war was a war toend war. They are now disillusioned.
Many quite sensible people believe that the Marxian class
war will be a war to end war. If it ever comes, they too
will be disillusioned—if any of them survive. A well-in-
tentioned person who believes in any strong political move-
ment is merely helping to prolong that organized strife
which is destroying our civilization. Of course I do not
lay this down as an absolute rule: we must be sceptical even
of our scepticism. But if a political party has a policy
(as most have) which must do much harm on the way to
some ultimate good, the call for scepticism is very great,
in view of the doubtfulness of all political calculations. We
may fairly suspect that, from a psycho-analytic point of
view, the harm to be done by the way is what makes the
policy really attractive, and the ultimate good is of the
nature of a “rationalizing.”

Widespread political scepticism is possible; psychologi-


146 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


cally, it means concentrating our enmity upon politicians,
instead of nations or social classes. Since enmity cannot
be effective except by the help of politicians, an enmity of
which they are the objects may be psychologically satisfy-
ing, but cannot be socially harmful. I suggest it as ful-
filling the conditions for William James’ desideratum, a
‘‘moral equivalent for war.” True, it would leave politics
to obvious scoundrels (i.¢., persons whom you and I dis-
like), but that might be a gain. I read in The Freeman of
September 26, 1923, a story which may illustrate the useful-
ness of political scoundrelism. A certain Englishman, hay-
ing made friends with a Japanese Elder Statesman, asked
him why Chinese merchants were honest while those of.
Japan were not. ‘Some time ago,” he replied, ‘a period
of particularly brilliant corruption set in in Chinese politics,
and as far as the Courts were concerned, justice became a
mockery. Hence, in order to save the processes of trade
from complete chaos and stagnation, the Chinese merchant
was compelled to adopt the strictest ethical standards; and
since that time his word has been as good as his bond. In
Japan, however, the merchant has been under no such com-.
pulsion, for we have probably the finest code of legal justice
in the world. Hence when you do business with a Japanese,
you must take your chances.” This story shows that dis-
honest politicians may do less harm than honest ones.

The conception of an “honest” politician is not altogether
a simple one. The most tolerant definition is: one whose
political actions are not dictated by a desire to increase his
own income. In this sense, Mr. Lloyd George is honest.
The next stage would be the man whose political actions
are not dictated by desire to secure or preserve his own


NEED FOR POLITICAL SCEPTICISM 147


power any more than by pecuniary motives. In this sense,
Lord Grey is an honest politician. The last and most strin-
gent sense is: one who, in his public actions, is not only
disinterested, but does not fall very far below the standard
of veracity and honor which is taken for granted between
acquaintances. In this sense, the late Lord Morley was an
honest politician; at least, he was honest always, and a
politician until his honesty drove him out of politics. But
even a poltician who is honest in the highest sense may
be very harmful; one may take George III as an illustra-
tion. Stupidity and unconscious bias often work more dam-
‘age than venality. Moreover, an honest politician will not
‘be tolerated by a democracy unless he is very stupid, like the
‘late Duke of Devonshire; because only a very stupid man
can honestly share the prejudices of more than half the
‘nation. Therefore any man who is both able and public-
spirited must be a hypocrite if he is to succeed in politics;
but the hypocrisy will in time destroy his public spirit.
One obvious palliative of the evils of democracy in its
present form would be to encourage much more publicity
and initiative on the part of civil servants. They ought
to have the right, and, on occasion, the duty, to frame Bills
in their own names, and set forth publicly the arguments in
their favor. Finance and Labor already have international
conferences, but they ought to extend this method enor-
mously, and cause an international secretariat to be perpet-
ually considering measures to be simultaneously advocated
in different countries. The agricultural interests of the
world ought to meet for direct negotiations and adoption
‘of acommon policy. And so on. It is neither possible nor
‘desirable to dispense with democratic parliaments, because


148 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


measures which are to succeed must, after due discussion _
and the dissemination of considered expert opinions, be such


as to commend themselves to the ordinary citizen. But


at present, in most matters, the ordinary citizen does not —


know the considered opinion of experts, and little machin-


ery exists for arriving at their collective or majority opin- |


ion. In particular, civil servants are debarred from public
advocacy of their views, except in exceptional cases and by


non-political methods. If measures were framed by experts |
after international deliberation, they would cut across party


lines, and would be found to involve far less division of
opinion than is now taken for granted. I believe, for ex-


ample, that international finance and international labor, if


they could overcome their mutual distrust, could at this
moment agree on a program which would take the national


Parliaments several years to carry out, and would improve —


the world immeasurably. In unison, they would be difficult
to resist.

The common interests of mankind are numerous and
weighty, but our existing political machinery obscures them
through the scramble for power between different nations
and different parties. A different machinery, requiring no
legal or constitutional changes, and not very difficult to
create, would undermine the strength of national and party


passion, and focus attention upon measures beneficial to all


rather than upon those damaging to enemies. I suggest
that it is along these lines, rather than by party government


at home and foreign-office diplomacy abroad, that an issue


is to be found from the present peril to civilization. Knowl-
edge exists, and good will exists; but both remain impotent


until they possess the proper organs for making themselves
heard.


XII
FREE THOUGHT AND OFFICIAL PROPAGANDA?


Moncure Conway, in whose honor we are assembled to-
day, devoted his life to two great objects: freedom of
thought, and freedom of the individual. In regard to both
these objects, something has been gained since his time, but
something also has been lost. New dangers, somewhat dif-
ferent in form from those of past ages, threaten both kinds
of freedom, and unless a vigorous and vigilant public opin-
ion can be aroused in defense of them, there will be much
less of both a hundred years hence than there is now. My


_ purpose in this essay is to emphasize the new dangers and


to consider how they can be met.

Let us begin by trying to be clear as to what we mean
by “free thought.” This expression has two senses. In
its narrower sense it means thought which does not accept
the dogmas of traditional religion. In this sense a man is
a “free thinker” if he is not a Christian or a Mussulman or


a Buddhist or a Shintoist or a member of any of the other


bodies of men who accept some inherited orthodoxy. In
Christian countries a man is called a “free thinker” if he
does not decidedly believe in God, though this would not


suffice to make a man a “free thinker” in a Buddhist


country.
I do not wish to minimize the importance of free thought


in this sense. I am myself a dissenter from all known re-


. oo


1Moncure Conway Lecture for 1922.
149


150 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS ree |


ligions, and I hope that every kind of religious belief will \
die out. I do not believe that, on the balance, religious
belief has been a force for good. Although I am prepared |
to admit that in certain times and places it has had some }
good effects, I regard it as belonging to the infancy of /'
human reason, and to a stage of development which we are/ |
now outerowins, ~ J F|

but there is also a wider sense of ‘‘free thought,” which
I regard as of still greater importance. Indeed, the harm
done by traditional religions seems chiefly traceable to the
fact that they have prevented free thought in this wider
sense. [he wider sense is not so easy to define as the nar-
rower, and it will be well to spend some little time in trying
to arrive at its essence.

When we speak of anything as ‘“‘free,” our meaning is
not definite unless we can say what it is free from. What-
ever or whoever is “free” is not subject to some external
compulsion, and to be precise we ought to say what this
kind of compulsion is. Thus thought is ‘free’? when it is
free from certain kinds of outward control which are often
present. Some of these kinds of control which must be
absent if thought is to be “‘free’”’ are obvious, but others are
more subtle and elusive.

To begin with the most obvious: thought is not “free”
when legal penalties are incurred by the holding or not
holding of certain opinions, or by giving expression to one’s —
belief or lack of belief on certain matters. Very few coun-
tries in the world have as yet even this elementary kind of
freedom. In England, under the blasphemy laws, it is
illegal to express disbelief in the Christian religion, though |
in practice the law is not set in motion against the well-to- |


|


Sete! VOR


FREE THOUGHT AND PROPAGANDA 151


do. It is also illegal to teach what Christ taught on the
subject of non-resistance. Therefore whoever wishes to


avoid becoming a criminal must profess to agree with
- Christ’s teaching, but must avoid saying what that teaching


was. In America, no one can enter the country without
first solemnly declaring that he disbelieves in anarchism and
polygamy; and, once inside, he must also disbelieve in Com-
munism. In Japan, it is illegal to express disbelief in the


divinity of the Mikado. It will thus be seen that a voyage P


round the world is a perilous adventure. A Mahometan,
a Tolstoyan, a Bolshevik, or a Christian cannot undertake
it without at some point becoming a criminal, or holding
his tongue about what he considers important truths. This
of course only applies to steerage passengers; saloon pas-
sengers are allowed to believe whatever they please, pro-
vided they avoid offensive obtrusiveness.

It is clear that the most elementary condition, if thought
is to be free, is the absence of legal penalties for the ex-
pression of opinions. No great country has yet reached


~ to this level, although most of them think they have. The


te Aoshi,


opinions which are still persecuted strike the majority as
so monstrous and immoral that the general principle of


toleration cannot be held to apply to them. But this is
_ exactly the same view as that which made possible the tor-


tures of the Inquisition. There was a time when Protes-
tantism seemed as wicked as Bolshevism seems now. Please
do not infer from this remark that I am either a Protestant


or 2 Bolshevik.


1In New Zealand there is no such limitation. A publisher has been
convicted of blasphemy for publishing Sassoon’s. poems.


152 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


Legal penalties are, however, in the modern world, the
least of the obstacles to freedom of thought. The two
great obstacles are economic penalties and distortion of
evidence. It is clear that thought is not free if the pro-
fession of certain opinions makes it impossible to earn a
living. It is clear also that thought is not free if all the
arguments on one side of a controversy are perpetually
presented as attractively as possible, while the arguments
on the other side can only be discovered by diligent search.
Both these obstacles exist in every large country known to
me, except China, which is (or was) the last refuge of


freedom. It is these obstacles with which I shall be con- |


cerned—their present magnitude, the likelihood of their
increase, and the possibility of their diminution.


We may say that thought is free when it is exposed to
free competition among beliefs, i.e., when all beliefs are
able to state their case, and no legal or pecuniary advan- |


tages or disadvantages attach to beliefs. This is an ideal
which, for various reasons, can never be fully attained. But


it is possible to approach very much nearer to it than we |


do at present.


Three incidents in my own life will serve to show how, |


in modern England, the scales are weighted in favor of
Christianity. My reason for mentioning them is that many
people do not at all realize the disadvantages to which
avowed agnosticism still exposes people.


The first incident belongs to a very early stage in my


life. My father was a free-thinker, but died when I was


only three years old. Wishing me to be brought up with-
out superstition, he appointed two free-thinkers as my


guardians. The Courts, however, set aside his will, and —


FREE THOUGHT AND PROPAGANDA 153


had me educated in the Christian faith. I am afraid the
result was disappointing, but that was not the fault of the
law. If he had directed that I should be educated as a
Christadelphian or a Muggletonian or a Seventh-Day Ad-
ventist, the Courts would not have dreamed of objecting.
A parent has a right to ordain that any imaginable super-
stition shall be instilled into his children after his death,
but has not the right to say that they shall be kept free
from superstition if possible.

The second incident occurred in the year 1910. I had
at that time a desire to stand for Parliament as a Liberal,
and the Whips recommended me to a certain constituency.
I addressed the Liberal Association, who expressed them-
selves favorably, and my adoption seemed certain. But
being questioned by a smaller inner caucus, I admitted that I
was an agnostic. They asked whether the fact would come
out, and I said it probably would. They asked whether I
should be willing to go to church occasionally, and I replied
that I should not. Consequently they selected another can-
didate, who was duly elected, has been in Parliament ever
since, and is a member of the present (1922) Government.

The third incident occurred immediately afterwards. I
was invited to Trinity College, Cambridge, to become a lec-
turer, but not a Fellow. The difference is not pecuniary;
it is that a Fellow has a voice in the government of the
College, and cannot be dispossessed during the term of his
Fellowship except for grave immorality. The reason for’:
not offering me a Fellowship was that the clerical party did
not wish to add to the anti-clerical vote. The result was
that they were able to dismiss me in 1916, when they dis-


154 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


liked my views on the war.t If I had been dependent on
my lectureship, I should have starved.

These three incidents illustrate different kinds of dis-
advantages attaching to avowed free-thinking even in mod-
ern England. Any other avowed free-thinker could supply
similar incidents from his personal experience, often of a
far more serious character. The net result is that people
who are not well-to-do dare not be frank about their re-
ligious beliefs.

It is not, of course, only or even chiefly in regard to
religion that there is lack of freedom. Belief in Communism
or free love handicaps a man much more than agnosticism.
Not only is it a disadvantage to hold those views, but it is
very much more difficult to obtain publicity for the argu-
ments in their favor. On the other hand, in Russia the ad-
vantages and disadvantages are exactly reversed: comfort
and power are achieved by professing atheism, Communism,
and free love, and no opportunity exists for propaganda
against these opinions. The result is that in Russia one set
of fanatics feels absolute certainty about one set of doubtful
propositions, while in the rest of the world another set of
fanatics feels equal certainty about a diametrically opposite
set of equally doubtful propositions. From such a situation
war, bitterness, and persecution inevitably result on both
sides.

William James used to preach the ‘‘will to believe.” For
my part, I should wish to preach the “will to doubt.” None
of our beliefs are quite true; all have at least a penumbra —
of vagueness and error. The methods of increasing the


1T should add that they reappointed me later, when war passions had
begun to cool.


FREE THOUGHT AND PROPAGANDA 155


degree of truth in our beliefs are well known; they consist in
hearing all sides, trying to ascertain all the relevant facts,
controlling our own bias by discussion with people who have
the opposite bias, and cultivating a readiness to discard any
hypothesis which has proved inadequate. These methods
are practiced in science, and have built up the body of
scientific knowledge. Every man of science whose out-
look is truly scientific is ready to admit that what passes for
scientific knowledge at the moment is sure to require cor-
rection with the progress of discovery; nevertheless, it is
near enough to the truth to serve for most practical pur-
poses, though not for all. In science, where alone something
approximating to genuine knowledge is to be found, men’s
attitude is tentative and full of doubt.

In religion and politics, on the contrary, though there is
as yet nothing approaching scientific knowledge, everybody
considers it de rigueur to have a dogmatic opinion, to be
backed up by inflicting starvation, prison, and war, and to
be carefully guarded from argumentative competition with
any different opinion. If only men could be brought into a
tentatively agnostic frame of mind about these matters, nine-
tenths of the evils of the modern world would be cured.
War would become impossible, because each side would
realize that both sides must be in the wrong. Persecution
would cease. Education would aim at expanding the mind,
not at narrowing it. Men would be chosen for jobs on ac-
count of fitness to do the work, not because they followed
the irrational dogmas of those in power. Thus rational
doubt alone, if it could be generated, would suffice to intro-
duce the millennium.

We have had in recent years a brilliant example of the


156 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


scientific temper of mind in the theory of relativity and its
inception by the world. Einstein, a German-Swiss-Jew
pacifist, was appointed to a research professorship by the
German Government in the early days of the war; his
predictions were verified by an English expedition which
observed the eclipse of 1919, very soon after the Armistice.
His theory upsets the whole theoretical framework of tradi-
tional physics; it is almost as damaging to orthodox dyna-
mics as Darwin was to Genesis. Yet physicists everywhere
have shown complete readiness to accept his theory as soon
as it appeared that the evidence was in its favor. But none
of them, least of all Einstein himself, would claim that he
has said the last word. He has not built a monument of in-
fallible dogma to stand for all time. There are difficulties
he cannot solve; his doctrines will have to be modified in
their turn as they have modified Newton’s. This critical
undogmatic receptiveness is the true attitude of science.
What would have happened if Einstein had advanced
something equally new in the sphere of religion or politics?
English people would have found elements of Prussianism
in his theory; anti-Semites would have regarded it as a
Zionist plot; nationalists in all countries would have found
it tainted with lily-livered pacifism and proclaimed it a
mere dodge for escaping military service. All the old-fash-
ioned professors would have approached Scotland Yard to
get the importation of his writings prohibited. Teachers
favorable to him would have been dismissed. He, mean-
time, would have captured the Government of some back-
ward country, where it would have become illegal to teach
anything except his doctrine, which would have grown into
a mysterious dogma not understood by anybody. UI-


FREE THOUGHT AND PROPAGANDA 1547


timately the truth or falsehood of his doctrine would be
decided on the battlefield without the collection of any
fresh evidence for or against it. This method is the logical
outcome of William James’s will to believe.

What is wanted is not the will to believe, but the wish to
find out, which is the exact opposite.

If it is admitted that a condition of rational doubt would
be desirable, it becomes important to inquire how it comes
about that there is so much irrational certainty in the
world. A great deal of this is due to the inherent irration-
ality and credulity of average human nature. But this seed
of intellectual original sin is nourished and fostered by other
agencies, among which three play the chief part, namely,
education, propaganda, and economic pressure. Let us
consider these in turn. 5

(1) Education—Elementary education, in all advanced
countries, is in the hands of the State. Some of the things
taught are known to be false by the officials who pre-
scribe them, and many others are known to be false, or at
any rate very doubtful, by every unprejudiced person.
Take, for example, the teaching of history. Each nation
aims only at self-glorification in the school text-books of
history. When a man writes his autobiography he is ex-
pected to show a certain modesty; but when a nation writes
its autobiography there is no limit to its boasting and vain-
glory. When I was young, school-books taught that the
French were wicked and the Germans virtuous; now they
teach the opposite. In neither case is there the slightest
regard for truth. German school-books, dealing with the
battle of Waterloo, represent Wellington as all but defeated
when Bliicher saved the situation; English books represent


158 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


Bliicher as having made very little difference. The writers
of both the German and the English books know that they
are not telling the truth. American school-books used to be
violently anti-British; since the war they have become
equally pro-British, without aiming at truth in either case.’
Both before and since, one of the chief purposes of education
in the United States has been to turn the motley collection
of immigrant children into ‘“‘good Americans.” Apparently
it has not occurred to any one that a “good American,” like
a “good German,” or a “good Japanese,” must be, pro
tanto, a bad human being. A “good American” is a man
or woman imbued with the belief that America is the finest
country on earth, and ought always to be enthusiastically
supported in any quarrel. It is just possible that these prop-
ositions are true; if so, a rational man will have no quarrel
with them. But if they are true, they ought to be taught
everywhere, not only in America. It is a suspicious cir-
cumstance that such propositions are never believed outside
the particular country which they glorify. Meanwhile the
whole machinery of the State, in all the different countries,
is turned on to making defenseless children believe absurd
propositions, the effect of which is to make them willing to
die in defense of sinister interests under the impression
that they are fighting for truth and right. This is only
one of the countless ways in which education is designed, not
to give true knowledge, but to make the people pliable to the
will of their masters. Without an elaborate system of de-
ceit in the elementary schools it would be impossible to pre-
serve the camouflage of democracy.

Before leaving the subject of education, I will take an-


1See The Freeman, February 15, 1922, Pp. 532.


FREE THOUGHT AND PROPAGANDA 159


other example from America *—not because America is any
worse than other countries, but because it is the most
modern, showing the dangers that are growing rather than
those that are diminishing. In the State of New York, a
school cannot be established without a license from the
State, even if it is to be supported wholly by private funds.
A recent law ” decrees that a license shall not be granted to
any school “where it shall appear that the instruction pro-
posed to be given includes the teaching of the doctrine that
organized governments shall be overthrown by force,
violence, or unlawful means.” As the New Republic points
out, there is no limitation to this or that organized Goyv-
ernment. The law therefore should have made it illegal,
during the war, to teach the doctrine that the Kaiser’s
Government should be overthrown by force; and since then,
the support of Kolchak or Denikin against the Soviet Gov-
ernment would have been illegal. Such consequences, of
course, were not intended, and result only from bad
draughtsmanship. What was intended appears from an-
other law passed at the same time, applying to teachers in
State schools. This law provides that certificates permitting
persons to teach in such schools shall only be issued to those
who have “shown satisfactorily” that they are “loyal and
obedient to the Government of this State and of the United
States,” and shall be refused to those who have advocated,
no matter where or when,. “a form of government other
than the Government of this State or of the United States.”
The committee which framed these laws, as quoted by the
New Republic, laid it down that ‘‘the teacher who does not


1See The New Republic, February 1, 1922, PP. 259 ff.
2Modified since the above was written.


160 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


approve of the present social system . . . must surrender
his office,” and that “no person who is not eager to combat
the theories of social change should be entrusted with the
task of fitting the young and old for the responsibilities of
citizenship.” Thus according to the law of the State of ©
New York, Christ and George Washington were too de-
graded morally to be fit for the education of the young.
If Christ were to go to New York and say, ‘‘Suffer the little
children to come unto me,” the President of the New York
School Board would reply: ‘‘Sir, I see no evidence that you
are eager to combat theories of social change. Indeed, I
have heard it said that you advocate what you call the king-
dom of heaven, whereas this country, thank God, is a
republic. It is clear that the government of your kingdom
of heaven would diifer materially from that of New York
State, therefore no children will be allowed access to you.”
If he failed to make this reply, he would not be doing his
duty as a functionary entrusted with the administration of
the law.

The effect of such laws is very serious. Let it be granted,
for the sake of argument, that the Government and the
social system in the State of New York are the best that
have ever existed on this planet; yet even then, both would
presumably be capable of improvement. Any person who
admits this obvious proposition is by law incapable of teach-
ing in a State school. Thus the law decrees that the teachers
shall all be either hypocrites or fools.

The growing danger exemplified by the New York law
is that resulting from the monopoly of power in the hands
of a single organization, whether the State or a Trust or
federation of Trusts. In the case of education, the power


ail


FREE THOUGHT AND PROPAGANDA 161


is in the hands of the State, which can prevent the young


from hearing of any doctrine which it dislikes. I believe


_ there are still some people who think that a democratic State


is scarcely distinguishable from the people. This, however,
is a delusion. The State is a collection of officials, different
for different purposes, drawing comfortable incomes so
long as the status quo is preserved. The only alteration
they are likely to desire in the status quo is an increase of
bureaucracy and of the power of bureaucrats. It is there-
fore natural that they should take advantage of such oppor-
tunities as war excitement to acquire inquisitorial powers
over their employees, involving the right to inflict starva-
tion upon any subordinate who opposes them. In matters
of the mind, such as education, this state of affairs is fatal.
It puts an end to all possibility of progress or freedom or
intellectual initiative. Yet it is the natural result of allowing


the whole of elementary education to fall under the sway


of a single organization.

Religious toleration, to a certain extent, has been won,
because people have ceased to consider religion so important
as it was once thought to be. But in politics and economics,
which have taken the place formerly occupied by religion,
there is a growing tendency to persecution, which is not by
any means confined to one party. The persecution of


opinion in Russia is more severe than in any capitalist coun-


try. I met in Petrograd an eminent Russian poet, Alex-
ander Block, who has since died as the result of privations.
The Bolsheviks allowed him to teach esthetics, but he com-
plained that they insisted on his teaching the subject “from a
Marxian point of view.” He had been at a loss to dis-
cover how the theory of rhythmics was connected with


162 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


Marxism, although, to avoid starvation, he had done his ~
best to find out. Of course it was impossible, in Russia, for
years after the Bolsheviks came into power, to print any-
thing critical of the dogmas upon which their régime is —
founded.

The examples of America and Russia illustrate the con-
clusion to which we seem to be driven, namely that, so long ©
as men continue to have the present fanatical belief in the
importance of politics, free thought on political matters
will be impossible, and there is only too much danger that
the lack of freedom will spread to all other matters, as it
has done in Russia. Only some degree of political scepti-
cism can save us from this misfortune.

It must not be supposed that the officials in charge of
education desire the young to become educated. On the
contrary, their problem is to impart information without
imparting intelligence. Education should have two objects:
first, to give definite knowledge, reading and writing, lan-
guage and mathematics, and so on; secondly, to create those
mental habits which will enable people to acquire knowledge
and form sound judgments for themselves. The first of
these we may call information, the second intelligence. The —
utility of information is admitted practically as well as the-
oretically; without a literate population a modern state is
impossible. But the utility of intelligence is admitted only
theoretically, not practically: it is not desired that ordi-
nary people should think for themselves, because it is felt
that people who think for themselves are awkward to man-
age and cause administrative difficulties. Only the guard-
ians, in Plato’s language, are to think; the rest are to obey,
or to follow leaders like a herd of sheep. ‘This doctrine,


ate


FREE THOUGHT AND PROPAGANDA 163


_ often unconsciously, has survived the introduction of politi-


cal democracy, and has radically vitiated all national systems
of education.

The country which has succeeded best in giving informa-
tion without intelligence is the latest addition to modern
civilization, Japan. Elementary education in Japan is said
to be admirable from the point of view of instruction. But
in addition to instruction it has another purpose, which is
to teach worship of the Mikado—a far stronger creed now
than before Japan became modernized.’ Thus the schools
have been used simultaneously to confer knowledge and to
promote superstition. Since we are not tempted to Mikado-
worship, we see clearly what is absurd in Japanese teaching.
Our own national superstitions strike us as natural and
sensible, so that we do not take such a true view of them
as we do of the superstitions of Nippon. But if a traveled
Japanese were to maintain the thesis that our schools teach
superstitions just as inimical to intelligence as belief in the
divinity of the Mikado, I suspect that he would be able to
make out a very good case.

For the present I am not in search of remedies, but am


only concerned with diagnosis. We are faced with the para-


doxical fact that education has become one of the chief
obstacles to intelligence and freedom of thought. This is
due primarily to the fact that the State claims a monopoly ;


_ but that is by no means the sole cause.


(2) Propaganda—Our system of education turns
young people out of the schools able to read, but for the
most part unable to weigh evidence or to form an independ-


1See The Invention of a New Religion, by Professor Chamberlain of
Tokyo. Published by the Rationalist Press Association.


164 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


ent opinion. They are then assailed, throughout the rest of
their lives, by statements designed to make them believe all
sorts of absurd propositions, such as that Blank’s pills cure
all ills, that Spitzbergen is warm and fertile, and that Ger-
mans eat corpses. The art of propaganda, as practiced by
modern politicians and governments, is derived from the art
of advertisement. The science of psychology owes a great
deal to advertisers. In former days, most psychologists
would probably have thought that a man could not convince
many people of the excellence of his own wares by merely
stating emphatically that they were excellent. Experience
shows, however, that they were mistaken in this. If I were
to stand up once in a public place and state that ] am the
most modest man alive, I should be laughed at; but if I
could raise enough money to make the same statement on
all the buses and on hoardings along all the principal rail-
way lines, people would presently become convinced that I
had an abnormal shrinking from publicity. If I were to go —
to a small shopkeeper and say: “Look at your competitor —
over the way: he is getting your business; don’t you think —
it would be a good plan to leave your business and stand up
in the middle of the road and try to shoot him before he
shoots you ?’’—if I were to say this, any small shopkeeper
would think me mad. But when the Government says it
with emphasis and a brass band, the small shopkeepers be-
come enthusiastic, and are quite surprised when they find
afterwards that business has suffered. Propaganda, con-
ducted by the means which advertisers have found success-
ful, is now one of the recognized methods of government in
all advanced countries, and is especially the method by which
democratic opinion is created.


4
FREE THOUGHT AND PROPAGANDA 165


There are two quite different evils about propaganda as
now practiced. On the one hand, its appeal is generally to
irrational causes of belief rather than to serious argument;
on the other hand, it gives an unfair advantage to those
who can obtain most publicity, whether through wealth or
through power. For my part, I am inclined to think that
too much fuss is sometimes made about the fact that propa-
ganda appeals to emotion rather than reason. The line be-
tween emotion and reason is not so sharp as some people
think. Moreover, a clever man could frame a sufficiently
rational argument in favor of any position which has any
chance of being adopted. There are always good arguments
on both sides of any real issue. Definite misstatements of
fact can be legitimately objected to, but they are by no means
necessary. The mere words “Pears’ Soap,” which afirm
nothing, cause people to buy that article. If, wherever
these words appear, they were replaced by the words ‘“The
Labor Party,” millions of people would be led to vote for
the Labor Party, although the advertisements had claimed
no merit for it whatever. But if both sides in a controversy
were confined by law to statements which a committee of
eminent logicians considered relevant and valid, the main
evil of propaganda, as at present conducted, would remain.
Suppose, under such a law, two parties with an equally good
case, one of whom had a million pounds to spend on prop-
aganda, while the other had only a hundred thousand. It
is obvious that the arguments in favor of the richer party
would become more widely known than those in favor of the
poorer party, and therefore the richer party would win.
This situation is of course intensified when one party is the
Government. In Russia the Government has an almost


166 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


complete monopoly of propaganda, but that is not necessary.
The advantages which it possesses over its opponents will
generally be sufficient to give it the victory, unless it has
an exceptionally bad case.

The objection to propaganda is not only its appeal to
unreason, but still more the unfair advantage which it gives
to the rich and powerful. Equality of opportunity among
opinions is essential if there is to be real freedom of thought;
and equality of opportunity among opinions can only be
secured by elaborate laws directed to that end, which there
is no reason to expect to see enacted. The cure is not to be
sought primarily in such laws, but in better education and a
more sceptical public opinion. But for the moment I am
not concerned to discuss cures.

(3) Economic Pressure-—I have already dealt with
some aspects of this obstacle to freedom of thought, but I
wish now to deal with it on more general lines, as a danger —
which is bound to increase unless very definite steps are
taken to counteract it. The supreme example of economic
pressure applied against freedom of thought is Soviet —
Russia, where, until the trade agreement, the Government
could and did inflict starvation upon people whose opinions
it disliked, for example, Kropotkin. But in this respect
Russia is only somewhat ahead of other countries. In
France, during the Dreyfus affair, any teacher would have ~
lost his position if he had been in favor of Dreyfus at the
start or against him in the end. In America at the present —
day I doubt if a university professor, however eminent, ©
could get employment if he were to criticize the Standard ©
Oil Company, because all College Presidents have received —
or hope to receive benefactions from Mr. Rockefeller.


FREE THOUGHT AND PROPAGANDA 167


Throughout America socialists are marked men, and find it
extremely difficult to obtain work unless they have great
gifts. The tendency, which exists wherever industrialism is
well developed, for trusts and monopolies to control all in-
dustry, leads to a diminution of the number of possible em-
ployees, so that it becomes easier and easier to keep secret
black-books by means of which any one not subservient to
the great corporations can be starved. The growth of
monopolies is introducing in America many of the evils asso-
ciated with State Socialism as it has existed in Russia.
From the standpoint of liberty, it makes no difference to a
man whether his only possible employer is the State or a
Trust.

In America, which is the most advanced country indus-
trially, and to a lesser extent in other countries which are
approximating to the American condition, it is necessary
for the average citizen, if he wishes to make a living, to
avoid incurring the hostility of certain big men. And these
big men have an outlook—religious, moral, and political—
with which they expect their employees to agree, at least out-
wardly. A man who openly dissents from Christianity, or
believes in a relaxation of the marriage laws, or objects
to the power of the great corporations, finds America a very
uncomfortable country, unless he happens to be an eminent
writer. Exactly the same kind of restraints upon freedom
of thought are bound to occur in every country where eco-
nomic organization has been carried to the point of practical
monopoly. Therefore the safeguarding of liberty in the
world which is growing up is far more difficult than it was
in the nineteenth century, when free competition was still
a reality. Whoever cares about the freedom of the mind


168 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


must face this situation fully and frankly, realizing the
inapplicability of methods which answered well enough
while industrialism was in its infancy.

There are two simple principles which, if they were
adopted, would solve almost all social problems. The
first is that education should have for one of its aims
to teach people only to believe propositions when there is ©
some reason to think that they are true. The second is that
jobs should be given solely for fitness to do the work.

‘To take the second point first: the habit of considering
a man’s religious, moral, and political opinions before ap-
pointing him to a post or giving him a job is the modern
form of persecution, and it is likely to become quite as effi-
cient as the Inquisition ever was. ‘The old liberties can be
legally retained without being of the slightest use. If, in
practice, certain opinions lead a man to starve, it is poor
comfort to him to know that his opinions are not punishable
by law. There is a certain public feeling against starving
men for not belonging to the Church of England, or for
holding slightly unorthodox opinions in politics. But there
is hardly any feeling against the rejection of atheists or
Mormons, extreme communists, or men who advocate free
love. Such men are thought to be wicked, and it is consid-
ered only natural to refuse to employ them. People have
hardly yet waked up to the fact that this refusal, in a highly
industrial State, amounts to a very vigorous form of
persecution.

If this danger were adequately realized, it would be pos-
sible to rouse public opinion, and to secure that a man’s
beliefs should not be considered in appointing him to a post.
The protection of minorities is vitally important; and even


FREE THOUGHT AND PROPAGANDA 169


the most orthodox of us may find himself in a minority some
_ day, so that we all have an interest in restraining the tyranny
of majorities. Nothing except public opinion can solve this
problem. Socialism would make it somewhat more acute,
since it would eliminate the opportunities that now arise
through exceptional employers. Every increase in the size
of industrial undertakings makes it worse, since it diminishes
the number of independent employers. The battle must be
fought exactly as the battle of religious toleration was
fought. And as in that case, so in this, a decay in the in-
tensity of belief is likely to prove the decisive factor. While
men were convinced of the absolute truth of Catholicism
or Protestantism, as the case may be, they were willing to
persecute on account of them. While men are quite certain
of their modern creeds, they will persecute on their behalf.
Some element of doubt is essential to the practice, though
not to the theory, of toleration. And this brings me to my
other point, which concerns the aims of education.

If there is to be toleration in the world, one of the things
taught in schools must be the habit of weighing evidence,
and the practice of not giving full assent to propositions
which there is no reason to believe true. For example, the
art of reading the newspapers should be taught. The
schoolmaster should select some incident which happened
a good many years ago, and roused political passions in its
day. He should then read to the school-children what was
said by the newspapers on one side, what was said by those
on the other, and some impartial account of what really
happened. He should show how, from the biased account
of either side, a practiced reader could infer what really
happened, and he should make them understand that every-


170 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


thing in newspapers is more or less untrue. The cynical
scepticism which would result from this teaching would
make the children in later life immune from those appeals
to idealism by which decent people are induced to further the
schemes of scoundrels.

History should be taught in the same way. Napoleon’s
campaigns of 1813 and 1814, for instance, might be studied
in the Moniteur, leading up to the surprise which Parisians
felt when they saw the Allies arriving under the walls of
Paris after they had (according to the official bulletins)
been beaten by Napoleon in every battle. In the more
advanced classes, students should be encouraged to count
the number of times that Lenin has been assassinated by
Trotsky, in order to learn contempt for death. Finally,
they should be given a school history approved by the Gov-
ernment, and asked to infer what a French school history
would say about our wars with France. All this would
be a far better training in citizenship than the trite moral
maxims by which some people believe that civic duty can be
inculcated

It must, I think, be admitted that the evils of the world
are due to moral defects quite as much as to lack of in-
telligence. But the human race has not hitherto discovered
any method of eradicating moral defects; preaching and
exhortation only add hypocrisy to the previous list of vices.
Intelligence, on the contrary, is easily improved by methods
known to every competent educator. Therefore, until some
method of teaching virtue has been discovered, progress
will have to be sought by improvement of intelligence rather
than of morals. One of the chief obstacles to intelligence
is credulity, and credulity could be enormously diminished


FREE THOUGHT AND PROPAGANDA 171


by instruction in the prevalent forms of mendacity. Credu-
lity is a greater evil in the present day than it ever was
before, because, owing to the growth of education, it is
much easier than it used to be to spread misinformation,
and owing to democracy, the spread of misinformation is
_more important than in former times to the holders of
power. Hence the increase in the circulation of newspapers.

If I am asked how the world is to be induced to adopt
these two maxims, namely, (1) that jobs should be given
to people on account of their fitness to perform them, (2)
that one aim of education should be to cure people of the
habit of believing propositions for which there is no evi-
dence, I can only say that it must be done by generating
an enlightened public opinion. And an enlightened public
opinion can only be generated by the efforts of those who
desire that it should exist. I do not believe that the eco-
nomic changes advocated by socialists will, of themselves,
do anything towards curing the evils we have been con-
sidering. I think that, whatever happens in politics, the
trend of economic development will make the preservation
of mental freedom increasingly difficult, unless public
opinion insists that the employer shall control nothing in the
life of the employee except his work. Freedom in edu-
_ cation could easily be secured, if it were desired, by limit-
ing the function of the State to inspection and payment, and
confining inspection rigidly to the definite instruction. But
that, as things stand, would leave education in the hands
of the churches, because, unfortunately, they are more
anxious to teach their beliefs than free-thinkers are to
_ teach their doubts. It would, however, give a free field, and
would make it possible for a liberal education to be given


172 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


if it were really desired. More than that ought not to be
asked of the law.

My plea throughout this essay has been for the spread
of the scientific temper, which is an altogether different
thing from the knowledge of scientific results. The scientific
temper is capable of regenerating mankind and providing an
‘ssue for all our troubles. The results of science, in the
form of mechanism, poison gas, and the Yellow Press, bid
fair to lead to the total downfall of our civilization. It is
a curious antithesis, which a Martian might contemplate
with amused detachment. But for us it is a matter of life
and death. Upon its issue depends the question whether our
grandchildren are to live in a happier world, or are to ex-
terminate each other by scientific methods, leaving perhaps
to negroes and Papuans the future destinies of mankind.


XIII
FREEDOM IN SOCIETY


To what extent is freedom possible, and to what extent is
it desirable, among human beings who live in communities?
That is the general problem which I wish to discuss.

Perhaps it will be well to begin with definitions. “Free-
dom” is a term which is used in many senses, and we must
decide upon one of them before we can argue profitably.
“Society” is less ambiguous, but here, too, some attempt at
definition may be not amiss.

I do not think it desirable to use words in fancy senses.
For instance, Hegel and his followers think that “true”
freedom consists in the right to obey the police, who are
generally called “the moral law.” The police, of course,
must obey their official superiors, but the definition gives us
no guidance as to what the Government itself is to do. Ac-
cordingly, in practice, the adherents of this view argue that
the State is essentially and by definition impeccable. This
notion is inappropriate in a country where there is democ-
racy and party Government, since in such a country nearly
half the nation believes the Government to be very wicked.
We cannot, therefore, rest content with “true” freedom as
_a substitute for freedom.

_ “Freedom” in its most abstract sense means the absence
_of external obstacles to the realization of desires. Taken
in this abstract sense, freedom may be increased either

by maximizing power or by minimizing wants. An insect
173


174 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


which lives for a few days and then dies of cold may have
perfect freedom according to the definition, since the cold
may alter its desires, so that there is no moment when it
wishes to achieve the impossible. Among human beings,
also, this way of reaching freedom is possible. A young
Russian aristocrat, who had become a communist and a Red
Army Commissar, explained to me that the English do not,
like the Russians, need a physical strait-jacket, because they
have a mental one: their souls are always in strait-jackets.
Probably there is some truth in this. The people in Dostcev-
sky are no doubt not quite like real Russians, but at any
rate they are people whom only a Russian could have in-
vented. They have all sorts of strange violent desires, from
which the average Englishman is free, at least so far as his
conscious life is concerned. It is obvious that a community
who all wish to murder each other cannot be so free as a
community with more peaceable desires. Modification of
desire may, therefore, involve just as great a gain to free-
dom as increase of power.
This consideration illustrates a necessity which is not —
always satisfied by political thinking: I mean the necessity
of what may be called “psychological dynamics.” It has
been far too common to accept human nature as a datum —
in politics, to which external conditions have been adapted.
The truth is, of course, that external conditions modify |
human nature, and that harmony between the two is to be
sought by a mutual interaction. A man taken from one ~
environment and plunged suddenly into another may be by —
no means free, and yet the new environment may give
freedom to those accustomed to it. We cannot therefore
deal with freedom without taking account of the possibility


FREEDOM IN SOCIETY 175


of variable desires owing to changing environment. In
some cases this makes the attainment of freedom more diff-
cult, since a new environment, while satisfying old desires,
may generate new ones which it cannot satisfy. This possi-
bility is illustrated by the psychological effects of industrial-
ism, which generates a host of new wants: a man may be
discontented because he cannot afford a motor-car, and
soon we shall all want private aeroplanes. And a man may
be discontented because of unconscious wants. For instance,
Americans need rest, but do not know it. I believe this to
be a large part of the explanation of the crime wave in the
United States.

Although men’s desires vary, there are certain funda-
mental needs which may be taken as nearly universal: food,
drink, health, clothing, housing, sex, and parenthood are the
chief of these. (Clothing and housing are not absolute
necessaries in hot climates, but except in the tropics they
must be included in the list.) Whatever else may be in-
volved in freedom, certainly no person is free who is de-
prived of anything in the above list, which constitutes the
_ bare minimum of freedom.

This brings us to the definition of “society.” It is ob-
vious that the above minimum of freedom can be better
secured in a society than by a Robinson Crusoe; indeed, sex
and parenthood are essentially social. One may define a
“society” as a group of persons who codperate for certain
common purposes. Where human beings are concerned, the
most primitive social group is the family. Economic social
groups come quite early; apparently groups which coéper-
_ ate in war are not quite so primitive. In the modern world,
_ economics and war are the main motives for social cohesion.


176 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


Almost all of us are better able to satisfy our physical needs
than we should be if we had no larger social unit than the
family or the tribe, and in that sense society has served to
increase freedom. It is thought, also, that an organized
State makes us less likely to be killed by our enemies, but
this is a doubtful proposition.

If we take a man’s desires as a datum, i.e., if we ignore
psychological dynamics, it is obvious that the obstacles to
his freedom are of two sorts, physical and social. To take
the crudest instance: the earth may not yield enough food
for his sustenance, or other people may prevent him from
obtaining the food. Society diminishes the physical obstacles —
to freedom, but creates social obstacles. Here, however,
we are liable to go wrong through ignoring the effect of
society upon desire. One may assume that ants and bees,
though they live in well-organized societies, always do
spontaneously the things that constitute their social duties.
The same is true of most of the individuals among higher —
animals that are gregarious. According to Rivers, it is true
of men in Melanesia. This seems to depend upon a high
degree of suggestibility, and upon factors more or less akin —
to what happens in hypnotism. Men so constituted can co-
Sperate without loss of freedom, and have little need of
law. Oddly enough, though civilized men have a far more
elaborate social organization than savages have, they ap-
pear to be less social in their instincts: the effect of society
upon their actions is more external than it is with savages.
That is why they discuss the problem of freedom.

I do not, of course, wish to deny that social codperation
has an instinctive basis, even in the most civilized com-
munities. People want to be like their neighbors, and to be


FREEDOM IN SOCIETY 177


liked by them; they imitate, and they catch prevalent moods
by suggestion. Nevertheless, these factors seem to dimin-
ish in strength as men become more civilized. They are
much stronger in schoolboys than in adults, and on the whole
they have most power over the least intelligent individuals.
More and more, social codperation is coming to depend upon
rational apprehension of its advantages, rather than upon
what is loosely termed herd instinct. The problem of in-
dividual liberty does not arise among savages, because they
feel no need of it, but it arises among civilized men with
more and more urgency as they become more civilized. And
at the same time the part played by government in the regu-
lation of their lives is continually increasing, as it becomes
more clear that government can help to liberate us from
the physical obstacles to freedom. The problem of free-
dom in society is therefore one which is likely to increase
in urgency, unless we cease to become more civilized.

It is, of course, obvious that freedom is not to be in-
creased by a mere diminution of government. One man’s
desires are apt to be incompatible with another man’s, so
that anarchy means freedom for the strong and slavery
for the weak. Without government the human population
of the globe could hardly be a tenth of what it is; it would be
_ kept down by starvation and infant mortality. This would
be to substitute a physical slavery far more severe than
the worst social slavery to be found in civilized communi-
ties in normal times. The problem we have to consider is
not how to do without government, but how to secure its
advantages with the smallest possible interference with free-
dom. This means striking a balance between physical
and social freedom. To put it crudely: how much more


178 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


governmental pressure should we be prepared to endure in
order to have more food or better heatlh?

The answer to this question, in practice, turns upon
a very simple consideration: are we to have the food and
health, or is some one else? People ina siege, or in England
in 1917, have been found willing to endure any degree of
governmental pressure, because it was obvious that it was to
every one’s advantage. But when one person is to have the
governmental pressure and another person is to have the
food, the question looks quite different. In this form we
arrive at the issue between Capitalism and Socialism. Ad-
vocates of Capitalism are very apt to appeal to the sacred
principles of liberty, which are all embodied in one maxim:
The fortunate must not be restrained in the exercise of
tyranny over the unfortunate.

Laissez-faire Liberalism, which was based upon this
maxim, must not be confounded with anarchism. It invoked
the law to prevent murder and armed insurrection on the
part of the unfortunate; as long as it dared, it opposed
trade unionism. But given this minimum of government
action, it aimed at accomplishing the rest by economic power.
Liberalism considered it proper for an employer to say
to an employee: “‘You shall die of hunger,” but improper
for the employee to retort, ‘‘You shall die first, of a bullet.”
It is obvious that, apart from legal pedantries, it is ridicu-
lous to make a distinction between these two threats. Each
equally infringes the elementary minimum of freedom, but
not one more than the other. It was not only in the eco-
nomic sphere that this inequality existed. ‘The sacred prin-
ciples of liberty were also invoked to justify the tyranny
of husbands over wives and fathers over children; but it


FREEDOM IN SOCIETY 179


_ must be said that Liberalism tended to mitigate the first of
these. The tyranny of fathers over children, in the form
of compelling them to work in factories, was mitigated in
spite of the Liberals.

But this is a well-worn theme, and I do not wish to linger
on it. I want to pass to the general question: How far
should the community interfere with the individual, not for
the sake of another individual, but for the sake of the com-
munity? And for what objects should it interfere?

I should say, to begin with, that the claim to the bare
minimum of freedom—food, drink, health, housing, cloth-
ing, sex, and parenthood—should override any other claim.
The above minimum is necessary for bioloical survival, i.e.,
for the leaving of descendants. The things which I have
just enumerated may, therefore, be described as necessaries ;
what goes beyond them may be called comforts or luxuries
according to circumstances. Now I should regard it as
@ priori justifiable to deprive one person of comforts in
order to supply another with necessaries. It may not be
politically expedient, it may not be economically feasible,
in a given community at a given moment; but it is not ob-

jectionable on the ground of freedom, because to deprive
_a man of necessaries is a greater interference with freedom
_ than to prevent him from accumulating superfluities.

But if this is admitted, it takes us very far. Consider
health, for instance. In borough council elections one of
_ the questions to be decided is the amount of public money
_ to be spent on such matters as public health, maternity care,
and infant welfare. Statistics prove that what is spent on
_ these objects has a remarkable effect in saving life. In
every borough in London, the well-to-do have banded them-


180 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


selves together to prevent an increase, and if possible to se-
cure a diminution, of the expenditure in these directions.
That is to say, they are all prepared to condemn thousands
of people to death in order that they themselves may con-
tinue to enjoy good dinners and motor-cars. As they con-
trol almost all the Press, they prevent the facts from being
known to their victims. By the methods familiar to psycho-
analysts, they avoid knowing the facts themselves. ‘There
is nothing surprising in their action, which is that of all
aristocracies in all ages. All that I am concerned to say is
that their action cannot be defended on grounds of freedom.

I do not propose to discuss the right to sex and parent-
hood. I will merely observe that, in a country where there
is a great excess of one sex over the other, existing institu-
tions seem hardly calculated to secure it; and that the
tradition of Christian asceticism has had the unfortunate
effect of making people less willing to recognize this right
than to recognize the right to food. Politicians, who have
not time to become acquainted with human nature, are pe-
culiarly ignorant of the desires that move ordinary men and
women. Any political party whose leaders knew a little
psychology could sweep the country.

While admitting the abstract right of the community to
interfere with its members in order to secure the biological
necessaries to all, I cannot admit its right to interfere in
matters where what one man possesses is not obtained at the
expense of another. I am thinking of such things as opinion
and knowledge and art. The fact that the majority of a
community dislikes an opinion gives it no right to interfere
with those who hold it. And the fact that the majority
of a community wishes not to know certain facts gives it no


FREEDOM IN SOCIETY 181


right to imprison those who wish to know them. I know a


lady who wrote a long book giving an account of family life
in Texas, which I consider sociologically very valuable. The


British police hold that no one must know the truth about


anything; therefore it is illegal to send this book through


the post. Everybody knows that the patients of psycho-


analysts are often cured by the mere process of making
them become aware of facts of which they had repressed the
recollection. Society is, in certain respects, like these pa-
tients, but instead of allowing itself to be cured it imprisons
the doctors who bring unwelcome facts to its notice. This
is a wholly undesirable form of interference with freedom.
The same argument applies to interferences with personal
morals: if 2 man chooses to have two wives or a woman two
husbands, it is his affair and theirs, and no one else ought to
feel called upon to take action about it.

So far, I have been considering purely abstract arguments
as to the limitations of justifiable interferences with free-
dom. I come now to certain more psychological considera-
tions.

The obstacles to freedom, as we saw, are of two sorts,
social.and physical. Given a social and a physical obstacle
which cause the same direct loss of liberty, the social obs
stacle is more harmful, because it causes resentment. If
a boy wants to climb a tree and you forbid him, he will be
furious; if he finds that he cannot climb it, he will acquiesce
in the physical impossibility. To prevent resentment, it
may often be desirable to permit things which are in them-


selves harmful, such as going to church during an epidemic.


_ To prevent resentment, governments attribute misfortunes


to natural causes: to create resentment, oppositions attribute


182 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


them to human causes. When the price of bread goes up,
governments say it is due to bad harvests, and oppositions
say it is due to profiteers. Under the influence of industrial-
ism, people have come to believe more and more in the
omnipotence of man; they think there is no limit to what —
human beings can do to obviate natural misfortunes. So-
cialism is a form of this belief: we no longer regard poverty
as sent by God, but as a result of human folly and cruelty.
This has naturally altered the attitude of the proletariat
towards its “‘betters.” Sometimes the belief in human
omnipotence is carried too far. Many Socialists, including
the late Health Minister, apparently think that under So-
cialism there would be plenty of food for everybody, even
if the population multiplied until there was only standing
room on the earth’s surface. This, I am afraid, is an exag-
geration. However this may be, the modern belief in the
omnipotence of man has increased the resentment when
things go wrong, because misfortunes are no longer attrib-
uted to God or Nature, even when they justly might be.
This makes modern communities harder to govern than
the communities of the past, and accounts for the fact that |
the governing classes tend to be exceptionally religious, be-
cause they wish to regard the misfortunes of their victims as
due to the will of God. It makes interferences with the
minimum of freedom harder to justify than in former times,
because they cannot be camouflaged as immutable laws,
although every day in The Times there are letters from
clergymen trying to revive this ancient device.

In addition to the fact that interferences with social free-
dom are resented, there are two other reasons which tend
to make them undesirable. The first is that people do not


FREEDOM IN SOCIETY 183


desire the welfare of others, and the second is that they do
not know in what it consists. Perhaps, at bottom, these are
one and the same, for when we genuinely desire the good
of some person, we usually succeed in finding out what his
needs are. At any rate, the practical results are the same
whether people do harm from malevolence or from igno-
rance. We may therefore take the two together, and say
that hardly any man or class can be trusted as the trustee
of another’s interests. This is, of course, the basis of the
argument for democracy. But democracy, in a modern
State, has to work through officials, and thus becomes in-
direct and remote where the individual is concerned. There
is a special danger in officials, owing to the fact that they
usually sit in ofices remote from the people whose lives they
control. Take education as a case in point. Teachers, on
the whole, from contact with children, have come to under-
stand them and care for them, but they are controlled by
officials without practical experience, to whom children may
be merely+ nasty little brats. Therefore the interferences
of officials with freedom for teachers are generally harm-
ful. So in everything: power lies with those who control
finance, not with those who know the matter upon which
the money is to be spent. Thus the holders of power are,
in general, ignorant and malevoleut, and the less they exer-
cise their power the better. bite
The case for compulsion is strongest where the person
compelled gives a moral assent to the compulsion, although,
if he could, he would neglect what he recognizes to be his
duty. We would all rather pay rates than have no roads,
though if, by a miracle, the rate-collector overlooked us,
most of us would not remind him of our existence. And we


184 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


readily acquiesce in such measures as the prohibition of
cocaine, though alcohol is a more dubious proposition. But
the best case is that of children. Children must be under
authority, and are themselves aware that they must be,
although they like to play a game of rebellion at times. The
case of children is unique in the fact that those who have
authority over them are sometimes fond of them. Where
this is the case, the children do not resent the authority in
general, even when they resist it on particular occasions.
Education authorities, as opposed to teachers, have not this
merit, and do in fact sacrifice the children to what they con-
sider the good of the State by teaching them “patriotism,”
i.é., a willingness to kill and be killed for trivial reasons.
Authority would be comparatively harmless if it were always


in the hands of people who wish well to those whom they —


control ; but there is no known method of securing this result.
Compulsion is at its worst when the victim firmly be-
lieves the act commanded to be wicked or harmful. It


would be abominable, even if it were possible, to compel a —
Mahometan to eat pork or a Hindu to eat beef. Anti- —


vaccinationists ought not to be compelled to be vaccinated.
Whether their infant children should be, is another question:
I should say not, but the question is not one of freedom,
since the child is not consulted in either case. The question
is one between the parent and the State, and cannot be
decided on any general principle. The parent who has


conscientious objections to education is not allowed to keep —
his child uninstructed; yet, so far as general principles go, —


the two cases are exactly analogous.


The most important distinction, in this matter of free-_
dom, is between those goods which one man holds at the ;


en? oe


FREEDOM IN SOCIETY 185


expense of another, and those in which one man’s gain is not
another’s loss. If I absorb more than my fair share of food,
some other man goes hungry; if I absorb an unusually large
amount of mathematics, I do no one any harm, unless I have
monopolized educational opportunities. There is another
point: such things as food, houses, and clothes are neces-
saries of life, about the need of which there is not much
controversy or much difference between one man and an-
other. Therefore they are suitable for governmental action
in a democracy. In all such matters justice should be the
governing principle. In a modern democratic community,
justice means equality. But it would not mean equality in a
community where there was a hierarchy of classes, recog-
nized and accepted by inferiors as well as superiors. Even
in modern England, a large majority of wage-earners would
be shocked if it were suggested that the King should have no
more pomp than they have. I should therefore define
justice as the arrangement producing least envy. This
would mean equality in a community free from superstition,
but not in one which firmly believed in social inequality.
But in opinion, thought, art, etc., one man’s possessions
are not obtained at the expense of another’s. Moreover, it
is doubtful what is good in this sphere. If Dives is having
a feast while Lazarus is eating a crust of bread, Dives will
be thought a hypocrite if he preaches the advantage of pov-
erty. But if I like mathematics and another man likes music,
we do not interfere with each other, and when we praise
each other’s pursuits we are merely being polite. And in
matters of opinion, free competition is the only way of ar-
riving at truth. The old Liberal watchwords were applied
in the wrong sphere, that of economics; it is in the mental


186 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


sphere that they really apply. We want free competition in
ideas, not in business. The difficulty is that, as free com-
petition in business dies out, the victors more and more seek |
to use their economic power in the mental and moral sphere,
and to insist upon right living and right thinking as a con-
dition of being allowed to earn a living. ‘This is unfor-
tunate, since “right living’ means hypocrisy and “right
thinking” means stupidity. There is the gravest danger
that, whether under plutocracy or under Socialism, all men-
tal and moral progress will be rendered impossible by eco-
nomic persecution. The liberty of the individual should
be respected where his actions do not directly, obviously,
and indubitably do harm to other people. Otherwise our
persecuting instincts will produce a stereotyped society, as
in sixteenth-century Spain. The danger is real and press-
ing. America is in the van, but we in England are almost
sure to follow suit, unless we can learn to value freedom in
its proper sphere. The freedom we should seek is not the
right to oppress others, but the right to live as we choose
and think as we choose where our doing so does not prevent —
others from doing likewise.
Finally, I want to say a word about what, at the begin-
ning, I called “psychological dynamics.” A society where —
one type of character is common can have more freedom
than one in which a different type prevails. A society com-
posed of human beings and tigers could not have much free-
dom: either the tigers or the human beings must be en-
slaved. There cannot therefore be any freedom in parts
of the world where white men govern colored populations.
To secure the maximum of freedom, it is necessary to form —
character by education, so that men may find their happi-


FREEDOM IN SOCIETY 187


“ness in activities which are not oppressive. This is a mat-


ter of formation of character during the first six years of
life. Miss McMillan at Deptford is training children who


become capable of creating a free community. If her meth-


_ ods were applied to all children, rich and poor, one genera-


tion would suffice to solve our social problems. But emphasis
on instruction has made all parties blind to what is important
in education. In later years, desires can only be controlled,
not fundamentally altered; therefore it is in early child-
hood that the lesson of live-and-let-live must be taught.


_ Given men and women who do not desire the things which
can only be secured through the misfortunes of others, the


obstacles to social freedom will be at an end.


XIV
FREEDOM VERSUS AUTHORITY IN EDUCATION


FREEDOM, in education as in other things, must be a matter —


of degree. Some freedoms cannot be tolerated. I met a lady
once who maintained that no child should ever be forbidden
to do anything, because a child ought to develop its nature


from within. ‘How if its nature leads it to swallow pins?” —
I asked; but I regret to say the answer was mere vitupera- —
tion. And yet every child, left to itself; will sooner or later —
swallow pins, or drink poison out of medicine bottles, or —


fall out of an upper window, or otherwise bring itself to a


bad end. Ata slightly later age, boys, when they have the —


opportunity, will go unwashed, overeat, smoke till they are
sick, catch chills from sitting in wet feet, and so on—let
alone the fact that they will amuse themselves by plaguing


elderly gentlemen, who may not all have Elisha’s powers of


repartee. Therefore one who advocates freedom in edu-
cation cannot mean that children should do exactly as they
please all day long. An element of discipline and authority
must exist; the question is as to the amount of it, and the
way in which it is to be exercised.

Education may be viewed from many standpoints; that of
the State, of the Church, of the schoolmaster, of the par-


ents, or even (though this is usually forgotten) of the child


itself. Each of these points of view is partial; each con-


tributes something to the ideal of education, but also con-


tributes elements that are bad. Let us examine them succes-
188


FREEDOM VERSUS AUTHORITY 189


sively, and see what is to be said for and against them.

We will begin with the State, as the most powerful force
in deciding what modern education is to be. The interest
of the State in education is very recent. It did not exist in
antiquity or the Middle Ages; until the Renaissance, educa-
tion was only valued by the Church. The Renaissance
brought an interest in advanced scholarship, leading to the
foundation of such institutions as the Collége de France, in-
tended to offset the ecclesiastical Sorbonne. The Reforma-
tion, in England and Germany, brought a desire on the part
of the State to have some control over universities and gram-
mar schools, to prevent them from remaining hotbeds of
“Popery.”’ But this interest soon evaporated. The State
took no decisive or continuous part until the quite modern
movement for universal compulsory education. Neverthe-
less the State, now, has more to say to scholastic institu-
tions than have all the other factors combined.

The motives which led to universal compulsory education
were various. Its strongest advocates were moved by the
feeling that it is in itself desirable to be able to read and
write, that an ignorant population is a disgrace to a civilized
country, and that democracy is impossible without educa-
tion. These motives were reinforced by others. It was
soon seen that education gave commercial advantages, that
it diminished juvenile crime, and that it gave opportunities
for regimenting slum populations. Anti-clericals perceived
in State education an opportunity of combating the influence
of the Church; this motive weighed considerably in England
and France. Nationalists, especially after the Franco-
Prussian War, considered that universal education would
increase the national strength. All these other reasons,


190 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


however, were at first subsidiary. The main reason for
adopting universal education was the feeling that illiteracy
was disgraceful.

This institution, once firmly established, was found by
the State to be capable of many uses. It makes young people
more docile, both for good and evil. It improves manners
and diminishes crime; it facilitates common action for public
ends; it makes the community more responsive to direction
from a center. Without it, democracy cannot exist except
as an empty form. But democracy, as conceived by politi-
cians, is a form of government, that is to say, it is a method
of making people do what their leaders wish under the im-
pression that they are doing what they themselves wish.
Accordingly, State education has acquired a certain bias. It
teaches the young (so far as it can) to respect existing
institutions, to avoid all fundamental criticism of the powers
that be, and to regard foreign nations with suspicion and
contempt. It increases national solidarity at the expense
both of internationalism and of individual development.
The damage to individual development comes through the
undue stress upon authority. Collective rather than indi-
vidual emotions are encouraged, and disagreement with
prevailing beliefs is severely repressed. Uniformity is de-
sired because it is convenient to the administrator, regard-
less of the fact that it can only be secured by mental atrophy.
So great are the resulting evils that it can be seriously
questioned whether universal education has hitherto done
good or harm on the balance.

The point of view of the Church as regards education
is, in practice, not very different from that of the State.
There is, however, one important divergence: the Church


FREEDOM VERSUS AUTHORITY I9I


would prefer that the laity should not be educated at all,
and only gives them instruction when the State insists. The
State and the Church both wish to instill beliefs which are
likely to be dispelled by free inquiry. But the State creed
- is easier to instill into a population which can read the news-
_ paper, whereas the Church creed is easier to instill into a
' wholly illiterate population. State and Church are both
hostile to thought, but the Church is also (though now sur-
reptitiously) hostile to instruction. This will pass, and is
passing, as the ecclesiastical authorities perfect the tech-
nique of giving instruction without stimulating mental ac-
tivity—a technique in which, long ago, the Jesuits led the
way.

The schoolmaster, in the modern world, is seldom_al-
lowed a point of view of his own. He is appointed by an
education authority, and is “sacked” if he is found to be
educating. Apart from this economic motive, the school-
master is exposed to temptations of which he is likely to
be unconscious. He stands, even more directly than the
State and the Church, for discipline; officially he knows
what his pupils do not know. Without some element of
discipline and authority, it is difficult to keep a class in
order. It is easier to punish a boy for showing boredom
than it is to be interesting. Moreover, even the best school-
master is likely to exaggerate his importance, and to deem
it possible and desirable to mould his pupils into the sort
of human beings that he thinks they ought to be. Lytton
Strachey describes Dr. Arnold walking beside the Lake of
Como and meditating on ‘moral evil.” Moral evil, for
him, was whatever he wished to change in his boys. The
belief that there was a great deal of it in them justified


192 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


him in the exercise of power, and in conceiving of himself
as a ruler whose duty was even more to chasten than to
love. This attitude—variously phrased in various ages—
is natural to any schoolmaster who is zealous without being
on the watch for the deceitful influence of self-importance.
Nevertheless the teacher is far the best of the forces con-
cerned in education, and it is primarily to him or her that
we must look for progress.

Then, again, the schoolmaster wants the credit of his
school. This makes him wish to have his boys distinguish
themselves in athletic contests and scholarship examinations,
which leads to care for a certain selection of superior boys
to the exclusion of the others. For the rank and file, the
result is bad. It is much better for a boy to play a game
badly himself than to watch others playing it well. Mr.
H. G. Wells, in his Life of Sanderson of Oundle, tells how
this really great schoolmaster set his face against every-
thing that left the faculties of the average boy unexercised
and uncared for. When he became head master, he found
that only certain selected boys were expected to sing in
chapel; they were trained as a choir, and the rest listened.
Sanderson insisted that all should sing, whether musical or
not. In this he was rising above the bias which is natural
to a schoolmaster who cares more for his credit than for
his boys. Of course, if we all apportioned credit wisely
there would be no conflict between these two motives: the
school which did best by the boys would get the most credit.
But in a busy world spectacular successes will always win
credit out of proportion to their real importance, so that
some conflict between the two motives is hardly avoidable.

I come now to the point of view of the parent. This


FREEDOM VERSUS AUTHORITY 193


_ differs according to the economic status of the parent: the
average wage-earner has desires quite different from those
of the average professional man. The average wage-
earner wishes to get his children to school as soon as pos-
sible, so as to diminish bother at home; he also wishes

-to get them away as soon as possible, so as to profit by

their earnings. When recently the British Government de-
cided to cut down expenditure on education, it proposed that
children should not go to school before the age of six, and
should not be obliged to stay after the age of thirteen. The
former proposal caused such a popular outcry that it had
to be dropped: the indignation of worried mothers (re-

_ cently enfranchised) was irresistible. ‘The latter proposal,
lowering the age for leaving school, was not unpopular.
Parliamentary candidates advocating better education
would get unanimous applause from those who came to
meetings, but would find, in canvassing, that unpolitical

-_wage-earners (who are the majority) want their children to
be free to get paid work as soon as possible. The excep-
tions are mainly those who hope that their children may
rise in the social scale through better education.

Professional men have quite a different outlook. Their
own income depends upon the fact that they have had a
better education than the average, and they wish to hand
on this advantage to their children. For this object they
ate willing to make great sacrifices. But in our present
competitive society, what will be desired by the average
parent is not an education which is good in itself, but an
education which is better than other people’s. This may
be facilitated by keeping down the general level, and
therefore we cannot expect a professional man to be en-


194 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


thusiastic about facilities for higher education for the chil-
dren of wage-earners. If everybody who desired it could
get a medical education, however poor his parents might be,
‘t is obvious that doctors would earn less than they do, both
from increased competition and from the improved health
of the community. The same thing applies to the law,
the civil service, and so on. Thus the good things which
the professional man desires for his own children he will
not desire for the bulk of the population unless he has ex-
ceptional public spirit.

The fundamental defect of fathers, in our competitive
society, is that they want ‘their children to be a credit to
them. This is rooted in instinct, and can only be cured by
efforts directed to that end. The defect exists also, though
to a lesser degree, in mothers. We all feel, instinctively,
that our children’s successes reflect glory upon ourselves,
while their failures make us feel shame. Unfortunately,
the successes which cause us to swell with pride are often
of an undesirable kind. From the dawn of civilization
till almost our own time—and still in China and Japan—
parents have sacrificed their children’s happiness in mar-
riage by deciding whom they were to marry, choosing al-
most always the richest bride or bridegroom available.
In the Western world (except partially in France) children
have freed themselves from this slavery by rebellion, but
parents’ instincts have not changed. Neither happiness nor
virtue, but worldly success, is what the average father de-
sires for his children. He wants them to be such as he can
boast of to his cronies, and this desire largely dominates
his efforts for their education. |

Authority, if it is to govern education, must rest upon


FREEDOM VERSUS AUTHORITY 195


one or several of the powers we have considered: the State,
‘the Church, the schoolmaster, and the parent. We have
seen that no one of them can be trusted to care adequately
for the child’s welfare, since each wishes the child to min-
‘ister to some end which has nothing to do with its own well-
being. The State wants the child to serve for national ag-
grandizement and the support of the existing form of gov-
ernment. The Church wants the child to serve for
increasing the power of the priesthood. The schoolmaster,
in a competitive world, too often regards his school as the
State regards the nation, and wants the child to glorify the
school. The parent wants the child to glorify the family.
The child itself, as an end in itself, as a separate human
being with a claim to whatever happiness and well-being may
be possible, does not come into these various external pur-
poses, except very partially. Unfortunately, the child lacks
the experience required for the guidance of its own life,
and is therefore a prey to the sinister interests that batten
on its innocence. This is what makes the difficulty of edu-
cation as a political problem. But let us first see what can
be said from the child’s own point of view.

It is obvious that most children, if they were left to
themselves, would not learn to read or write, and would
grow up less adapted than they might be to the circum-
stances of their lives. There must be educational institu-
tions, and children must be to some extent under authority.
But in view of the fact that no authority can be wholly
trusted, we must aim at having as little authority as pos-
sible, and try to think out ways by which young people’s
natural desires and impulses can be utilized in education.
This is far more possible than is often thought, for, after


196 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


all, the desire to acquire knowledge is natural to most young
people. The traditional pedagogue, possessing knowledge
not worth imparting, and devoid of all skill in imparting
it, imagined that young people have a native horror of in-
struction, but in this he was misled by failure to realize his
own shortcomings. There is a charming tale of Tchekoy’s
about a man who tried to teach a kitten to catch mice.
When it wouldn’t run after them, he beat it, with the result
that even as an adult cat it cowered with terror in the pres-
ence of a mouse. “This is the man,” Tchekov adds, ‘‘who
taught me Latin.” Now cats teach their kittens to catch
mice, but they wait till the instinct has awakened. Then
the kittens agree with their mammas that the knowledge is
worth acquiring, so that discipline is not required.

The first two or three years of life have hitherto escaped
the domination of the pedagogue, and all authorities are
agreed that those are the years in which we learn most.
Every child learns to talk by its own efforts. Anyone who
has watched an infant knows that the efforts required are
very considerable. The child listens intently, watches move-
ments of the lips, practices sounds all day long, and concen-
trates with amazing ardor. Of course grown-up people
encourage it by praise, but it does not occur to them to
punish it on days when it learns no new word. All that
they provide is opportunity and praise. It is doubtful
whether more is required at any stage.

What is necessary is to make the child or young person
feel that the knowledge is worth having. Sometimes this
is difficult because in fact the knowledge is not worth having.
It is also difficult when only a considerable amount of knowl-
edge in any direction is useful, so that at first the pupil


FREEDOM VERSUS AUTHORITY 197


tends to be merely bored. In such cases, however, the
difficulty is not insuperable. Take, for instance, the teach-
ing of mathematics. Sanderson of Oundle found that al-
most all his boys were interested in machinery, and he pro-
vided them with opportunities for making quite elaborate
“machines. In the course of this practical work, they came
upon the necessity for making calculations, and thus grew
interested in mathematics as required for the success of a
‘constructive enterprise on which they were keen. This
method is expensive, and involves patient skill on the part
of the teacher. But it goes along the lines of the pupil’s
instinct, and is therefore likely to involve less boredom
with more intellectual effort. Effort is natural both to ani-
mals and men, but it must be effort for which there is an
instinctive stimulus. A football match involves more effort
than the treadmill, yet the one is a pleasure and the other
a punishment. It is a mistake to suppose that mental effort
can rarely be a pleasure; what is true is that certain condi-
tions are required to make it pleasurable, and that, until
lately, no attempt was made to create these conditions in
education. The chief conditions are: first, a problem of
which the solution is desired; secondly, a feeling of hope-
fulness as to the possibility of obtaining a solution. Con-
sider the way David Copperfield was taught arithmetic:
Even when the lessons are done, the worst is yet to happen, in the shape
of an appalling sum. This is invented for me, and delivered to me orally
by Mr. Murdstone, and begins, “If I go into a cheesemonger’s shop, and
buy five thousand double-Gloucester cheeses at fourpence-halfpenny each,
present payment”—at which I see Miss Murdstone secretly overjoyed. I
pore over these cheeses without any result or enlightment until dinner-time ;
when, having made a mulatto of myself by getting the dirt of the slate into


the pores of my skin, I have a slice of bread to help me out with the
cheeses, and am considered in disgrace for the rest of the evening.


198 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


Obviously the poor boy could not be expected to take
any interest in the cheeses, or to have any hope of doing
the sum right. If he had wanted a box of a certain size,
and had been told to save up his allowance until he could
buy enough wood and nails, it would have stimulated his —
arithmetical powers amazingly.

There should be nothing hypothetical about the sums
that a child is asked to do. I remember once reading a
young boy’s own account of his arithmetic lesson. The
governess set the problem: If a horse is worth three times
as much as a pony, and the pony is worth £22, what is the
horse worth? ‘Had he been down?” asks the boy. ‘‘That
makes no difference,” says the governess. ‘“‘Oh, but James
(the groom) says it makes a great difference.” The power
of understanding hypothetical truth is one of the latest de-
velopments of logical faculty, and ought not to be expected ©
in the very young. This, however, is a digression, from
which we must return to our main theme.

I do not maintain that all children can have their intel-
lectual interests aroused by suitable stimuli. Some have
much less than average intelligence, and require special
treatment. It is very undesirable to combine in one class
children whose mental capacities are very different: the
cleverer ones will be bored by having things explained that
they clearly understand, and the stupider ones will be wor-
ried by having things taken for granted that they have not
yet grasped. But subjects and methods should be adapted
to the intelligence of the pupil. Macaulay was made to learn
mathematics at Cambridge, but it is obvious from his let-
ters that it was a sheer waste of time. I was made to learn
Latin and Greek, but I resented it, being of the opinion that


FREEDOM VERSUS AUTHORITY 199


it was silly to learn a language that was no longer spoken.
‘I believe that all the little good I got from years of classical
studies I could have got in adult life in a month. After the
bare minimum, account should be taken of tastes, and pupils
should only be taught what they find interesting. This puts
a strain upon teachers, who find it easier to be dull, espe-
cially if they are overworked. But the difficulties can be
overcome by giving teachers shorter hours and instruction
in the art of teaching, which is done at present in training
teachers in elementary schools, but not teachers in universi-
- ties or public schools.

Freedom in education has many aspects. ‘There is first
of all freedom to learn or not to learn. Then there is
freedom as to what to learn. And in later education there
is freedom of opinion. Freedom to learn or not to learn
can only partially be conceded in childhood. It is necessary
to make sure that all who are not imbecile learn to read
and write. How far this can be done by the mere provision
of opportunity, only experience can show. But even if
_ opportunity alone suffices, children must have the oppor-
tunity thrust upon them. Most of them would rather play
out of doors, where the necessary opportunities would be
lacking. Later on, it might be left to the choice of young
' people whether, for instance, they should go to the unt-
_ versity; some would wish to do so, others would not. This
would make quite as good a principle of selection as any
to be got from entrance examinations. Nobody who did
not work should be allowed to stay at a university. The
rich young men who now waste their time in college are
demoralizing others and teaching themselves to be useless.
If hard work were exacted as a condition of residence, uni-


200 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


versities would cease to be attractive to people with a dis-
taste for intellectual pursuits.

Freedom as to what to learn ought to exist far more
than at present. I think it is necessary to group subjects
by their natural affinities; there are grave disadvantages
in the elective system, which leaves a young man free to
choose wholly unconnected subjects. If I were organizing
education in Utopia, with unlimited funds, I should give
every child, at the age of about twelve; some instruction in
classics, mathematics, and science. After two years, it
ought to be evident where the child’s aptitudes lay, and
the child’s own tastes would be a safe indication, provided
there were no “‘soft options.” Consequently I should allow
every boy and girl who so desired to specialize from the age
of fourteen. At first, the specialization should be very
broad, growing gradually more defined as education ad-
vanced. The time when it was possible to be universally
well informed is past. An industrious man may know some-
thing of history and literature, which requires a knowledge
of classical and modern languages. Or he may know some
parts of mathematics, or one or two sciences, But the ideal
of an “all-around” education is out of date; it has been
destroyed by the progress of knowledge.

Freedom of opinion, on the part of both teachers and
pupils, is the most important of the various kinds of free-
dom, and the only one which requires no limitations what-
ever. In view of the fact that it does not exist, it is worth
while to recapitulate the arguments in its favor.

The fundamental argument for freedom of opinion is the
doubtfulness of all our beliefs. If we certainly knew the
truth, there would be something to be said for teaching it.


FREEDOM VERSUS AUTHORITY 201


But in that case it could be taught without invoking au-
thority, by means of its inherent reasonableness. It is not
necessary to make a law that no one shall be allowed to
teach arithmetic if he holds heretical opinions on the multi-
plication table, because here the truth is clear, and does not
require to be enforced by penalties. When the State inter-
venes to ensure the teaching of some doctrine, it does so
because there is no conclusive evidence in favor of that
doctrine. The result is that the teaching is not truthful,
even if it should happen to be true. In the State of New
York, it was till lately illegal to teach that Communism is
good; in Soviet Russia, it is illegal to teach that Com-
-munism is bad. No doubt one of these opinions is true
and one false, but no one knows which. Either New York
or Soviet Russia was teaching truth and proscribing false-
hood, but neither was teaching truthfully, because each was
representing a doubtful proposition as certain.

The difference between truth and truthfulness is im-
portant in this connection. Truth is for the gods; from
our human point of view it is an ideal towards which we
can approximate, but which we cannot hope to reach. Edu-
cation should fit us for the nearest possible approach to
truth, and tordo this it must teach truthfulness. Truthful-
ness, as I mean it, is the habit of forming our opinions on
the evidence, and holding them with that degree of convic-
tion which the evidence warrants. This degree will always
fall short of complete certainty, and therefore we must be
always ready to admit new evidence against previous beliefs.
Moreover, when we act on a belief, we must, if possible,
only take such action as will be useful even if our belief is
more or less inaccurate; we should avoid actions which are


202 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


disastrous unless our belief is exactly true. In science, an
observer states his results along with the “probable error”;
but who ever heard of a theologian or a politician stating
the probable error in his dogmas, or even admitting that
any error is conceivable? ‘That is because in science, where
we approach nearest to real knowledge, a man can safely
rely on the strength of his case, whereas, where nothing is
known, blatant assertion and hypnotism are the usual ways
of causing others to share our beliefs. -If the fundamental-
ists thought they had a good case against evolution, they
would not make the teaching of it illegal.

The habit of teaching some one orthodoxy, political,
religious, or moral, has all kinds of bad effects. To begin
with, it excludes from the teaching profession men who
combine honesty with intellectual vigor, who are just the
men likely to have the best moral and mental effect upon
their pupils. I will give three illustrations. First, as to
politics: a teacher of economics in America is expected to
teach such doctrines as will add to the wealth and power of
the very rich; if he does not, he finds it advisable to go
elsewhere, like Mr. Laski, formerly of Harvard, now one
of the most valuable teachers in the London School of
Economics. Second, as to religion: the immense majority
of intellectually eminent men disbelieve the Christian re-
ligion, but they conceal the fact in public, because they are
afraid of losing their incomes. Thus on the most important |
of all subjects most of the men whose opinions and argu-
ments would be best worth having are condemned to
silence. Third, as to morals: Practically all men are un-—
chaste at some time of their lives; clearly those who conceal —
this fact are worse than those who do not, since they add >


FREEDOM VERSUS AUTHORITY 203


the guilt of hypocrisy. But it is only to the hypocrites that
teaching posts are open. So much for the effects of ortho-
doxy upon the choice and character of teachers.

I come now to the effect upon the pupils, which I will take
under two heads, intellectual and moral. Intellectually,
_ what is stimulating to a young man is a problem of obvious
_ practical importance, as to which he finds that divergent
opinions are held. A young man learning economics, for
example, ought to hear lectures from individualists and
socialists, protectionists and free-traders, inflationists and
believers in the gold standard. He ought to be encouraged
to read the best books of the various schools, as recom-
mended by those who believe in them. This would teach
him to weigh arguments and evidence, to know that no
opinion is certainly right, and to judge men by their quality
rather than by their consonance with preconceptions. His-
tory should be taught not only from the point of view
of one’s own country, but also from that of foreigners.
If history were taught by Frenchmen in England, and by
Englishmen in France, there would be no disagreements
between the two countries, because each would understand
the other’s point of view. A young man should learn to
think that all questions are open, and that an argument
should be followed wherever it leads. The needs of prac-
tical life will destroy this attitude all too soon when he
begins to earn his living; but until that time he should be
encouraged to taste the joys of free speculation.

Morally, also, the teaching of an orthodoxy to the young


is very harmful. There is not only the fact that it compels


the abler teachers to be hypocrites, and therefore to set a
bad moral example, but there is also, what is more impor-


204 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


tant, the fact that it encourages intolerance and the bad
forms of herd instinct. Edmund Gosse, in his Father and
Son, relates how, when he was a boy, his father told him
he was going to marry again. The boy saw there was some-
thing his father was ashamed of, so at last he asked, in
accents of horror: ‘‘Father, is she a Pedo-Baptist?’ And
she was. Until that moment, he had believed all Paedo-
Baptists to be wicked. So children in Catholic schools be-
lieve that Protestants are wicked, children in any school in
an English-speaking country believe that atheists are
wicked, children in France believe that Germans are wicked,
and children in Germany believe that Frenchmen are wicked.
When a school accepts as part of its task the teaching of
an opinion which cannot be intellectually defended (as
practically all schools do), it is compelled to give the
impression that those who hold an opposite opinion are
wicked, since otherwise it cannot generate the passion re-
quired for repelling the assaults of reason. Thus for the
sake of orthodoxy the children are rendered uncharitable,
intolerant, cruel, and bellicose. This is unavoidable so long
as definite opinions are prescribed on politics, morals, and
religion.

Finally, arising out of this moral damage to the indi-
vidual, there is untold damage to society. Wars and perse-
cutions are rife everywhere, and everywhere they are ren-
dered possible by the teaching in the schools. Wellington
used to say that the battle of Waterloo was won on the
playing-fields of Eton. He might have said with more
truth that the war against revolutionary France was insti-
gated in the classrooms of Eton. In our democratic age,
Eton has become unimportant; now, it is the ordinary ele-


FREEDOM VERSUS AUTHORITY 205


mentary and secondary school that matters. In every coun-
try, by means of flag-waving, Empire Day, Fourth-of-July
celebrations, Officers’ Training Corps, etc., everything is
done to give boys a taste for homicide, and girls a convic-
tion that men given to homicide are the most worthy of
respect. This whole system of moral degradation to which
innocent boys and girls are exposed would become impos-
sible if the authorities allowed freedom of opinion to teach-
ers and pupils.

Regimentation is the source of the evil. Education au-
thorities do not look on children, as religion is supposed
to do, as human beings with souls to be saved. They
look upon them as material for grandiose social schemes:
future “hands” in factories or “bayonets” in war or what
not. No man is fit to educate unless he feels each pupil
an end in himself, with his own rights and his own per-
sonality, not merely a piece in a jig-saw puzzle, or a soldier
in a regiment, or a citizen in a State. Reverence for human
personality is the beginning of wisdom, in every social ques-
tion, but above all in education.


XV
PSYCHOLOGY AND POLITICS


I WANT to discuss in this essay the kind of effects which
psychology may, before long, come to have upon politics.
I propose to speak both of the good effects that are pos-
sible, and of the bad effects that are probable.

Political opinions are not based upon reason. Even so
technical a matter as the resumption of the gold standard
was determined mainly by sentiment, and according to the
psycho-analysts, the sentiment in question is one which can-
not be mentioned in polite society. Now the sentiments of
an adult are compounded of a kernel of instinct surrounded
by a vast husk of education. One way in which education
works is through influencing imagination. Everybody —
wants to see himself as a fine fellow, and therefore both
his efforts and his delusions are influenced by what he con-
siders the best possible in the way of achievement. I think
the study of psychology may alter our conception of a “fine |
fellow” ; if so, obviously its effect upon politics will be pro-
found. I doubt whether anyone who had learned modern
psychology in youth could be quite like the late Lord
Curzon or the present Bishop of London.

With regard to any science, there are two kinds of effects
which it may have. On the one hand, experts may make ©
inventions or discoveries which can be utilized by the hold-

_ ers of power. On the other hand, the science may influence —
“Imagination, and so alter people’s analogies and expecta- —
206


PSYCHOLOGY AND POLITICS 207


_ tions. There is, strictly speaking, a third kind of effect,
namely, a change in manner of life with all its conse-
quences. In the case of physical science, all three classes
of effects are, by this time, clearly developed. The first is
illustrated by aeroplanes, the second by the mechanistic out-
look on life, the third by the substitution, in a large part of
the population, of industry and urban life for agriculture
and the country. In the case of psychology, we still have
to depend upon prophecy as regards most of its effects.
Prophecy is always rash, but is more so as regards effects
of the first and third kinds than as regards those which
depend upon a change of imaginative outlook. I shall,
_ therefore, speak first and chiefly about effects of this kind.

A few words about other périods of history may help
to give the atmosphere. Inthe Middle Ages, every political
question was determined by theological arguments, which
_ took the form of analogies. The dominant controversy
was between the Pope and the Emperor: it became recog-
_ nized that the Pope was the Sun and the Emperor was the
‘Moon, so the Pope won. It would be a mistake to argue
that the Pope won because he had better armies; he owed
his armies to the persuasive power of the Sun-and-Moon
analogy, as set forth by Franciscan friars acting as recruit-
ing sergeants. This is the kind of thing that really moves
masses of men and decides important events. In the pres-
ent age, some people think society is a machine and some
think it is a tree. The former are Fascisti, imperialists,
industrialists, Bolsheviks; the latter constitutionalists, agra-
rians, or pacifists. —The argument is just as absurd as that
of the Guelfs and Ghibellines, since society is in fact neither


a machine nor a tree.


208 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


With the Renaissance, we come to a new influence, the
influence of literature, especially classical literature. This
continues to our own day, more particularly among those
who go to the public schools and the older universities.
When Professor Gilbert Murray has to make up his mind
on a political question, one feels that his first reaction is
to ask himself, “What would Euripides have said about
it?” But this outlook is no longer dominant in the world.
It was dominant in the Renaissance, and in the eighteenth
century, down to and including the French Revolution. Rev-
olutionary orators constantly appealed to shining examples |
of Roman virtue, and liked to conceive themselves in
togas. Writers such as Montesquieu and Rousseau had an
influence far surpassing what any writer can have now. One
may say that the American Constitution is what Mon-
tesquieu imagined the British Constitution to be. I am not
enough of a jurist to trace the influence which admiration
of Rome exercised upon the Code Napoléon.

With the industrial revolution, we pass to a new era—
the era of physics. Men of science, especially Galileo and
Newton, had prepared the way for this era, but what
brought it to birth was the embodiment of science in eco-
nomic technique. A machine is a very peculiar object: it
works according to known scientific laws (otherwise it
would not be constructed) for a definite purpose lying out-
side itself, and having to do with man, usually with man’s
physical life. Its relation to man is exactly that which the
world had to God in the Calvinist theology; perhaps that
is why industrialism was invented by Protestants, and by
Nonconformists rather than Anglicans. The machine-anal-
ogy has had a profound effect upon our thought. We speak


PSYCHOLOGY AND POLITICS 209


of a “mechanical” view of the world, a “mechanical” ex-
planation, and so on, meaning, nominally, an explanation in
terms of physical laws, but introducing, perhaps uncon-
sciously, the teleological aspect of a machine, namely, its
devotion to an end outside itself. So, if society is a ma-
chine, we think that it has a purpose of an external sort.
- We are no longer content to say that it exists for the glory
of God, but it is easy to find synonyms for God, such as:
the Bank of England, the British Empire, the Standard Oil
Company, the Communist Party, etc. Our wars are con-
flicts between these synonyms—it is the medieval sun-and-
moon business over again.

The power of physics has been due to the fact that it
is a very definite science, which has profoundly altered daily
life. But this alteration has proceeded by operating on
the environment, not on man himself. Given a science
equally definite, and capable of altering man directly,
physics would be put in the shade. This is what psychol-
ogy may become. Until recent times, psychology was
unimportant philosophical verbiage—the academic stuff that
I learned in youth was not worth learning. But now there
are two ways of approaching psychology which are ob-
viously important: one that of the physiologists, the other
that of psycho-analysis. As the results in these two direc-
tions become more definite and more certain, it is clear
that psychology will increasingly dominate men’s outlook.
Let us take Education as a case in point. In old days,

the received view was that education should begin at about
eight years old, with the learning of Latin declensions;
what happened before that was regarded as unimportant.
This view, in essence, seems to be still dominant in the


210 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


Labor Party, which, when in office, took much more inter-
est in improving education after fourteen than in providing
nursery schools for infants. With concentration on late
education there goes a certain pessimism as to its powers:
it is thought that all it can really do is to fit a man for


earning a living. But one finds that the scientific tendency


‘s to attribute far more power to education than was
formerly done, only it must begin very early. Psycho-an-
alysts would begin at birth; biologists would begin even
sooner. You can educate a fish to have one eye in the
middle, instead of two eyes, one on either side (Jennings,
Prometheus, p. 60). But to do this you have to begin long
before the fish is born. So far, there are difficulties in the


way of pre-natal mammalian education, but probably they —


will be overcome.


But, you will say, you are using “education” in a very —


funny sense. What is there in common between distorting
a fish and teaching a boy Latin Grammar? I must say they
seem to me very similar: both are wanton injuries inflicted


for the pleasure of the experimenter. However, this would |


perhaps hardly do as a definition of education. ‘The essence
of education is that it is a change (other than death) ef-
fected in an organism to satisfy the desires of the operator.
Of course the operator says that his desire is to improve
the pupil, but this statement does not represent any ob-
jectively verifiable fact.

Now there are many ways of altering an organism. You
may change its anatomy, as in the fish that has lost an


eye, or the man that has lost an appendix. You may alter 3


its metabolism, for instance, by drugs. You may alter its
habits by creating associations. Ordinary instruction is a


———


PSYCHOLOGY AND POLITICS 211


particular case of this last. Now everything in education,
with the exception of instruction, is easier when the organ-
ism is very young, because then it is malleable. In human
beings, the important time for education is from conception
to the end of the fourth year. But, as I said before, pre-
natal education is not yet possible, though it probably will
be before the end of this century.

There are two principal methods of early education: one
is by chemicals, the other by suggestion. When I say “‘chem-
icals,” perhaps I shall be thought unduly materialistic. But
no one would have thought so if I had said, “Of course
a careful mother will provide the infant with the most
wholesome diet available,’ which is only a longer way of
saying the same thing. However, I am concerned with
possibilities that are more or less sensational. It may be
_ found that the addition of suitable drugs to the diet, or
the injection of the right substances into the blood, will

increase intelligence or alter the emotional nature. Every
one knows of the connection of idiocy with lack of iodine.
_ Perhaps we shall find that intelligent men are those who, in
infancy, got small quantities of some rare compound acci-
dentally in their diet, owing to lack of cleanliness in the
pots and pans. Or perhaps the mother’s diet during preg-
_ nancy will turn out to be the decisive factor. I know noth-

ing about this whole subject; I merely observe that we know
‘much more about the education of salamanders than about
that of human beings, chiefly because we do not imagine that
salamanders have souls.

The psychological side of early education cannot well
- begin before birth, because it is chiefly concerned with habit-
formation, and habits acquired before birth are useless


202 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


afterwards, for the most part. But I think there is no doubt
of the enormous influence of the early years in forming
character. There is a certain opposition, to my mind quite
unnecessary, between those who believe in dealing with the
mind through the body, and those who believe in dealing
with it directly. The old-fashioned medical man, though
an earnest Christian, tends to be a materialist; he thinks
that mental states have physical causes, and should be cured
by removing those causes. The psycho-analyst, on the con-
trary, always seeks for psychological causes, and tries to
operate upon them. This whole thing hangs together with
the mind-and-matter dualism, which I regard as a mistake.
Sometimes it is easier to discover the sort of antecedent we
call physical; sometimes the sort we call psychological is
easier to discover. But I should suppose that both always
exist, and that it is rational to operate through the one most
easily discoverable in the particular case. There is no in-
consistency in treating one case by administering iodine, and
another by curing a phobia.

When we try to take a psychological view of politics, it
is natural to begin by looking for the fundamental impulses
of ordinary human beings, and the ways in which they can
be developed by the environment. The orthodox economists
of a hundred years ago thought that acquisitiveness was the
only motive the politician need take account of; this view
was adopted by Marx, and formed the basis of his economic
interpretation of history. It derives naturally from physics
and industrialism: it is the outcome of the imaginative dom-
ination of physics in our time. It is now held by capitalists
and communists, and by all respectable persons, such as
The Times and the magistrates, both of whom express utter


PSYCHOLOGY AND POLITICS 213


amazement when young women sacrifice their earnings to
marry men on the dole. The received view is that happi-
ness is proportional to income, and that a rich old maid must
be happier than a poor married woman. In order to make
this true, we do all we can to inflict misery upon the latter.

As against orthodoxy and Marxianism, the psycho-an-
alysts say that the one fundamental human impulse is sex.
Acquisitiveness, they say, is a morbid development of a cer-
tain sexual perversion. It is obvious that people who believe
this will act quite differently from people who take the eco-
nomic view. Everybody except certain pathological cases
wishes to be happy, but most people accept some current
theory as to what constitutes happiness. If people think
wealth constitutes happiness, they will not act as they will
if they think sex the essential thing. I do not think either
view quite true, but I certainly think the latter the less
harmful. What does emerge is the importance of a right
theory as to what constitutes happiness. In such important
acts as choosing a career, a man is greatly influenced by
theory. If a wrong theory prevails, successful men will be
unhappy, but will not know why. This fills them with rage,


which leads them to desire the slaughter of younger men,


TJ) hh 3 ee


whom they envy unconsciously. Most modern politics,
while nominally based on economics, is really due to rage
caused by lack of instinctive satisfaction; and this lack, in
turn, is largely due to false popular psychology.

I do not think that sex covers the ground. In politics,


| especially, sex is chiefly important when thwarted. In the


war, elderly spinsters developed a ferocity partly attribu-
table to their indignation with young men for having
neglected them. They are still abnormally bellicose. I


214 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


remember soon after the Armistice crossing Saltash Bridge
in the train, and seeing many battleships anchored below.
Two elderly spinsters in the carriage turned to each other
and murmured: “Isn’t it sad to see them all lying idle!”
But sex satisfied ceases to influence politics much. I should
say that both hunger and thirst count for more politically.
Parenthood is immensely important, because of the im-
portance of the family; Rivers even suggested that it is the
source of private property. But parenthood must not be
confounded with sex.

In addition to the impulses which serve for the preserva-
tion and propagation of life, there are others concerned with
what may be called Glory: love of power, vanity, and ri-
valry. These obviously play a very great part in politics. If
politics is ever to allow of a tolerable life, these glory-
impulses must be tamed and taught to take no more than
their proper place.

Our fundamental impulses are neither good nor bad: they
are ethically neutral. Education should aim at making them
take forms that are good. ‘The old method, still beloved
by Christians, was to thwart instinct; the new method is to
train it. Take love of power: it is useless to preach Chris-
tian humility, which merely makes the impulse take hypo-
critical forms. What you have to do is to provide benef-
icent outlets for it. The original native impulse can be
satisfied in a thousand ways—oppression, politics, business,
art, science, all satisfy it when successfully practiced. A
man will choose the outlet for his love of power that corre-
sponds with his skill; according to the type of skill given
him in youth, he will choose one occupation or another. |
The purpose of our public schools is to teach the technique


PSYCHOLOGY AND POLITICS 215


of oppression and no other; consequently they produce
men who take up the white man’s burden. But if these
men could do science, many of them might prefer it. Of two
activities which a man has mastered, he will generally prefer
the more difficult: no chess-player will play draughts. In
this way, skill may be made to minister to virtue.

As another illustration, take Fear. Rivers enumerates
four kinds of reaction to danger, each appropriate in certain
circumstances :


I, Fear and Flight.

II. Rage and Fight.
TII. Manipulative activity.
IV. Paralysis.


It is obvious that the third is the best, but it requires the
appropriate type of skill. The second is the one praised
by militarists, schoolmasters, bishops, etc., under the name
of “courage.” Every governing class aims at producing it
in its own members, and producing fear and flight in the
subject population. So women were, until our own times,
carefully trained to be timorous. And one finds still in
Labor an inferiority complex, taking the form of snobbery
and social submissiveness.

It is greatly to be feared that psychology will place new
weapons in the hands of the holders of power. They will
be able to train timidity and docility, and make the mass of
men more and more like domestic animals. When I speak
of the holders of power, I do not mean only the capitalists
—L include all officials, even those of trade unions and Labor
Parties. Every official, every man ina position of authority,
wants his followers to be tame: he is indignant if they insist
on having their own ideas as to what constitutes their hap-


216 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


piness, instead of being grateful for what he is good enough
to provide. In the past, the hereditary principle ensured
that many of the governing class should be lazy and incom-
petent, which gave the others a chance. But if the gov-
erning class is to be recruited from the most energetic
in each generation, who are to rise by their own efforts, the
outlook for ordinary mortals is very black. It is hard to see
how, in such a world, anybody can champion the rights of
the lazy, i.e., of those who do not want to interfere with
other people. It seems that quiet people will have to learn
fearlessness and energy in youth if they are to have any
chance in a world where all power is the reward of hustling.
Perhaps democracy is a passing phase; if so, psychology will
serve to rivet the chains on the serfs. This makes it im-
portant to secure democracy before the technique of oppres-
sion has been perfected.

Reverting to the threefold effects of a science which I
enumerated at the beginning, it is clear that we cannot
guess what use the holders of power will make of psychol-
ogy, until we know what sort of government we are to have.
Psychology, like every other science, will place new weapons
in the hands of the authorities, notably the weapons
of education and propaganda, both of which may, by a more
finished psychological technique, be brought to the point
where they will be practically irresistible. If the holders of
power desire peace, they will be able to produce a pacific
population; if war, a bellicose population. If they desire
to generate intelligence, they will get it; if stupidity, they
will get that. On this head, therefore, prophecy is quite
impossible.

As to the effect of psychology upon the imagination, that


PSYCHOLOGY AND POLITICS EH he


will probably be of two opposite kinds. On the one hand,
there will be a wider acceptance of determinism. Most men
now feel uncomfortable about prayers for rain, because of
meteorology; but they are not so uncomfortable about pray-
ers for a good heart. If the causes of a good heart were
as well known as the causes of rain, this difference would
cease. A man who prayed for a good heart instead of call-
ing in the doctor to rid him of bad desires would be branded
as a hypocrite, if everybody could become a saint by paying a
few guineas to a Harley Street specialist. With the in-
crease of determinism would go, probably, a lessening of
effort and a general increase of moral laziness—not that
such an effect would be logical. I cannot say whether this
would be a gain or a loss, as I do not know whether more
good or harm comes from moral effort combined with faulty
psychology. On the other hand, there would be an emanci-
pation from materialism, both metaphysical and ethical;
emotions would be thought more important if they formed
the subject matter of a generally recognized and practically
efficacious science. ‘This effect, I think, would be wholly
good, since it would remove the erroneous notions now
prevalent as to what constitutes happiness.

As to the possible effect of psychology in altering our
manner of life through discoveries and inventions, I do not
venture upon any forecast, as I cannot see any reason for
expecting one sort of effect rather than another. For ex-
ample: it may be that the most important effect will be to
teach negroes to fight as well as white men, without acquir-
ing any other new merits. Or, conversely, psychology may
be used to induce negroes to practice birth control. These
two possibilities would produce very different worlds, and


218 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


there is no way of guessing whether one or the other or
neither will be realized.

Finally: the great practical importance of psychology
will come in giving ordinary men and women a more just
conception of what constitutes human happiness. If people
were genuinely happy, they would not be filled with envy,
rage, and destructiveness. Apart from the necessaries of
life, freedom for sex and parenthood is what is most needed
—at least as much in the middle class as among wage-
earners. It would be easy, with our present knowledge, to
make instinctive happiness almost universal, if we were not
thwarted by the malevolent passions of those who have
missed happiness and do not want any one else to get it.
And if happiness were common, it would preserve itself,
because appeals to hatred and fear, which now constitute
almost the whole of politics, would fall flat. But if psycho-
logical knowledge: is wielded by an aristocracy, it will pro-
long and intensify all the old evils. The world is full of
knowledge of all sorts that might bring such happiness as
has never existed since man first emerged, but old malad-
justments, greed, envy, and religious cruelty, stand in the
way. I do not know what the outcome will be, but I think
it will be either better or worse than anything the human
race has yet known.


XVI
THE DANGER OF CREED WARS


VARIOUS periodic oscillations run through the history of


eT kt


mankind, and any one of them may be regarded by an
enthusiastic person as the key to history. The one with
which I propose to deal is perhaps not the least important;
it is the oscillation from synthesis and intolerance to anal-
ysis and tolerance, and back again.

Uncivilized tribes are almost always synthetic and intol-
erant: there must be no departure from social customs, and
strangers are viewed with the gravest suspicion. The pre-
Hellenic civilizations of historical times on the whole re-
tained these characteristics; in Egypt, more especially, the
powerful priesthood was the guardian of the national tradi-
tions, and was able to repel the solvent scepticism which
Akhnaton acquired from contact with the alien civilization
of Syria. Whatever may have been the case in the Minoan
period, the first full historical age of analytic tolerance was
that of Greece. The cause, then as in subsequent instances,
was commerce, with its experience of foreigners and its need
of friendly relations with them. Commerce was, until very
recent years, a matter of individual enterprise, in which
prejudices were a hindrance to profits, and laissez-faire was
the rule of success. But in Greece, as in later times, the
commercial spirit, while it inspired art and thought, could
not produce the degree of social cohesion required for mili-

219


220 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


tary success. ‘The Greeks therefore succumbed first to
Macedonia and then to Rome.

The Roman system was essentially synthetic, and intol-
erant in a quite modern way, i.e., not theologically, but im-
perialistically and financially. The Roman synthesis, how-
ever, was slowly dissolved by Greek scepticism, and gave
place to the Christian and Mahometan syntheses, which
dominated the world until the Renaissance. In Western
Europe the Renaissance produced a brief period of intel-
lectual and artistic splendor, leading to political chaos and
the determination of plain men to have done with this fool-
ing and revert to the serious business of killing each other in
the wars of religion. The commercial nations, Holland
and England, were the first to emerge from the intolerance
of the Reformation and Counter-Reformation, and showed
their tolerance by fighting each other instead of combining
against the adherents of Rome. England, like ancient
Greece, has had a solvent effect upon neighbors, and has
gradually produced the degree of scepticism required for
democracy and parliamentary government, which are
scarcely possible in an intolerant age, and are therefore
tending to be replaced by Fascism and Bolshevism.

The world of the nineteenth century, more than is gen-
erally realized, is due to the philosophy embodied in the
revolution of 1688 and expressed by John Locke. This
philosophy dominated America in 1776 and France in 1789,
spreading thence to the rest of the Western world, largely
as a result of the prestige which England acquired through
the industrial revolution and the defeat of Napoleon. .

It is only quite gradually that men have become aware
of an essential inconsistency in this situation. The ideas of


THE DANGER OF CREED WARS 221


Locke and of nineteenth-century Liberalism were commer:
cial, not industrial: the philosophy appropriate to industrial-


ism is quite different from that of seafaring merchant ad-
_venturers. Industrialism is synthetic; it builds up large


economic units, makes society more organic, and demands a
suppression of individualistic impulses. Moreover, the eco-


“nomic organization of industrialism has hitherto been oli-


garchic, and has neutralized political democracy in the very


- moment of its apparent victory. For these reasons it seems


likely that we are entering upon a new age of synthetic in-
tolerance, involving, as such ages always do, wars between
rival philosophies or creeds. It is this probability that I
wish to explore.

There are in the world to-day only two Great Powers:


one is the United States, the other is the U.S.S.R. Their


populations are about equal; so are the populations of the
other nations which they dominate. ‘The United States
dominates the rest of the American continent and Western


Europe; the U.S.S.R. dominates Turkey, Persia, and most


‘


E


+


of China. The division is reminiscent of the medieval divi-
sion between Christian and Mussulman; there is the same
kind of difference of creed, the same implacable hostility,
and a similar though more extended division of territory.
Just as there were in the Middle Ages wars between Chris-
tian Powers and wars between Mahometan Powers, so
there will be wars within these two great groups; but we may
expect that they will be terminated, sooner or later, by
genuine peace treaties, whereas between the two great
groups there will only be truces produced by mutual exhaus-
tion. I do not suppose that either group can be victorious,


~ or can derive any advantage from the conflict; I suppose the


a | eae ere


— Aes


222 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


conflict is maintained because each group hates the other and
regards it as wicked. This is a characteristic of creed wars.

I am not, of course, suggesting that a development of this
sort is sure to come about: in human affairs the future must
always be uncertain until science has advanced very much
further than it has done yet. I suggest only that there are
potent forces tending in the direction indicated. Since these
forces are psychological, they are within human control;
therefore if a future of creed wars seems disagreeable to
the holders of power, they can avert it. In making any un-
pleasant prophecy about the future, provided the prophecy
is not based upon purely physical considerations, part of the
object of the prophet is to induce people to make the efforts
necessary to falsify his predictions. The prophet of evil, if
he is a philanthropist, should therefore seek to make himself |
hated, and let it seem as though he would be much vexed if
events failed to confirm his forecast. With this preliminary,
I propose to examine the grounds for expecting creed wars,
and afterwards the measures that will be necessary if they
are to be averted.

The fundamental reason for expecting a greater degree of
effective intolerance in the near future than in the eighteenth
and nineteenth centuries is the cheapness of large-scale stan-
dard production. The result of this in leading to trusts.
and monopolies is an ancient common-place, as old, at
least, as the Communist Manifesto. But it is the conse-
quences in the intellectual sphere that concerns us in the
present connection. There is an increasing tendency for con-
trol of the sources of opinion to become concentrated in a
few hands, with the result that minority opinions lose the
chance of effective expression. In the U.S.S.R. this con-


THE DANGER OF CREED WARS 225


centration has been carried out deliberately and politically
in the interests of the dominant party. At the first it seemed
very doubtful whether such a method could succeed, but as
the years pass success becomes more and more probable.
Concessions have been made in economic practice, but not in


- economic or political theory, nor yet in philosophical out-
_ look. Communism is becoming more and more a creed, con-
_ cerned with a future heaven, and less and less a way of life


_ for this mundane existence. A new generation is growing


up which takes this creed for granted, having never heard it
effectively questioned during the formative years. If the


_ present control over literature, the Press, and education lasts


for another twenty years—and there is no reason to suppose
that it will not—the communist philosophy will be the one


_ accepted by the immense majority of vigorous men. It will


be combated, on the one hand, by a diminishing remnant of


_ elderly discontented men, out of touch with affairs and with


the main stream of the national life; on the other hand


by a few free-thinkers, whose influence is likely to remain
negligible for a long time. There have aways been free-
thinkers—the Italian aristocracy in the thirteenth century


_ were largely Epicureans—but they have only been impor-


tant when, owing to some accidental circumstance, their


_ opinions were useful to important groups for economic or


_ political reasons, as at the present moment in Mexico. This


ie a a eh


can always be avoided by a little good sense on the part of


the Established Church, and one may assume that this


modicum of good sense will be displayed by the Established
Church in Russia. With the spread of education, the
younger peasants are being brought into the fold, and their
conversion to the theory is facilitated by the increasing con-


224 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


cessions to the individualism of peasant practice. The less
Communism there is in the actual economic régime, the
more there will be in the generally accepted creed.

Nor is it only in Russia, or in the territories of the
U.S.S.R., that this process is taking place. In China it is
beginning, and may not improbably become very strong.
Whatever is vigorous in China—more particularly the Na-
tionalist Government—is under Russian influence. Military
successes won by the Southern armies have been largely due
to propaganda organized under Russian guidance. ‘Those
Chinese who cling to the ancient religions—Buddhism and
Taoism—are politically reactionary; the Christians tend
to be more friendly to foreigners than is pleasing to the
nationalists. In the main, the nationalists are opposed to all
old religions, whether native or foreign. The new religion
of Russia attracts the patriotic intelligentsia, both as being
the latest thing, the last word in “‘progress,”’ and also be-
cause it is associated with a politically friendly Power, in fact
the only friendly Power. While, therefore, it is impossible
to imagine China instituting Communism in practice, it is
quite probable that it may adopt the philosophy of the
Bolsheviks.

One of the great mistakes of the British in their dealings
with “backward” nations has been their excessive belief
in the power of tradition. You will find in‘China many
Englishmen with a considerable knowledge of the Chinese
classics, with an understanding of popular superstitions, and
with friends among the older Conservative literati. You
will find hardly any who understand Young China, or view
it with anything but ignorant contempt. In the face of the
transformation of Japan, they continue to judge China’s fu-


THE DANGER OF CREED WARS 226


ture by her past, and to assume that no great rapid change
is possible. I am convinced that this is an illusion. As in
Japan, so in China, the military and economic strength
of the West has given it prestige and at the same time caused
it to be hated. But for Russia, the hatred might remain
impotent; as it is, Russia offers a model in emancipation
- from the West and help to the Chinese in traveling a more
or less similar road. In these circumstances rapid change is
very possible. Rapid change is always easier to effect in
dealing with a hitherto uneducated population, because edu-
cation backed by the prestige of government can easily
cause the young to despise their illiterate elders.

It is therefore by no means improbable that, twenty
years hence, the Bolshevik ideology will be in power
throughout China, and will be combined with a close politi-
cal alliance with Russia. Gradually, by means of education,
this ideology will be instilled into about half the population
of the globe. What, meanwhile, will happen to the other

half?

In the Western world, where official orthodoxy has the
advantage of the status quo and tradition, more subtle
methods suffice; indeed, the methods which exist have
largely grown up without set purpose. The modern creed
is not seen in its purity in Europe, where remnants of the
Middle Ages interfere. It is in the United States that in-
dustrial capitalism has the freest hand, and that its character
is most obvious. But Western Europe must, bit by bit, take
on the American character, in view of the fact that America
is the greatest of World Powers. I do not mean that we
shall have to adopt fundamentalism, for example, which is
merely a belated European creed surviving among a trans-


226 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


planted population of pious peasants. The agricultural por-
tion of America is not the internationally important part,
nor the part whose outlook is likely to shape the future of
America. It is the industrial creed that is important and
novel. This creed has one form in Russia, and another in
America; the contrast of these two forms is what con-
cerns the world.

America, like Russia, has an ideal which is not realized,
but to which values are theoretically adjusted. The Russian
ideal is Communism. The American ideal is free com-
petition. What the New Economic Policy was as a stum-
bling-block to the Russian ideal, trusts are to the American
ideal. Where the Communist thinks in terms of organiza-
tions, the typical American thinks in terms of individuals.
From Log Cabin to White House represents the ideal to be
put before the young in politics, and a similar ideal in the
economic sphere inspires the advertisements of systems for
securing business advancement. ‘The fact that it is im-
possible for every one to occupy the White House or become
President of a corporation is not held to be a defect in the
ideal, but only a reason for urging every young man to be
more industrious and cunning than his fellows. While
America was still empty it was possible for most people to
achieve a considerable measure of success without standing
upon the shoulders of others; even now, so long as a man
cares only for material prosperity, not for power, a wage-
earner in America can be richer than a professional man
on the Continent.

But power is becoming concentrated, and there is a danger
lest those who are excluded should come to demand their
share. A part of the national creed is designed to minimize


THE DANGER OF CREED WARS B29


this danger. The Napoleonic maxim of La carriére ouverte
aux talents does a great deal; the rest is done by represent-
ing success as an individual rather than a collective affair.
In the Communist philosophy the success which is sought
is that of a group or an organization; in the American
philosophy it is that of an individual. Consequently the in-
_ dividual who fails feels ashamed of his incapacity rather
than angry with the social system. And the individualist
philosophy to which he is accustomed prevents him from
imagining that there is anything to be gained by collective
action. There is therefore no effective opposition to the
holders of power, who remain free to enjoy the advantages
of a social system which gives them wealth and world-wide
influence.

There never has been a period when the things that men
desire were evenly distributed throughout the population.
In a stable social system there must be some method of mak-
ing the less fortunate acquiesce in their lot, and this is usu-
ally some kind of creed. But in order to secure widespread
acceptance, a creed has to offer advantages to the whole com-
munity sufficiently great to compensate for the injustices
which it condones. In America it offers technical progress
and increase in the general standard of material comfort.
It may not be able to go on providing the latter indefinitely,
but probably it will do so for some time to come. In Russia
it offers the conception of industry conducted for the bene-
fit of all, not only of the capitalists. No doubt the Russian
wage-earner is poorer than the American, but he has the con-
solation of knowing (or at least believing) that he is re-
- ceiving his fair share, and is not suffering unnecessarily to
make some one else great and grand. Moreover, he feels


228 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


himself a unit in a closely-knit codperative community, not
one of a mass of units all struggling one against the other.

I think we come here to the kernel of the difference be-
tween the creeds of America and Russia. America, whose
outlook is molded by the Protestant tradition and @ cen-
tury of pioneering, believes in the individual fighting his
way by his unaided efforts from poverty to affluence. In
imagination he is supposed to be fighting the wilderness
like the backwoodsman; if in fact it is against human com-
petitors that he fights, that is not a matter upon which it is
necessary to dwell. Nor is it good form to stress the fact
that he will be probably all his life a slave as regards the
expression of opinion, winning material comfort by the
sacrifice of mental integrity. ‘The opinions which he must
not express are obviously undesirable opinions, and to com-
pel him to hold his tongue about them is only to exercise
a wholesome restraint upon anarchic impulses. By the time
he is middle-aged he himself is in complete agreement with
this point of view.

In Russia, on the contrary, the Byzantine Church, the
Tartars, and the Tsardom have successively impressed upon
the popular mind the nothingness of the individual; what
he formerly sacrificed to God or the Tsar can be sacrificed
with less dificulty to the community. Russian Communists
differ from their sympathizers in the West chiefly in this
matter of lack of respect for the individual. (See René
Filop-Miller, Geist und Gesicht der Bolschewismus.) In
this they can be more thorough than their Byzantine prede-
cessors, who believed in the soul and the prospect of im-
mortality. Having abolished the soul, the rulers of the
U.S.S.R. can accept the analogy of Leviathan more whole-


THE DANGER OF CREED WARS 229


heartedly than is possible for a Christian. To them the
individualism of the West is as absurd as if the separate
parts of the human body were to set up to live for them-
selves as in the fable of Menenius Agrippa. This is the
root of their views on art, on religion, on ethics, on the
family—indeed, on everything.

Socialists in the West sometimes speak as if they held
similar views as to the paramount importance of the com-
munity, but in fact they seldom do. They would think it
natural, for example, that a man who migrates to a distant
place should wish to take his wife and children with him,
but to the more thoroughgoing Eastern Communists this
would seem mere sentimentalism. ‘They would say that his
children could be cared for by the State, and he could no
doubt get a new wife, just as good as the old one, in the
place to which he was going. The claims of natural affection
would be thought a trivial matter. It is true that similar
things are tolerated in the practice of capitalist societies, but
not to the same extent in their theories. It is true also that
the cult of Lenin runs counter to what I have been saying.
This, I think, must be admitted to be an inconsistency, an
eruption of the natural man through the crust of theory.
But I fancy a full-fledged Communist would say that Lenin
is revered as the incarnation of a Force rather than as a
concrete individual. He may in time become as theoreti-
cally abstract as the Logos.

There have been some who have supposed that the Rus-
sian philosophy would suddenly or gradually conquer the
West. In favor of this view there are certain considerations
that might at first sight seem to carry great weight. Un-
doubtedly the Communist philosophy is more suited to in-


230 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


dustrialism than the philosophy of Capitalism, because
industrialism inevitably increases the importance of organi-
zations as against individuals, and also because individual
ownership of land and natural resources belongs more nat-
urally to an agricultural than to an industrial régime.
There have been two sources of private ownership of land:
the one aristocratic, based everywhere upon the right of the
sword, the other democratic, based upon the right of the
peasant to own the land which he cultivates himself. Both
these rights become illogical and absurd in an industrial com-
munity. Mining royalties and urban landlordism exhibit
the absurdity of the aristocratic form of land-ownership,
since it cannot be pretended that the revenue derived by
the owner has any social utility. But the right of the
peasant to the land which he .cultivates may lead to equal
absurdities. AA Boer farmer on whose farm gold is found
acquires wealth to which he is in no way entitled by any
service which he performs to the community. So does the
man who has a farm in a district which becomés urban.
Not only private ownership, but even national ownership
may easily involve absurdities. It would be ridiculous to
pretend that Egypt and the Republic of Panama should con-
trol the canals in their territories, and nothing but harm
comes of the notion that undeveloped countries have an in-
defeasible right to the control of such things as oil which
may be found upon their territories. The theoretical argu-
ment for the international control of raw materials is irre-
sistible, and only the agricultural tradition leads us to
tolerate the fact that wealthy highwaymen are allowed to
levy toll upon the world for the use of indispensable
minerals,


et ea OO oe


THE DANGER OF CREED WARS 231


Industrial communities are much more closely knit than
agricultural communities, and legal powers which can be
accorded to individuals without great harm in the latter
become extremely dangerous in the former. Moreover,
there is the obvious appeal to envy (otherwise known as a
sense of justice), which works on the side of the Socialist.


- But in spite of these considerations I do not think that the


socialistic outlook is likely to become common in America
at any time during the next hundred years, and unless
America is socialistic in opinion, no nation within its eco-
nomic orbit will be allowed to practice even a modicum of
Socialism, as was seen by the abolition of the State owner-
ship of railways in Germany under the Dawes Scheme. .
My reasons for saying that America will not become
socialistic are based upon the belief that American pros-
perity will continue. So long as the American working-man


js richer than the working-man in a socialist country, it will


be possible for capitalistic propaganda to rebut the argu-
ments in’‘favor of economic change. In this respect the econ-
omies of large-scale production which I mentioned earlier
are of paramount importance. Syndicated newspapers,
higher education subsidized by millionaires, elementary edu-
cation controlled by the Churches, which in turn profit by
the donations of millionaires, a well-organized book-trade
which can decide by advertisement which books shall sell
widely, and can produce them much more cheaply than
books with a limited circulation, radio, but, above all, the
cinema, where immensely expensive productions are made
to pay by being exhibited throughout the Western world—
all these things make for uniformity, for centralized control
of ideas and news, for the dissemination of only such creeds


232 — §$CEPTICAL ESSAYS


and philosophies as are approved by the holders of power.

I do not think that such propaganda is wholly and in-
evitably irresistible, but I do think it is likely to prevail so
long as the régime which it recommends appears to the
common man to bear the marks of success. Defeat in war,
which is a mark of failure that everybody can understand,
may upset any régime, but the prospect of America being
defeated in war is remote. One may therefore expect the
same kind of popular enthusiasm for the American system
in America as there was in England for parliamentary gov-
ernment in the nineteenth century when England was suc-
cessful. Of course, differences in economic creeds between
East and West will continue to be reinforced by differences
of theology in the old-fashioned sense. One may expect
America to remain Christian and the East anti-Christian.
One may expect America to continue to pay lip-service to
Christian doctrines of marriage and the family, while the
East regards these as outworn superstitions. One may
expect that on both sides there will be cruelty on a large
scale, and that propaganda will cause each side to know the
cruelties of the other, but not its own. Very few Americans,
for example, know the truth about Sacco and Vanzetti:
condemned to death for a murder to which another man
confessed, and the evidence for which has been acknowledged
by policemen engaged in collecting it to have been a ‘“‘frame-
up.” A new trial was refused to these men partly on the
ground that the man who confessed to the murder was a bad
character. Apparently, in the opinion of American judges,
only persons of good character commit murders. The real
crime of Sacco and Vanzetti was that they were anarchists.
All these facts are, of course, known in Russia, where they


THE DANGER OF CREED WARS 233


tend to produce an unfavorable opinion as to capitalistic
justice. Similarly, the Russian trials of Patriarchs and So-
cial Revolutionaries are known in America. Thus each side
acquires abundant evidence to prove the other side wicked,
but remains ignorant of its own wickedness.

I met recently a professor in the University of California
who had never heard of Mooney, imprisoned in a Calli-
- fornian jail for a murder he is known to have probably
not committed, in spite of the fact that during the Kerensky
régime the Russian Government made official representa-
tions to the Government of the United States about this
case, and President Wilson appointed a commission to en-
"quire into it, which reported that there was no good ground
for supposing him guilty. But he is a communist.

Persecution for opinion is thus tolerated in all countries.
In Switzerland it is not only legal to murder a communist,
but the man who has done so is exonerated for his next
crime on the ground that he is a first offender. This state
of affairs causes no indignation outside the Soviet Republic.
The best of the capitalist countries in this respect is Japan,
where the policeman who strangled two eminent anarchists
and their little nephew (whom he mistook for their son) in
a police-station was sentenced to a term of imprisonment, in
spite of the fact that he had become a popular hero and that
school-children were invited to write themes in his praise.
~ For these reasons I do not think it likely that any country
in which the existing régime appears to the common man to
be successful, or in which American economic influence is
uppermost, will adopt the communistic creed within any
measurable future. On the contrary, it seems probable that
the defense of the status quo will lead the holders of power


234 ) SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


to become increasingly conservative and to support all such
conservative forces as they find in the community. ‘The
strongest of these, of course, is religion. In the plebiscite
in Germany about royal property the Churches ruled off-
cially that it would be anti-Christian to confiscate any of it.
Such opinions deserve to be rewarded. ‘They no doubt will
be.

I think it is to be expected that organized religion, and
more particularly the Catholic Church, will become increas-
ingly powerful in all capitalist countries as a result of a
tighter control over education in the interests of the rich.
The opposition between Russia and the West, therefore,
though fundamentally economic, may be expected to extend
over the whole sphere of belief. When I speak of belief I
mean dogmatic opinions on matters as to which the truth is
not known. The whole evil could, of course, be avoided by
the spread of the scientific spirit, that is to say, by the habit
of forming opinions on evidence rather than on prejudice;
but although scientific technique is necessary to industrialism,
the scientific spirit belongs rather to commerce, since it is
necessarily individualistic and uninfluenced by authority.
We may therefore expect to see it surviving only in small
countries, such as Holland, Denmark, and Scandinavia,
which lie outside the main current of modern life,

But it is not improbable that gradually, after a century
or so of conflict, both sides will grow weary, as they did
after the Thirty Years War. When that time comes, the
latitudinarians will again have their chance.

For my part, I look upon the coming strife as Erasmus
did, without the ability to join whole-heartedly with either
party. No doubt I agree with the Bolsheviks on many more


THE DANGER OF CREED WARS 23s


points than with the American magnates, but I cannot be-
lieve that their philosophy is ultimately true or capable
of producing a happy world. I admit that individualism,
which has been increasing ever since the Renaissance, has
gone too far, and that a more codperative spirit is necessary
if industrial societies are to be stable and to bring content-
-ment to the average man and woman. But the difficulty
in the Bolshevik philosophy, as in that of America, is that
the principle of organization for them is economic, whereas
the groupings that are consonant with human instinct are
biological. The family and the nation are biological, the
trust and the trade union are economic. The harm that is
done at present by biological groupings is undeniable, but
I do not think the social problem can be solved by ignoring
the instincts which produce those groupings. I am con-
vinced, for example, that if all children were educated in
State institutions without the codperation of the parents, a
large proportion of men and women would lose the incentive
to arduous activity and would become listless and bored.
Nationalism also perhaps has its place, though clearly armies
and navies are an undesirable expression of it, and its proper
sphere is cultural rather than political. Human beings can
be greatly changed by institutions and education, but if
they are changed in such a way as to thwart fundamental
instincts, the result is a loss of vigor. And the Bolsheviks
certainly are mistaken in speaking as though the economic
instinct were the only one of psychological importance.
They share this mistake with the competitive society of
the West, although the West is less explicit in the matter.

The fundamental delusion of our time, in my opinion,
is the excessive emphasis upon the economic aspects of life,


236 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


and I do not expect the strife between Capitalism and Com-
munism as philosophies to cease until it is recognized that —
both are inadequate through their failure to recognize bio-
logical needs.

“As to the methods of diminishing the ferocity of the
struggle, I do not know of anything better than the old
Liberal watchwords, yet I feel that they are likely to be very
ineffective. What is needed is freedom of opinion, and
opportunity for the spread of opinion. It is the latter par-
ticularly that causes the difficulty. The mechanism for
the effective and widespread diffusion of an opinion must
necessarily be in the hands either of the State or of great
capitalistic concerns. Before the introduction of democracy
and education this was much less true: effective opinion was
confined to a small minority, who could be reached without
all the expensive apparatus of modern propaganda. But
it can hardly be expected that either the State or a great
capitalist organization will devote money and energy to
the propagation of opinions which it considers dangerous
and subversive, and contrary to true morality. The State,
no less than the capitalist organization, is in practice a
stupid elderly man accustomed to flattery, ossified in his
prejudices, and wholly unaware of all that is vital in the
thought of his time. No novelty can be effectively advo-
cated until it has passed the censorship of some such old
fogy. It is true that hole-and-corner publicity is possible,
but this only obtains hole-and-corner readers.

The evil is an increasing one, since the whole tendency of
modern business is amalgamation and centralization. The
only method of securing wide publicity for an unpopular
cause is that which was adopted by the suffragettes, and that


THE DANGER OF CREED WARS 237


is only suitable where the issue is simple and passionate, not
where it is intricate and argumentative. The effect of the
oficial or unofficial censorship is therefore to make oppo-
sition to it passionate rather than rational and to render
calm discussion of the evidence for or against an innovation
only possible in obscure ways which never reach the general
~ public,

For example, there is an official medical publication ex-
posing worthless patent medicines, but no newspaper will
mention it and hardly any one knows of its existence; on
the other hand, the Christian Scientists, who maintain that
all medicines are equally worthless, are able to obtain pub-
licity. Exactly analogous things happen in politics. Ex-
treme opinions on either side can obtain publicity, while
moderate and rational opinions are thought too dull to
bear down the opposition of the authorities. This evil is,
however, much less in England than in most other countries,
because England has been predominantly commercial and
has retained the love of freedom associated with commerce.

It would, of course, be possible to devise remedies if
- one could suppose that those in authority felt the need of
them. It would be possible to educate people in such a way
as to increase their powers of weighing evidence and form-
_ ing rational judgments, instead of which they are taught pa-
triotism and class bias. Perhaps in time men may come to
feel that intelligence is an asset to a community, but I
cannot say that I see much sign of any movement in this
_ direction.


XVII
SOME PROSPECTS: CHEERFUL AND OTHERWISE


I


THERE are two ways of writing about the future, the
scientific and the Utopian. The scientific way tries to dis-
cover what is probable; the Utopian way sets out what
the writer would like. In a well-developed science such as
astronomy no one would adopt the Utopian method: people
do not prophesy eclipses because it would be pleasant if
they took place. But in social affairs those who profess
to have discovered general laws enabling them to foretell
future developments are usually not so scientific as they
pretend to be; there must be a great deal of guesswork in
any attempt to say what is going to happen to human. in-
stitutions. We do not know, for instance, what difference
may be made by new discoveries. Perhaps people will
find out how to go to Mars or Venus. Perhaps almost all
our food will be manufactured in chemical laboratories in-
stead of being grown in the fields. To such possibilities
there is no end. I shall ignore them, and consider only
tendencies which are already well developed. And I shall
also assume that our civilization will continue, although
this is by no means certain. It may be destroyed by wars,
or by a gradual decay such as occurred in the later Roman
Empire. But if it survives, it is likely to have certain
characteristics, and it is these that I shall be attempting to
discover.
238


EE EE —— — ee rl


SOME PROSPECTS 239


In addition to the introduction of machinery, and largely


as a result of it, there has been another change: society has


become far more organized than it was formerly. Print-
ing, railways, the telegraph, and (now) broadcasting have
provided the technical means for large organizations such as
a modern State or an international financial business. Pub-


‘lic affairs play almost no part in the life of an Indian or


Chinese peasant, whereas in England they are a matter of
interest to almost every one even in the remotest country
districts. ‘This was not the case until recently; one would
gather from Jane Austen that the country gentry of her
time hardly noticed the Napoleonic wars. I should put as
the most important change in modern times the tendency
towards closer social organization.

Connected with this is another result of science, namely,
the greater unity of the world. Before the sixteenth cen-
tury, America and the Far East were almost unrelated to
Europe; since that time their relations have become continu-
ally closer. Augustus in Rome and the Han Emperor in


China simultaneously imagined themselves masters of the


whole civilized world; nowadays such pleasing illusions are
impossible. Practically every part of the world has relations
to practically every other part, which may be either friendly
or hostile, but are in either case important. The Dalai
Llama, after centuries of isolation, found himself courted by
both Russians and British; he took refuge from their em-
barrassing attentions in Peking, where all his suite arrived
duly armed with kodaks from America.

From these two premises, of closer social organization
and greater unity in the world, it follows that, if our civili-
zation is to develop, there will have to be a central authority


240 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


to control the whole world. For, if not, causes of dispute
will multiply and wars will become more intense owing
to the growth of public spirit. The central authority may
not be a formal government; I think it likely that it will not
be. It is far more likely to be a combination of financiers,
who have become persuaded that peace is to their interest
because money lent to the belligerent States is often lost. Or
it may be a single dominant State (America), or a group
of States (America and the British Empire). But before
such a condition is reached, there may be a long period in
which the world is virtually divided between America and
Russia, the former controlling Western Europe and the
self-governing Dominions, the latter controlling all Asia.
Two such groups would be strong for defense and weak
for attack, so that they might subsist for a century or more.
Ultimately, however—I mean at latest some time during
the twenty-first century—there must be either a cataclysm
or a central authority controlling the whole world. I shall
assume that civilized mankind will have enough sense, or
that America will have enough power, to prevent a cata-
clysm involving a return to barbarism. If so, what powers
must the central authority possess ?

First and foremost, it must be able to decide questions of
peace and war, or to ensure that if there is war the side
which it favors wins a speedy victory. This end may be
secured by financial supremacy alone, without formal polit-
ical control. As war becomes more scientific it becomes
more expensive, so that the leading financiers of the world,
if they combined, could decide the issue by giving or with-
holding loans. And by the sort of pressure which has been
brought to bear upon Germany since the Treaty of Versailles


SOME PROSPECTS 241


_ they could secure the virtual disarmament of any group that
| they dislike. In this way they would gradually come to

control all the large armed forces of the world. This is the
fundamental condition for the other activities which they
would have to undertake.

In addition to revising treaties and intervening in disputes,
there are three matters which would have to be decided by
the central authority. They are (1) the allocation of terri-
tory to the different national States, (2) movements of
population across the boundaries of national States, and
(3) the rationing of raw materials as between different
claimants. Each of these demands a few words.

Questions of territorial allegiance are treated at present
with an absurd solemnity which has grown out of the old

_ personal allegiance to a sovereign. If a person in one State
_ gives expression to the opinion that the district in which he
lives ought to belong to another State he is guilty of treason,
_and liable to severe punishment. And yet, in itself, his
opinion is as much a legitimate matter of political debate as
any other. We do not feel any horror of a citizen of (say)
Croydon who holds that Croydon ought to count as part
of London. But a citizen of Colombia who holds that his
village should belong to Venezuela is regarded by his Gov-
ernment as a monster of iniquity. The central authority will
have to prevent the national governments from acting upon
such prejudices, and will have to treat territorial readjust-
ments rationally, i.e., mainly by the wishes of the local popu-
lation, but also in part by economic and cultural considera-
tions.

(2) Movements of population are likely to raise in-
creasingly difficult problems as years go by. It is natural


242 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


for population to flow from places where wages are low to
those where they are high. This is now permitted within a
single country, but not throughout a super-national federa-
tion such as the British Empire. Asiatic immigration is
almost totally prohibited in America and the self-governing
Dominions, and European immigration into America is be-
coming more and more restricted. The forces on both sides —
in this matter are immensely powerful. They afford a
stimulus to Asiatic militarism, and may ultimately cause it to
become so strong that it can challenge the white race—say
during the next great war between white nations.

Ultimately, if war on a large scale has been eliminated ;
and public health has been immensely improved by medicine
and hygiene, it will become essential to the preservation of ©
peace and well-being that the backward nations shall limit —
the increase of population, as the more civilized nations are -
already doing. Those who in principle oppose birth control ©
are either incapable of arithmetic or else in favor of war,
pestilence and famine as permanent features of human life.
One may assume that the international authority will insist
upon freedom to limit births among backward races and
classes, and will not, as governments do now, insist that only
the intelligent shall have small families.

(3) The last matter, the rationing of raw material, is
perhaps the most important of all. Wars are likely to be
very largely concerned with raw material; it is notorious
what a large part oil, coal, and iron have played in post-war
disputes. I am not assuming that raw materials will be
rationed justly, but merely that they will be rationed in
some way by an authority having irresistible force at its
command. I believe that the problem of organizing the


SOME PROSPECTS 243


world as a single economic and political unit will have to
be solved before questions of justice can be tackled suc-
. cessfully. I am an international socialist, but I expect to
see internationalism réalized sooner than Socialism.


II


_ Assuming that within the next one hundred and fifty
_ years a central authority is developed, strong enough to re-
duce all wars to the level of sporadic revolts quickly sup-
pressed, what kind of economic changes are likely to be
associated with this development? Will the general level of
well-being be increased? Will competition survive, or will
production be monopolistic? In the latter case, will the
monopolies be in private hands or in those of the State?
And will the products of labor be distributed with less in-
justice than at present?

There are here two different kinds of questions: one is
concerned with the forms of economic organization, the
other with the principles of distribution. The latter will
depend upon political power: every class and every nation
always secures as great a share of wealth as it can, and it is
ultimately armed force that decides how large this share
shall be. Let us first discuss organization, and leave distri-
bution alone for the moment.

A study of history reveals a somewhat humiliating fact
about organization. Whenever an increase in the size of
organizations has been desirable in the interests of those
concerned, it has had to be brought about (with negligible
exceptions) by means of force on the part of the stronger.
Where voluntary federation was the only available method
no unity has been achieved. It was so with ancient


244 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


Greece in the face of Macedonia, with sixteenth-century
Italy in the face of France and Spain, with present-day
Europe in the face of America and Asia. I assume, there-
fore, that the central authority will be brought into being
by force, or the threat of force, not by a voluntary organi-
zation such as the League of Nations, which will never be
strong enough to coerce recalcitrant Great Powers. I
think, also, that the power of the central authority will be
primarily economic, and will rest upon possession of raw
materials combined with control of financial credit. I con-
ceive of it as consisting, in the beginning, of a group of
financiers backed, informally, by one or more great States.

It follows that at the basis of the economic structure there
will be monopoly. All the oil supply of the world, for ex-
ample, will be centrally controlled. It follows that aéro-
planes and oil-driven warships will be useless to Powers
which conflict with the central authority, unless they can be
used to capture an oil-field by a brief raid. The same will
apply to other things in less obvious ways. Already at the
present day a large proportion of the world’s meat supply
is controlled by the Big Five in Chicago, who are themselves
to some extent controlled by Messrs. J. P. Morgan & Co. —
From the raw material to the finished commodity there is —
a long road to travel, and monopoly may intervene at any
stage. In the case of oil the natural stage is at the begin-
ning. In other cases, it may be harbors or ships or rail-
ways that give the monopolist his opportunity to control. —
But wherever he intervenes, he is stronger than any of the —
other parties concerned.

Given monopoly at one stage of a process there will be a
tendency to extend the monopoly to earlier and later stages.


SOME PROSPECTS 245


The growth of economic monopoly is part of the general
tendency to increase of organization, which is shown politi-
cally in the greater power and size of States. We may
therefore confidently expect a continuation of the process of
eliminating competition which has been going on throughout
the last half-century. It is of course to be assumed that
trade unions will continue to diminish competition among
wage-earners. ‘The view that while employers are organized
wage-earners should be prevented by law from counter-
organizing is not one which it will be found long possible to
maintain.

Secure peace and adequate control of production ought to
lead to a great increase of material comfort, provided it is
not all swallowed up by an increase of population. Whether
the world, at that stage, is capitalistic or socialistic, we may
expect an improvement in the economic position of all
classes. But this brings us to our second question, that of
distribution.

Assuming a dominant group associated with a dominant
nation (or several dominant nations in alliance), it is of
course obvious that the dominant group will secure great
wealth to itself, and will produce contentment in the popul-
lation of the dominant nation by conceding to its wage-
_ earners a progressive increase in their earnings. This has
been happening in the United States, as it formerly hap-
pened in England. So long as there is a rapid increase in the
total wealth of a nation it is easy for capitalists to prevent
successful socialist propaganda by timely monetary control.
‘And the less fortunate nations can be kept subdued by a
system of imperialistic control.

But such a system will probably develop in the direction


246 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


of democracy, i.e., of Socialism—for Socialism is merely
economic democracy in a community which has reached the
stage of monopoly in many industries. One may take the
political development of England as a parallel. England
was unified by the King—a process practically completed by
Henry VII after the anarchy of the Wars of the Roses.
The royal power was necessary to produce unity, but when
unity had been achieved the movement towards democracy
began almost at once, and it was found, after the troubles
of the seventeenth century, that democracy was compatible
with public order. We are now, in the economic sphere, just
about at the transition from the Wars of the Roses to
Henry VII. When once economic unity, however despotic,
has been achieved, the movement towards economic democ-
racy will be immensely strengthened, since it will no longer
have to contend with the fear of anarchy. Minorities can
only retain power if they have considerable support in
public opinion, since they must be loyally served by their
armies and navies and civil servants. Situations will con-
tinually arise in which the holders of economic power will
find it prudent to make concessions; in the control of af-
fairs they will have to associate with themselves representa-
tives of the less fortunate nations and classes, and this
process will probably continue until a complete democratic
régime has been established.

Since we have been assuming a central authority which
controls the whole world, democracy in regard to this
authority would be international democracy, embracing not
only the white races, but also the races of Asia and Africa.
Asia is developing at present with such extraordinary rapid-.
ity that it may well be capable of taking a worthy part in


SOME PROSPECTS 247


the government of the world by the time such a government
comes into existence. Africa is a more difficult problem.
But even in Africa the French (who are in this respect our
superiors) are achieving remarkable results, and no one
can foretell what may be accomplished within the next
hundred years. I conclude, therefore, that a system of
world-wide Socialism, involving economic justice to all na-
tions and classes, may well become possible not long after
the establishment of a central authority. And, if so, the
natural operation of political forces is pretty sure to bring
it about.

There are, however, other possibilities, which might
lead to a perpetuation of caste distinctions. Wherever
white men and negroes live side by side, as in South
Africa and the Southern States of America, it has been
found possible to combine democracy for white men with
a semi-servile condition for the colored population. What
stands in the way of this development on a large scale
is the objection by Labor to colored immigration in most
parts of the English-speaking world. Nevertheless, it re-
mains a possibility to be borne in mind. I shall have some-
thing more to say about it later.


iil


What is likely to be the development of the family during
the next two centuries? We cannot tell, but we can note
certain forces at work which are likely, if unchecked, to have
certain results. I wish to state, at the outset, that I am
not concerned with what I desire, but with what I expect,
which is a very different thing. The world has never in the


248 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


past developed just as I should have wished, and I see no
reason to think that it will do so in future.

There are certain things in modern civilized communities
which are tending to weaken the family; the chief of them is
humanitarian sentiment towards children. More and more,
people come to feel that children should not suffer more
than can be helped through their parents’ misfortunes or
even sins. In the Bible the lot of the orphan is always
spoken of as very sad, and so no doubt it was; nowadays
he suffers little more than other children. There will be
a growing tendency for the State or charitable institutions
to give fairly adequate care to neglected children, and con-
sequently children will be more and more neglected by un-
conscientious parents or guardians. Gradually the expense
_ of caring for neglected children out of public funds will be-
come so great that there will be a very strong inducement
for all who are not well off to avail themselves of the op-
portunities for giving their children over to the State; prob-
ably this will be done, in the end, as now with schooling, by
practically all who are below a certain economic level.

The effects of such a change would be very far-reaching.
With parental responsibility removed, marriage would no
longer be felt important, and would gradually cease among
those classes which left their children to the State. In
civilized countries, the number of children produced under
these conditions would probably be very small, and the State
would have to fix a payment to mothers at a scale found ade-
quate to produce the number of citizens which it considered
desirable. All this is not'so very remote; it might easily hap-
pen in England before the end of the twentieth century.

If all this happens while the capitalist system and the


SOME PROSPECTS 249


international anarchy are still in force, the results are likely
to be terrible. To begin with, there will be a profound
division between the proletarians, who will virtually have
neither parents nor children, and the well-to-do, who will
preserve the family system with inheritance of property.
The proletarians, being educated by the State, will be im-
bued, like the Janissaries in old Turkey, with a passionate
militaristic loyalty. The women will be taught that it is
their duty to have many children, both to keep down the
tariff of State payments for children and to increase the
supply of soldiers for killing the population of other coun-
tries. With no paternal propaganda to counteract that
of the State, there will be no limit to the anti-foreign fero-
city with which children can be imbued, so that when they
grow up they will fight blindly for their masters. Men
whose opinions the Government dislikes will be punished
by having their children confiscated to the State institu-
tions.

It is thus quite possible that through the joint operation of
patriotism and humanitarian feeling for children we may
be led, step by step, to the creation of a society profoundly
divided into two different castes, the upper retaining mar-
riage and family loyalties, the lower feeling loyalty only to
the State. For military reasons the State will secure, by
payment, a high birth-rate among the proletarians; hygiene
and medicine will secure a low death-rate. War will there-
fore be the only way of keeping the population of the world
within limits, except starvation, which nations will try to
avert by fighting. In these circumstances we may expect
an era of internecine wars, comparable only to the inva-


sions of Huns and Mongols in the Middle Ages. The only


250 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


hope will lie in the speedy victory of some one nation or
group of nations.

The results of State care of children will be almost dia-
metrically opposite to the above if a world-wide authority
has been previously established. In that case the central
authority will not permit the children to be taught a militar-
istic patriotism, and will not permit the various national
States to pay for an increase of population beyond what is
economically desirable. The children brought up in State
institutions will, if the pressure of militaristic necessities is
removed, almost certainly be better developed both physi-
cally-and mentally than the average child is now, and a very
rapid progress will therefore become possible.

But even if a central authority exists the effects will be
profoundly different if the world remains Capitalistic from
what they will be if it has adopted Socialism. In the
former alternative there will be that division of castes which
we spoke of a moment ago, the upper caste retaining the
family, the lower substituting the State for the parents.
And there will still be need to produce submissiveness in
the lower caste, lest it should rebel against the rich. This
will involve a low level of culture, and will perhaps lead
the rich to encourage breeding among black rather than
white or yellow proletarians. The white race may thus
gradually become a numerically small aristocracy, and be
finally exterminated by a negro insurrection.

All this may be thought fantastic, in view of the fact
that most white nations possess political democracy. I ob-
serve, however, that the democracy everywhere permits the
school teaching to be such as furthers the interests of the
rich; school teachers are dismissed for being communists,


SOME PROSPECTS 251


but never for being conservatives. I see no reason to sup-
pose that this will change in the near future. And I think,.
for such reasons as I have been giving, that if our civili-
zation continues much longer to pursue the interests of
the rich, it is doomed. It is because I do not desire the
collapse of civilization that I am a socialist.

If we have been right in what was said earlier, the fam-
ily is likely to die out except in a privileged minority.
Therefore if there ceases to be a privileged minority the
family may be expected to die out almost completely. Bio-
logically, this seems inevitable. ‘The family is an institution
which serves to protect children during their years of help-
lessness; with ants and bees the community undertakes this
task, and there is no family. So, among men, if infant life
comes to be safe apart from the protection of parents,
family life will gradually disappear. This will make pro-
found changes in men’s emotional life, and a great divorce
from the art and literature of all previous ages. It will
diminish the differences between different people, since par-
ents will no longer educate their children to reproduce their
peculiarities. It will make sex-love less interesting and ro-
mantic; probably all love-poetry will come to be thought
absurd. The romantic elements in human nature will have
to find other outlets, such.as art, science, politics. (To Dis-
raeli politics was a romantic adventure.) I cannot but think
that there will be a real loss in the emotional texture of life;
but every increase of safety involves some such loss. Steam-
ers are less romantic than sailing-ships; tax-collectors than
highwaymen. Perhaps, in the end, safety will become weari-
some, and men will become destructive from sheer boredom.
But such possibilities are incalculable.


252 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


IV


The tendency of culture in our time is, and will probably
continue to be, towards science and away from art and litera-
ture. This is due, of course, to the immense practical utility
of science. There is a powerful literary tradition, which
comes to us from the Renaissance, and is backed by social
prestige: a “gentleman” should know some Latin, but need
not know how a steam-engine is made. The survival of this
tradition, however, tends only to make ‘‘gentlemen”’ less
useful than other men. I think we may assume that, be-
fore very long, no one will be considered educated unless he
knows something of science.

This is all to the good, but what is regrettable is that
science seems to be winning its victories at the expense of an
impoverishment of our culture in other directions. Art be-
comes more and more an affair of coteries and a few rich
patrons: it is not felt by ordinary men to be important, as it
was when it was associated with religion and public life.
The money that built St. Paul’s might have been used to
give our navy the victory over the Dutch, but in the time of
Charles IT St. Paul’s was thought more important. The
emotional needs that were formerly satisfied in esthetically
admirable ways are now finding more and more trivial out-
lets: the dancing and dance-music of our time have, as a
rule, no artistic value, except in the Russian ballet, which
is imported from a less modern civilization. I am afraid
the decay of art is inevitable, and is connected with our
more careful and utilitarian way of living as compared with
our ancestors.


I imagine that a hundred years hence every fairly edu-


SOME PROSPECTS 253


cated person will know a good deal of mathematics, a fair
amount of biology, and a great deal about how to make ma-
chines. Education, except for the few, will become more
and more what is called “‘dynamic,” i.¢., will teach people to
do rather than to think or feel. They will perform all sorts
of tasks with extraordinary skill, but will be incapable of
considering rationally whether the tasks are worth perform-
ing. There will probably be an official caste of thinkers and
another of feelers, the former a development of the Royal
Society, the latter a federation of the Royal Academy and
the Episcopate. The results obtained by the thinkers will
be the property of the Government, and they will be re-
vealed only to the War Office, Admiralty, or Air Ministry,
as the case may be. Perhaps the Health Ministry will be in-
cluded, if, in time, it becomes part of its duties to spread
disease in enemy countries. The Official Feelers will decide
‘what emotions are to be propagated in schools, theaters,
churches, etc., though it will be the business of the Official
Thinkers to discover how the desired emotions are to be
caused. In view of the cussedness of school-children it will
probably be thought desirable that the decisions of the
Official Feelers also should be Government secrets. ‘They
‘will, however, be allowed to exhibit pictures or preach ser-
mons which have already been sanctioned by the Board of
Elder Censors.

The daily Press, presumably, will be killed te broad-
casting. A certain number of weeklies may survive for the
expression of minority opinions. But reading may come to
be a rare practice, its place being taken by listening to the
gramophone, or to whatever better invention takes its place.


254 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


Similarly, writing will be replaced, in ordinary life, by the
dictophone.

If wars are eliminated and production is organized scien-
tifically, it is probable that four hours work a day will suf-
fice to keep everybody in comfort. It will be an open ques-
tion whether to work that amount and enjoy leisure, or to
work more and enjoy luxuries; presumably some will choose
one course, some the other. The hours of leisure will no
doubt be spent by most people in dancing, watching football,
and going to the movies. Children will be no anxiety, since
the State will care for them; illness will be very rare; old
age will be postponed by rejuvenation till a short time before
death. It will be a hedonist’s paradise, in which almost
every one will find life so tedious as to be scarcely endurable.

In such a world it is to be feared that destructive impulses
would become irresistible. R. L. Stevenson’s Suicide Club
might flourish in it; secret societies devoted to artistic mur-
der might grow up. Life in the past has been kept serious
by danger, and interesting by being serious. Without
danger, if human nature remained unchanged, life would
lose its savor and men would resort to all kinds of decadent
vices in the hope of a little excitement.

Is this dilemma inescapable? Are the more somber
aspects of life essential to what is best in it? I do not
think so. If human nature were unchangeable, as ignorant
people still suppose it to be, the situation would indeed be
hopeless. But we now know, thanks to psychologists and
physiologists, that what passes as “human nature” is at
most one-tenth nature, the other nine-tenths being nurture.
What is called human nature can be almost completely
changed by changes in early education. And these changes


SOME PROSPECTS 255


could be such as to preserve sufficient seriousness in life with-
out the spice of danger, if thought and energy were de-
voted to that end. Two things are necessary for this pur-
pose: the development of constructive impulses in the young,
and opportunities for their existence in adult life.

Hitherto, defense and attack have provided most of what
is serious in life. We defend ourselves against poverty, our
children against an indifferent world, our country against
national enemies; we attack, verbally or physically, those
whom we regard as hostile or dangerous. But there are
other sources of emotions which are capable of being quite
as powerful. ‘The emotions of esthetic creation or scientific
discovery may be as intense and absorbing as the most pas-
sionate love. And love itself, though it may be grasping and
oppressive, is also capable of being creative. Given the
right education, a very large percentage of mankind could
find happiness in constructive activities, provided the right
kind were available.

And this brings us to our second requisite. There must
be scope for constructive initiative, not only for useful
work ordered by a superior authority. There must be no
barrier to intellectual or artistic creation, nor to human
relations of a constructive kind, nor to the suggestion of
ways in which human life might be improved. If all this is
the case, and education is of the right kind, there will still be
room for serious and strenuous living on the part of all
those who feel the need of it. In that case, but in that
case only, a community organized so as to eliminate the
major evils of life as we know it might be stable, because it
would be satisfactory to its more energetic members.

This is, I must confess, the matter upon which I feel that


256 SCEPTICAL ESSAYS


our civilization is most likely to go wrong. There is need
of much organization, and where there must be so much,
there is almost sure to be more than there ought to be. The
harm that this will do will be the diminution of opportuni-
ties for individual effort. Vast organizations produce a sense
of impotence in the individual, leading to a decay of effort.
The danger can be averted if it is realized by administrators, —
but it is of a kind which most administrators are constitu-

tionally incapable of realizing. Into every tidy scheme for
arranging the pattern of human life it is necessary to inject
a certain dose of anarchism, enough to prevent immobility
leading to decay, but not enough to bring about disruption.
This is a delicate problem, not theoretically insoluble, but


hardly likely to be solved in the rough-and-tumble of
practical affairs.


NORTON


ANTHROPOLOGY AND


Mopern Lire. ._.. $3.00
ul Bekker . . . WAGNER... Sea OD
THE STORY OF Music ate Semen
verett Dean Martin . THE MEANING OF A LIB-
ERAL EDUCATION... 3.00
PSYCHOLOGY 2. SP sn; 3.00
_ A. Overstreet . . ABOUT OURSELVES 3.00
INFLUENCING HUMAN
BERAVIORC ee 3.00
rtrand Russell . . Scepricau Essays. . . 2.50
PHILOSOPHY . .. . 3.00
omas E. Tallmadge . THE Story oF ARCHITEC-
TURE IN AMERICA .. 3.50
ohn B. Watson . . PsycHOLOGICAL CARE OF
INFANT AND CHILD . 2.00
BEHAVIORISM . .. . 3.00
.H. Mottram PEVAOLOGE oe cee 3.00
*hilip N. Youtz, Editor AN OUTLINE OF /ESTHET-
Sr ad 5.00


Nee eee ee ee


V- W: NORTON & COMPANY, INC.
70 Fifth Avenue New York


A vay Se,
. OI beh ae


- ‘
r . = be ‘
y W :
7 ys : ‘
‘ ¢ ss :
5 ,
“~~ ae? sv
Png et, aaet
| EE Ce ie. ee


a COE Se hs oe ee
hie NS nah i a es ao Se


ks
a . “
ed ¢ = R


dA
Pr aewee 9


ee

16M leh Kaylee

fees sae URaRyibon am HVE ey
ok Lomi


& - Y "
. ¥ i


fi ate rapn iy
he eat vce SOOO AEP
phe


°
Seer. Sree we
cate eta
pyre reas Sank
beh ye xetnniry tan aitmic wk Ba
fie printer erry eat


a


an
te 0h hh bans
eer


we
TY are or


Aes Gist Ae Ala eR pie
uh LEAS CF Reds oy i
By teeseuses ce tase


ay
we


hn hue
be Be,


Ve toa


Ee LV et
PF bs is


ale Pedy


‘h rm


Tesh

be LO nha,

oy ean mp iyS
Ube be ther
eee


Lihat in neat
LY Chae


ee unit
he ot eve
Palaty yr


Ue ses bn
> ABH 38 ah, Be ee
bey Baty 5 y Deg ey


re ea


anew risk ous


ey
.


High 15 he
Sean ie


eh afak


ae eye


Se eee en ee
| ania ne Seats), ae


» teas eet


Mt tno BOA Oe on
oe


Sue seer ge Ao ade
210 Tatty Vow Fay sy


HAA ey
a


a
*


Nr) arts
Feri ry Sait tar aN
h


Peel in hr


mew


Ay A ed


ubaepe


ARS mre


IR ne
es
7


biog ie
seeue dae


Lei Oo


Byte whic ory apenepty gee
‘ 1 “ eo


a bad
AM a at tee
Mgnt eer


vd oad,
chor suet eth
basis


Soe A PA Ob ete


tet me


TS at


ow
~


WS dodo sgs


Rn te


dt


on
ron


“


=


ee rs

AR AIAD aes
PO alge

Ley Eee)

“ ae

CT oe


th otc nm
vie oom Ae,
Per eye ts
6 eg, :
P Soe
wade doay


A fey 4g.
Poe si


Thor


vib fh poe
+h ab beer ain
4 Lis


0p by yr
OF Bin 6 0
spas Mbvecnh el:


N08 oboe
ry err eek


"
Peis t
NAb tend lat


ao
aaeid
ey
Folens
CRP


y ae


wed


wae


| i AN ee ihe eet es eaten


9 Wir


(ey ame


Lesa
iyi Serra Sry arc
ree ince ade

eres f


Piette


iain eh hey


a Fates:
DB DOK wtih uyher sar


diresaihs: Bei pat nessa


*
‘cA Si ata oN ee
HGS oh ge wey eee
ra ng sarees tip ae Ae 49
ais or TA
peantarty
my FNS tiga


irae he"
4 Bib aw apne Lee
ema re Wen nL te eet eled
sh edebes arts LF uh
Wdtawt on
je :

rains War 6 0 yale dd

tS weer ee as
rrr tat ne)


Syuilay cong 4 laatee
rate ne pes
praia est

4 Bee


ibd Ae bie ash ft
Meera sean ght,
eres


Eagles
Rideewisetn


Babe bh
geht hd gant he
bik gosto dh Ate
ry | a! vt er pe
ey ert cere a ome rree
Shar iarye vir veri geri
Senter


er


ie
