Philosophical Essays (Bertrand Russell, 1910)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.125798). Early analytic essays on truth, knowledge, pragmatism, and the elements of ethics.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

BY BERTRAND RUSSELL


1903 The Principles of Mathematics

1910 Philosophical Essays

1914 Our Knowledge of the External World

1916 Principles of Social Reconstruction

1917 PoUHcal Ideals

1918 Roads to Freedom

1918 Mysticism and Logic

1919 Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy

1920 The Practice and Theory of Bolshevism

1921 The Analysis of Mind

1923 The Prospects of Industrial Civilization (with Dora Russell)
1925 The ABC of Relativity

1925 On Education

1927 OutUne of Philosophy

1928 Sceptical Essays

1929 Marriage and Morals

1930 The Conquest of Happiness

1932 Education and Social Order

1934 Frudom and Organization: 1814-1914

1935 In Praise of Idleness

1938 Power

1940 An Inquiry into Meaning and Truth

1945 History of Western Philosophy

1948 Human Knowledge

1949 Authority and the Individual

1950 Unpopular Essays

1952 The Impact of Science on Society

1954 Human Society in Ethics and Politics

1956 Logic and Knowledge

1956 Portraits from Memory

1957 Why I am Not a Christian (ed by Paul Edwards)

1958 Bertrand RusselVs Best (ed by Robert Egner)

1959 My Philosophical Development

1961 Fact and Fiction

1967 The Autobiography of Bertrand Russell VoL 1

1968 The Autobiography of Bertrand Russell VoL 2

1969 The Autobiography of Bertrand Russell VoL 3

1972 The Collected Stories

1975 Mortals and Others (ed by Henry Ruja)

1983 The Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell VoL 1

1984 The Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell VoL 7

1985 The Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell VoL 12

1986 The Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell VoL 8

1987 The Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell VoL 9


PHILOSOPHICAL

ESSAYS

BERTRAND RUSSELL


London and New York


First published in 1910.


Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada
by Routledge

29 West 35th Street, New York, NY 10001


British Ubraty Cataloguing in Publication Data
A CIP catalogue record is available from the British Library.

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Also available.


CONTENTS


PREFACE

PREFACE TO ORIGINAL EDITION

I. TTu Elements of Ethics

II. On History

III. Science and Hypothesis {A Review)

IV. Pragmatism

V. William James's Conception of Truth

VI. The Monistic Theory of Truth

VII. On the Pfature of Truth and Falsehood


PREFACE


The volume to which this is a preface is essentially a reprint
of a book, with the same title, published in 1910. However, two
essays in that volume, namely *The Free Man’s Worship* and
'The Study of Mathematics’, were reprinted in 'Mysticism
and Logic’ and are therefore not included in the present
volume. They are replaced by an article on history and one
on Poincare’s 'Science and Hypothesis’.

1 have not attempted to make such emendations in the texts
reprinted in this volume as might be called for by changes in
my opinions during the intervening fifty-five years. The chief
change is that I no longer believe in objective ethical values
as I did when (following Moore) I wrote the first essay in the
present volume.


7


PREFACE TO ORIGINAL EDITION


The following essays, with the exception of the last, are reprints,
with some alterations, of articles which have appeared in various
periodicals. The first three essays are concerned with ethical
subjects, while the last four are concerned with the nature of
truth. I include among the ethical essays the one on *The Study of
Mathematics’, because this essay is concerned rather with the
value of mathematics than with an attempt to state what mathe-
matics is. Of the four essays which are concerned with Trutti, two
deal with Pragmatism, whose chief novelty is a new definition of
‘truth’. One deals with the conception of truth advocated by
those philosophers who are more or less affiliated to Hegel, while
the last endeavours to set forth briefly, without technicalities, the
view of truth which commends itself to the author. All the essays,
with the possible exception of the one on ‘The Monistic Theory
of Truth’, are designed to appeal to those who take an interest in
philosophical questions without having had a professional training
in philosophy.

I have to thank the editor of The New Qjiarterly for permission to
reprint ‘The Study of Mathematics’ and Sections I, II, III, V and
VI of the essay on ‘The Elements of Ethics’, and for Section IV I
have to thank the editor of the Hibbert Journal. My acknowledg-
ments are also due to the editors of The Independent Review^ The
Edinburgh Review^ The Albany Review^ and the Proceedings of the
Aristotelian Society, for permission to reprint the essays II, IV, V
and VI respectively. In the sixth essay as originally printed,
there was a third section, which is now replaced by the seventh
essay.

Oxford
July 1910


Postscript . — ^The death of William James, which occurred when
the printing of this book was already far advanced, makes me
wish to express, what in the course of controversial writings does
not adequately appear, the profound respect and personal esteem
which I felt for him, as did all who knew him, and my deep sense
of the public and private loss occasioned by his death. For readers


9


PREFACE TO ORIGINAL EDITION

trained in philosophy, no such assurance was r^uired; but for
those unaccustom^ to the tone of a subject in which agreement
is necessarily rarer than esteem, it seemed desirable to record
what to others would be a matter of course.

October 1910


10


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS


I


THE ELEMENTS OF ETHICS^


1. THE SUBJECT-MATTER OF ETHICS

I. The Study of Ethics is perhaps most commonly conceived
as being concerned with the questions ‘What sort of actions
ought men to perform?* and ‘What sort of actions ought
men to avoid?* It is conceived, that is to say, as dealing with
human conduct, and as decic^g what is virtuous and what
vicious among the kinds of conduct between which, in
practice, people are called upon to choose. Owing to this
view of the province of ethics, it is sometimes regarded as
the practical study, to which all others may be opposed as
theoretical; the good and the true are sometimes spoken of
as independent kingdoms, the former belonging to ethics,
while the latter belongs to the sciences.

This view, however, is doubly defective. In the first place,
it overlooks the fact that the object of ethics, by its own
account, is to discover true propositions about virtuous and
vicious conduct, and that these are just as much a part of
truth as true propositions about oxygen or the multiplication
table. The aim u, not practice, but propositions about
practice; and propositions about practice are not themselves
practical, any more than propositions about gases are gaseous.
One might as well maintain that botany is vegetable or
zoology animal. Thus the study of ethics is not something

^ What follow* is largely based on Mr G. E. Moore’s Priet^ ElhUe, to
wdiich the reader is refer^ for fuller discussion*. Section* i and n of the
following essay ate reprinted from the Nem Qfurttrlj), February 1910; section
m from the Qyarterfy, May 1910; section iv from the Hibbtrt Jomtd,
October 190S; and section* v and vi from the JKw Qfiamrij, SqHember 1910.


*3


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

outside science and co-ordinate with it: it-.js merely one
among sciences.

2. In the second place, the view in question unduly limits
the province of ethics. When we are told that actions of
certain kinds ought to be performed or avoided, as, for
example, that we ought to speak the truth, or that we ought
not to steal, we may always legitimately ask for a reason, and
this reason will always be concerned, not only with the
actions themselves, but also with the goodness or badness of
the consequences likely to follow from such actions. We shall
be told that truth-speaking generates mutual confidence,
cements friendships, facilitates the dbpatch of business, and
hence increases the wealth of the society which practises it,
and so on. If we ask why we should aim at increasing mutual
confidence, or cementing friendships, we may be told that
obviously these things are good, or that they lead to happi-
ness, and happiness is good. If we still ask why, the plain man
will probably feel irritation, and will reply that he does not
know. Hfa irritation is due to the conflict of two feelings —
the one, that whatever is true must have a reason; the
other, that the reason he has already given is so obvious
that it is merely contentious to demand a reason for the
reason. In the second of these feeUngs he may be right; in the
first, he is certainly wrong. In ordinary life, people only ask
why when they are unconvinced. If a reason is given which
they do not doubt, they are satisfied. Hence, when they do
ask they usually have a logical right to expect an
answer, and they come to think that a belief for which no
reason can be given is an unreasonable belief. But in this they
are mistaken, as they would soon discover if their habit of
asking wl^ were more pendstent.

It is the business of the plutosopher to ask for reasons as
long as reasons can legitimately be demanded, and to register
the propositions which give the most ultimate reasons that
are attainable. Since a proposition can only be proved by
means of other propositions, it is obvious that not all pro-
positions can be proved, for proofi can only begin by assum-


14


THE ELEMENTS OF ETHICS

ing something. And since the consequences have no more
certainty than their premisses, the things that are proved are
no more certain than the dungs that are accepted merely
because they are obvious, and are then made the basis of
our proofi. Thus in the case of ethics, we must ask why such
and such actions ought to be performed, and continue our
backward inquiry for reasons until we reach the kind of
proposition of which proof is impossible, because it is so
simple or so obvious that nothing more fundamental can be
found from which to deduce it.

3. Now when we ask for the reasons in favour of the actions
which moralists recommend, these reasons are, usually, that
the consequences of the actions are likely to be good, or if not
wholly good, at least the best possible under the circum-
stances. Hence all questions of conduct presuppose the
decision as to what things other than conduct are good and
what iad. What is called good conduct is conduct which is a
means to other things which are good on their own account;
and hence the study of what u good on its own account is
necessary before we can decide upon rules of conduct. And
the study of what is good or bad on its own account must be
included in ethics, which thus ceases to be concerned only
with human conduct.

The first step in ethics, therefore, is to be quite clear as to
what we mean by good and bad. Only then can we return to
conduct, and ask how right conduct is related to the pro-
duction of goods and the avoidance of evils. In this, as in
all philosophical inquiries, after a preliminary analysis of
complex data we proceed again to build up complex things
from their simpler constituents, starting from ideas which we
understand though we cannot define them, and from pre-
misses which we know though we cannot prove them. The
appearance of dogmatism in this procedure is deceptive, for
the premisses are such as ordinary reasoning unconsciously
assumes, and there is less real dogmatism in believing them
after a critical scrutiny than in employing them implicitly
without examination.


*5


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

II. THE MEANING OF GOOD AND' BAD

4. Good and Bad, in the sense in which the words are here
intended (which is, I believe, their usual sense), are ideas
which everybody, or almost everybody, possesses. These ideas
are apparently among those which form the simplest con-
stituents of our more complex ideas, and are therefore in-
capable of being analysed or built up out of other simpler
ideas. When people ask ‘What do you mean by “good”?’ the
answer must consist, not in a verbal definition such as could be
given if one were asked ‘What do you mean by “pentagon”?’
but in such a characterization as shall call up the appropriate
idea to the mind of the questioner. This characterization
may, and probably will, itself contain the idea of good, which
would be a fault in a definition, but is harmless when our
purpose is merely to stimulate the imagination to the produc-
tion of the idea which is intended. It is in this way that
children are taught the names of colours: they arc shown
(say) a red book, and told that that is red; and for fear they
should think ‘red’ means ‘book’, they arc shown also a red
flower, a red ball, and so on, and told that these are all red.
Thus the idea of redness is conveyed to their minds, although
it is quite impossible to analyse redness or to find constituents
which compose it.

In the case of ‘good’, the process is more difficult, both
because goodness is not perceived by the senses, like redness,
and because there is less agreement as to the things that are
good than as to the things that are red. This is perhaps one
reason that has led people to think that the notion of good
could be analysed into some other notion, such as pleasure or
object of desire. A second reason, probably more potent, is
the common confusion that makes people think they cannot
understand an idea unless they can define it — forgetting that
ideas are defined by other ideas, which must be already
understood if the definition is to convey any meaning. When
people begin to philosophize, they seem to make a point of
forgetting everything familiar and ordinary; otherwise their

16


THE ELEMENTS OF ETHICS

acquaintance with redness or any other colour might show
them how an idea can be intelligible where definition, in the
sense of analysis, is impossible.

5. To explain what we mean by Good and Bad, we may
say that a thing is good when on its own account it ought to
exist, and bad when on its own account it ought not to exist.
If it seems to be in our power to cause a thing to exist or not
to exist, we ought to try to make it exist if it is good, and not
exist if it is bad. When a thing is good, it is fitting that we
should feel pleasure in its existence; when it is bad, it is fitting
that we should feel pain in its existence. But all such character-
izations really presuppose the notions of good and bad, and
are therefore useful only as means of calling up the right ideas,
not as logical definitions.

It might be thought that 'good’ could be defined as the
quality of whatever we ought to try to produce. This would
merely put ought in the place of good as our ultimate un-
defined notion; but as a matter of fact the good is much wider
than what we ought to try to produce. There is no reason to
doubt that some of the lost tragedies of Aeschylus were good,
but we ought not to try to re-write them, because we should
certainly fail. What we ought to do, in fact, is limited by our
powers and opportunities, whereas the good is subject to no
such limitation. And our knowledge of goods is confined to
the things we have experienced or can imagine; but pre-
sumably there are many goods of which we human beings
have absolutely no knowledge, because they do not come
within the very restricted range of our thoughts and feelings.
Such goods are still goods, although human conduct can have
no reference to them. Thus the notion of good is wider and
more fundamental than any notion concerned with conduct;
we use the notion of good in explaining what right conduct
is, but we do not use the notion of right conduct in explaining
what good is.

6. A fairly plausible view is that 'good’ means the same as
'desired’, so that when we say a thing is good we mean that it
is desired. Thus anything is good which we either hope to

*7


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

acquire or fear to lose. Yet it is commonly adrtutted that there
are bad desires; and when people speak of bad desires, they
seem to mean desires for what is bad. For example, when one
man desires another man’s pain, it is obvious that what is
desired is not good but bad. But the supporter of the view that
‘good’ means ‘desired’ will say that nothing is good or bad in
itself, but is good for one person and perhaps bad for another.
This must happen, he will say, in every case of a conflict of
desires; if I desire your suffering, then your suffering is good
for me, though it is bad for you. But the sense of good and bad
which is needed in ethics is not in this way personal; and it is
quite essential, in the study of ethics, to realize that there is an
impersonal sense. In this sense, when a thing is good, it ought
to exist on its own account, not on account of its consequences,
nor yet of who is going to enjoy it. We cannot maintain that
for me a thing ought to exist on its own account, while for
you it ought not; that would merely mean that one of us is
mistaken, since in fact everything either ought to exist or ought
not. Thus the fact that one man’s desire may be another man’s
aversion proves that ‘good’, in the sense relevant to ethics,
does not mean the same as ‘desired’, since everything is in
itself either good or not good, and cannot be at once good
for me and bad for you. This could only mean that its effects
on me were good, and on you bad; but here good and bad
are again impersonal.

7. There is another line of argument, more subtle but more
instructive, by which we can refute those who say that ‘good’
means ‘desired’, or who propose any other idea, such as pleas-
ure, as the actual meaning of ‘good’. This line of argument will
not prove that the things that are good are not the same as the
things that are desired; but i^wiU prove that, if this were the
case, it could not be proved by appealing to the meaning of
the word ‘good’. So farj it might be thought that such an
argument could only have a purely logical importance. But
in fact this is not so. Many ethical theories have been based
upon the contention that ‘good’ means so-and-so, and people
have accepted consequences of this contention which, if they

18


THE ELEMENTS OF ETHICS

had relied upon inspection untrammelled by fabe theory,
they would almost certainly have rejected. Whoever believes
that *good’ means 'desired* will try to explain away the cases
where it seems as if what b denred b bad; but if he no longer
holds thb theory, he will be able to allow free play to hb un-
biased ethical perceptions, and will thus escape erron into
which he would otherwbe have fallen.

The argument in question is thb: If anyone affirms that
the good b the desired, we consider what he says, and either
assent or dissent; but in any case our assent or dissent b
decided by considering what the good and the desired really
are. When, on the contrary, someone gives a definition of the
meaning of a word, our state of mind b quite different. If we
are told ‘a pentagon b a figure which has five sides’, we do
not consider what we know about pentagons, and then agree
or dbagree; we accept this as the meaning of the word, and
we know that we are getting information, not about penta-
gons, but merely about the word ‘pentagon*. What we are
told b the sort of thing that we expect dictionaries to tell us.
But when we are told that the good is the desired, we feel at
once that we are being told something of philosophical im-
portance, something which has ethical consequences, some-
thing which it b quite beyond the scope of a dictionary to tell
us. The reason of thb b, that we already know what we mean
by the good, and what we mean by the desired; and if these
two meanings always applied to the same objects, that
would not be a verbal definition, but an important truth.
The analogue of such a proposition b not the above definition
of a pentagon, but rather: ‘A pentagon (defined as above) is
a figure which has five angles.’ Whenever a proposed
definition sets us thinking whether it b true in fact, and not
whether that is how the word is used, there b reason to
suspect that we are not dealing with a definition, but with
a significant proposition, in which the word professedly
defined has a meaning already known to us, either as simple
or as defined in some other way. By applying thb test, we
shall easily convince ourselves that all hitherto suggested


>9


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

definitions of the good are significant, not merely verbal,
propositions; and that therefore, though they may be true in
fact, they do not give the meaning of the word ‘good’.

The importance of this result is that so many ethical
theories depend upon the denial of it. Some have contended
that ‘good* means ‘desired*, others that ‘good* means
‘pleasure*, others again that it means ‘conformity to Nature*
or ‘obedience to the will of God*. The mere fact that so many
different and incompatible definitions have been proposed is
evidence against any of them being really definitions; there
have never been two incompatible definitions of the word
‘pentagon*. None of the above are really definitions; they
are all to be understood as substantial affirmations concern*
ing the things that are good. All of them are, in my opinion,
mistaken in fact as well as in form, but I shall not here under-
take to refute them severally.

8. It is important to realize that when we say a thing is
good in itself, and not merely as a means, we attribute to the
thing a property which it either has or does not have, quite
independently of our opinion on the subject, or of our wishes
or other people’s. Most men are inclined to agree with
Hamlet: ‘There is nothing good or bad but thinking makes
it so.* It is supposed that ethical preferences are a mere matter
of taste, and ^t if X thinks A is a good thing, and Y thinks
it b a bad thing, all we can say is that A is good for X and
bad for Y. This view is rendered plausible by the divergence
of opinion as to what is good and bad, and by the difficulty of
finding arguments to persuade people who differ from us in
such a question. But the difficulty in discovering the truth
does not prove that there is no truth to be discovered. If X
says A is good, and Y sa)^A is bad, one of them must be
mistaken, though it may be impossible to discover which.
If this were not the case, there would be no difference of
opinion between them. If, in asserting that A is good, X
meant merely to assert that A had a certain relation to
himself, say of pleasing his taste in some way; and if Y, in
saying that A is not good, meant merely to deny that A had


30


THE ELEMENTS OF ETHICS

a like relation to himself: then there would be no subject of
debate between them. It would be absurd, if X said T am
eating a pigeon-pie*, for Y to answer ‘that is false: I am eating
nothing*. But this is no more absurd than a dispute as to
what is good, if, when we say A is good, we mean merely to
affirm a relation of A to ourselves. When Christians assert
that God is good, they do not mean merely that the con-
templation of God roiues certain emotions in them: they may
admit that this contemplation rouses no such emotion in the
devils who believe and tremble, but the absence of such
emotions is one of the things t^t make devils bad. As a
matter of fact, we consider some tastes better than others: we
do not hold merely that some tastes are ours and other tastes
are other people’s. We do not even always consider our ovm
tastes the best: we may prefer bridge to poetry, but think it
better to prefer poetry to bridge. And when Christians affirm
that a world created by a good God must be a good World,
they do not mean that it must be to their taste, for often it is
by no means to their taste, but they use its goodness to argue
that it ought to be to their taste. And they do not mean merely
that it is to God’s taste: for that would have been equally the
case if God had not been good. Thus, good and bad are quali-
ties which belong to objects independently of our opinions,
just as much as round and square do; and when two people
differ as to whether a thing is good, only one of them can be
right, though it may be very hard to know which is right.

9. One very important consequence of the indefinability
of ‘good’ must be emphasized, namely, the fact that knowledge
as to what things exist, have existed, or will exist, can throw
absolutely no light upon the question as to what things are
good. There might, as far as mere logic goes, be some general
proposition to the effect ‘whatever exists, is good*, or ‘what-
ever exists, is bad’, or ‘what will exist is better (or worse)
than what does exist*. But no such general proposition can be
proved by considering. the meaning of ‘good’, and no such
general proposition can be arrived at empirically from
experience, since we do not know the whole of what does


21


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

exist, nor yet of what has existed or will exist. We cannot
therefore arrive at such a general proposition, unless it is
itself self-evident, or follows from some self-evident pro-
position, which must (to warrant the consequence) be of the
same general kind. But as a matter of fact, there is, so far as
I can discover, no self-evident proposition as to the goodness
or badness of all that exists or has existed or will exist. It
follows that, from the fact that the existent world is of such
and such a nature, nothing can be inferred as to what things
are good or bad.

lo. The belief that the world is wholly good has, neverthe-
less, been widely held. It has been held either because, as a
part of revealed religion, the world has been supposed created
by a good and omnipotent God, or because, on metaphysical
grounds, it was thought possible to prove that the sum-total of
existent things must be good. With the former line of argu-
ment we are not here concerned; the latter must be briefly
dealt with.

The belief that, without assuming any ethical premiss, we
can prove that the world is good, or indeed any other result
containing the notion of good, logically involves the belief
that the notion of good is complex and capable of definition.
If when we say that a thing is good we mean (for example)
that it has three other simpler properties, then, by proving
that a thing has those three properties we prove that.it is
good, and thus we get a conclusion involving the notion of
good, although our premisses did not involve it. But if good
is a simple notion, no such inference will be possible; unless
our premisses contain the notion of good, our conclusion
cannot contain it. The case is analogous to the case of
elements and compounds i^ chemistry. By combining ele-
ments or compounds we can get a new compound, but no
chemical operation will give an element which was not
present in the beginning. So, if good is simple, no proposi-
tions not containing this notion can have consequences
which (fo contain it.

As a matter of fact, those who have endeavoured to prove


22


THE ELEMENTS OF ETHICS

that the world as a whole is good have usually adopted the
view that all evil consists wholly in the absence of something
and that nothing positive is evil. This they have usually sup-
ported by defining ‘good’ as meaning the same as ‘real’. Spinoza
says:^ ‘By reality and perfection I mean the same thing’; and
hence it follows, with much less trouble than metaphysicians
have usually taken in the proof, that the real is perfect. This
is the view in ‘Abt Vogler’: ‘The evil is null, is nought, is
silence implying sound.’

Whenever it is said that all evil is limitation, the same
doctrine is involved; what is meant is that evil never consists
in the existence of something which can be called bad, but
only in the non-existence of something. Hence everything that
does exist must be good, and the sum-total of existence, since
it exists most, must be the best of all. And this view is set forth
as resulting from the meaning of ‘evil’.

The notion that non-existence is what is meant by ‘evil’ is
refuted exactly as the previous definitions of ‘good’ were
refuted. And the belief that, as a matter of fact, nothing that
exists is evil, is one which no one would advocate except a
metaphysician defending a theory. Pain and hatred and envy
and cruelty are surely things that exist, and arc not merely the
absence of their opposites; but the theory should hold that
they are indistinguishable from the blank unconsciousness of
an oyster. Indeed, it would seem that this whole theory has
been advanced solely because of the unconscious bias in
favour of optimism, and that its opposite is logically just
as tenable. We might urge that evil consists in existence,
and good in non-existence; that therefore the sum-total of
existence is the worst thing there is, and that only non-exist-
ence is good. Indeed, Buddhism does seem to maintain some
such view. It is plain that this view is false; but logically it is
no more absurd than its opposite.

1 1 . We cannot, then, infer any results as to what is good or
bad from a study of the things that exist. This conclusion
needs chiefly, at the present time, to be applied against

' Ethics, pt. ii df. vi.


23


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

evolutionary ethics. The phrase ‘survival of the fittest* seems
to have given rise to the belief that those who survive are the
fittest in some ethical sense, and that the course of evolution
gives evidence that the later type is better than the earlier.
On this basis, a worship of fi>rce is easily set up, and the
mitigation of struggle by civilization comes to be deprecated.
It is thought that what fights most successfully is most
admirable, and that what does not help in fighting is worth*
less. Such a view is wholly destitute of logical foundation. The
course of nature, as we have seen, is irrelevant in deciding as
to what is good or bad. A priori, it would be as probable that
evolution should go from bad to worse, as that it should go
from good to better. What makes the view plausible is the
fact that the lower animals existed earlier than the higher,
and that among men the civilized races are able to defeat and
often exterminate the uncivilized. But here the ethical prefer-
ence of the higher to the lower animals, and of the exter-
minators to the exterminated, is not based upon evolution,
but exists independently, and unconsciously intrudes into
our judgment of the evolutionary process. If evolutionary
ethics were sound, we ought to be entirely indifferent as to
what the course of evolution may be, tince whatever it is is
thereby proved to be the best. Yet if it should turn out that
the Negro or the Chinaman was able to oust the European,
we should cease to have any admiration of evolution; for as a
matter of fact our preference of the European to the Negro is
wholly independent of the European’s greater prowess with
the Maxim gun.

Broadly, the fact that a thing is unavoidable affords no
evidence that it is not an evil; and the fact that a thing is
impossible affords no evidence that it is not a good. It is
doubtless foolish, in practice, to fret over the inevitable; but it
is false, in theory, to let the actual world dictate our standard
of good and evil. It is evident that among the things that
exist some are good, some bad, and that we know too little of
the universe to have any right to an opinion as to whether the
good or the bad preponderates, or as to whether either is


*4


THE ELEMENTS OF ETHICS

likely in the future to gain on the other. Optimism and
pessimism alike are general theories as to the universe which
there is no reason whatever for accepting; what we know of
the world tends to suggest that the good and the evil are
fairly balanced, but it is of course possible that what we do
not know is very much better or very much worse than what
we do know. Complete suspense of judgment in this matter
is therefore the only rational attitude.


III. RIGHT AND WRONG

12. The ideas of right and wrong conduct are, as we have
seen, those with which ethics is generally supposed to be most
concerned. This view, which is unduly narrow, is fostered by
the use of the one word ‘good’, both for the sort of conduct
which is right, and for the sort of things which ought to exist
on account of their intrinsic value. This double use of the
word ‘good’ is very confusing, and tends greatly to obscure the
distinction of ends and means. I shall therefore speak of right
actions, not of good actions, confining the word ‘good’ to the
sense explained in Section ii.

The word ‘right’ is very ambiguous, and it is by no means
easy to distinguish the various meanings which it has in
common parlance. Owing to the variety of these meanings,
adherence to any one necessarily involves us in apparent
paradoxes when we use it in a context which suggests one of
the other meanings. This is the usual result of precision of
language; but so long as the paradoxes are merely verbal,
they do not give rise to more than verbal objections.

In judging of conduct we find at the outset two widely
divergent methods, of which one is advocated by some
moralists, the other by others, while both are practised by
those who have no ethical theory. One of these methods,
which is that advocated by utilitarians, judges the rightness
of an act by relation to the goodness or badness of its conse-
quences. The other method, advocated by intuitionists,
judges by the approval or disapproval of the moral sense or

25


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

conscience. I believe that it is necessary ^ combine both
theories in order to get a complete account of right and
wrong. There is, I think, one sense in which a man does
right when he does what will probably have the best conse-
quences, and another in which he does right when he follows
the dictates of his conscience, whatever the probable conse-
quences may be. (There are many other senses which we may
give to the word ‘right’, but these two seem to be the most
important.) Let us begin by considering the second of these
senses.

13. The question we have to ask ourselves is: What do we
mean by the dictates of the moral sense? If these are to afford
a definition of right conduct, we cannot say that they consbt
in judging that such and such acts are right, for that would
make our definition circular. We shall have to say that the
moral sense consists in a certain specific emotion of approval
towards an act, and that an act is to be called right when the
agent, at the moment of action, feels this emotion of approval
towards the action which he decides to perform. There is
certainly a sense in which a man ought to perform any act
which he approves, and to abstain from any act which he dis-
approves; and it seems also undeniable that there are emo-
tions which may be called approval and disapproval. Thus
this theory, whether adequate or not, must be allowed to
contain a part of the truth.

It is, however, fairly evident that there are other meanings
of right conduct, and that, though there is an emotion of
approval, there is also a judgment of approval, which may or
may not be true. For we certainly hold that a man who has
done an action which his conscience approved may have been
mistaken, and that in some^ense his conscience ought not to
have approved his action. But this would be impossible if
nothing were involved except an emotion. To be mistaken
implies a judgment; and thus we must admit that there is
such a thing as a judgment of approval. If this were not the
case we could not reason with a man as to what is right; what
he approves would be necessarily right for him to do, and

36


THE ELEMENTS OF ETHICS

there could be no argument against his approval. We do in
fact hold that when one man approves of a certain act, while
another disapproves, one of them is mistaken, which would
not be the case with a mere emotion. If one man likes oysters
and another dislikes them, we do not say that either of them is
mistaken.

Thus there is a judgment of approval,^ and this must
consist of a judgment that an act is, in a new sense, right. The
judgment of approval is not merely the judgment that<we feel
the emotion of approval, for then another who disapproved
would not necessarily hold our judgment of approval to be
mistaken. Thus in order to give a meaning to the judgment
of approval, it is necessary to admit a sense of right other than
approved. In this sense, when we approve an act we judge that
it is right, and we may be mistaken in so judging. This new
sense is objective, in the sense that it does not depend upon the
opinions and feelings of the agent. Thus a man who obeys
the dictates of his conscience is not always acting rightly in
the objective sense. When a man does what his conscience
approves, he does what he believes to be objectively right, but
not necessarily what is objectively right. We need, therefore,
some other criterion than the moral sense forjudging what is
objectively right.

14. It is in defining objective rightness that the conse-
quences of an action become relevant. Some moralists, it is
true, deny the dependence upon consequences; but that is to
be attributed, I think, to coriusion with the subjective sense.
When people argue as to whether such and such an action is
right, they always adduce the consequences which it has or
may be expected to have. A statesman who has to decide

* The judgment of approval does not always coincide with the emotion of
approval. For example, when a man has hem led by his reason to reject a
moral code which he formerly held, it will commonly happen, at least for a
time, that his emotion of approval follows the old code, though his judgment
has abandoned it. Thus he may have been brought up, like Mohammed’s first
disciples, to believe it a duty to avenge the murder of relations by murdering
the murderer or his relations; and he may continue to ftel approval of such
vengeance after he has ceased to Judgi it approvingly. The motion of approval
will not be again in question in what follows.


27


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

what is the right policy, or a teacher who has to decide what
is the right education, will be expected to consider what
policy or what education is likely to have the best results.
Whenever a question is at all complicated, and cannot be
settled by following some simple rule, such as ‘thou shalt not
steal’, or ‘thou shalt not bear false witness’, it is at once
evident that the decision cannot be made except by con-
sideration of consequences.

But even when the decision can be made by a simple precept,
such as not to lie or not to steal, the justification of the precept
is found only by consideration of consequences. A code such
as the Decalogue, it must be admitted, can hardly be true
without exception if the goodness or badness of consequences is
what determines the rightness or wrongness of actions; for
in so complex a world it is unlikely that obedience to the
Decalogue will always produce better consequences than dis-
obedience. Yet it is a suspicious circumstance that breaches of
those of the Ten Commandments which people still hold it a
duty to obey do, as a matter of fact, have bad consequences
in the vast majority of instances, and would not be considered
wrong in a case in which it was fairly certain that their conse-
quences would be good. This latter fact is concealed by a
question-begging addition of moral overtones to words. Thus,
e.g., ‘thou shalt do no murder’ would be an important pre-
cept if it were interpreted, as Tolstoy interprets it, to mean
‘thou shalt not take human life’. But it is not so interpreted;
on the contrary, some taking of human life is called ‘justi-
fiable homicide’. Thus murder comes to mean ‘unjustifiable
homicide’; and it is a mere tautology to say, ‘Thou shalt do
no unjustifiable homicide’. That this should be announced
from Sinai would be as fQjitless as Hamlet’s report of the
ghost’s message: ‘There’s ne’er a villain, dwelling in all
Denmark, but he’s aii arrant knave.’ As a matter of fact,
people do make a certain classification of homicides, and
decide that certain kinds are justifiable and certain others
unjustifiable. But there are many doubtful cases: tyrannicide,
capital punishment, killing in war, killing in self-defence,

28


THE ELEMENTS OF ETHICS

killing in defence of others, are some of these. And if a
decision is sought, it is sought usually by co nsi dering whether
the consequences of actions belonging to these classes are on
the whole good or bad. Thus the importance of precepts such
as the Ten Commandments lies in the fact that they give
simple rules, obedience to which wiU in almost all cases have
better consequences than disobedience; and the justification
of the rules is not wholly independent of consequences.

15. In common language the received code of moral rules
is usually presupposed, and an action is only called immoral
when it infringes one of these rules. Whatever does not
infringe them is regarded as permissible, so that on most of
the occasions of life no one course of action is marked out as
alone right. If a man adopts a course of action which, though
not contrary to the received code, will probably have bad
consequences, he is called unwise rather than immoral. Now,
according to the distinction we have made between objective
and subjective rightness, a man may well act in a way which
is objectively wrong without doing what is subjectively
wrong, i.e. what hb conscience disapproves. An act (roughly
speaking, I shall return to this point presently) is immoral
when a man’s conscience disapproves it, but is judged only
unwise or injudicious when his conscience approves it,
although we judge that it will probably have bad conse-
quences. Now the usual moral code is supposed, in common
language, to be admitted by every man’s conscience, so that
when he infringes it, his action is not merely injudicious, but
immoral; on the other hand, where the code is silent, we
regard an unfortunate action as objectively but not subject-
ively wrong, i.e. as injudicious, but not immoral. The
acceptance of a moral code has the great advantage that, in
so far as its rules are objectively right, it tends to harmonize
objective and subjective rightness. Thus it tends to cover all
firequent cases, leaving only the rarer ones to the individual
judgment of the agent. Hence when new sorts of cases become
common, the moral code soon comes to deal with them; thus
each profession has its own code concerning cases common


29


PHILOSOPHIC3AL ESSAYS

in the profession, though not outside it. But the moral code
is never itself ultimate; it is based upon an estimate of prob-
able consequences, and is essentially a method of leading
men’s judgment to approve what is objectively right and dis-
approve what is objectively wrong. And when once a fairly
correct code is accepted, the exceptions to it become very
much fewer than they would otherwise be, because one of the
consequences of admitting exceptions is to weaken the code,
and this consequence is usually bad enough to outweigh the
good resulting from admitting such and such an exception.
This argument, however, works in the opposite direction
with a grossly incorrect code; and it is to be observed that
most conventional codes embody some degree of un-
warrantable selfishness, individual, professional, or national,
and are thus in certain respects worthy of detestation.

1 6 . What is objectively right, then, is in some way de-
pendent on consequences. The most natural supposition to
start from would be that the objectively right act, under any
circumstances, is the one which will have the best conse-
quences. We will define this as the most fortunate act. The most
fortunate act, then, is the one which will produce the greatest
excess of good over evil, or the least excess of evil over good
(for there may be situations in which every possible act will
have consequences that are on the whole bad). But we
cannot maintain that the most fortunate act is always the one
which is objectively right, in the sense that it is what a wise
man will hold that he ought to do. For it may happen that
the act which will in fact prove the most fortunate is likely,
according to all the evidence at our disposal, to be less
fortunate than some other. In such a case, it will be, at least
in one sense, objectively inrong to go against the evidence, in
spite of the actual good result of our doing so. There have
certainly been some men who have done so much harm that
it would have been fortunate for the world if their nurses had
killed them in infancy. But if their nurses had done so their
action would not have been objectively right, because the
probability was that it would not have the best effects. Hence


30


THE ELEMENTS OF ETHICS

it would seem we must take account of probability in judging
of objective rightness; let us then consider whether we can say
that the objectively right act is the one which will probably
be most fortunate. I ^all define this as the tvisest act.

The wisest act, then, is that one which, when account is
taken of all available data, gives us the greatest expectation
of good on the balance, or the least expectation of evil on the
balance. There is, of course, a difficulty as to what are to be
considered available data; but broadly we can distinguish,
in any given state of knowledge, things capable of being
foreseen from things which are unpredictable. I suppose
account to be taken of the general body of current knowledge,
in fact the sort of consideration which people expect when
they ask legal or medical advice. There is no doubt this brings
us nearer to what is objectively right than we were when we
were considering the actually most fortunate act. For one
thing, it justifies the unavoidable limitation to not very
distant consequences, which is almost always necessary if a
practical decision is to be reached. For the likelihood of error
in calculating distant consequences is so great that their
contribution to the probable good or evil is very small, though
their contribution to the actual good or evil is likely to be much
greater than that of the nearer consequences. And it seems
evident that what it is quite impossible to know cannot be
relevant in judging as to what conduct is right. If, as is
possible, a cataclysm is going to destroy life oi) this planet this
day week, many acts otherwise useful will prove to have been
wasted labour, for example, the preparation of next year’s
Nautical Almanac; but since we have no reason to expect
such a cataclysm, the rightness or wrongness of acts is plainly
to be estimated without regard to it.

17. One apparent objection at once suggests itself to the
definition. Very few acts are of sufficient importance to
justify such elaborate and careful consideration as is required
for forming an opinion as to whether they are the wisest.
Indeed, the least important decisions are often those which
it would be hardest to make on purely reasonable grounds.


3 *


PHILOSOPHICAL ASSAYS

A man who debates on each day whichbf two ways of taking
exercise is likely to prove most beneficial is considered absurd;
the question is at once difiicult and unimportant, and is
therefore not worth spending time over. But although it is
true that unimportant decisions ought not to be made with
excessive care, there is danger of confusion if this is regarded
as an objection to our definition of objective rightness. Fdr
the act which, in the case supposed, is objectively wrong is
the act of deliberation, not the act decided upon as a result of
deliberation. And the deliberation is condemned by our defini<
tion, for it is very unlikely that there is no more beneficial way
of spending time than in debating trivial points of conduct.
Thus, although the wisest act is the one which, after complete'
investigation, appears likely to give the most fortunate results,
yet the complete investigation required to show that it is the
wisest act is only itself wise in the case of very important
decisions. This is only an elaborate way of saying that a wise
man will not waste time on unimportant details. Hence this
apparent objection can be answered.

1 8. One further addition is required for the definition of
the objectively right act, namely, that it must be possible.
Among the acts whose consequences are to be considered we
must not include such as are either physically impossible to
perform or impossible for the agent to think of. This last con-
dition introduces difficulties connected with determinism,
which are discussed in Section iv. Ignoring these difficulties,
we may say that the objectively right act is that one which,
of all that are possible, will probably have the best conse-
quences.

ig. We must now return to the consideration of subjective
rightness, with a vieukto distinguishing conduct which is
merely mistaken from conduct which is immoral or blame-
worthy. We here require a new sense of ought, which it is by
no means easy to de^e. In the objective sense, a man ought
to do what is objectively right. But in the subjective sense,
which we have now to examine, he sometimes ought to do
what is objectively wrong. For example, we saw that it is often


32


THE ELEMENTS OF ETHICS

objectively right to give less consideration to an unimportant
question of conduct than would be required for forming a
trustworthy judgment as to what is objectively right. Now it
seems plain that if we have given to such a question the
amount and kind of consideration which is objectively right,
and we then do what appears to us objectively right, our
action is, in some sense, subjectively right, although it may be
objectively wrong. Our action could certainly not be called
a sin, and might even be highly virtuous, in spit; of its
objective wrongness. It is these notions of what is sinful and
what is virtuous that we have now to consider.

20. The first suggestion that naturally occurs is that an act
is subjectively right when it is judged by the agent to be
objectively right, and subjectively wrong when it is judged
to be objectively wrong. I do not mean that it is subjectively
right when the agent judges that it is the act which, of all
that are possible, will probably have the best results; for the
agent may not accept the above account of objective right>
ness. I mean merely that it is the one towards which he has
the judgment of approval. A man may judge an act to be
right without judging that its consequences will be probably
the best possible; I only contend that, when he /ruf)' judges it
to be right, then its consequences will probably be the best
possible. But his judgment as to what is objectively right may
err, not only by a wrong estimate of probable consequences,
or by failing to think of an act which he might have thought
of, but also by a wrong theory as to what constitutes objective
rightness. In other words, the definition I gave of objective
rightness is not meant as an analysis of the meaning of the
word, but as a mark which in fact attaches to all objectively
right actions and to no others.

We are to consider then the suggestion that an act is moral
when the agent approves it and immoral when he dbap-
proves it; using ‘moral’ to mean ‘subjectively right’ and ‘im-
moral’ to mean ‘subjectively wrong’. This suggestion, it is plain,
will not stand without much modification. In the first place, we
often hold it immoral to approve some things and disapprove

33


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

others, unless there are special circumstj^ces to excuse such
approval or disapproval. In the second place, unreflecting
acts, in which there is no judgment either of approval or dis-
approval, are often moral or immoral. For both these reasons
the suggested definition must be regardefl as inadequate.

21. The doctrine that an act is never immoral when the
agent thinks it right has the drawback (or the advantage)
that it excuses almost all the acts which would be conunonly
condemned. Very few people deliberately do what, at the
moment, they believe to be wrong; usually they first argue
themselves into a belief that what they wish to do is right.
They decide that it is their duty to teach so-and-so a lesson,
that their rights have been so grossly infringed that if they
take no revenge there will be an encouragement to injustice,
that without a moderate indulgence in pleasure a character
cannot develop in the best way, and so on and so on. Yet we
do not cease to blame them on that account. Of course it
may be said that a belief produced by a course of self-
deception is not a genuine belief, and that the people who
invent such excuses for themselves know all the while that the
truth is the other way. Up to a point this is no doubt true,
though I doubt if it is always true. There are, however, other
cases of mistaken judgment as to what is right, where the
judgment is certainly genuine, and yet we blame the agent.
These are cases of thoughtlessness, where a man remembers
consequences to himself, but forgets consequences to others.
In such a case he may judge correcdy and honestly on all the
data that he remembers, yet if he were a better man he
would remember more data. Most of the actions commonly
condemned as selfish probably come under this head. Hence
we must admit that an act may be immoral, even if the agent
quite genuinely judges filat it is right.

Unreflecting acts, again, in which there is no judgment as
to right or wrong, are often praised or blamed. Acts of
generosity, for example, are more admired when they are
impulsive than when they result from reflection. I cannot
think of any act which is more blamed when it is impulsive


34


THE ELEMENTS OF ETHICS

than when it is deliberate; but certainly many impulsive acts
are blamed — ^for example, such as spring from an impuke of
malice or cruelty.

22. In all these cases where reflection is absent, and also in
the case of inadequate reflection, it may be said that blame
does not belong properly to the act, but rather to the charac-
ter revealed by the act, or, if to some acts, then to those
previous deliberate acts by which the character has been pro-
duced which has resulted in the present act. The cases of self-
deception would then be dismissed on the ground that the
self-deceiver never really believes what he wishes to believe.
We could then retain our original definition, that a moral act
is one which the agent judges to be right, while an immoral
one is one which he judges to be wrong. But I do not think
this would accord with what most people really mean. I rather
think that a moral act should be defined as one which the
agent would have judged to be right if he had considered the
question candidly and with due care; if, that is to say, he had
examined the data before him with a view to discovering
what was right, and not with a view to proving such and
such a course to be right. If an act is unimportant, and tit the
same time not obviously less right than some obvious alter-
native, we shall consider it neither moral nor immoral; for
in such a case the act does not deserve careful consideration.
The amount of care which a decision deserves depends upon
its importance and difficulty; in the case of a statesman
advocating a new policy, for example, years of deliberation
may sometimes be necessary to excuse him from the charge
of levity. But with less important acts, it is usually right to
decide even when further reflection might show the present
decision to be erroneous. Thus there is a certain amount of
reflection appropriate to various acts, while some right acts
are best when they spring from impulse (though these are
such as reflection would approve). We may therefore say that
an act is moral when it is one which the agent would judge
to be right after an appropriate amount of candid thought,
or, in the case of acts which are best when they are un-


35


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

reflecting, after the amount and kind of tl^iight requisite to
form a first opinion. An act is immoral when the agent would
judge it to be wrong after an appropriate amount of reflec*
tion. It is neither moral nor immoral when it is unimportant
and a small amount of reflection would not suffice to show
whether it was right or wrong.

33. We may now sum up our discussion of right and wrong.
When a man asks himself: ‘What ought I to do?’ he is asking
what conduct is right in an objective sense. He cannot mean:
‘What ought a person to do who holds my views as to what a
person ought to do?’ for his views as to what a person ought
to do are what will constitute his answer to the question
‘What ought I to do?’ But the onlooker, who thinks that the
man has answered this question wrongly, may nevertheless
hold that, in acting upon his answer, the man was acting
rightly in a second, subjective, sense. This second sort of right
action we call moral action. We held that an action is moral
when the agent would judge it to be right after an appro-
priate amount of candid thought, or after a small amount in
the case of acts which are best when they are unreflecting;
the appropriate amount of thought being dependent upon
the difficulty and the importance of the decision. And we held
that an action is right when, of all that are possible, it is the
one which will probably have the best results. There are
many other meanings of right, but these seem to be the
meanings required for answering the questions: ‘What ought
I to do?’ and ‘What acts are immoral?’


IV. DETERMINISM AND MORALS

24. The importance to ethics of the free-will question is a
subject upon which ther^as existed almost as much diversity
of opinion as on the free-will question itself. It has been urged
by advocates of free-will that its denial involves the denial of
merit and demerit, and that, with the denial of these, ethics
collapses. It has been uiged on the other side that, uidess we
can foresee, at least partially, the consequences of our actions,

36


THE ELEMENTS OF ETHICS

it is impossible to know what course we ought to take under
any given circumstances; and that if other people’s actions
cannot be in any degree predicted, the foresight required for
rational action becomes impossible. I do not propose, in the
following discussion, to go into the free-will controversy itself.
The grounds in favour of determinism appear to me over-
whelming, and I shall content myself with a brief indication
of these grounds. The question I am concerned with is not
the freewill question itself, but the question how, if .at all,
morals are affected by assuming determinism.

In considering this question, as in most of the other prob-
lems of ethics, the moralist who has not had a philosophical
training appears to me to go astray, and become involved in
needless complications, through supposing that right and wrong
in conduct are the ultimate conceptions of ethics, rather
than good and bad, -in the effects of conduct and in other
things. The words ‘feood’ and ‘bad’ are used both for the sort
of conduct which is right or wrong, and for the sort of effects
to be expected from right and wrong conduct, respectively.
We speak of a good picture, a good dinner, and so on, as well
as of a good action. But there is a great difference between
these two meanings of good. Roughly speaking, a good action
is one of which the probable effects are good in the other sense.
It is confusing to have two meanings for one word, and we
therefore agreed in the previous section to speak of a right
action rather than a good action. In order to decide whether
an action is right, it is necessary, as we have seen, to consider
its probable effects. If the probable effects are, on the whole,
better than those of any other action which is possible under
the circumstances, then the action is right. The things that
are good are things which, on their own account, and apart
from any consideration of their effects, we ought to wish to see
in existence: they are such things as, we may suppose, might
make the world appear to the Creator worth creating. I do
not wish to deny that right conduct is among the things that
are good on their own account; but if it is so, it depends for
its intrinsic goodness upon the goodness of those other things


37


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

which it aims at producing, such as love or happiness. Thus
the rightness of conduct is not the fiindamenud conception
upon which ethics is built up. This fundamental conception
is intrinsic goodness or badness.

As the outcome of our discussions in the previous section,
I shall assume the following definitions. The objective^ right
action, in any circumstances, is that action which, of all that
are possible, gives us, when account is taken of all available
data, the greatest expectation of probable good effects, or the
least expectation of probable bad effects. The subjectively
right or Tttord action b that one which will be judged by the
agent to be objectively right if he devotes to the question an
appropriate amount of candid thought, or, in the case of
actions that ought to be impulsive, a small amount. The
appropriate amount of thought depends upon the importance
of the action and the difficulty of the decision. An act is
neither moral nor immoral when it b unimportant, and a
small amount of reflection would not suffice to show whether
it was right or wrong. After these preliminaries, we can pass
to the consideration of our main topic.

25. The principle of causality — that every event b deter-
mined by previous events, andean (theoretically) be predicted
when enough previous events are known — appears to apply
just as much to human actions as to other events. It cannot
be said that its application to human actions, or to any other
phenomena, b wholly beyond doubt; but a doubt extending
to the principle of causality must be so fundamental as to
involve all science, all everyday knowledge, and everything,
or almost everything, that we believe about the actual world.
If causality is doubted, morab collapse, since a right action,
as we have seen, b one of which the probable effects are the
best possible, so that estimates of right and wrong necessarily
presuppose that our actions can have effects, and therefore
that the law of causality holds. In favour of the view that
human actions alone are not the effects of causes, there
appears to be no ground whatever except the sense of
spontaneity. But the sense of spontaneity only affirms that

38


THE ELEMENTS OF ETHICS

we can do as we choose, and choose as we please, which no
detcrminist denies; it cannot affirm that our choice is
independent of all motives,^ and indeed introspection tends
rather to show the opposite. It is said by the advocates of
free-will* that determinism destroys morals, since it shows
that all our actions are inevitable, and that therefore they
deserve neither praise nor blame. Let us consider how far,
if at all, this is the case.

26. The part of ethics which is concerned, not with con-
duct, but with the meaning of good and bad, and the things
that are intrinsically good and bad, b plainly quite indepen-
dent of freewill. Causality belongs to the description of the
existing world, and we saw that no inference can be drawn
from what exists to what is good. Whether, then, causality
holds always, sometimes, or never is a question wholly
irrelevant in the consideration of intrinsic goods and evik.
But when we come to conduct and the notion of ought, we
cannot be sure that determinism makes no difference. For we
saw that the objectively right action may be defined as that
one which, of all that are possible under the circumstances,
will probably on the whole have the best consequences. The
action which is objectively right must therefore be in some
sense possible. But if determinism is true, there is a sense in
which no action is possible except the one actually performed.
Hence, if the two senses of possibility are the same, the action
actually performed is always objectively right; for it is the
only possible action, and therefore there is no other possible
action which would have had better results. There is here,
I think, a real difficulty. But let us consider the various kinds
of possibility which may be meant.

In order that an act may be a possible act, it must be
physically possible to perform, it must be possible to think of,
and it must be possible to choose if we think of it. Physical

^ A motiue means merely a cause of wditien,

' I use freewUl to mean the doctrine that not all volitions are determined by
causes, which is the denial of determinism. Freewill is often used in senses
compatible with determinism, but I am not concerned to affirm or deny it in
such senses.


39


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

possibility, to begin with, is obviously necessary. There are
drcumstances under which I might do a great deal of good
by running from Oxford to London in five minutes. But I
should not be called unwise, or guilty of an objectively wrong
act, for omitting to do so. We may define an act as physically
possible when it will occur if I will it. Acts for which thib
condition fails are not to be taken account of in estimating
rightness or wrongness.

27. To judge whether an act is possible to think of is more
difficult, but we certainly take account of it in judging what a
man ought to do. There is no pfysical impossibility about
employing one’s spare moments in writing lyric poems better
than any yet written, and this would certainly be a more
useful employment than most people find for their spare
moments. But we do not blame people for not writing lyric
poems unless, like FitzGerald, they are people that we feel
could have written them. And not only do we not blame
them, but we feel that their action may be objectively as well
as subjectively right if it is the wisest that they could have
thought of. But what they could have thought of is not the
same as what they did think of. Suppose a man in a fire or a
shipwreck becomes so panic-stricken that he never for a
moment thinks of the help that is due to other people, we do
not on that account hold that he does right in only thinking
of himself. Hence in some sense (though it is not quite clear
what this sense is), some of the courses of action which a man
does not think of are regarded as possible for him to think of,
though others are admittedly impossible.

There is thus a sense in which it must be possible to think
of an action, if we are to hold that it is objectively wrong not
to perform the action. There is also, if determinism is true, a
sense in which it is not possible to think of any action except
those which we do think of. But it is questionable whether
these two senses of possibility are the same. A man who finds
that his house is on fire may run out of it in a panic without
thinking of warning the other inmates; but ytt feel, rightly or
wrongly, that it was possible for him to think of warning


40


THE ELEMENTS OF ETHICS

them in a sense in which it is not possible for a prosaic person
to think of a lyric poem. It may be that we are wrong in feel-
ing this difference, and that what really distinguishes the two
cases is dependence upon past decisions. That is to say, we
may recognize that no different choice among alternatives
thought of at any time would have turned an ordinary man
into a good lyric poet; but that most men, by suitably choos-
ing among alternatives actually thought of, can acquire the
sort of character which will lead them to remember' their
neighbours in a fire. And if a man engages in some useful
occupation of which a natural effect is to destroy his nerve,
we may conceivably hold that this excuses his panic in an
emergency. In such a point, it would seem that our judgment
may really be dependent on the view we take as to the
existence of freewill; for the believer in freewill cannot allow
any such excuse.

If we try to state the difference we feel between the case of
the lyric poems and the case of the fire, it seems to come to
this: that we do not hold an act objectively wrong when it
would have required what we recognize as a special aptitude
in order to think of a better act, and when we believe that
the agent did not possess this aptitude. But this distinction
seems to imply that there is not such a thing as a special
aptitude for this or that virtue; a view which cannot, I think,
be maintained. An aptitude for generosity or for kindness
may be as much a natural gift as an aptitude for poetry; and
an aptitude for poetry may be as much improved by practice
as an aptitude for kindness or generosity. Thus it would seem
that there is no sense in which it is possible to think of some
actions which in fact we do not think of, but impossible to
think of others, except the sense that the ones we regard as
possible would have been thought of if a different choice
among alternatives actually thought of had been made on
some previous occasion. We shall then modify our previous
definition of the objectively right action by saying that it is the
probably most beneficial among those that occur to the agent
at the moment of choice. But we shall hold that, in certain

4 >


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

cases, the fact that a more beneficial altotiative does not
occur to him is evidence of a wrong choice on some previous
occasion.

28. But since occasions of choice do often arise, and since
there certainly is a sense in which it is possible to choose any
one of a number of different actions which we think of, we
can still distinguish some actions as right and some as wrong.
Our previous definidons of objecdvely right actions and of
morsd actions still hold, with the modification that, among
physically possible actions, only those which we actually think
of are to be regarded as possible. When several alternative
actions present themselves, it is certain that we can both do
which we choose, and choose which we will. In this sense all
the alternatives are possible. What determinism maintains is,
that our will to choose this or that alternative is the effect of
antecedents; but this does not prevent our will from being
itself a cause of other effects. And the sense in which different
decisions are possible seems sufficient to distinguish some
actions as right and some as wrong, some as moral and some
as immoral.

Connected with this is another sense in which, when we
deliberate, either decbion is possible. The fact that we judge
one course objectively right may be the cause of our choosing
this course: thus, before we have decided as to which course
we think right, either is possible in the sense that either will
result from our decision as to which we think right. This sense
of possibility is important to the moralist, and illustrates the
fact that determinism does not make moral deliberation
futile.

29. Determinism does not, therefore, destroy the distinc-
tion of right and wrong; and we saw before that it does not
destroy the distinction of good and bad: we shall still be able
to regard some people as better than others, and some actions
as more right than others. But it is said that praise and blame
and responsibility are destroyed by determinism. When a
madman commits what in a sane man we should call a crime,
we do not blame him, partly because he probably cannot


42


THE ELEMENTS OF ETHICS

judge rightly as to consequences, but partly also because we
feel that he could not have done otherwise: if all men are
really in the position of the madman, it would seem that all
ought to escape blame. But I think the question of choice
really decides as to praise and blame. The madman, we
believe (excluding the case of wrong judgment as to conse-
quences), did not choose between different courses, but was
impelled by a blind impuke. The sane man who (say)
commits a murder has, on the contrary, either at the time of
the murder or at some earlier time, chosen the worst of two
or more alternatives that occurred to him; and it is for this
we blame him. It is true that the two cases merge into each
other, and the madman may be blamed if he has become
mad in consequence of vicious self-indulgence. But it is right
that the two cases should not be too sharply distinguished,
for we know how hard it often is in practice to decide whether
people are what is called Responsible for their actions’. It is
sufficient that there is a distinction, and that it can be applied
easily in most cases, though there are marginal cases which
present difficulties. We apply praise or blame, then, and we
attribute responsibility, where a man, having to exercise
choice, has chosen wrongly; and this sense of praise or blame
is not destroyed by determinism.

30. Determinism, then, does not in any way interfere with
morak. It is worth noticing that freewill, on the contrary,
would interfere most seriously, if anybody really believed in
it. People never do, as a matter of fact, believe that anyone
eke’s actions are not determined by motives, however much
they may think themselves free. Bradshaw consists entirely of
predictions as to the actions of engine-drivers; but no one
doubts Bradshaw on the ground that the volitions of engine-
drivers are not governed by motives. If we really believed
that other people’s actions did not have causes, we could
never try to influence other people’s actions; for such influence
can only result if we know, more or less, what causes will
produce the actions we desire. If we could never try to
influence other people’s actions, no man could try to get


43


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

elected to Parliament, or ask a woman to marry him:
argument, exhortation, and command would become mere
idle breath. Thus almost all the actions with which morality
is concerned would become irrational, rational action would
be wholly precluded from trying to influence people’s
volitions, and right and wrong would be interfered with in a
way in which determinism certainly does not interfere with
them. Most morality absolutely depends upon the assump-
tion that volitions have causes, and nothing in morals is
destroyed by this assumption.

Most people, it is true, do not hold the freewill doctrine in
so extreme a form as that against which we have been
arguing. They would hold that most of a man’s actions have
causes, but that some few, say one per cent, are uncaused
spontaneous assertions of will. If this view is taken, unless we
can mark off the one per cent of volitions which are uncaused,
every inference as to human actions is infected with what we
may call one per cent of doubt. This, it must be admitted,
would not matter much in practice, because, on other
grounds, there will usually be at least one per cent of doubt
in predictions as to human actions. But from the standpoint of
theory there is a wide difference: the sort of doubt that must
be admitted in any case is a sort which is capable of indefinite
diminution, while the sort derived from the possible inter-
vention of freewill is absolute and ultimate. In so &r, there-
fore, as the possibility of uncaused volitions comes in, all the
consequences above pointed out follow; and in so far as it
does not come in, determinism holds. Thus one per cent of
freewill has one ^er cent of the objectionableness of absolute
freewill, and has also only one per cent of the ethical con-
sequences.

In fact, however, no one really holds that right acts are
uncaused. It would be a monstrous paradox to say that a
man’s decision ought not to be influenced by his belief as to
what is his duty; yet, if he allows himself to decide on an act
because he believes it to be his duty, his dedtion has a
motive, i.e. a cause, and is not free in the only sense in which


44


THE ELEMENTS OF ETHICS

the determinist must deny freedom. It would seem, therefore,
that the objections to determinism are mainly attributable to
misunderstanding of its purport. Hence, finally it u not deter-
minism but fi*eewill that has subversive consequences. There
is therefore no reason to regret that the grounds in favour of
determinism are overwhelmingly strong.

V. EGOISM

31. We have next to consider an objection to the view that
objective rightness consists in probably having the best
consequences on the whole. The objection I mean is that of
egoism: that a man’s first duty is to Itimself, and that to secure
his own good is more imperative than to secure other people’s.
Extensions of this view are, that a man should prefer the
interest of his family to that of strangers, of his countrymen to
that of foreigners, or of his friends to that of hb enemies. All
these views have in common the belief that, quite apart from
practicability, the ends which one man ought to pursue are
different from those which another man ought to pursue.

Egobm has several different meanings. It may mean that
every man is psychologically bound to pursue hb own good
exclusively; it may mean that every man will achieve the
best result on the whole by pursuing hb own good; it may
mean that his own good is the only thing a man ought to
think good; and it may mean, lastly, that there b no such
thing as the general good at all, but only individual goods,
and that each man b only concerned with what b good for
himself. These meanings all presuppose that we know what
b meant by good’; but thb is not an easy conception to
define clearly. I shall therefore begin by considering what it
b capable of meaning.

32. ‘My good’ b a phrase capable of many different
meanings. It may mean any good that I desire, whether thb
has any further special relation to me or not. Or, again, it
may mean my pleasure, or any state of mind in me which is
gooid. Or it may include honour and respect from others, or


45


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

anything which is a good and has some relation to me in
virtue of which it can be considered mtiw. The two meanings
with which we shall be concerned are: (i) any good I
desire, (2) any good having to me some relation other than
that I desire it, which it does not have to others, of the kind
which makes it mine, as my pleasure, my reputation, my
learning, my virtue, etc.

The theory that every man is psychologically bound to
pursue his own good exclusively is, I think, inconsutent with
known facts of human nature, unless ‘my good’ is taken in the
sense of ‘something which I desire’, and even then I do not
necessarily pursue what I desire most strongly. The important
point is, that what I desire has not necessarily any such other
relation to me as would make it my good in the second of the
above senses. This is the point which must now occupy us.

If ‘my good’ means a good which is mine in some other
sense than that I desire it, then I think it can be shown that
my good is by no means the only object of my actions. There
is a common confusion in people’s thoughts on this subject,
namely the following: If I desire anything, its attainment will
give me more or less pleasure, and its non-attainment will
give me more or less pain. Hence it is inferred that I desire it
on account of the pleasure it would give me, and not on its
own account. But this is to put the cart before the horse. The
pleasure we get from things usually depends upon our having
had a desire which they satisfy; the pleasures of eating and
drinking, for example, depend upon hunger and thirst. Or
take, again, the pleasure people get from the victory of their
own party in a contest. Other people would derive just the
same pleasure from the victory of the opposite party; in
each case the pleasure depands for its existence upon the
desire, and would not exist if the desire had not existed. Thus
we cannot say that people only desire pleasure. They desire
all kinds of things, and pleasures come from desires much
oflener than desires from imagined pleasures. Thus the mere
fact that a man will derive some pleasure from achieving his
object is no reason for saying that his desire is self-centred.

46


THE ELEMENTS OF ETHICS

33. Such arguments are necessary for the refutation of those
who hold it to be obvious a priori that every man must always
pursue his own good exclusively. But, as is often the case with
refutations of a priori theories, there is an air of logic-chopping
about a discussion as to whether desire or the pleasure
expected from its satisfaction ought to have priority. Let us
leave these questions, and consider whether, as a matter of
fact, people’s actions can be explained on the egoistic
hypothesis. The most obvious instances to the contrary are,
of course, cases of self-sacrifice — of men to their country, for
example, or of parents to children. But these instances are so
obvious that the egoistic theory is ready with an answer. It
will maintain that, in such cases, the people who make the
sacrifice would not be happy if they did not make it, that
they desire the applause of men or of their own consciences,
that they find in the moment of sacrifice an exaltation which
realizes their highest self, etc., etc., etc. Let us examine these
arguments. It is said that the people in question would not
be happy if they did not make the sacrifice. This is often fake
in fact, but we may let that pass. Why would they not be
happy? Either because others would think less well of them,
or because they themselves would feel pangs of conscience,
or because they genuinely desired the object to be attained
by their sacrifice and could not be happy without it. In the
last case they have admittedly a desire not centred in self;
the supposed effect upon their happiness is due to the desire,
and would not otherwise exist, so that the effect upon happi-
ness cannot be brought into account for the desire. But if
people may have desires for things that lie outside their ego,
then such desires, like others, may determine action, and it is
possible to pursue an object which is not *my’ good in any
sense except that I desire and pursue it. Thus, in all cases of
self-sacrifice, those who hold the egoistic theory will have to
maintain that the outside end secured by the self-sacrifice is
not desired. When a soldier sacrifices his life he does not
desire the victory of his country, and so on. This is already
sufficiently preposterous, and sufficiently contrary to plain


47


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

fact. But it is not enough. Assuming that this is the case, let us
suppose that self-sacrifice is dictated, not by desire for any
outside end, but by fear of the disapproval of others. If this
were so there would be no self-sacrifice if no one would know
of its non-performance. A man who saw another drowning
would not try to save him if he was sure that no one would
see him not jumping into the water. This also is plainly
contrary to fact. It may be said that the desire for approval,
as well as the fear of disapproval, ought to be taken into
account; and a man can always make sure of approval by
judicious boasting. But men have made sacrifices univers-
ally disapproved, for example, in maintaining unpopular
opinions; and very many have made sacrifices of which an
essential part was that they should not be mentioned. Hence
the defender of psychological egoism is driven back on the
approval of conscience as the motive to an act of self-sacrifice.
But it is really impossible to believe that all who deny them-
selves are so destitute of rational foresight as this theory
implies. The pangs of conscience are to most people a very
endurable pain, and practice in wrong-doing rapidly dim-
inishes them. And if the act of self-denial involves the loss
of life, the rapture of self-approbation, which the virtuous
man is supposed to be seeking, must in any case be very brief.
I conclude that the psychology of egoism is only produced by
the exigencies of a wrong theory, and is not in accordance
with the facts of observable human nature.

Thus when we consider human actions and desires apart
from preconceived theories, it is obvious that most of them
are objective and have no direct reference to self. If ‘my good’
means an object belonging to me in the sense of being a state
of my mind, or a whole of which a state of my mind is a part,
or what others think about me, then it is false that I can only
desire or pursue my good. The only sense in which it is true
is when ‘my good’ is taken to mean ‘what I desire’; but what
1 desire need not have any other connection with myself,
except that I desire it. Thus there is no truth in the doctrine
that men do, as a matter of fact, only desire or pursue objects

48


THE ELEMENTS OF ETHICS

specially related to themselves in any way except as objects
desired or pursued.

34. The next form of egoism to be considered is the doctrine
that every man will best serve the general good by pursuing
his x>wn. There is a comfortable eighteenth-century flavour
about this doctrine — ^it suggests a good income, a good
digestion, and an enviable limitation of sympathy. We may
admit at once that in a well-ordered world it would be true,
and even' that, as society becomes better organized," it be-
comes progressively truer, since rewards will more and more
be attached to useful actions. And in so far as a man’s own
good is more in his control than other people’s, his actions
will rightly concern themselves more wiA it than with other
people’s. For the same reason he will be more concerned with
the good of his family than with that of people with whom he
has less to do, and more with the good of his own country
than with that of foreign countries. But the scope of such
considerations is strictly limited, and everyone can easily find
in his own experience cases where the general good has been
served by what at any rate appears to be a self-sacrifice. If
such cases are to be explained away, it is necessary to alter
the conception of ‘my own good’ in a way which destroys the
significance of the doctrine we are considering. It may be
said, for example, that the greatest of goods is a virtuous life.
It will then follow that whoever lives a virtuous life secures
for himself the greatest of goods. But if the doctrine means to
assert, as it usually does, that self-centred desires, if they are
prudent and enlightened, will suffice to produce the most
useful conduct, then a refutation may be obtained either
from common experience or from any shining example of
public merit. The reformer is almost always a man who has
strong desires for objects quite unconnected with himself; and
indeed this is a characteristic of all who are not petty-minded.
I think the doctrine depends for its plausibility, like psycho-
logical egoism, upon regarding every object which I desire as
fip* good, and supposing that it must be mine in some other
sense than that I desire it.


49


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

35. The doctrine that my good u the only thing that I
ought to think good can only be logically maintained by
those who hold that I ought to believe what is false. For if I
am right in thinking that my good is the only good, then
everyone else is mistaken unless he admits that my good, not
his, is the only good. But this is an admission which I can
scarcely hope that others will be willing to make.

But what is really intended is, as a rule, to deny that there
is any such thing as the general good at all. This doctrine
cannot be logically refuted, unless by discovering in those
who maintain it some opinion which implies the opposite.
If a man were to maintain that there is no such thing as
colour, for example, we should be unable to disprove his
position, provided he was careful to think out its implications.
As a matter of fact, however, everybody does hold opinions
which imply a general good. Everybody judges that some
sorts of communities are better than others; and most people
who affirm that when they say a thing is good they mean
merely that they desire it, would admit that it is better two
people’s desires should be satisfied than only one person’s. In
rome such way people fail to carry out the doctrine that there
is no such concept as good’, and if there is such a concept, then
what is good is not good for me or for you, but is simply good.
The denial that there is such a thing as good in an impersonal
sense is only possible, therefore, to those who are content to
have no ethics at all.

36. It is possible to hold that, although there is such a
thing as the general good, and although this is not always
best served by pursuing my own good, yet it is always right
to pursue my own good exclusively. This doctrine is not now
often held as regards individuab; but in international politics
it b commonly held as regards nations. Many Englbhmen
and many Germans would admit that it b right for an
Englbh statesman to pursue exclusively the good of England,
and a German the good of Germany, even if that good b to be
attained by greater injury to the other. It b difficult to see
what grounds there can ^ for such a view. If good b to be


50


THE ELEMENTS OF ETHICS

pursued at all, it can hardly be relevant who is going to enjoy
the good. It would be as reasonable for a man on Sundays to
think only of his welfare on future Sundays, and on Mondays
to think only of Mondays. The doctrine, in fact, seems to have
no merit except that it justifies acts otherwise unjustifiable.
It is, indeed, so evident that it is better to secure a greater
good for A than a lesser good for B, that it is hard to find any
still more evident principle by which to prove this. And if A
happens to be someone else, and B to be myself, that cdnnot
affect the question, since it is irrelevant to the general maxim
who A and B may be.

If no form of egoism is valid, it follows that an act which
ought to be performed may involve a self-sacrifice not com-
pensated by any personal good acquired by means of such an
act. So unwilling, however, are people to admit self-sacrifice
as an ultimate duty that they will often defend theological
dogmas on the ground that such dogmas reconcile self-
interest with duty. Such reconciliations, it should be ob-
served, are in any case merely external; they do not show
that duty means the pursuit of one’s own interest, but only that
the acts which it dictates are those that further one’s own
interest. Thus when it is pretended that there are logical
grounds making such reconciliations imperative, we must
reply that the logical purpose aimed at could only be secured
by showing that duty means the same as self-interest. It is
sometimes said that the two maxims, ’You ought to aim at
producing the greatest possible good’ and ‘You ought to
pursue your own interest’, are equally evident; and each is
supposed to be true in all possible circumstances and in all
possible worlds. But if that were the case, a world where self-
interest and the general good might conflict ought not only
to be non-existent, but inconceivable; yet so far is it from
being inconceivable that many people conceive it to be
exemplified in the actual world. Hence the view that honesty
is the best policy may be a comfort to the reluctant saint, but
cannot be a solution to the perplexed logician. The notion,
therefore, that a good God or a future life can be logically


5 *


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

inferred to remove the apparent conflict of self-interest and
the general good is quite unwarrantable. If there were a
logical puzzle, it could only be removed by showing that
self-interest and the general good man the same thing, not
by showing that they coincide in fact. But if the above
disciission has been sound, there is no logical puzzle: we
ought to pursue the general good, and when this conflicts
with self-interest, self-interest oug^t to give way.

VI. METHODS OF ESTIMATING GOODS AND EVILS

37. In order to complete our account of ethics, it would be
natural to give a list of the principal goods and evils of which
we have experience. I shsdl, however, not attempt to give
such a list, since I hold that the reader is probably quite as
capable as I am of judging what things are good and what
bad. All that I propose to do in this section is to examine the
view that we can never know what is good and what bad,
and to suggest methods to be employed and fallacies to be
avoided in considering intrinsic goodness or badness.

There is a widespread ethical scepticism, which is based
upon observation of men’s differences in regard to ethical
questions. It is said that A thinks one thing good, and B
thinks another, and there is no possible way in which either
can persuade the other that he is wrong. Hence, it is con-
cluded, the whole thing is really only a matter of taste, and
it is a waste of time to ask which is right when two people
differ in a judgment of value.

It would be absurd to deny that, as compared with
physical science, ethics does suffer from a measure of the
defect which such scepdo^allege. It must be admitted that
ultimately the judgment *this thing is good’ or ‘that thing is
bad’ must be an immediate judgment, which results merely
from considering the thing appraised, and cannot be proved
by any argument that would appeal to a man who had
passed an opposite immediate judgment. I think it must also
be admitted that, even after every possible precaution against


5 *


THE ELEMENTS OF ETHICS

error has been taken, people’s inunediate judgments of value
do still differ more or less. But such immediate differences
seem to me to be the exception: most of the actual differences
are of a kind which argument might lessen, since usually the
opinion held is either one of which the opposite is demon-
strable or one which is falsely believed to be itself demon-
strable. This second alternative embraces all false beliefi
held because they flow from a false theory; and such beliefi,
though often the direct contraries of what immediate in-
spection would lead to, are apt to be a complete bar to
inspection. This is a very familiar phenomenon. Sydney
Smith, believed to be always witty, says ‘pass the mustard’,
and the whole table is convulsed with laughter. Much wrong
judgment in ethics is of this nature.

38. In regard to the things that are good or bad, in them-
selves, and not merely on account of their effects, there are
two opposite errors of this sort to be avoided — the one the
error of the philosopher, the other that of the moralist. The
philosopher, bent on the construction of a system, is inclined
to symplify the facts unduly, to give them a symmetry which
is fictitious, and to twist them into a form in which they can
all be deduced from one or two general principles. The
moralist, on the other hand, being primarily concerned with
conduct, tends to become absorbed in means, to value the
actions men ought to perform more than the ends which such
actions serve. This latter error — ^for in theorizing it is an
error — ^is so forced upon us by the exigencies of practice that
we may easily come to feel die ultimate ends of life far less
important than the proximate and intermediate purposes
which we consciously endeavour to realize. And hence most
of what they value in this world would have to be omitted by
many merits from any imagined heaven, because there
such things as self-denial and effort and courage and pity
could find no place. The philosopher’s error is less common
than the moralist’s, because the love of system and of the
intellectual satisfaction of a deductive edffice is rarer than
the love of virtue. But among writers on ethics the philo-


53


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

sopher’s error occurs oftener than the othet', because such
writers are almost always among the few men who have the
love of system. Kant has the bad eminence of combining both
errors in the highest possible degree, since he holds that there
is nothing good except the virtuous will — a view which
simplifies the good as much as any philosopher could wish,
and mistakes means for ends as completely as any moralist
could enjoin.

39. llie moralist’s fallacy illustrates another important
point. The immediate jud^ents which are required in
ethics concern intrinsic goods and evils, not right and wrong
conduct. I do not wish to deny that people liave immediate
judgments of right and wrong, nor yet that in action it is
usually moral to follow such judgments. What I mean is that
such judgments are not among those which ethics must
accept without proof, provided that (whether by the suggest-
ions of such judgments or otherwise) we have accepted some
such general connection of right action with good conse-
quencies as was advocated in Section in. For then, if we know
what is good and bad, we can discover what is right or wrong;
hence in regard to right and wrong it is unnecessary to
rely upon immediate inspection — a method which must
be allowed some scope, but should be allowed as little as
possible.

I think when attention is clearly confined to good and bad,
as opposed to right and wrong, the amount of disagreement
between different people is seen to be much less than might
at first be thought. Right and wrong, since they depend upon
consequences, will vary as men’s circumstances vary, and
will be largely affected, in particular, by men’s beliefs about
right and wrong, since many acts will in all likelihood have
a worse effect if they are generally believed to be wrong than
if they are generally believed to be right, while with some
acts the opposite is the case. (For example, a man who, in
exception^ circumstances, acts contrary to a received and
generally true moral rule, is more likely to be right if he will
be thought to be wrong, for then his action will have less


54


THE ELEMENTS OF ETHICS

tendency to weaken the authority of the rule.) Thus differ-
ences as regards rules of right action are not a ground for
scepticism, provided the different rules are held in different
societies. Yet such differences are in practice a very powerful
solvent of ethical beliefs.

40. Some differences as to what is good in itself must,
however, be acknowledged even when all possible care has
been taken to consider the question by itself. For example,
retributive punishment, as opposed to deterrent or reforma-
tive punishment, was almost universally considered good until
a recent time; yet in our own day it is very generally con-
demned. Hell can only be justified if retributive punishment
is good; and the decay of a belief in hell appears to be mainly
due to a change of feeling on this point.

But even where there seems to be a difference as to ends,
this difference is often due to some theory on one side or on
both, and not to immediate inspection. Thus in the case of
hell, people may reason, consciously or unconsciously, that
revelation shows that God created hell, and that therefore
retributive punishment must be good; and this argument
doubtless influences many who would otherwbe hold retri-
butive punishment to be bad. Where there is such an influence
we do not have a genuine difference in an immediate judg-
ment as to intrinsic good or bad; and in fact such differences
are, I believe, very rare indeed.

41. A source of apparent differences is that some things
which in isolation are bad or indifferent are essential in-
gredients in what is good as a whole, and some things which
are good or indifferent are essential ingredients in what is
bad as a whole. In such cases we judge differently according
as we are considering a thing in isolation or as an ingredient
in some larger whole. To judge whether a thing is in itself
good, we have to ask ourselves whether we should value it if
it existed otherwise than as an ingredient in some whole
which we value. But to judge whether a thing ought to exist,
we have to consider whether it is a part of some whole which
we value so much that we prefer the existence of the whole


55


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

with its possibly bad part to the existence 'of neither. Thus
compassion is a good of which someone’s misfortune is an
essential part; envy is an evil of which someone’s good is an
essential part. Hence the position of some optimists, that all
the evil in the world is necessary to constitute the best
possible whole, is not logically absurd, though there is, so far
as I know, no evidence in its favour. Similarly the view that
all the good is an unavoidable ingredient in the worst
possible whole is not logically absurd; but this view, not being
agreeable, has found no advocates.

Even where none of the parts of a good whole are bad, or
of a bad whole good, it often happens that the value of a
complex whole cannot be measured by adding together the
values of its parts; the whole is often better or worse than the
sum of the values of its parts. In all aesthetic pleasures, for
example, it is important that the object admired should really
be beautiful: in the admiration of what is ugly there is some-
thing ridiculous, or even sometimes repulsive, although,
apart from the object, there may be no difference in the value
of the emotion per se. And yet, apart from the admiration it
may produce, a beautiful object, if it is inanimate, appears to
be neither good nor bad. Thus in themselves an ugly object
and the emotion it excites in a person of bad taste may be
respectively just as good as a beautiful object and the
emotion it excites in a person of good taste; yet we consider
the enjoyment of what is beautiful to be better, as a whole,
than an exactly similar enjoyment of what is ugly. If we did
not we should be foolish not to encourage bad taste, since
ugly objects are much eader to produce than beautiful ones.
In like manner, we consider it better to love a good person
than a bad one. Titania’s 4 ove for Bottom may be as lyric as
Juliet’s for Romeo; yet Titania is laughed at. Thus many
goods must be estimated as wholes, not piecemeal; and
exactly the same applies to evib. In such cases the wholes
may be called orgamc unities.

43. Many theorists who have some simple account of the
sole good have also, probably without having recognized

56


THE ELEMENTS OF ETHICS

them as such, immediate judgments of value inconsistent
with their theory, from which it appears that their theory is
not really derived from immediate judgments of value. Thus
those who have held that virtue is the sole good have
generally also held that in heaven it will be rewarded by
happiness. Yet a reward must be a good; thus they plainly
feel that happiness also is a good. If virtue were the sole good
it would be logically compelled to be its own reward.

A nmilar argument can be brought against those who hold
that the sole good is pleasure (or happiness, as some prefer
to call it). This doctrine is regarded as self-evident by many,
both philosophers and plain men. But although the general
principle may at first sight seem obvious, many of its applica-
tions are highly paradoxical. To live in a fool’s paradise is
commonly considered a misfortune; yet in a world which
allows no paradise of any other kind a fool’s paradise is surely
the happiest habitation. All hedonists are at great pains to
prove that what are called the higher pleasures are really the
more pleasurable. But plainly their anxiety to prove this
arises ^m an uneasy instinct that such pleasures are higher,
even if they are not more pleasurable. The bias which appears
in hedonist arguments on this point is otherwise quite in-
explicable. Although they hold that, ’quantity of pleasure
being equal, pushpin is as good as poetry,’ they are careful to
argue t^t quantity of pleasure is not equal, but is greater
in the case of poetry — a proposition which seems highly
disputable, and chiefly commended by its edifying nature.
Anyone would admit that the pleasure of poetry is a greater
good than the pleasure of bathing on a hot day; but few
people could say honestly that it is as intense. And even
states of mind which, as a whole, are painful, may be highly
good. Love of the dead may easily be the best thing in a life;
yet it cannot but be full of pain. And conversely, we condemn
pleasure derived from the love of what is bad; even if we
admit that the pleasure in itself is a good, we consider the
whole state of mind bad. If two bitter enemies lived in
different countries, and each falsely believed that the other

57


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

was undergoing tortures, each might feel pleasure; yet we
should not consider such a state of things good. We should
even think it much worse than a state in which each derived
pain from the belief that the other was in torture. It may, of
course, be said that this is due to the fact that hatred in
general causes more pain than pleasure, and hence is con-
demned broadly on hedonistic grounds, without sufficient
regard to possible exceptions. But the possibility of exceptions
to the principle that hatred is bad can hardly be seriously
maintained, except by a theorist in difficulties.

Thus while we may admit that all pleasure, in itself, is
probably more or less good, we must hold that pleasures are
not good in proportion to their intensity, and that many
states of mind, although pleasure is an element in them, are
bad as a whole, and may even be worse than they would be
if the pleasure were absent. And this result has been reached
by appealing to ethical judgments with which almost every-
one would agree. I conclude, therefore, from all that has been
adduced in this section, that although some ultimate ethical
differences must be admitted between different people, by
far the greater part of the commonly observed differences
are due either to asking the wrong question (as, e.g., by mu-
taking means for ends), or to the influence of a hasty theory
in falsifying immediate judgments. There is reason to hope,
therefore, that a very large measure of agreement on ethical
questions may be expected to result from clearer thinking;
and this is probably the chief benefit to be ultimately derived
from the study of ethics.

43. We may now sum up our whole discussion of ethics.
The most fundamental notions in ethics, we agreed, are the
notions of intrinsic good^and evil. These are wholly in-
dependent of other options, and the goodness or badness of
a thing cannot be inferred from any of its other qualities,
such as its existence or non-existence. Hence what actually
occurs has no bearing on what ought to occur, and what
ought to occur has no bearing on what does occur. The next
pair of notions with which we were concerned were those of

58


THE ELEMENTS OF ETHICS

objective right and wrong. The objectively right act is the act
which a man will hold tliat he ought to perform when he is
not mistaken. This, we decided, is that one, of all the acts
that are possible, which will probably produce the best
results. Thus in judging what actions are right we need to
know what results are good. When a man is mistaken as to
what is objectively right, he may nevertheless act in a way
which is subjectively right; thus we need a new pair of notions,
which we called moral and immoral. A moral act is virtuous
and deserves praise; an immoral act is sinful and deserves
blame. A moral act, we decided, is one which the agent
would have judged right after an appropriate amount of
candid reflection,^ where the appropriate amount of re-
flection depends upon the difficulty and importance of his
decision. We then considered the bearing of determinism on
morals, which we found to consist in a limitation of the acts
which are possible under any circumstances. If determinism is
true, there is a sense in which no act is possible except the
one which in fact occurs; but there is another sense, which is
the one relevant to ethics, in which any act is possible which
is contemplated during deliberation (provided it is physically
possible, i.e. will be performed if we will to perform it). We
then discussed various forms of egoism, and decided that all
of them are fake. Finally, we considered some mistakes which
are liable to be made in attempting to form an immediate
judgment as to the goodness or badness of a thing, and we
decided that, when these mistakes are avoided, people
probably differ very little in their judgments of intrinsic
value. The making of such judgments we did not undertake;
for if the reader agrees, he could make them himself, and if
he dkagrees without falling into any of the possible con-
fusions, there is no way of altering his opinion.

* Or after a small amount in the case of acts which ought to be impulsive.


59


II


ON HISTORY!


Of all the studies by which men acquire citizenship of the
intellectual commonwealth, no single one is so indispensable
as the study of the past. To know how the world developed
to the point at which our individual memory begins; how
the religions, the institutions, the nations among which we
live, became what they are; to be acquainted with the great
of other times, with customs and belief differing widely from
our own — these things are indispensable to any consciousness
of our position, and to any emancipation from the accidental
drcumstances of our education. It is not only to the historian
that history is valuable, not only to the professed student of
archives and documents, but to all who are capable of a con-
templative survey of human life. But the value of history is so
multiform, that those to whom some one of its sides appeals
with especial force are in constant danger of forgetting all the
others.


I

History is valuable, to begin widi, because it is true; and this,
though not the whole of its value, is the foundation and con-
dition of all the rest. ThaLall knowledge, as such, is in some
degree good, would appear to be at least probable; and the
knowledge of every historical fact possesses this element of
goodness, even if it possesses no oUier. Modem historians,
for the most part, seem to regard tmth as constituting the
whole of the value of history. On this ground they urge the

* Reprinted bcm Thi /ndpmdml RtvUw, July 1904.

60


ON HISTORY

self*efFacement of the historian before the document; every
intrusion of his own personality, they fear, will involve some
degree of &lsification. Objectivity before all things is to be
sought, they tell us; let the facts be merely narrated, and
allowed to speak for themselves — ^if they can find tongues.
It follows, as a part of the poridon, that all facts are equally
important; and, although this doctrine can never be quite
conformed to in practice, it seems nevertheless to float before
many minds as an ideal toward which research may^grad-
uaily approximate.

That the writing of history should be based on the study
of documents is an opinion which it would be absurd to
controvert. For they alone contain evidence as to what really
occurred; and it is plain that untrue history can have no great
value. Moreover, there is more life in one document than in
fifty histories (omittii^ a very few of the best); by the mere
fact that it contains what belongs to that actual past time, it
has a strangely vivid life-in-death, such as belongs to our own
past when some sound or scent awakens it. And a history
written after the event can hardly make us realize that the
actors were ignorant of the future; it is difficult to believe that
the late Romans did not know their empire was about to fall,
or that Charles I was unaware of so notorious a fact as his
own execution.

But if documents are, in so many ways, superior to any
deliberate history, what function remains to the historian?
There is, to begin with, the business of selection. This would
be admitted by all; for the materials are so vast, that it is
impossible to present the whole of them. But it is not always
realized that selection involves a standard of value among
facts, and therefore implies that truth is not the sole aim in
recording the past. For all facts are equally true; and
selection among them is only possible by means of some other
criterion than their truth. And the existence of some such
criterion is obvious; no one would maintain, for example,
that the litde Restoration scandals recorded by Grammont
are as important as the letters on the Piedmontese massacres,

6i


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

by which Milton, in the name of Cromwell, summoned the
tardy potentates of Europe.

It may be said, however, that the only true principle of
selection is the purely scientific one; those facts are to be
regarded as important which lead to the establishment of
general laws. Whether there ever will be a science of history,
it is quite impossible to guess; at any rate it is certain that
no such science exists at present, except to some slight degree
in the province of economics. In order that the scientific
criterion of importance among facts should be applicable, it
is necessary that two or more hypotheses should have been
invented, each accounting for a large number of the facts,
and that then a crucial fact should be discovered which
discriminates between the rivals. Facts are important, in the
inductive sciences, solely in relation to theories; and new
theories give importance to new facts. So, for example, the
doctrine of Natural Selection brought into prominence all
transitional and intermediate species, the existence of rudi-
ments, and the embryological record of descent. But it will
hardly be maintained that history has reached, or is soon
likely to reach, a point where such standards are applicable
to its facts. History, considered as a body of truth, seems
destined long to remain almost purely descriptive. Such
generalizations as have been suggested — omitting the sphere
of economics — are, for the most part, so plainly unwarranted
as to be not even worthy of refutation. Burke argued that
all revolutions end in military tyrannies, and predicted
Napoleon. In so far as hu argument was based on the analogy
of Cromwell, it was a very lucky hit; but certainly not a
scientific law. It is true that numerous instances are not
always necessary to establish a law, provided the essential
and relevant circumstances can be easily disentangled. But,
in history, so many circumstances of a small and accidental
nature are relevant, that no broad and simple uniformities
are possible.

And there is a further point against this view of history as
solely or chiefly a causal science. Where our main endeavour

62


ON HISTORY

is to discover general laws, we regard these as intrinsically
more valuable than any of the facts which they inter-connect.
In astronomy, the law of gravitation is plainly better worth
knowing than the position of a particular planet on a par-
ticular night, or even on every night throughout a year.
There are in the law a splendour and simplicity and sense of
mastery, which illuminate a mass of otherwise uninteresting
detaik. And so again in biology: until the theory of evolution
put meaning into the bewildering variety of organic' struc-
tures, the particular facts were interesting only to the
professed naturalist. But in hktory the matter is far otherwise.
In economics, it k true, the data are often subordinate to the
attempts at science which are based upon them; but in all
other departments, the data are more interesting, and the
scientific superstructure less satkfactory. Historical facts,
many of them, have an intrinsic value, a profound interest on
their own account, which makes them worthy of study, quite
apart from any possibility of linking them together by means
of causal laws.

The study of history k often recommended on the ground
of its utility in regard to the problems of present-day politics.
That hktory has great utility in this respect, it k impossible
to deny; but it k necessary very carefully to limit and define
the kind of guidance to be expected from it. The ‘teachings
of hktory’, in the crude sense, pre-suppose the discovery of
causal laws, usually of a very sweeping kind; and ‘teachings’
of thk sort, though in certain cases they may do no harm,
are always theoretically unsound. In the eighteenth century
perpetually, and in our own day occasionally, arguments as
to the value of liberty or democracy are drawn from Greece
and Rome; their greatness or their decay, according to the
bias of the author, k attributed to these causes. What can be
more grotesque than to hear the rhetoric of the Romans
applied to the circumstances of the French Revolution! The
whole organization of a City State, based on slavery, without
representative institutions, and without printing, k so utterly
remote from any modem democracy as to make all analogy,

63


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

except of the vaguest kind, totally fiivdlous and unreal. So
with regard to imperialism, arguments are drawn from the
successes and failures of the ancients. Shall we believe, for
example, that Rome was ruined by the perpetual extension
of her firontiers? Or shall we believe, with Mommsen, that the
failure to conquer the Germans between the Rhine and the
Danube was one of her most fatal errors? All such arguments
will always be conducted according to the prejudices of the
author; and all alike, even if they have some measure of
truth in regard to the past, must be quite inapplicable to the
present.

This evil is greatest when history is regarded as teaching
some general philosophical doctrine, such as: Right, in the
long run, is Might; Truth always prevails in the end; or.
Progress is a universal law of society. All such doctrines
require, for their support, a careful choice of place and time,
and, what is worse, a falsification of values. A very fiagrant
instance of this danger is Carlyle. In the case of Puritanism,
it led him to justify all Cromwell’s acts of impatience and
illegality, and arbitrarily to arrest his survey in 1658; how
he accounted for the Restoration, it is impossible to say. In
other cases, it led him still further astray. For it is often hard
to discover on which side the Right lies, but the Might is
visible to all men; thus the doctrine that Right is might slides
insensibly into the belief that Might is Right. Hence the
praise of Frederick and Napoleon and Bismarck, the pitiless
contempt for the Negroes, the Irish, and the ‘thirty-thousand
distressed needlewomen’. In some such way, every general
theory that all is for the best must be forced by the facts into
defence of the indefensible.

Nevertheless, historY has a function in regard to current
affairs, but a funcdon less direct, less exact, and less decisive.
It may, in the first place, suggest minor maxims, whose truth,
when they are once propounded, can be seen without the
help of the events that suggested them. This is largely the case
in economics, where most of the motives concerned are
ample. It is the case also, for a similar reason, in regard to

64


ON HISTORY

strategy. Wherever, out of the facts, a ample deductive
argument from indubitable premises can be eUcited, history
may yield useful precepts. But these will only apply where the
end is given, and are therefore of a technical nature. They
can never tell the statesman what end to pursue, but only,
within certain limits, how some of the more definite ends,
such as wealth, or victory in war, are to be attained.

u

Another and a greater utility, however, belongs also to
history. It enlarges the imagination, and suggests possibilities
of action and feeling which would not have occurred to an
uninstructed mind. It selects from past lives the elements
which were significant and important; it fills our thoughts
with splendid examples, and with the desire for greater ends
than unaided reflection would have discovered. It relates the
present to the past, and thereby the future to the present. It
makes visible and Uving the growth and greatness of nations,
enabling us to extend our hopes beyond the span of our own
lives. In all these ways, a knowledge of history is capable of
giving to statesmanship, and to our daily thoughts, a breadth
and scope unattainable by those whose view is limited to the
present.

What the past does for us may be judged, perhaps, by the
consideration of those younger nations whose energy and
enterprise are winning the envy of Europe. In them we see
developing a type of man, endowed with all the hopefulness
of the Renaissance or of the Age of Pericles, persuaded that
his more vigorous efibrts can quickly achieve whatever has
proved too difficult for the generations that preceded him.
Ignorant and contemptuous of the aims that inspired those
generations, unaware of the complex problems that they
attempted to solve, his rapid success in comparatively simple
achievements encourages his confident belief that the future
belongs to him. But to those who have grown up surrounded
by monuments of men and deeds whose memory they

65


PHILOSOPHICSAL. ESSAYS

cherish, there is a curious thinness about the thoughts and
emotions that inspire this confidence; optimism seems to be
sustained by a too exclusive pursuit of what can be easily
achieved; and hopes are not transmuted into ideals by the
habit of appraising current events by their relation to the
history of the past. Whatever is different from the present is
despised. That among those who contributed nothing to the
dominion of Mammon great men lived, that wisdom may
reside in those whose thoughts are not dominated by the
machine, is incredible to this temper of mind. Action, Success,
Change, are its watchwords; whether the action is noble, the
success in a good cause, or the change an improvement in
anything except wealth, are questions which there is no time
to ask. Against this spirit, whereby all leisure, all care for the
ends of life, are sacrificed to the struggle to be first in a worth-
less race, history and the h^it -Giving with the past are the
surest antidote^ andvfC^^g^,‘niore than ever before, such
antidotes aro

Tl^Wcbtd-of gdMt' de^^is a defeat of Time; for it pro-
longS|jbrir^'^ib^i»^y|l9fi;^lr many ages after they and their
authora have wren swallowed by die abyss of the non-existent.
And, in regard to the past, where contemplation is not ob-
scured by desire and the need for action, we see, more clearly
than in the lives about us, the value, for good and evil, of the
aims men have pursued and the means they have adopted.
It is good, from time to time, to view the present as already
past, and to examine what elements it contains that will add
to the world’s store of permanent possessions, that will live
and give life when we and all our generation have perished.
In the light of this contemplation, all human experience is
transformed, and w^Mitever is sordid or personal is purged
away. And, as we grow in wisdom, the treasure-house of the
ages opens to our view; more and more we learn to know and
love the men through whose devotion all this wealth has
become ours. Gradually, by the contemplation of great lives,
a mystic communion becomes possible, filling the soul like
music firom an invisible choir. Still, out of the past, the voices

66


ON HISTORY

of hexoes call us. As, from a lofty promontory, the bell of an
ancient cathedral, unchanged since the day when Dante
returned from the kingdom of the dead, still sends its solemn
warning across the waters, so their voice still sounds across
the intervening sea of time; still, as then, its calm deep tones
speak to the solitary tortures of cloistered aspiration, putting
the serenity of things eternal in place of the ^ubtful struggle
against ignoble joys and transient pleasures. Not by those
about them were tiiey heard; but they spoke to the winds of
heaven, and the win^ of heaven tell the tale to the great of
later days. The great are not solitary; out of the night come
the voices of those who have gone before, clear and coura-
geous; and so through the ages they march, a mighty pro-
cession, proud, undaunted, unconquerable. To join in this
glorious company, to swell &e immortal paeon of those whom
fate could not subdue — ^this may not be happiness; but what
is happiness to those whose souls are filled with that celestial
music? To them is given what is better than happiness: to
know the fellowship of the great, to livi: in the inspiration of
lofty thoughts, and to be illumined in every perplexity by the
fire of nobility and truth.

But history is more than the record of individual men,
however great: it is the province of history to tell the bio-
graphy, not only of men, but of Man; to present the long
procession of generations as but the passing thoughts of one
continuous life; to transcend their blindness and brevity in
the slow unfol^g of the tremendous drama in which all play
their part. In the migrations of races, in the birth and death
of religions, in the rise and fall of empires, the unconscious
units, without any purpose beyond the moment, have con-
tributed unwittingly to the pageant of the ages; and, firom the
greatness of the whole, some breath of greatness breathes
over ^ who participate in the march. In this lies the haunt-
ing power of the din* history beyond written records. There,
nothing is known but the cloudy outlines of huge events; and,
of all the separate lives that came and went, no memory
remains. Huough unnumbered generations, forgotten sons

67


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

worshipped at the tombs of forgotten fsltfaers, forgotten
mothers bore warriors whose bones whitened the silent
steppes of Asia. The clash of arms, foe hatreds and oppres*
sions, foe blind conflicts of dumb nations, are all sdll, like a
distant waterfall; but slowly, out of foe strife, foe nations that
we know emerged, with a heritage of poetry and piety trans-
mitted from foe buried past.

And this quality, which is all that remains of pre-historic
times, belongs also to foe later periods where foe knowledge
of details is apt to obscure foe movement of foe whole. We,
too, in all our deeds, bear our part in a process of which we
cannot guess foe development: even foe obscurest are actors
in a drama of which we know only that it is great. Whether
any purpose that we value will be achieved, we cannot tell;
but foe drama itself, in any case, is foil of Titanic grandeur.
This quality it is foe business of foe historian to extract from
foe bewildering multitude of irrelevant details. From old
books, wherein foe loves, the hopes, foe faiths of bygone
generations lie embalmed, he calls pictures before our minds,
pictures of high endeavours and brave hopes, living still
through his care, in spite of foilure and death. Before all is
wrapped in oblivion, foe historian must compose afiresh, in
each succeeding age, foe epitaph upon foe life of Man.

The past alone is truly real: foe present is but a painful,
struggling birth into foe immutable being of what is no
longer. Only foe dead exist folly. The lives of foe living are
fragmentary, doubtful, and subject to change; but foe lives
of foe dead are complete, free from foe sway of Time, foe
all but omnipotent lord of foe world. Their failures and
successes, foeir hopes and fears, their joys and pains, have
become eternal — our efforts cannot now abate one jot of
them. Sorrows long buried in foe grave, tragedies of which
only a fading memory remains, loves immortalized by
Death’s hallowing touch — ^foese have a power, a magic, an
untroubled calm, to which no present can attain.

Year by year, comrades die, hopes prove vain, ideals fade;
foe enchant^ land of youth grows more remote, foe road of

68


ON HISTORY


life more wearisome; the burden of the world increases, until
the labour and the pain become almost too heavy to be
borne; joy fades firom the weary nations of the earth, and the
tyranny of the future saps men’s vital force; all that we love is
waning, waning from the dying world. But the past, ever
devouring the transient offspring of the present, lives by the
universal death; steadily, irresistibly, it adds new trophies to
its silent temple, which all the ages build; every great deed,
every splentUd life, every achievement and every heroic
failure, is there ensluined. On the banks of the river of Time,
the sad procession of human generations is marching slowly
to the grave; in the quiet country of the Past, the march is
ended, the tired wanderers rest, and all their weeping is
hushed.


69


Ill


SCIENCE AND HYPOTHESIS^


In this book*, which consists in the main of previous articles
somewhat re-written, M. Poincare’s well-known merits
appear to the full — ^his ludd and trenchant brevity, his air of
easy mastery, which often makes his thought appear less pro-
found than it is, and his power of co-ordinating the whole
domain of mathematics and physics in a single system of
ideas. But these merits, great as they are, are accompanied
by what cannot but appear as defects to anyone accustomed
to philosophy. His fundamental principles, as a rule, are
assumed without discussion, presumably on the ground that
they are self-evident, yet many of them are at the extreme of
one side in time-honoured controversies. Such are: Deduc-
tion can never give new truth; mathematics, so far as it is not
mere definition, derives its certainty from the fact that its
principles concern not nature, but properties of the mind;
science teaches us, not about things themselves, but 9.bout
their relations; ’experiment is the sole source of truth. It alone
can teach us something new; it alone can give us certainty.*
There are also some principles embedded in the chapter on
probability; but these are harder to discover or to state
precisely.

The first section, on Number and Magnitude, begins with
the question: If mathematics is not deductive, why is it
rigorous? and if it is 'deductive, why is it not one vast

^ Reprinted from Mind, July 1905.

^ Science and Hypothesis by H. Poincar6, Member of the Institute of
France. With a preface by J. Larmor, d.sc, Sec. R.S., Lucasian Professor
of Mathematics in the University of Cambridge. London and Newcastle-
on-Tyne: The Walter Scott Publishing Go. Ltd, 1905. Pp xxvii, 244*

70


SCIENCE AND HYPOTHESIS

tautology? The conclusion arrived at is that all pure mathe*
matics depends upon mathematical induction — ^die principle,
that is, that if a property belongs to the number o, and also
belongs to a+ 1, whenever it belongs to n, then this property
belongs to all the natural numbers. This principle may be
expressed popularly by saying that we can get to any one of
the natural numbers, starting from o, by successive additions
of 1 continued for a sufficient (finite) number of times. This
principle, M. Poincar^ says, enables mathematics to pass
from the particular to the general; it condenses within itself
an infinite number of syllogisms: it is synthetic a priori
intuition; it affirms the power of the mind to conceive the
indefinite repetition of the same act, when the act is once
possible; it is ‘necessarily imposed upon us, because it is only
the affirmation of a property of the mind itseir (p. 13); yet
‘this induction is only possible if the same operation can be
repeated indefinitely’ (p. 16).

Since the above theory of deduction underlies most of the
later parts of the book, I shaU consider it at some length.
First of all, the meaning of mathematical induction according
to M. Poincar^ is far firom clear. It affirms, we are told, that
we can conceive the indefinite repetition of an act which is
once possible. Yet it is not a mere repetition that is meant.
What is affirmed is not (say) that if we can at one time add
1 to 2 then we can do so at another time; what is affirmed is
that if we can add i to 2 and so get 3, we can add i to 3 and
so get 4, and so on <»? it^mitum. That is, it is affirmed that if
an operation transforms an object a into an object b, it can be
performed on & so as to turn it into c: in better words, if a has
the relation K to b then b will have the relation R to some
term e. Now this property holds of some relations, but not of
others;^ hence M. Poincar6 has to admit that induction is only
possible if the same operation can be repeated indefinitely.
Hence his apriori synthetic intuition becomes: ‘If an operation
is one of those than can be repeated indefinitely, then it is

‘ E.g. it is not the case that if a is the wife of h, b must be the wife of
someone else.


7 *


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

capable of indefinite repetition.’ It can hatdly be this prin-
ciple which saves mathematics from being a Vast tautology’.

The fact is, of course, that M. Poincard only means to apply
his principle to the operation of adding i to a number. Tlie
property of the mind which is in question is, therefore, this:
’It is possible to add i to any number whatever.’ But this
does not yield us the principle of mathematical induction,
which says not merely that the addition of i will always give
a number, but that every natural number can be obtained by
such additions starting fix>m o. It limits the natural numbers
at the same time that it shows the series of them to be endless:
they all appear in this series, any point of which can be
reached by successive steps starting ^m o. Now this limita-
tion, which is what is really used when proofi are conducted
by means of mathematical induction, is not a synthetic a
prioti intuition, or a property of the mimd, or a condensation
of an infinite number of syllogisms; it is merely the definition
of a finite number. A finite number means one to which
mathematical induction applies; an infinite number means
one to which it does not apply. There are infinite numbers,
and many theorems can be proved concerning them, as well
as concerning things which are not numbers at all; hence
plainly mathematical induction is not what accounts for the
fruitfulness of mathematics.

Again, M. Poincard is mistaken in regarding mathematical
induction as a means of passing from the particular to the
general: it is merely a means of passing from one general
proposition to another. Our premisses are, first, that a certain
property belongs to o; this, we may admit, is particular;
second, that eoety finite number n is such that, if n has the said
property, so has n + t; this*is general. The conclusion is that
every finite number has the said property; but this conclusion
has exactly the same degree of generality as our second
premiss. The appearance of passing firom particular to general
arises only fit>m neglect of our second premiss.

The notion that a principle is rendered certain by express-
ing a property of the mind is also curious. ’The mind’ must


72


SCIENCE AND HYPOTHESIS

be somebody’s mind; all minds are a part of nature; minri!^
differ from time to time and from person to person; and
psychology is not usually considered more certain than
arithmetic. M. Poincare’s view, like Kant’s, assumes that we
know already, before we have any other knowledge, that all
minds are alike in certain respects; that their likeness con-
sists in their all sharing certain beliefr; that these beliefs have
no warrant except their universal existence, i.e. that they are
universal delusions; and that universal delusions are what we
call a priori truths, and as such are the indispensable pre-
misses of all really indubitable knowledge.

M. Poincard gives no reasons for the view that deduction
can never give new truths. The fact is that the general prin-
ciples of deduction are analogous, in this respect, to what he
conceives mathematical induction to be; that is to say, they
lead to conclusions which are other than themselves, so that
in this sense they are synthetic. We shall conclude, therefore,
that mathematics does not, as M. Poincar<i affirms (p. 24),
contain an inductive element, and yet is not ‘avast tautology’.

The second part, on Space, repeats the contention that
none of the various Euclidean and non-Euclidean geometries
is truer than another, but that the Euclidean is the most
convenient. The argument is, that all our experiments
concern bodies, and that any apparently non-Euclidean
result can be interpreted as due to the nature of bodies, not
to the nature of space. Admitting this, I do not think the
consequence follows. In the first place, it does not follow that
the Euclidean geometry must always remain the most con-
venient. But this point is of less importance than the following:
There are relations which arrange the points of space in any
order imaginable, e.g. so that objects which we perceive as
near together would be widely separated, while objects
which, in the perceived spatial order, are very distant, would
come between objects which arc very near to us. In short,
relations subsist between points which make a complete
re-arrangement of them, not at all resembling the arrange-
ment we perceive. These other arrangements differ from the

73


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

one we perceive, it would seem, just in the fact that we do not
perceive them; and this brings out the necessity of supposing
that the spatial relations we regard as actual are perceived.
But if thu is the case, then those relations constitute a Euclid-
ean or some definite non-Euclidean space, though it may be
impossible for us to know which. In any case, it is an em-
pirical fact that the material parts of any ordinary object are
nearer to each other than are the parts of two objects between
which the said object lies, and that we do perceive bodies as
made up of parts more or less contiguous. All this shows that
matter is arranged by perception in a spatial order which is
certainly different from some of the possible orders; and it is
only fur reasons whose origin is in perception that we select at
all from among the orders that are a priori possible. And this
suffices to prove that geometry is not wholly conventional, as
M. Poincar6 contends.

The third part, on Force, discusses rational mechanics, and
finds that its principles also are really definitions. ‘There is
no escape,’ we are told, ‘from the following definition, which
is only a confession of failure: Masses are co-efficmts which it is
found convenient to introduce into calculations' (p. 103). The dis-
cussion of which this is the conclusion is admirable. But it is
admitted that the principles of mechanics were obtained,
and ought to be obtained, by experiment, and this introduces
an element which is not conventional. The view advocated
seems to be that actual bodies behave in a way very like the
way in which the ideal bodies of rational mechanics behave,
but that the principles of mechanics are rendered conven-
tional by the fact that, whenever they might seem to be vio-
lated, we prefer to invent hypotheticid bodies or hypothetical
motions which prevent thttsviolation. Thus a principle, it
would seem, becomes conventional the moment we are less
willing to abandon it than to seek a supplementary hypothesis
to preserve it. It is possible, however — though M. Poincar^
takes no account of the possibility — to believe that such
a principle is strictly true, and that any supplementary
hypothesis which may be necessary to preserve it is thereby


74


SCIENCE AND HYPOTHESIS

proved to be also true. M. Poincar 6 ignores such a view,
because it leads to the result that a law nuty be true although
experiment can neither prove nor disprove it. The course
of science seems to be, that a general principle is found to
account for a number of phenomena, while others, though
not inconsistent with it, are not to be explained by it without
further hypotheses. In every subsequent experiment, as M.
Poincar^ points out, no one hypothesis is really being tated,
but a whole body of hypotheses; and if any one of them is
regarded as beyond doubt, it will almost always be possible
to explain a phenomenon by denying one or more of the other
hypotheses. Hence a hypothesis which we no longer regard
as open to doubt is thereby withdrawn from the region of
experimental verification; but it does not follow that such a
hypothesis is a mere convention. Indeed, if it did, mere
completeness of proof would constitute disproof.

There is an unsatisfactory chapter on absolute and relative
motion, in which it is admitted diat, from Foucault’s pendu-
lum, from the flattening of the earth at the poles, and firom
the different weights of a given mass in different latitudes, it
would be possible to infer the rotation of the earth even if the
sky were always cloudy and we saw no heavenly bodies. It
follows that the rotation of the earth would be convenient as
accounting for the phenomena even if there were no heavenly
bodies; but this involves absolute rotation, and is therefore
meaningless, in M. Poincare’s opinion. He says (p. 117):
'This afiirmation, “the earth turns round”, has no meaning,
since it cannot be verified by experiment ... or, in other
words, these two propositions, “the earth turns round,” and
“it is more convenient to suppose that the earth turns
round,” have one and the same meaning.’ But if “the earth
turns round” has no meaning, it has the same meaning as
“Abracadabra”, and therefore, if M. Poincar^ is right, it has
the same meaning as “it is more convenient to suppose that
Abracadabra”. But M. Poincar^ supposes it true that it is
more convenient to suppose the earth turns round; yet I
cannot see what convenience is going to result fivm supposing


75


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

Abracadabra. In short, what it is convenient' to suppose must
have some meaning; hence, it would seem, the facts which
make it convenient to suppose that the earth turns round
prove that there is such a thing as absolute rotation.

The fourth and last part, on Nature, deals with physics,
and points out where, according to M. Poincar^, the domain
of convention and definition ceases, and substantial scientific
laws come into play. There is an interesting comparison of
the methods of English and French physicists, giving the
preference, in the main, to the former as more experimental
and less concerned to rear a logical edifice. There is also
an interesting but unsatisfactory discussion of probability,
whose importance, in inductive proofi, M. Poincar6 very
justly emphasizes, though this discussion is rather marred,
logically, by the assumption that, in the long run, the most
probable distribution, say of heads and tails, will actually
occur (p. 188), whereas we can only say that it will probably
occur. But I pass by these matters to consider the main theses
of this part, which are two: (1) that science deals only with
the relations of things; (3) that experiment is the sole test of
truth.

(i) Qpestions concerning the real, as opposed to the rela-
tion of real things, are said to be illusory and devoid of mean-
ing (pp. xxiv, 163). Certainly we have much more belief in
the accuracy of our perceptions of relations than in that of
our perceptions of qualities. When we see green in one place
and red in another, we are willing to believe that secondary
qualities are subjective, but not that the fact of difierence
between what is in the two places is an illusion. It is only by
holding fast to relations as perceived that science manages,
on an empirical basis, to Atnstruct a world so different firom
that of perception. Why we should trust in our perception of
relations I do not know; but it is a fact that we do so. But 1
do not see how it can be maintained that questions as to the
qualities of real things are unmeaning. The proposition amounts
to this, that if a really exists, a statement about a has no
meaning unless it asserts a relation to a 6 which also really

76


SCIENCE AND HYPOTHESIS


exists. The fact seems to be, not that such propositions are
unmeaning, but that, except in psychology, they are unknow*
able. We may even push the theory further, and say that in
general even the relations are for the most part unknown, and
what is known are properties of the relations, such as are
dealt with by mathematics. And this, I think, expresses sub-
stantially the same view as that which M. Poincar6 really
holds.

(2) That experiment alone can teach us something hew, is
a view underlying all M. Poincare’s theories, and is connected
with his opinion that deductions are mere tautologies. Yet
he himself admits that a good experiment teaches more than
an isolated fact (p. 142), and that ‘the physicist who would
content himself with experiment pure and simple would be
compelled to enunciate very extraordinary laws indeed’
(p. 143). But it is surely plain that if experiment were the sole
source of truth, no experiment could teach anything beyond
itself. To do this, the result of the experiment must imply
other propositions, and this implication, in the long run,
cannot itself be wholly proved by experiment. We speak of
general laws being proved by experiment, but the mere fact
of their generality shows that they are not whollj/ proved by
experiment, since all experience is of particulars. When a
gener2d law is proved by experiment, it is merely selected
^ experiment from among several, which are themselves
regarded a priori as the only possible laws. M. Poincard more
or less admits that the uniformity of nature and other
fundamental principles cannot be proved by experiment;
but he concludes that they are only probable. His argument
in favour of their being even probable depends, however,
upon assumptions as to probability — notably that an observed
regularity is not likely to be due to accident — ^which are
certainly incapable of experimental proof, or of being made
probable without some axiom concerning probability.

The book throughout is interesting, and has the great merit
of making its meaning perfectly definite. Moreover, M.
Poincare’s opinions, whether one agrees or disagrees, are such


77


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

as it is by no means easy to disprove, and the'disproof, when
it is possible, is instructive. Professor Larmor’s introduc-
tion suggests that its author feek a strong objection to M.
Poinca^’s sceptidsm, but this scepticism is never wanton,
and has always a constructive purpose. I cannot but think
that the translator has sometimes misplaced a negative; e.g.
on page 48, ‘these geometries of Riemann . . . can never be . . .
purely analytical’ surely does not translate ‘ne peuvent jamais
£tre que*, which means ‘can never be more than*. Similar
mistakes seem to occur on pages 18, 162, 205.


78


IV


PRAGMATISM!


The appearance in the world of a genuinely new philosophy
is at all times an event of very great importance. More par-
ticularly is this the case when the new philosophy embodies
the prevailing temper of the age better than any of its older
rivals; for in that case it is likely to establish itself in popular
favour, to colour the thoughts of the educated and half-
educated public, and to strengthen those elements in the
mental atmosphere to which it owes its success. It would
be a mistake to suppose that new philosophies are always
adapted to the age in which they appear; but when they are
not, they fail to win wide acceptance whatever their other
merits may be. Spinoza, for example, deserved success as
well as Leibniz; yet his works were almost wholly neglected
until more than a century after his death, because the political
and intellectual milieu was not one in which they could thrive.
Leibniz, on the contrary, gave scope to the love of calcula-
tion which men derived from the discoveries of his time, and
represented the world as a hierarchy of systems, each exactly
like the Holy Roman Empire; his system, therefore, ruled the
German mind until the ferment which preceded the French
Revolution set men’s thoughts running in new channels.

The philosophy which is called Pragmatism or Humanism^ is
genuinely new, and is singularly well adapted to the pre-
dominant intellectual temper of our time. As regards its
adaptation to the age, we shall have more to say when we

^ Reprinted from the Edinburgh Review, April 1909.

* These two names are distinguished by William James and Dr Schiller in
various ways at various times. For our purposes, it is unnecessary to consider
these distinctions.


79


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

have considered what it is. As regards no^^ty, its authors
show a modesty which, in our opinion, is somewhat excessive.
‘Pragmatism, a new name for some old ways of thinking*,
William James calls his book; and Dr Schiller constantly
asserts that his doctrines are those of Protagoras. As for
Protagoras, we know sufficiently litde about him to be able
to read into him almost any doctrine we please; and the
appeal to him may be regarded as mainly due to the desire
to produce an ancestry which has acquired respectability by
the lapse of time. With regard to more modem precursors, it
must be admitted that many philosophers — as chief among
whom we may mention Nietzsche — ^have paved the way for
the new doctrines. Nevertheless the cardinal point in the
pragmatist philosophy, namely, its theory of truth, is so new,
and so necessary to the rest of the philosophy, even to those
parts which had been previously maintained by others, that
its inventors cannot be regarded as merely developing the
thoughts of less explicit predecessors.

The name ‘pragmatism* was first invented by Mr C. S.
Peirce, as long ago as 1878. It was applied by him to the doc-
trine that the significance of a thought lies in the actions to
which it leads. In order to estimate the difference between
two different belief about the same matter, he maintained
we ought to consider what difference in conduct would re-
sult according as we adopted the one belief or the other. If no
difference would result, the two beliefs are not effectively
different. Mr Peirce’s doctrine, however, remained sterile
until it was taken up twenty years later by William James,
who, while retaining the word ‘pragmatism*, gave it a more
sweeping significance. The full-fledged philosophy is to be
attributed to him and Dr Sishiller jointly. Professor Dewey,
of Columbia University, is also to be reckoned among the
founders of pragmatism.' His writings are more technical and
less popular than those of James and Dr Schiller, but on
certain points his exposition is perhaps preferable to theirs.^

* Gf. especially an article on The Experimental Theory of Knowledge*,
MM, N.S., No. 59 (July 1906).


80


PRAGMATISM


As an introduction to pragmatism, it is interesting to read
William James’s essay on ‘The Will to Believe’, first pub-
lished in i8g6, and reprinted in book form in the following
year. In this essay, though the word ‘pragmatism’ does not
appear, we find much that is characteristic of James’s later
views. The thesis he is advocating is that, in certain cases, it is
right to believe whole-heartedly in one of two alternatives,
even when there is no evidence as to which of them is true.
These cases arise, he says, when we are compelled tot:hoose
between two hypotheses, each of which seems to us possible,
and when it makes a great diiSerence which we choose. The
instances he has in mind are chiefly questions of morals and
religion. In a moral perplexity we are compelled to come to
some decision, since inaction is as much a decision as action.
In regard to religion, also, we must act as though it were true
or as though it were false; we are therefore practically com-
pelled to choose. His contention is that, in such cases, it
would be foolish to refuse to have faith merely on the ground
that we do not find conclusive evidence on either side of the
question. To quote his own words:

Our passional nature not only lawfully may, but must,
decide an option between propositions, whenever it is a
genuine option that cannot by its nature be decided on
intellectual grounds; for to say, under such circumstances,
‘Do not decide, but leave the question open’, is itself a
passional decision— just like deciding yes or no — and is
attended with the same risk of losing the truth.

He proceeds to justify himself against the charge of in-
sufiicient regard for truth, not, as he would do now, by con-
tending that, in the absence of other evidence, the answer
which gives the greatest emotional satisfaction is true, but on
a variety of grounds tending to show that there are no suffici-
ent moral arguments against thinking it true. He points out, to
begin with, that emotions and wishes, though often unable to
alter our beliefi when these have become established, never-
theless play a great part in initially deciding w^t our

8i


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

bdiefi are to be. He points out next that our duty in the
matter of opinion has two branches: (i) we must know the
truth; (ii) we must avoid error. These two precepts, he says,
have very different results. If, in cases where evidence is lack-
ing, we abstain wholly from either belief, we are sure of not
incurring error, but, on the other hand, we are sure of not
knowing truth. If, however, we decide for one of the al-
ternatives, we have an even chance of knowing the truth. It
follows that those who urge us to abstain from belief in the
absence of evidence consider it more important to avoid error
than to believe truth. This ‘horror of being duped’ he repre-
sents as a somewhat contemptible form of cowardice; ‘our
errors’, he says, ‘are surely not such awfully solemn things. In
a world where we are so certain to incur them in spite of all
our caution, a certain lightness of heart seems healthier than
this excessive nervousness on their behalf.’ The legitimate
conclusion from this argument would be that, in such cases
as William James has in mind, we ought to believe both
alternatives; for in that case we are sure of ‘knowing’ the truth
in the matter. If it were said that to believe both is a psycho-
logical impossibility, we would rejoin that, on the contrary, it
is often done, and that those who cannot yet do it need only
practise the ‘will to believe’ until they have learnt to believe
that the law of contradiction is false — a feat which is by no
means as difficult as it is often supposed to be.

William James proceeds to point out that, in the case of
religion, the choice between believing and cUsbelieving pos-
sesses all the characteristics of the options which, according
to him, ought to be decided by the emotions. He tacitly
assumes that there is no evidence for or against religion, and
he points out that by refining either to believe or to dis-
believe we lose the benefits of religion just as much as by
deciding to disbelieve.

Scepticism, then, is not avoidance of option; it is option of a
certain kind of risk. Better risk loss of truth than chance of
error — that is your faith-vetoer’s exact position. He is

82


PRAGMATISM


acdvdy playing his stake as much as the believer is; he is
backing the field against the rdigious hypothesis, just as
the believer is backing the religious hypothesu against the
field. ... It is not intellect against all passions, then; it is
only intellect with one passion laying down its law. And
by what, forsooth, is the supreme wisdom of this passion
warranted? Dupery for dupery, what proof is there that
dupery through hope is so much worse than dupery
through fear?

The conclusion is that, although there is no evidence in
favour of religion, we ought nevertheless to believe it if we
find satisfaction in so doing.

This essay on the will to believe is important, because it
has been widely read and much criticized, both adversely and
favourably, and because it affords a good introduction to the
pragmatist temper of mind. Some practice in the will to
believe is an almost indispensable preliminary to the accept-
ance of pragmatism; and conversely pragmatism, when once
accepted, is found to give the full justification of the will to
believe. We shall therefore, before proceeding to pragmatism
proper, consider briefly what there is to be said, on a
common-sense basb, against the doctrines so persuasively
set forth in this essay.

We may observe, to begin with, the agnostic hypothesis
upon which the whole argument rests. The hypothesis is
that no evidence for or against religion is at present known.
Pragmatists pose as the friends of religion (except in Italy),
and many religious people have accepted them as allies. It is
therefore worth while to emphasize this underlying hypo-
thesb, and to point out the very questionable wisdom of
accepting it as the basis of a defence of orthodoxy. \A^th the
truth or falsehood of this hypothesis, however, we need not
concern ourselves in this discussion; the question for us is
whether, granting the hypothesis, we can accept the results
which WiMam James derives from it.

Let us observe, in the first place, a confusion which runs

83


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

through the whole pragmatist account of knbwledge, namely,
the confusion between acting on an hypothesu and believing
it. In the cases which William James has in mind, the option
between rival hypotheses is, he says, a ‘forced* option; i.e. it is
not avoidable:

If I say, ‘Either accept this truth or go without it’, I put
on you a forced option, for there is no standing place out-
side of the alternative.

This statement appears to us to be contrary to many of the
plainest facts of daily life. If, in walking along a country
road, I come to a fork where there is no signpost and no
passer-by, I have, from the point of view of action, a ‘forced’
option. I must take one road or other if I am to have any
chance of reaching my destination; and I may have no
evidence whatever as to which is the right road. 1 then act on
one or other of the two possible hypotheses, until I find some-
one of whom I can ask the way. But I do not believe either
hypothesis. My action is either right or wrong, but my belief
is neither, since I do not entertain either of the two possible
beliefi. The pragmatist assumption that I believe the road I
have chosen to be the right one is erroneous. To infer belief
fi’om action, in the crude way involved in the assumption
that we must ‘either accept this truth or go without it’, is to
ignore the plain fact that our actions are constantly- based
upon probabilities, and that, in all such cases, we neither
accept a truth nor go without it, but entertain it as an hypo-
thesis. This applies, in particular, to the working hypotheses
of science. A man of science who considers it worth while to
devise experimental tests of an hypothesis, and to construct
elaborate theories which «se the hypothesis, is not on that
account to be regarded as believing the hypothesu. Prag-
matists tell us that, in such cases, the initial unverified belie/
is a necessary condition for the subsequent established theory,
and by so doing they make out a case for the usefulness of
believing before we have evidence. This is, however, a
mistaken analysis of the state of mind of a man who is testing

84


PRAGMATISM


an hypothesis. All that is required, and all that occurs among
carehil investigators, is the belief that the hypothesis has a
greater or smaller chance of being true, and for this belief
there is probably sufficient evidence. The actual belief that
the hypothesis is true, when it occurs, is apt to be a hindrance,
since it retards the abandonment of false hypotheses when the
evidence goes against them, and if the l^lief is general, it
makes people regard experimental verification as unnecessary.
The Aristotelians who opposed Galileo and refused h> give
weight to his experiments had faithfully obeyed the precepts
revived by William James.

The matter is, however, more complicated in such cases as
religious beliefi, where the chief benefit is derived from the
emotional satisfaction of the belief itself, not firom the useful
actions to which it direcdy prompts. But here, too, the anti-
thesis of ‘accepting’ or ‘going without’ is far too crude; we
may regard the belief as more or less probable, entertain a
greater or less degree of hope that it may be true, and derive,
accordingly, a greater or less proportion of the comfort we
should derive fix>m complete belief. In practice, to adopt the
pragmatists’ test, the effect of partial belief is very different
fiom that of complete belief. Complete belief, if the issue is
sufficiently momentous, will justify persecution — assuming, as
history warrants us in doing, that the blood of Protestant
martyrs is the seed of the Catholic Church. An incomplete
belief, on the contrary, will not warrant the infliction of an
indubitable evil for the sake of a gain which may possibly be
illusory. This affords a pragmatic argument against con-
ceding^// belief in such cases as those with which William
James is concerned. But if, as he assumes, there is a genuine
possibility of the truth of an hypothesis, it is in accordance
with all the strictest tenets of scientific veracity that we should
bear the hypothesis in mind, and allow to it whatever influ-
ence over our emotions and actions corresponds to thedegree
of its probability.

We will next examine the argument that, in doubtful
cases, the precept ‘we must know the truth’ should lead us to

85


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

bdieve one hypothesis at a venture, since, if we believe
neither, we certainly do not know the truth. This argument
rests upon an ambiguity in the word ‘know’. At first sight it
might be thought that if we believe what is in fact true we
must have knowledge. But this is not the sense in which the
word is commonly used. Suppose, to take a trivial instance,
that a man believed that Ae late Prime Minister’s name
began with a B, but believed this because he thought Mr
Balfour was the late Prime Minister. What he believes is, in
fact true, yet no one would say that he ‘knew’ that the late
Prime Minister’s name began with a B. In this case the true
belief is based upon a false reason. But the case is similar
when the true b^ef is based upon no reason (except, indeed,
in the case of immediate data such as the facts of perception) .
Thus if, in the case of an option which we have no rational
means of deciding, we believe one alternative at a venture,
we caimot be said to knoWy even if, by good luck, we have
chosen the alternative which in fact is true. In such cases, we
caimot knmo the truth, though we may by chance believe it.
Hence the precept ‘we must know the truth’, which James
invokes, is irrelevant to the issue. The usual antitheses of
belief and disbelief, what b known and what b unknown, are
not adequate to meet the situation. The true precept of
veracity, which includes both the pursuit of truth and the
avoidance of error, b thb: ‘We ought to give to every pro-
position which we consider as nearly as possible that degree
of credence which b warranted by the probability it acquires
firom the evidence known to us.’ The further questions, what
propositions to consider, and how much trouble to take to
acquire knowledge of the evidence, depend of course upon
our circumstances and the iltiportance of the issue. But to go
about the world believiug everything in the hope that there-
by we shall believe as much truth as possible b like practising
polygamy in the hope that amoi^ so many we shall find some-
one who will make us happy.

Another interesting point to observe in James’s doctrine b
the immense multiplicity of differing beliefi which it simul-

86


PRAGMATISM


taneously justifies in different people. This arises from the
condition that the option must be what he calls a ‘living’
option, that is, it must be one in which cither alternative
seems to us possible.

If I say to you: ‘Be a theosophist or be a Mohanunedan’, it
is probably a dead option, because for you neither hypo-
thesis is likely to be alive. But if I say: ‘Be an agnostic or be
a Christian’, it is otherwise: trained as you are, each hypo-
thesis makes some appeal, however sm^, to your belief.

He points out that to different people different options are
living. It follows that the beliefi which, on his principles,
different men ought to adopt, are different, since the three
conditions for adopting a belief without evidence are that the
option should be living, forced, and momentous. One gathers
(perhaps wrongly) fiom his instances that a Frenchman
ought to believe in Catholicism, an American in the Monroe
Doctrine, and an Arab in the Mahdi (he wrote before the
battle of Omdurman). It seems odd that, in view of this out-
come, he should maintain that acceptance of his doctrine
would diminish persecution; for an essential part of each of
the above three creeds is that people who think otherwise
must be taught their place.

To sum up our criticism of ‘The Will to Believe’ : It ignores
the distinction between believing and entertaining an hypo-
thesis, and wrongly assumes that if we do not completely
believe an hypothesis, we must either completely disbelieve it
or wholly suspend judgment. Hence it is able to represent the
option ‘Either accept this truth or go without it’ as one from
which there is no escape, whereas all experiment, both in
science and in daily life, implies a state of nund which
accepts neither alternative. He assumes that we may be said
to ‘know’ a truth, when we believe it at a venture, without
reasons, and that therefore, in order to maximize our know-
ledge, we have only to maximize our beliefi. And his doc-
trines lead to the conclusion that different people ought to
have incompatible beliefi. These objections, we shall find,

87


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS


may also be urged ag:au||jt full-fledged pragmatism. But we
must now approa^somejjtrhat more diflicult topics than
those which us hitherto, since pragmatism

cannot without examining its doctrine as to

the Mtuw <tf^Kfmv%$Hhis doctrine, therefore, we will now

S 9U'r ^

c^'^rag^atic theory of truth takes credit to itself —
y, aVwe think — ^for a due consideration of error. Most


theories as to the nature of truth have tacitly assumed to
begin with that all our beliefi are true, and have arrived at
results incompatible with the existence of error. They have
then had to add a postscript explaining that what we call
error is really partial truth. If we think it is Tuesday when
it is really Wednesday, we are at least right in thinkin g that
‘it’ is a day of the week. If we think America was discovered
in 1066, we are at least right in thinking that something
important happened in that year. If we think Charles I died
in his bed, we are at least so far right that, in view of the
many people who do die in their beds, he probably had the
{Mtentiali^ of dying in his bed. And so on. Dr Schiller
rightly points to the Theaetetus as showing the difficulties to
which a theory of knowledge is reduced by neglecting to take
due account of error from the beginning; and among more
recent books, Mr Joachim’s The Nature of Truth is used to
point the same moral.

Pragmatism, then, emphasizes from the start the flict that
some of our beliefi turn out to be mistaken, and that the
proper business of a theory of truth is to show how truth and
falsehood are distinguished. This might seem, to those not
sophisticated by philosophy, to be an obvious truism; but in
fact philosophy has alwaysvegarded it as its business to prove
(as far as possible) that everything is true, rather than to dis-
tinguish between truth and falsehood. Similarly in ethics,
philosophers have not sought to distinguish between the good
and the bad, so much as to prove that everything is good. If
little truth has been attained in philosophy, the reason is
chiefly that few philosophers have wished to attain truth.


88


PRAGMATISM


Whether pragmatists are superior in this respect we shall not
venture to pronounce; but at any rate the peculiarity of their
bias makes them willing to ad^t facts which other philo-
sophers find inconvenient, and among such facts is the pre-
vsdence of error.

In order to discover the difference between- truth and
falsehood, pragmatism sets about a Socradc inductive in-
quiry as to the things we call ‘true’ and ‘false’. These words,
to begin with, are applied to beliefi, and are appliM only
when a question has arisen. Concerning the ordinary facts of
perception, we do not ask questions until we have become
philosophers; we do not apply either of the words ‘true’ and
‘false’ to such unquestioned matters. But when once the
question has arisen concerning some actual belief, ‘Is it a true
or a false belief?’ how do we in fact decide the question? The
answer of pragmatism is that if the belief furthers the purpose
which led us to ask the question it is regarded as a ‘true’
belief; if it fails to further the purpose it is regarded as a
‘false’ belief. This, therefore, according to pragmatism, is the
meaning of the words ‘true’ and ‘false’. ‘True’ means ‘further-
ing the purpose which led to the question’. Or, more ex-
plicitly: When, in pursuing any purpose, a belief is enter-
tained which is relevant to the piupose, the belief is ‘true’ if it
furthers the achievement of the purpose, and ‘false’ if it does
not do so.^

A few quotations will serve to amplify and elucidate the
above brief statement. After explaining recent changes in the
methodology of science, James says:

Riding now on the front of this wave of scientific logic,
Messrs Schiller and Dewey appear with their pragmatistic
account of what truth everywhere signifies. Everywhere,
these teachers say, ‘truth’ in our ideas and belieft means
the same thing that it means in science. It means, they say,
nothing but this, that ideas (which themselves are but parts of our


^ Cf. Schiller, Studies m Humamim, p. 154.

89


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

experience) become true just in so far as th^ help us to get into
saHsfacUny relations unth other parts of our experience.'^

Again:

I am well aware how odd it must seem to some of you to
hear me say that an idea is ‘true’ so long as to believe it is
profitable to our lives. That it is good^ for as much as it
profits, you will gladly admit. . . . But is it not a strange mis-
use of the word ‘truth’, you will say, to call ideas also ‘true’
for this reason? . . . You touch here upon the very central
point of Messrs Schiller’s, Dewey’s and my own doctrine
of truth. . . . Let me now say only this, that truth is one
species of good, and not, as is usually supposed, a category
distinct from good, and co-ordinate with it. The true is the
name of whatever proves itself to be good in the way of belief, and
good, too, for definite assignable reasons.*

The sixth of William James’s lectures on pragmatism is
concerned wholly with the notion of truth. He begins by
assenting to the dictionary definition that ‘truth’ means ‘the
agreement’ of our ideas with ‘reality’. But, as he justly
observes, this definition does not take us very far, unless we
know what we mean by ‘agreement’ and what we mean by
‘reality’. The pragmatist holds that different sorts of ‘agree-
ment’ and different sorts of ‘reality’ are concerned in differ-
ent cases. The popular notion that a true idea must copy its
reality holds good, he says, of sensible things, but goes wrong
as soon as we come to abstractions. The idea of the elasticity
of a spring, for example, cannot, according to him, be a copy
of a reality — ^presumably on the ground that an elasticity is not
an actually existing thingrThe question is, then, what sort of
agreement with reali^ is possible in such cases? ‘The great
assumption of the intellectualists’, he says, ‘is that truth
means essentially an inert static relation.’ An intellectualist, by
the way, is anyone who is not a pragmatist. He proceeds:

* Pragmatiim, pp. 57, 58.

• Ibid., pp. 75, 76.


90


PRAGMATISM


Pragmatism, on the other hand, asks its usual question.
‘Grant an idea or belief to be true,* it says, Vhat concrete
difference will its being true make in anyone’s actual life?
How will the truth be realized? What experiences will be
different from those which would obtain if the belief were
false? What, in short, is the truth’s cash-value in experi-
ential terms?’

The moment pragmatism asks this question it sees the
answer: True ideas are those that we can assimilate,* validate,
corroborate and verify. False ideas are those that we cannot. . . .

The truth of an idea is not a stagnant property inherent
in it. Truth happens to an idea. It becomes true, is made true
by events. Its verity is in fact an event, a process: the pro-
cess namely of its verifying itself, its vcn-fication. Its validity
is the process of its valid-oftoa.^

Recurring to the definition of ‘truth’ as ‘agreement with
reality’, James sums up by distinguishing three kinds of
reality: (i) concrete facts, (2) ‘abstract kinds of things and
relations perceived intuitively between them’, (3) truths al-
ready in our possession. ‘Agreement’ he defines as follows:

To ‘agree’ in the widest sense with a reality can only mean
to be guided either straight up to it or into its surroundings, or to be
put into such working touch with it as to handle either it or some-
thing connected with it better than if we disagreed, (p. 212.)

Two further quotations will complete the material re-
quired for understanding James’s account of truth.

‘ The true', to put it very briejfy, is only the expedient in the way of
our thinking, just as 'the righP is only the expedient in the way
of our behaving. Expedient in almost any fashion; and ex-
pedient in the long run and on the whole of course, (p. 222.)

Our account of truth is an account of truths in the plural,
of processes of leading, realized tn rebus, and having only
this quality in common, that they pay. (p. 218.)


^ PtugmoHsm, pp. aoo, 201.


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

Before proceeding further, it will be as well to clear up a
misunderstanding, from wUch the pragmatists themselves
appear not to be exempt. When it is said that truth is ‘one
species of good’, it is natural to suppose that ethical con-
siderations are involved, and that logic will become depend-
ent upon ethics. This view is, in fact, adopted in Dr Schiller’s
essay^ on ‘the ethical basis of metaphysics’. But a closer
examination shows that pragmatists mean by the word
‘good’ whatever satisfies desire.* So far as we know, they
have nowhere justified this use of the word, but that is not
our present concern. What concerns us at present is to ob-
serve that, in virtue of this definition, only psychological con-
siderations are relevant where, to judge from the language,
ethical considerations might seem to be involved. In order to
judge whether a belief is true, it is only necessary to discover
whether it tends to the satisfaction of desire.* The nature of
the desire to be satisfied is only relevant in so far as it may
involve conflict with other desires. Thus psychology is para-
mount, not only over logic and the theory of knowledge, but
also over ethics. In order to discover what is good, we have
only to inquire how people are to get what they want; and
‘true’ beliefs are those which help in this process. This is the
pragmatist theory of truth; and its consequences, as might be
supposed, are far-reaching.

Before considering the metaphysic which Dr Schiller has
deduced from the pragmatist theory of truth, let us examine
the grounds upon which that theory is based. Most philoso-

^ The first essay in his Humanism,

* Schiller, Studies in Humanism^ p. 152: *Good and bad also (in their wider and
primary sense) have reference to purpose. **Good’* is what conduces to, **bad"
what thwarts, a purpose.’

* Schiller, Studies in Humanism^ p. 154: Tn all actual knowing the question
whether an assertion is ’’true” or “false” is decided uniformly and very simply.
It is decided, that is, by its consequences, by its bearing on the interest which
prompted to the assertion, by its relation to the purpose which put the question.
To add to this that the consequences must be good u superfluous. For if and so
far as an assertion satisfies or forwards the purpose of the inquiry to which it
owes its being, it is so far “true”; if and so far as it thwarts or baffles it, it is
unworkable, unserviceable, ’’false”.*


9 *


PRAGMATISM


phies are determined by their initial questions, and by the
facts which habitually fill the imagination of the philosopher.
The initial question of pragmatism is: What characteristics of
beliefi do in fact lead men to reg^ard some as true, others as
false? The answer to this question — so pragmatism assumes —
will give us the meaning of truth and falsehood. The facts
which fill the imaginations of pragmatists are psychical facts:
where others might think of the starry heavens, pragmatists
think of the perception of the starry heavens; where'others
might think of God, pragmatists think of the belief in God,
and so on. In discussing the sciences, they never think, like
scientific specialists, about the facts upon which scientific
theories are based: they think about the theories themselves.
Thus their initial question and their habitual imaginative
background are both psychological. In order to arrive at an
external world, they have to prove that the belief in an
external world has the marks which (according to them)
distinguish a true belief. Hence they infer that there is an
external world. And a similar process is necessary as regards
all other facts which transcend the Ego.

One of the approaches to pragmatism is through the con-
sideration of induction and scientific method. The old in-
ductive philosophy, as exemplified in Mill’s logic, conceived
the nature and scope of induction far too narrowly, and prag-
matism deserves credit for having remedied this defect. In-
duction, though it cannot give complete certainty, underlies
all the sciences, even pure mathematics. In any science, we
have a collection of facts bound together (as far as possible)
by general laws. The facts appear, in the formal exposition,
as deductions fix>m the laws; this, at least, holds for the most
advanced sciences, such as mathematics and physics. But in
reality the laws are inductions from the facts. We cannot say
that this or that fact proves this or that law: the whole body
of facts proves (or, rather, renders probable) the whole body
of laws. It might be thought that, in an experimentum crucis, a
single fact establishes a single law; but this is only the case so
long as the other laws of the science are taken for granted. If


93


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

other facts should lead us to doubt the other laws, the in-
terpretation of our experimet^um cruets might be wholly
changed. Thus the just^cadon of a science is that it fits all
the known facts, and that no altemadve system of hypo-
theses is known which fits the facts equally well. We may
therefore say truly that scientific theories are adopted simply
because they work, i.e. because their consequences are satis-
factory. Thus it would appear as though a right analysis of
sdendfic inducdon led us straight to the pragmatic test of
truth.

Certain objections to this conclusion, however, at once
suggest themselves. In the first place, scientific induction
assumes certain data, the ‘facts’ with which our theories have
to agree. That the heavenly bodies have the apparent posi-
tions, in the sky, which we perceive them to have, is not
proved by astronomy, but is assumed as the datum upon which
astronomy proceeds. It would seem, therefore, that there are
truths of fact which are prior to the whole inductive pro-
cedure, and that these truths of fact must be ‘true* in some
other sense than that the consequences of supposing them
true are satisfactory. To this argument pragmatists reply
that what really u ‘fact’ is neither true nor false, but prior to
the whole antithesis of truth and falsehood. ‘Day follows day,
and its contents are simply added. The new contents them-
selves are not true, they simply com and are. Truth- is what
we say about them, and when we say that they have come,
truth is satisfied by the plain additive formula.’^ Pragmatists
contend, therefore, that the mere recognition of facts is the
simplest case of the application of their formula. If all ‘truth*
were of this simple native, the pragmatist doctrine would be
unnecessary, though there would be nothing to show that it
was false. But the ‘truths* which do not consist in the mere
recognition of facts cannot, according to pragmatism, be ex-
plained in this simple way; hence we are forced to adopt a
theory of truth not derived firom the exclusive consideration
of this amplest case. For the moment let us allow this

* James, Pragmetism, p. 6s.


94


PRAGMATISM


answer to pass. We shall return to the subject of ‘facts’ in con*
nection with Dr Schiller’s doctrine of the making of reality.

A more serious objection to the argument from the pro-
cedure of the sciences is derived firom the ambiguity of the
conception of ‘working’. What science requires of a working
hypothesis is that it shall work theoretically, i.e. that all its
verifiable consequences shall be true, and none false. The law
of gravitation enables us to calculate the motions of the
heavenly bodies: so far as these motions can be observed,
they are found to agree with our calculations. It is true that
the heavenly bodies have such and such apparent positions
at such and such times, and the law of gravitation agrees
with this trutii. This is what we mean when we say that the
law ‘works’. We do not mean that it gives us emotional
satisfaction, that it satisfies our aspirations, that it is a help in
navigation, or that it facilitates a virtuous life. Any or all of
these may be true, but they are irrelevant; if they were all
false, we should still say that the law ‘works’, because it
agrees with observed facts. Thus the kind of ‘working’ which
science desiderates is a very different thing from the kind
which pragmatism conaders to be the essence of truth.

To this, as to our previous objection, pragmatists reply that
the ‘truth’ concerned is a particular species of ‘truth’, and
that scientific working is a particular species of their general
conception of working. Our purpose, they say, in asking the
question to which the law of gravitation is an answer, b to be
able to calculate the motions of the heavenly bodies. The law
of gravitation furthers thb purpose, and b therefore true in
the pragmatic sense. This answer shows that the procedure of
science, so far, has not been shown to contradict pragmatism;
but it does not show that the procedure of science positively
supports pragmatism. Where, as in science, our purpose is to
discover truth, an answer which furthers our purpose will be
true. But from thb trubm it cannot be inferred (as pragmatists
pretend) that if we had had some quite different purpose,
an answer which furthered it would still have been true.
Another objection to the argument from ‘working hypotheses’


95


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

is that by men of science these are explicitly contrasted with
established truths. An hypothesis, as experience shows, may
explain all known relevant facts admirably, and yet may at
any moment be rendered inadequate by new facts. For this
reason, prudent men give only a very provisional assent to a
working hypothesis. Thus the cases ^m which pragmatism
endeavours to discover the nature of truth are the very cases
in which we have least assurance that truth is present at all.
This is certainly a curious and not very hopeful mode of pro-
cedure. It may be said, however, that what leads us to feel
doubtful about a working hypothec is merely that it has not
yet been shown to work over a sufficiently wide field; the
more it works, the more we believe in it. But to this again it
may be rejoined that the more it works the less probability is
there that any other hypothesis would also work. To pursue
this topic, however, would require a discussion of the laws of
probability, for which this is not the place.

From w^t has been said it results that the utmost that
pragmatism can derive from science is that the scientific
conception of working is not incompatible with the {>rag-
matist conception, since the scientific working may be re-
garded as a species of the pragmatic working. It is, however,
a species whose differentia adds just those elements which
other philosophies declare to be necessary to truth, while
piagmatism declares them to be unnecessary. The essential
novelty of pragmatism is that it admits, as a ground of belief,
ar^ kind of satufaction to be derived from entertaining the
belief, not merely the theoretic satisfaction which is sought
by science. For this contention no support whatever is to
be found in science. Let us see whether any support is to be
found elsewhere.

Pragmatists are never weary of inveighing against those
who say that our beliefi ought not to be influenced by con-
siderations which in fact do influence them. They point
triumphantly to the influence of desire upon belief, and boast
that their theory alone is based upon a true psychological
account of how belief arises. With this account we have no

96


PRAGMATISM


quarrel; what we deny is its relevance to the question: What
is meant by ‘truth’ and ‘&lsehood’? At first sight it might
seem a perfectly proper inductive proceeding to inquire
what properties a belief must have in order that we may call
it true, and to infer that those properties constitute the mean-
ing of ‘truth’. There is, however, a fallacy in this method of
inquiry; and this fallacy, in our opinion, is at the bottom of
the whole pragmatist philosophy.

There is, in the first place, an ambiguity in therword
‘meaning’. We may say ‘that cloud means rain’, or we may
say *pluU means rain’. It is obvious that these two senses of
‘meaning’ are wholly different. What they have in common
is that in each case we have one thing which points to an-
other. The doud is a sign that rmn is coming; the word
pluie is a sign which signifies rain. But beyond this, the two
senses of ‘meaning’ have little in common. In the first sense,
one thing ‘means’ another when the existence (past, present,
or future) of the other can be inferred from the one, i.e.
when there is a causal connection between them. In the
second sense ‘meaning’ is confined to symbols, i.e. to words,
and whatever other ways may be employed for conununica-
ting our thoughts. It is this second sense of ‘meaning’ which
we expect a dictionary to give us. When we ask ‘What does
such and such a word mean?’ what we want to know is ‘What
is in the mind of a person using the word?’ A confusion of the
two senses of ‘meaning’ is not uncommon in philosophy; and,
if we are not mistaken, pragmatism has confused them in its
inquiry as to the ‘meaning’ of truth. It has discovered some-
thing which has a causal connection with our beliefs that
things are true, and which, therefore, in the first sense of
‘meaning’, may be taken to be what these beliefs ‘mean’. It
has then supposed that this is what is ‘meant’, in the second
sense, by ‘truth’, i.e. what we have in mind (or should have in
mind?) when we use the word ‘truth’.

This confusion between the two senses of ‘meaning’ seems
to be necessarily involved in the method adopted by prag-
matists, namely, the method which inquires into the causes of


97


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

our judging things to be true, in the hope'of thereby discover-
ing what ‘truth’ means. Let us grant to the pragmatists, in
order to avoid disputes concerning what is unimportant, diat
what causes people to judge that a belief, about which a doubt
has arisen, is true is the fact that this belief is found to further
the purposes which led us to inquire into its truth. Then to
judge that a belief is true ‘means’ that this belief furthers our
purposes, in the sense in which the cloud ‘means’ rain, i.e.
there is a causal connection between them. But truth is not
the same thing as furthering our purposes any more than the
cloud is the same thing as rain. When we say that a belief is
true, the thought we wish to convey is not the same thought
as when we say that the belief furthers our purposes; thus
‘true’ does not mean ‘furthering our purposes’ in the sense in
which 'pluie' means rain. Thus pragmatism does not answer
the question: What is in our minds when we judge that a
certain belief is true?

We find pragmatists, when pressed, willing to admit this
fact. Thus Dr Schiller says:^

In a sense, therefore, the predications of ‘good’ and ‘bad’,
‘true’ and ‘false’, etc., may take rank with the experiences
of ‘sweet’, ‘red’, ‘loud’, ‘hard’, etc., as ultimate facts which
need be analysed no further.

To which he adds, in a footnote:

The purport of this remark is to confute the notion, which
seems dimly to underlie some intellectualist criticisms,
that the specific character of the truth-predication is
ignored in pragmatist quarters.

This fundamental meaning of ‘truth’ is treated by Dr
Schiller as unimportanfbecause it does not enable us to dis-
tinguish the cases in which we have rightly predicted truth
from those in which we have done so wrongly. The prag-
matist test, he maintains, enables us to distinguish the truly
true firom the falsely true. An untested predication of truth

^ Smiits in Hymamsm, p. 144 .


98


PRAGMATISM


he calls 'truth as daim*; a predication which is subsequent
to the application of the pragmatist test he calls ‘truth
validated’. The distinction between the two is treated at
length in his essay on ‘the ambiguity of truth’.^ This
‘ambiguity’ appears to us to be wholly non-existent. The dis-
tinction involved is the distinction between what is true and
what is thought to be true. The reader who will, throughout
this essay on the ambiguity of truth, substitute ‘butter’ for
‘truth’ and ‘margarine’ for ‘falsehood’, will find -that the
point involved is one which has no special relevance to the
nature of truth. There is ‘butter as claim’, i.e. whatever the
grocer calls butter; this, we will suppose, includes margarine.
There is ‘butter validated’, which is butter that, after the
usual tests, has been found not to be margarine. But there is
no ambiguity in the word ‘butter’. When the grocer, point-
ing to the margarine, says ‘this is butter’, he means by ‘butter’
precisely what the customer means when he says ‘this is not
butter’. To argue from the grocer’s language that ‘butter’ has
two meanings, one of which includes margarine, while the
other does not, would be obviously absurd. Similarly when
the rash man, without applying any tests, affirms ‘this belief
is true’, while the prudent man, after applying suitable tests,
judges ‘this belief is not true’, the two men mean the same
thing by the word ‘true’, only one of them applies it wrongly.
Thus Dr Schiller’s reasons for regarding ‘the specific char-
acter of the truth-predication’ as unimportant are not valid.

We must now return to the two senses of ‘meaning’, and
show how they are relevant to our problem. It is evident that,
in the sense in which the meaning of a word is ‘what is in our
minds when we use the word’, the meaning of the word
‘truth’ is just that ‘specific character of the truth-predication’
which, as Dr Schiller confesses, is something quite other than
‘furthering our purposes’. His contention is that the belieft of
which we can predicate truth tndjf are those which further
our purposes. And his reason for saying this is that the beliefi
which further our purposes are those which we persut in

* Shidut m Hmuuusm, pp. 141-163.


99


^P^OSOPHIGAL ESSAYS

calling tru(^^W^|xflect^on. But that oijly proves that these
are thp^Mi^^i^ch we continue to think true, not that these
are^fe^bc^fro which are true. Owing, however, to confusion
the of ‘meaning*, he is led to argue that useful-

, TOS^'gi\;^%e meaning of truth, and that therefore when a
.^^>^e^^useful it must be true. All that really follows, if we
Vl^ant the whole of the psychological argument, is that beliefi
which are found to be useful will continue to be thought to be
true. This is an entirely different proposition, and one which,
by itself, throws no l^ht whatever either upon the nature of
truth or upon what beliefi are in fact true. It may well be
that beliefi which fulfil certain purposes are true, while
beliefs which fulfil others are not true; or, again, that there is
no connection whatever between truth and usefulness. Dr
Schiller’s argument (and William James’s, for the two are
practically identical on this point) involves a vwety of the
very assumption which he criticizes in others, namely, the
assumption that all our beliefi are true. In pragmatism the
assumption is that the beliefi which we persist in holding must
be true. It is then pointed out how very unreasonable our
grounds often are for persisting in a belief, and this fact, in-
stead of being used to throw doubt on the belief, is used to
discredit reasonableness. Thus we are brought back to the
standpoint of ‘The Will to Believe’, and we find that the pre-
cepts of that essay really underlie the whole pragmatist theory
of truth. But the superstructure is so vast that pragmatists
appear to be no longer aware of the foundations upon which
their edifice is reared.

We may now restate the pragmatist theory of truth in bald
outline, giving due prominence to presuppositions of which
pragmatists themselves are perhaps not fully conscious. Their
major premiss is: Beliefs^hich persist after a doubt has been
raised are true. Their minor premiss is: Belieft which are
found to be serviceable persist after a doubt has been raised.
Hence it follows that such beliefi are true. The pragmatist
then turns round and exhorts us to cherish such beliefi, on
the ground that they are true. But if his psychology was


too


PRAGMATISM


right the exhortation is needless, since, by his minor premiss,
we certainly shall cherish such belief. His major premiss
should be: ‘Beliefs which we cherish after you have raised a
doubt are true.’ But those who have raised the doubt can
hardly be expected to be much impressed by this premiss.
The argument is a form of the old refutation of an opponent
by the contention that the whole human race thinks as you
do, which is a somewhat unsuccessful weapon against a
human being who does not think as you do.

It is now time to turn our attention to the metaphysic
which Dr Schiller has based upon the pragmatist theory of
truth. Pragmatism as such professes to be only a method; the
metaphysical doctrine which Dr Schiller derives from it he
calls Humanism. In regard to metaphysics, pragmatism pro-
fesses to be a kind of universal provider, willing and able to
suit all tastes. As William James puts it:

Against rationalism as a pretension and a method prag-
matism is fully armed and militant. But, at the outset, at
least, it stands for no particular results. It has no dogn^as,
and no doctrines save its method. As the young Italian
pragmatist Papini has well said, it lies in the midst of our
theories, like a corridor in a hotel. Innumerable chambers
open out of it. In one you may find a man writing an
atheistic volume; in the next someone on his knees praying
for faith and strength; in a third a chemist investigating a
body’s properties. In a fourth a system of idealistic meta-
physics is being excogitated; in a fifth the impossibility of
metaphysics is being shown. But they all own the corridor,
and sill must pass through it if they want a practicable way
of getting into or out of their respective rooms. ^

In spite of this catholicity, however, we agree with Dr
Schiller in thinking that his metaphysic is the one which
naturally results from pragmatism. It will be remembered
that, in considering induction, we pointed to the dependence
of inductive verification upon an appeal to ‘facts’. Human-

^ Pragmaiim, p. 54.


101


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

ism, as a metaphysic, results from the application of the
pragmatic method to the question: What is a ‘fact’? This sub-
ject has been treated by Dr Schiller in his essay on ‘the
making of reality’.^

The main purpose of humanist metaphysics is to emphasize
the primacy of the Will. The Will, it is true, requires a datum
of ‘fact’ to which to apply its operations, but this datum is
itself the product of previous volitions, and although we can-
not quite deny some original OXq which has been moulded by
will, yet this is remote and unimportant, and has been trans-
formed into genuine reality by the agency of human beings
and other beings more or less resembling them. Nothing that
can be known, nothing that can properly be called ‘real’, is
independent of the knower. There is no such thing as ‘mere’
knowing, in which we passively apprehend the nature of a
merely ‘given’ object. All knowing is bound up with doing
and everything that we know has been in some degree
altered by our agency. This, Dr Schiller says, is dbvious in
the case of our acquaintances, who plainly are more or less
affected by the fact that we are acquainted with them. When
we say that something is ‘independent’ of our knowing, we
mean, according to him, that the thing is not aware that we
know it. But, as a matter of fact, everything we know, even a
stone, is aware of us in its own way. To the charge that this is
Hylozoism, Dr Schiller replies by admitting it.

The grounds for these opinions are not set forth quite so
clearly as could be wished, but we may gather them from a
complimentary allusion to Hegel’s dialectic at the beginning
of the essay. Imagine some ‘fact’ in regard to which we
entertain a belief. The belief leads to action, and the action
alters the ‘fact’. If it alters it into harmony with our wishes
the belief is proved to lakve been what pragmatists call ‘true’,
since it has proved -successful in action. In this case, since the
belief in the fact is true, it follows that the fact is real. Thus
the belief has made the fact. But if the outcome of the belief is
a ‘fact’ which, though in harmony with the wishes which

* 3 W 8w M Htmarism, pp. 4 SItS>*


103


PRAGMATISM


originally led us to concern ourselves with the matter, is in
conflict with others of our wishes, the belief is not ‘true’ as
regards these other wishes; hence we shall have to change our
belief, and take fresh action on the new belief, and so bring
the ‘fact’ into harmony with these new wishes. In this way, so
long as we have any unsatisfied wishes, we are led on in a
cycle of beliefi and actions, the beliefs becoming gradually
‘truer’, and the ‘facts’ with which the beliefs are concerned
becoming gradually more ‘real’ as greater harmony is
established between the ‘facts’ and our wishes. The motive
power of this whole development is the pragmatic definition
of truth. For if we believe A to be a fact, that belief is true if it
is successful as a means to satisfying our wishes; hence so long
as our wishes are not completely satisfied, the belief that A
is a fact is not completely true, and therefore A is not com-
pletely a fact. Thus complete truth and complete reality go
hand in hand, and both are only to be found at the end of the
road which leads to the complete satisfaction of all our wishes.

The similarity of the above process to the Hegelian dia-
lectic is emphasized by Dr Schiller: with hb inveterate love of
a pun, he has chiistened hb process ‘trialectic’. He does not
seem, however, to have observed that hb process, like Hegel’s,
introduces a dbtinction between appearance and reality;
that appearance embraces the whole of the world as we know
it, and that it b only to reality that the pragmatic test of
truth applies. The ‘facts’ which he can accept as real must be
such as not to thwart our purposes; the ‘facts’ which appear
are very often such as to thwart our purposes. If a fact b such
as to thwart our purposes, the pragmatist test of truth is not
fully applicable to it; for by believing that it will thwart our
purposes, we do not prevent it from doing so, and our belief,
though possibly preferable pragmatically to any other, does
not secure the satisfaction of our desires. If, on the other hand,
we believe that the fact b not such as to thwart our purposes,
we believe what, ex kypothesi, b not the case. Hence it follows
that such facts cannot be real. Since many apparent facts
thwart our purposes, we are led to dbtingubh between real

103


PHILOSOPHICAL . ESSAYS

and apparent facts. Hence it is not here on earth that prag-
matism applies, but only in Dr Schiller’s heaven, just as it is
only in Mr Bradley’s heaven that Mr Bradley’s metaphysic
applies. The whole doctrine, therefore, reduces itself to the
proposition that it would be heavenly to live in a world
where one’s philosophy was true, and this is a proposition
which we have no desire to controvert.

The distinction between appearance and reality is one
which Dr Schiller is never weary of attacking; indeed, a very
large proportion of his writings is directed against it. His
complete reality, he holds, is being progressively realized, and
is not, like the Absolute, something wholly unconnected with
our actual world of appearance. But his only reason for sup-
posing that his complete reality is being progressively realized
is a tacit assumption of co-operation among the agents com-
posing the universe. He assumes, that is, that the various
desires which (according to him) form the motive power of all
that occurs in the universe are not such as to countract each
other: the world’s activities are not to be conceived as a
tug-of-war. For this view there is, we fancy, no argument ex-
cept the pragmatic argument, that it is pleasant and cannot
be conclusively disproved.

Thus the whole humanist metaphysic rests upon the prag-
matic theory of truth, and falls with that theory. Moreover,
it introduces, in a slightly modified form, the old distinction of
appearance and reality, of which the ^fficulties have been
admirably set forth by Dr Schiller himself. Since the distinc-
tion, and therefore the difficulties, result inevitably from the
pragmatic theory of truth, they afford a new argument
against that theory; for they show that the theory is applic-
able, not to our actuaLworld, but to an ideal world where all
the hopes of pragmatists have been realized.

Although, for the reasons alleged above, we do not our-
selves accept the pragmatist philosophy, we nevertheless
believe that it is likely to aclfieve widespread popularity,
because it embodies some of the nudn intellectual and polit-
ical tendencies of our time. This aspect of pragmatism


104


PRAGMATISM


deserves consideration, since the influence of a doctrine (as
pragmatists have very prudently pointed out) is by no means
proportional to its intellectual vsdue.

On the intellectual side, pragmatism embodies scepticism,
evolution, and the new insight into the nature and scope
of scientific induction. On the political side, it embodies
democracy, the increased belief in human power which has
come from the progress of mechanical invention, and the
Bismarckian belief in force. *

The scepticism embodied in pragmatism is that which says,
‘Since all beliefs are absurd, we may as well believe what b
most convenient.’ This is by no means a new contention; in
England it has been popularized by Mr Balfour’s Founda-
tions of Belief and Notes on Insular Free Trade. Scepticbm b
of the very essence of the pragmatic philosophy: nothing b
certain, everything is liable to revision, and the attainment of
any truth in which we can rest securely b impossible. It b,
therefore, not worth while to trouble our heads about what
really b true; what b thought to be true b all that need con-
cern us. Instead of the old distinction between ‘true’ and ‘false’,
we adopt the more useful distinction between what we per-
sist in thinking true, and what merely seems true at first
sight. Later on, the old meanings of ‘true’ and ‘false’ may slip
back unnoticed, and we may come to think that what b true
in the pragmatic sense b true in the old sense also; thb hap-
pens especially in regard to religion. But on pragmatist prin-
ciples, there b no reason to regret this; for the ‘true’ b what it
is useful to believe, and therefore it b useful to believe what
pragmatism declares to be true. Scepticbm, therefore, though
necessary at the start, must be banbhed later on if we are
to get the full benefits of pragmatism. In thb there b no
great psychological difficulty, since, as Hume confessed, the
sceptical attitude is one not easily maintained in practice.

The philosophy of evolution h2is also had its share in
generating the pragmatic tone of mind. It has led people to
regard everything as fluid and in process of development,
everything as passing by imperceptible gradations into every-

105


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

thing else. Some biologists, it is true, have begun to regard
development as discontinuous, proceeding by the sudden
appearance of ficaks; but philosophers and the general
public have not been influenced by this change. Hence it has
come to be felt that all sharp antitheses, such as that of true
and falu, must be blurred, and all finality must be avoided.
We must always build a road by which everything can pass
into everything else at a leisurely pace and with small steps.
Instead of ‘the true’ we shall have ‘the more true’, or ‘Ae
most true up to date’. And between different claimants for
truth, we must provide a struggle for existence, leading to
the survival of the strongest. All this is admirably effected by
the pragmatic theory of truth. M. Bergson, whom prag-
matists claim as an ally, may be regarded as embodying this
tendency.

The influence of modem theories of scientific induction has
probably been more restricted, in point of numbers, than the
influence of scepticism or of evolution, but the men in-
fluenced have been important by their scientific eminence.
We may take as their protagonist M. Poincar^, who, while
not extending the pragmatist doctrine to particular facts, has
dealt in a thoroughly pragmatic spirit with the general hypo-
theses of logic, mathematics, and physics, showing that what
leads to the acceptance of a scientific hypothesis is its conveni-
ence. Such general assumptions as causality, the existence of
an external world, etc., cannot be supported by Mill’s canons
of induction, but require a far more comprehensive treat-
ment of the whole organized body of accepted scientific doc-
trine. It is in such treatment that the pragmatic method is
seen at its best; and among men of science its apparent
success in this directioa has doubtless contributed greatly to
its acceptance.

The influence of democracy in promoting pragmatism is
visible in almost every page of William James’s writing.
There is an impatience of authority, an unwillingness to
condemn widespread prejudices, a tendency to decide
philosophical questions by putting them to the vote, which

106


PRAGMATISM


contrast curiously with the usual dictatorial tone of philo-
sophic writings. Dr Schiller at one time set to work to eluci-
date the question of a future life by taking a poU.^ William
James claims for the pragmatist temper ‘the open air and
possibilities of nature, as ag2unst dogma, artificiality, and the
pretence of finality in truth*. A thing which simply is true,
whether you like it or not, is to him as hateful as a Russian
autocracy; he feels that he is escaping from a prison, made
not by stone walls but by ‘hard facts*, when he has huifianized
truth, and made it, like the police force in a democracy, the
servant of the people instead of their master. The democratic
temper pervades even the religion of the pragmatists: they
have the religion they have chosen, and the traditional
reverence is changed into satisfaction with their own handi-
work. ‘The prince of darkness*, James says, ‘may be a gentle-
man, as we are told he is, but whatever the God of earth and
heaven is, he can surely be no gentleman.** He is rather, we
should say, conceived by pragmatists as an elected president,
to whom we give a respect which is really a tribute to the
wisdom of our own choice. A government in which we have
no voice is repugnant to the democratic temper. William
James carries up to heaven the revolt of his New England
ancestors: the Power to which he can yield respect must be a
George Washington rather than a George III.

Closely connected with this democratic spirit is the belief
in human power, which is one of the dominant notes of
pragmatism. By the progress of mechanical invention, the
possibilities of our command over nature have been shown to
be much greater than they were formerly supposed to be, and
no definite limits can be set to them. Hence has arisen —
especially in America, where the economic conditions are
favourable, and the chief concern of most people is with those
matters in which recent advances have been greatest — a

^ See his essay on The Desire for Immortality* {Himumism, pp. 228-49). We
do not, of course, suggest that he would have considered the result of the poll
decisive, even if the electorate had been larger.

' FragmaiUmt p. 72.


107


PHILOSOPHIC3AL ESSAYS

general feeling that by energy and hope all obstacles can be
overcome, and that it is a mark of laziness or pusillanimity to
admit that anything is impossible. The habit of mind which
believes that there are no essential impossibilities has been
fostered by the doctrine of evolution, with its literary corol-
lary of the Uebemensch. Hence have arisen a self-confidence
and a pride of life which in many ways remind one of the
Renaissance, and establish some affinity between historical
humanism and its modem namesake. For the modem
humanism is essentially the philosophy which is appropriate,
as Dr Schiller himself has said, to ‘the young, the strong, the
virile’.^ The inventor, the financier, the advertiser, the suc-
cessful men of action generally, can find in pragmatism an
expression of their instinctive view of the world. Such men,
both for good and evil, expect the world to be malleable to
their wishes, and in a greater or less degree find their ex-
pectation justified by success. Hence arises a disbelief in those
‘hard facts* which pragmatists tend to deny, and a confidence
of victory in contests with the outer world, whether these
contests be cognitive or more directly practical. An Italian
pragmatist has expressed this confidence in victory as follows:

Dio ^ perfetto perch^ h onnipossente. Sosdtuiamo dunque

al misticismo della rinunzia, dell’ Imitazjum di Cristo, il

misticismo della conquista, dell’ Imitazione di Dio.*

Other pragmatists have been less explicit than this
modern Thomas k Kempis, but he has correcdy expressed
the spirit of their philosophy.

From the confidence of victory in contests it is an easy
passage to the love of contest. For this pragmatism provides
full scope. The many different ‘tmths as claim’ must fight it
out among themselves, and the victor will become ‘tmth
validated’. Dr Schiller on one occasion implicitly confesses
that, with his theory of tmth, persecution can actually make
a doctrine tme which would otherwise be false, since it can

' Humanism^ p. viii.

* Leonardo, April 1905, VImiUtciotu d* p. 64.

108


PRAGMATISM


make a doctrine ‘useful to our lives’.* In the absence of any
standard of truth other than success, it seems evident that the
familiar methods of the struggle for existence must be applied
to the elucidation of difficult questions, and that ironclads
and Maxim guns must be the ultimate arbiters of meta-
physical truth.

llie worship offeree, as we find it in Nietzsche, is not to be
found in the same ferm in William James, who, though he
lauds the will and the life of action, does not wish action to be
bellicose. Nevertheless, the excesrive individualism of the
pragmatic theory of truth is inherently connected with the
appeal to force. If there is a non-human truth, which one
man may know, while another does not, there is a standard
outside the disputants, to which, we may urge, the dispute
ought to be submitted; hence a pacific and judicial settle-
ment of disputes is at least theoretically possible. If, on the
contrary, the only way of discovering which of the disputants
is in the right is to wait and see which of them is successful,
there is no longer any principle except ferce by which the
issue can be decided. It is true, of course, that in a private
dispute the public opinion of the community, especially as
embodied in the law, will usually compel a peaceful decision.
But this public opinion is formed (at least in theory) upon an
objective estimate of the rights and wrongs of the case; in
place of this, if pragmatism were the accepted creed, public
opinion would have to be g^uided by the interests of the com-
munity. To this there would be no objection if, as would
commonly be done, the maintenance of justice could be
teJeen as one of the ends which it is in the interest of the com-
munity to pursue. But in a pragmatist community this would
be impossible, since justice is derivative from the interests of
the community, and not an independent constituent of those
interests. In international matters, owing to the fact that the
disputants are often strong enough to be independent of out-

^ Humanism, p. 59: 'Ddicate queitiont may ariie out of the iket that not oidy
does what works receive social recognition, but also that «dut receives social
recognition for this very reason largely works.'

log


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

side control, these considerations beconie more important. If
the pragmatist urges that always and everywhere the only
ultimate arbiter in a dispute must be force, the reply is that,
although this is true, at the actual moment of the battle, it is
yet not true in a wider sense, since it ignores the motives
which generate the force on either side. The hopes of inter-
national peace, like the achievement of internal peace,
depend upon Ae creation of an effective force of public
opinion formed upon an estimate of the rights and wrongs of
disputes. Thus it would be misleading to say that the dispute
is decided by force, without adding that force is dependent
upon justice. But the possibility of such a public opinion
depends upon the possibility of a standard of justice which is
a cause, not an effect, of the wishes of the community; and
such a standard of justice seems incompatible with the prag-
matist philosophy. This philosophy, therefore, although it
begins with liberty and toleration, develops, by inherent
necessity, into the appeal to force and the arbitrament of the
big battalions. By this development it becomes equally
adapted to democracy at home and to imperialism abroad.
Thus here, again, it is more delicately adjusted to the re-
quirements of the time than any other philosophy which has
hitherto been invented.

To sum up: Pragmatism appeals to the temper of mind
which finds on the surface of this planet the whole of its
imaginative material; which feels confident of progress, and
unaware of non-human limitations to human power; which
loves battle, with all the attendant risks, because it has no
real doubt foat it will achieve victory; which desires religion,
as it desires railways and electric light, as a comfort and a
help in the affairs of thi^orld, not as providing non-human
objects to satisfy the hunger for perfection and for something
to be worshipped without reserve. But for those who feel that
life on this planet would be a life in prison if it were not for
the windows into a greater world beyond; for those to whom
a belief in man’s omnipotence seems arrogant, who desire
rather the Stoic freedom tiiat comes of mastery over the


no


PRAGMATISM


passions than the Napoleonic domination that sees the king-
doms of this world at its feet — ^in a word, to men who do not
find Man an adequate object of their worship, the prag-
matist’s world will seem narrow and petty, robbing life of
all that gives it value, and making Man himself smaller
by depriving the universe which he contemplates of all its
splendour.


Ill


V


WILLIAM JAMES’S CONCEPTION
OF TRUTRi


'The history of philosophy’, as William James observes, ‘is to
a great extent that of a certain clash of human tempera-
ments.’ In dealing with a temperament of such charm as his,
it is not pleasant to think of a ‘clash’; one does not willingly
differ, or meet so much urbanity by churlish criddsms. For-
tunately, a very large part of his book is concerned with the
advocacy of posidons which pragmatism shares with other
forms of empiricism; with all this part of his book, I, as an
empiricist, ^d myself, broadly speaking, in agreement. I
might instance the lecture devoted to a problem which he
considers ‘the most central of all philosophic problems’,
namely, that of the One and the Many. In this lecture he
declares himself on the whole a pluralist, after a discussion of
the kinds and degrees of unity to be found in the world to
which any empiricist may wholly assent. Throughout the
book, the disdncdve tenets of pragmatism only -make their
appearance now and again, after the groimd has been care-
fully prepared. James speaks somewhere of Dr Schiller’s
‘butt-end foremost statement of the humanist posidon’. His
own statement is the very reverse of ‘butt-end foremost’; it is
insinuating; gradual, ingpercepdble.

A good illustradon of his insinuadng method is afforded by

^ FragmoHm: a new name fir some old ways of thinking. Popular Lectures on
Philosophy, by William James (Longmans, Green, and Go., 1907). The
following article is reprinted from the Albany Xeview, January 1908, where it
appeared under the tide 'Transatlandc "Truth**.’ It has b^n cridcized by
William James in The Meaning of Truth (Longmans, 1909), in the ardcle called
'Two English Grides*.


118


JAMES’S CONCEPTION OF TRUTH

his lecture on common sense. The categories of common
sense, as he points out, and as we may all agree, embody dis-
coveries of our remote ancestors; but these discoveries cannot
be regarded as final, because science, and still more philo-
sophy, finds common-sense notions inadequate in many ways.
Common sense, science, and philosophy, we are told, are all
insuffidendy true in some respect; and to this again we may
agree. But he adds: ‘It is evident that the conflict of these so
widely differing systems obliges us to overhaul the very idea
of truth, for at present we have no definite notion of what the
word may mean’ (p. 192). Here, as I think, we have a mere
non sequitwr. A damson-tart, a plum-tart, and a gooseberry-
tart may all be insufiidendy sweet; but does that oblige us to
overhaul the very notion of sweetness, or show that we have
no definite notion of what the word ‘sweetness’ may mean? It
seems to me, on the contrary, that if we perceive that they
are insufiidendy sweet, that shows that we do know what
‘sweetness’ is; and the same surdy applies to truth. But this
remark is merely by the way.

James, like most philosophers, represents his views as
mediating between two opposing schools. He begins by dis-
tinguishing two philosophic types called respectively the
‘tender-minded’ and the ‘tough-minded’. The ‘tender-
minded’ are ‘rationalistic, intellectualistic, idealistic, opti-
mistic, religious, free-wiUist, monistic, dogmatical’. The
‘tough-minded’ are ‘empiridst, sensationalistic, materialistic,
pessimistic, irreligious, fatalistic, pluralistic, sceptical’. Tradi-
tionally, Gemum philosophy was on the whole ‘tender-
minded’, British philosophy was on the whole ‘tough-
minded’. It will dear the ground for me to confess at once
that I bdong, with some reserves, to the ‘tough-minded’
type. Pragmatism, William James avers, ‘can satisfy both
kinds of demand. It can remain religious like the rational-
isms, but at the same time, like the empiricisms, it can pre-
serve the richest intimacy with facts’. This reconciliation, to
my mind, is illusory; I find mysdf agreeing with the ‘tough-
minded’ half of pragmatism and totally disagreeing with the


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

‘tender-minded’ half. But the disentagling of the two halves
must be postponed till we have seen how the reconciliation
professes to be effected. Pragmatism represents, on the one
hand, a method and habit of mind, on the other, a certain
theory as to what constitutes truth. The latter is more nearly
what Dr Schiller calls humanism; but this name is not
adopted by James. We must, therefore, distinguish the prag-
matic method and the pragmatic theoiy of truth. The former, up
to a point, is involved in all induction, and is certainly largely
commendable. The latter is the essential novelty and the
point of real importance. But let us first consider the prag-
matic method.

‘Pragmatism’, says James, ‘represents a perfectly familiar
attitude in philosophy, the empiricist attitude, but it repre-
sents it, as it seems to me, both in a more radical and in a less
objectionable form than it has ever yet assumed. A prag-
matist turns his back resolutely and once for all upon a lot of
inveterate habits dear to professional philosophers. He turns
away from abstraction and insufficiency, from verbal solu-
tions, from bad a priori reasons, from fixed principles, closed
systems, and pretended absolutes and origins. He turns to-
wards concreteness and adequacy towards facts, towards
action and towards power. That means the empiricist temper
regnant and the rationalist temper sincerely given up. It
means the open air and possibilities of nature, as against
dogma, artificiality, and the pretence of finality in truth’
(P- SO*

The temper of mind here described is one with which I, for
my part, in the main cordially sympathize. But I think there
is an impression in the mind of William James, as of some
other pragmatists, tha^ pragmatism involves a more open
mind than its opposite. As regards scientific questions, or
even the less important questions of philosophy, this is no
doubt more or less the case. But as regards the fundamental
questions of philosophy — especially as regards what I con-
sider the fundamental question, namely, the nature of truth —
pragmatism is absolutely dogmatic. The hypothesis that


“4


JAMES’S CONCEPTION OF TRUTH

pragmatism is erroneous is not allowed to enter for the prag>
made compeddon; however well it may work, it is not to be
entertained To ‘turn your back resolutely and once for all’
upon the philosophy of others may be heroic or praiseworthy,
but it is not undogmadc or open-minded. A modest shrinking
fiom self-asserdon, a sense that all our theories are provi-
sional, a constant realizadon that after all the hypothesb of
our opponents may be the tight one — these characterize the
truly empirical temper, but I do not observe that they invari-
ably characterize the wiidngs of pragmatists. Dogmadsm in
fundamentals is more or less unavoidable in philosophy, and
I do not blame pragmatists for what could not be otherwise;
but I demur to their claim to a greater open-mindedness than
is or may be possessed by their cridcs.

William James, however, it must be admitted, is about as
litde pontifical as a philosopher well can be. And his com-
plete absence of unedon is most refireshing. ‘In this real world
of sweat and dirt’, he says, ‘it seems to me that when a view
of things is “noble”, that ought to count as a presumpdon
against its truth and as a philosophic disqualification’ (p. 72).
Accordingly his contentions are never supported by ‘fine
writing*; he brings them into the market-place, and is not
afraid to be homely, untechnical, and slangy. All this makes
his books refireshing to read, and shows that they contain
what he really lives by, not merely what he holds in his pro-
fessional capacity.

But it is time to return to the pragmatic method.

‘The pragmatic method’, we are told, ‘is primarily a
method of settling metaphysical disputes that otherwise
might be interminable. Is the world one or many? — fated
or free? — ^material or spiritual? — ^here arc notions either of
which may or may not hold good of the world; and disputes
over such notions are unending. The pragmatic method in
such cases is to try to interpret each notion by tracing its re-
spective practical consequences. What difference would it
practically make to anyone if this notion rather than that
notion were true? If no practical difference whatever can be


“5


PHILOSOPHICAL . ESSAYS

traced, then the alternatives mean practically the same thing,
and all dispute is idle. Whenever a dispute is serious, we
ought to be able to show some practical cUfFerence that must
follow from one side or the other’s being right.’ And again:
‘To attain perfect dearness in our thoughts of an object, then,
we need only consider what conceivable effects of a practical
kind the object may involve — ^what sensations we are to ex-
pect from it, and what reactions we must prepare. Our con-
ception of these effects, whether immediate or remote, is then
for us the whole of our conception of the object, so far as that
conception has positive significance at all’ (pp. 45-7).

To this method, applied within limits and to suitable
topics, there is no ground for objecting. On the contrary, it
is wholesome to keep in touch with concrete facts, as far as
possible, by remembering to bring our theories constantly
into connection with them. The method, however, involves
more than is stated in the extract which I quoted just now. It
involves also the suggestion of the pragmatic criterion of
truth: a belief is to be judged true in so far as the practical
consequences of its adoption are good. Some pragmatists, for
example, Le Roy (who has lately suffered Papal condemna-
tion), regard the pragmatic test as giving only a criterion;^
others, notably Dr Schiller, regard it as giving the actud
meaning of truth. William James ^ees on this point with Dr
Schiller, though, like him, he does not enter into the question
of criterion versus meaning.

The pragmatic theory of truth is the central doctrine of
pragmatism, and we must consider it at some length. William
James states it in various ways, some of which I shall now
quote. He says: ‘Ideas (which themsdves are but parts of our
experience) become tgue just in so far as they hdp us to get
into satisfactory relation with other parts of our experience’
(p. 58). Again: ‘Truth is one species of good, and not, as is
usually supposed, a category ^tinct firom good, and co-
ordinate with it. The true is the name of whatever proves itself to be

^ Gf., e.g., Le Roy, ‘Comment le pofe le problime de Dieu’, Rioue M4ia-
pl^siqui $t dt Aforo^, xv 4 (July 1907), pp. 506, 507 n.

116


JAMES’S CONCEPTION OF TRUTH

good in the way of belief, and good, too, for definite, assignable
reason^ (p. 75). That truth means ‘agreement with reality*
may be said by a pragmatist as well as by anyone else, but
the pragmatist differs from others as to what is meant by
‘agreement’, and also (it would seem) as to what is meant by
‘reality’. William James gives the following definition of ‘agree-
ment’ : ‘To “agree” in the widest sense with a reality can only
mean to be guided either straight up to it or into its surroundings, or to
be put into such working touch with it as to handle either'it or some-
thing connected with it better than if we disagreed' (p. 312). This
language is rather metaphorical, and a little puzzling; it is
plain, however, that ‘agreement’ is regarded as practical, not
as merely intellectual. This emphasis on practice is, of course,
one of the leading features of pragmatism.

In order to understand the pragmatic notion of truth, we
have to be clear as to the basis of fact upon which truths are
supposed to rest. Inunediate sensible experience, for ex-
ample, does not come under the alternative of true and false.
‘Day follows day*, says James, ‘and its contents are simply
added. The now contents themselves are not true, they simply
come and are. Truth is what we say about them’ (p. 62). Thus
when we are merely aware of sensible objects, we are not to
be regarded as knowing any truth, although we have a
certain kind of contact with reality. It is important to realize
that the facts which thus lie outside the scope of truth and
falsehood supply the material which is presupposed by the
pragmatic theory. Our beliefi have to agree with matters of
fact: it is an essential part of their ‘satisfactoriness’ that they
should do so. James also mentions what he calk ‘relations
among purely mental ideas’ as part of our stock-in-trade with
which pragmatism starts. He mentions as instances ‘i and i
m^e 2’, ‘white differs less from grey than it does from black’,
and so on. All such propositions as these, then, we are sup-
posed to know for certain before we can get under way. As
James puts it: ‘Between the coercions of the sensible order
and those of the ideal order, our mind is thus wedged tightly.
Our ideas must agree with realities, be such realities concrete


PHILOSOPHICAL . l^SAYS

or abstract, be they facts or be they principles, under penalty
of endless inconsistency and firustration’ (p. 211). Thus it is
only when we pass beyond plain matters of fact and a priori
truisms that the pragmatic notion of truth comes in. It is,
in short, the notion to be applied to doubtful cases, but it is
not the notion to be applied to cases about which there can be
no doubt. And that there are cases about which there can be
no doubt is presupposed in the very statement of the prag-
matist position. ‘Our account of truth’, James tells us, ‘is an
account ... of processes of leading, realized in rebus, and
having only this quality in common, that they pyi’ (p. 218).
We may thus sum up the philosophy in the following defini-
tion: ‘A truth is anything which it pays to believe.’ Now, if
this definition is to be useful, as pragmatism intends it to be,
it must be possible to know that it pays to believe something
without knowing anything that pragmatism would call a
truth. Hence the knowledge that a certain belief pays must be
classed as knowledge of a sensible fact or of a ‘relation among
purely mental ideas’, or as some compound of the two, and
must be so easy to discover as not to be worthy of having the
pragmatic test applied to it. There is, however, some diffi-
culty in this view. Let us consider for a moment what it
means to say that a belief ‘pays’. We must suppose that this
means that the consequences of entertaining the belief are
better than those of rejecting it. In order to know this, we
must know what are the consequences of entertaining it, and
what are the consequences of rejecting it; we must know also
what consequences are good, what bad, what consequences
are better, and what worse. Take, say, belief in the Ronum
Catholic Faith. This, we may agree, causes a certain amount
of happiness at the exQgnse of a certain amount of stupidity
and priestly domination. Such a view is disputable and dis-
puted, but we will let that pass. But then comes the question
whether, admitting the effects to be such, they are to be
classed as on the whole good or on the whole bad; and this
question is one which is so difficult that our test of truth be-
comes practically useless. It is fiu: easier, it seems to me, to

118


JAMES’S CONCEPTION OF TRUTH

settle the plain question of fact: ‘Have Popes been always
infallible?’ than to settle the question whether the effects of
thinking them infallible are on the whole good. Yet this
question, of the truth of Roman Catholicism, is just the sort of
question that pragmatists consider specially suitable to their
method.

The notion that it is quite easy to know when the con-
sequences of a belief are good, so easy, in fact, that a theory of
knowledge need take no account of anything so siniple — this
notion, I must say, seems to me one of the strangest assump-
tions for a theory of knowledge to make. Let us take another
illustration. Many of the men of the French Revolution were
disciples of Rousseau, and their belief in his doctrines had
far-reaching effects, which make Europe at this day a differ-
ent place from what it would have been without that belief.
If, on the whole, the effects of their belief have been good, we
shall have to say that their belief was true; if bad, that it was
false. But how are we to strike the balance? It is almost im-
possible to disentangle what the effects have been; and even
if we could ascertain them, our judgment as to whether they
have been good or bad would depend upon our politicaJ
opinions. It is surely far easier to discover by direct investiga-
tion that the Contrat Social is a myth than to decide whether
belief in it has done harm or good on the whole.

Another difficulty which I feel in regard to the pragmatic
meaning of ‘truth’ may be stated as follows: Suppose I accept
the pragmatic criterion, and suppose you persuade me that a
certain belief is useful. Suppose I thereupon conclude that the
belief is true. Is it not obvious that there is a transition in my
mind from seeing that the belief is useful to actually holding
that the belief is true? Yet this could not be so if the pragmatic
accQunt of truth were valid. Take, say, the belief that other
people exist. According to the pragmatists, to say ‘it is true
that other people exist’ means ‘it is useful to believe that other
people exist’. But if so, then these two phrases are merely
different words for the same proposition; therefore when I
believe the one I believe the other. If this were so, there could


PHILOSOPHIGAl, ^SAYS

be no transition from the one to the oiher, as plainly there is.
This shows that the word ‘true’ represents for us a different
idea from that represented by the phrase ‘useful to believe*,
and that, therefore, the pragmatic definition of truth ignores,
without destroying, the meaning commonly given to the
word ‘true*, which meaning, in my opinion, is of funda-
mental importance, and can only be ignored at the cost of
hopeless inadequacy.

This brings me to the difference between criterion and
meaning — a point on which neither James nor Dr Schiller is
very clear. I may best explain the difference, to begin with,
by an instance. If you wish to know whether a certain book is
in a library, you consult the catalogue: books mentioned in
the catalogue are presumably in the library, books not men-
tioned in it are presumably not in the library. Thus the cata-
logue affords a criterion of whether a book is in the library or
not. But even supposing the catalogue perfect, it is obvious
that when you say the book is in the library you do not mean
that it is mentioned in the catalogue. You mean that the
actual book is to be found somewhere in the shelves. It there-
fore renuiins an intelligible hypothesis that there are books in
the library which are not yet catalogued, or that there are
books catalogued which have been lost and are no longer in
the library. And it remains an inference from the discovery
that a book is mentioned in the catalogue to the-conclusion
that the book is in the library. Speaking abstractly, we may
say that a property A is a criterion of a property B when the
same objects possess both; and A is a useful criterion of B if it
is easier to discover whether an object possesses the property
A than whether it possesses the property B. Thus being men-
tioned in the catalogue is a usejid criterion of being in the
library, because it is easier to consult the catalogue than to
hunt through the ‘shelves.

Now if pragmatists only afiSrmed that utility is a criterion of
truth, there would be much less to be said against their view.
For there certainly seem to be few cases, if any, in which it is
clearly useful to believe what is false. The chief criticism one


120


JAMES’S CONCEPTION OF TRUTH

would then have to make on pragmatism would be to deny
that utility is a useful criterion, because it is so often harder to
determine whether a belief is useful than whether it is true.
The arguments of pragmatists are almost wholly directed to
proving that utility is a criterioni that utility is the meaning of
truth is then supposed to follow. But, to return to our illus-
tration of the library, suppose we had conceded that there
are no mistakes in the British Museum catalogue: would it
follow that the catalogue would do without the Books? We
can imagine some person long engaged in a comparative
study of libraries, and having, in the process, naturally lost all
taste for reading, declaring that the catalogue is the only
important thing — as for the books, they are useless lumber;
no one ever wants them, and the principle of economy should
lead us to be content with the catalogue. Indeed, if you con-
sider the matter with an open mind, you will see that the
catalogue is the library, for it tells you everything you can
possibly wish to know about the library. Let us, then, save
the taxpayers’ money by destroying the books: allow free
access to the catalogue, but condemn the desire to read as
involving an exploded dogmatic realism.

This analogy of the library is not, to my mind, fantastic or
unjust, but as close and exact an analogy as I have been able
to think of. The point I am trying to make clear is concealed
from pragmatists, I think, by the fact that their theories start
very often from such things as the general hypotheses of
science — ether, atoms, and the like. In such cases, we take
little interest in the hypotheses themselves, which, as we well
know, are liable to rapid change. What we care about are the
inferences as to sensible phenomena which the hypotheses
enable us to make. All we ask of the hypotheses is that they
should ‘work’ — though it should be observed that what con-
stitutes ‘working’ is not the general agreeableness of their
results, but the conformity of these results with observed
phenomena. But in the case of these general scientific hypo-
theses, no sensible man believes that they are true as they
stand. They are believed to be true in part, and to work


I2I


PHILOSOPHICAt ESSAYS

because of the part that is true; but it-is expected that in time
some element of falsehood will be discovered, and some truer
theory will be substituted. Thus pragmatism would seem to
derive its notion of what constitutes belief from cases in which,
properly speaking, belief is absent, and in which — ^what is
pragmatically important — there is but a slender interest
in truth or falsehood as compared to the interest in what
‘works’.

But when this method is extended to cases in which the
proposition in question has an emotional interest on its own
account, apart from its working, the pragmatic account be-
comes less satisfactory. This point has been well brought out
by Professor Stout in Mind}, and what I have to say is mostly
contained in his remarks. Take the question whether other
people exist. It seems perfectly possible to suppose that the
hypothesis that they exist will always work, even if they do
not in fact exist. It is plain, also, that it makes for happiness to
believe that they exist — ^for even the greatest misanthropist
would not wish to be deprived of the objects of his hate.
Hence the belief that other people exist is, pragmatically, a
true belief. But if I am troubled by solipsbm, the discovery
that a belief in the existence of others is ‘true’ in the prag-
matist’s sense is not enough to allay my sense of loneliness:
the perception that I should profit by rgecting solipsism is
not alone sufficient to make me reject it. For what I desire
is not that the belief in solipsism should be false in the
pragmatic sense, but that other people should in fact exist.
And with the pragmatist’s meaning of truth, these two
do not necessarily go together. The belief in solipsism
might be false even if I were the only person or thing in the
universe. »

This paradoxical consequence would, I presume, not be
admitted by pragmatists. Yet it is an inevitable outcome of
the divorce which they make between fact and truth. Return-
ing to our illustration, we may say that ‘facts’ are represented

^ October 1907, pp. 586-8. This criticism occurs in the course of a very
sympathetic review of Dr Schiller’s Stndm in Humanim,


122


JAMES’S CONCEPTION OF TRUTH

by the books, and ’truths’ by the entries in the catalogue. So
long as you do not wish to read the books, the ’truths’ will
do in place of the ‘facts’, and the imperfections of your
library can be remedied by simply making new entries in the
catalogue. But as soon as you actually wish to read a book,
the ‘truths’ become inadequate, and the ‘facts’ become all-
important. The pragmatic account of truth assumes, so it
seems to me, that no one takes any interest in facts^ and that
the truth of the proposition that your friend exists is an
adequate substitute for the &ct of hh existence. ‘Facts’, they
tell us, are neither true nor false, therefore truth cannot be
concerned with them. But the truth ‘A exists’, if it is a truth,
is concerned with A, who in that case is a fact; and to say
that ‘A exists’ may be true even if A does not exist is to give a
meaning to ‘truth’ which robs it of all interest. Dr Schiller is
fond of attacking the view that truth must correspond with
reality; we may conciliate him by agreeing that his truth, at
any rate, need not correspond with reality. But we shall
have to add that reality is to us more interesting than such
truth.

I am, of course, aware that pragmatists minimize the
basis of ‘fact’, and speak of the ‘making of reality’ as pro-
ceeding pari passu with the ‘making of truth’. It is easy to
criticize the claim to ‘make reality’ except within obvious
limits. But when such criticisms are met by pointing to the
pragmatist’s admission that, after all, there must be a basis of
‘fact’ for our creative activity to work upon, then the opposite
line of criticism comes into play. Dr Schiller, in his essay on
‘the making of realit/, minimizes the importance of the basis
of ‘fact’, on the ground (it would seem) that ‘facts’ will not
submit to pragmatic treatment, and that, if pragmatism is
true, they are unknowable.^ Hence, on pragmatistic prin-
ciples, it is useless to think about facts. We therefore return to
fictions with a sigh of relief, and soothe our scruples by calling
them ‘realities’. But it seems something of a petitio prineipii to
condemn ‘facts’ because pragmatism, though it finds them
^ Gf. StaJBu M Hmmdsm, pp. 434-6.


1S3


PHILOSOPHICAL. ESSAYS

necessary, is unable to deal with them. And William James,
it should be said, makes less attempt than Dr Schiller does to
minimize facts. In this essay, therefore, I have considered the
difficulties which pragmatism has to face if it admits ‘facts’
rather than those (no less serious) which it has to face if it
denies them.

It is chiefly in regard to religion that the pragmatist use of
‘truth’ seems to me misleading. Pragmatists boast much of
their ability to reconcile religion and science, and William
James, as we saw, professes to have discovered a position
combining the merits of tender-mindedness and tough-
mindedness. The combination is really effected, if I am not
mistaken, in a way of which pragmatists are not themselves
thoroughly aware. For their position, if they fully realized it,
would, I think, be this: ‘We cannot know whether, in fact,
there is a God or a future life, but we can know that the
belief in God and a future life is true.’ This position, it is to be
feared, would not afford much comfort to the religious if it
were understood, and I cannot but feel some sympathy with
the Pope in his condemnation of it.

‘On pragmatic principles’, James says, ‘we cannot reject
any hypothesis if consequences useful to life flow from it’ (p.
273). He proceeds to point out that consequences useful to
life flow from the hypothesis of the Absolute, which is there-
fore so far a true hypothesis. But it should be observed that
these useful consequences flow from the hypothesis that the
Absolute is a fact, not from the hypothesis that useful conse-
quences flow from belief in the Absolute. But we cannot
believe the hypothesis that the Absolute is a fact merely be-
cause we perceive that useful consequences flow from this
hypothesis. What WQcan believe on such grounds is that this
hypothesis is what pragmatists call ‘true’, i.e. that it is useful;
but it is not froni this belief that the useful consequences flow,
and the grounds alleged do not make us believe that the
Absolute is a fact, which is the useful belief. In other words,
the useful belief is that the Absolute is a fact, and pragmatism
shows that this belief is what it calls ‘true’. Thus pragmatism


124


JAMES’S CONCEPTION OF TRUTH

persuades us that belief in the Absolute is ‘true’, but does not
persuade us that the Absolute is a fact. The belief which it per-
suades us to adopt is therefore not the one which is useful.
In ordinary logic, if the belief in the Absolute is true, it
follows that the Absolute is a fact. But with the pragmatist’s
meaning of ‘true’ this does not follow; hence the proposition
which he proves is not, as he thinks, the one from which com-
forting consequences flow.

In another place James says: ‘On pragmatistic principles,
if the hypothesis of God works satisfactorily in the widest
sense of the word, it is true’ (p. 299). This proposition is, in
reality, a mere tautology. For we have laid down the defini-
tion: ‘The word “true” means “working satisfactorily in the
widest sense of the word”.’ Hence the proposition stated by
James is merely a verbal variant on the following: ‘On prag-
matistic principles, if the hypothesis of God works satis-
factorily in the widest sense of the word, then it works satis-
factorily in the widest sense of the word.’ This would hold
even on other than pragmatistic principles; presumably what
is peculiar to pragmatism is the belief that this is an impor-
tant contribution to the philosophy of religion. The advantage
of the pragmatic method is that it decides the question of the
truth of the existence of God by purely mundane arguments,
namely, by the effects of belief in His existence upon our life
in this world. But unfortunately this gives a merely mundane
conclusion, namely, that belief in God is true, i.e. useful,
whereas what religion desires is the conclusion that God
exists, which pragmatism never even approaches. I infer,
therefore, that the pragmatic philosophy of religion, like
most philosophies whose conclusions are interesting, turns on
an unconscious play upon words. A common word — ^in this
case, the word ‘true’ — ^is taken at the outset in an uncommon
sense, but as the ailment proceeds, the usual sense of the
word gradually slips back, and die conclusions arrived at
seem, therefore, quite different fi'om what they would be seen
to be if the initial definition had been remembered.

The point is, of course, that, so soon as it is admitted that


125


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

there are things that exist, it is imposdble to av(^ recogniz-
ing a distinction, to which we may give what name we
please, between believing in tbe existence of something that
exists and believing in the existence of something that does
not exist. It is common to call the one belief true, the other
false. But if, with the pragmatists, we prefer to give a different
meaning to the words ‘true* and ‘false’, that does not prevent
the distinction commonly called the distinction of ‘true’ and
‘false’ from persuting. The pn^matist attempt to ignore this
distinction fails, as it seems to me, because a basis of fact can-
not be avoided by pragmatism, and this basis of &ct demands
the usual antithesu of ‘true’ and ‘false’. It is hardly to be sup-
posed that pragmatists will admit this conclusion. But it may
be hoped that they will tell us in more detail how they pro-
pose to avoid it.

Pragmatism, if 1 have not misunderstood it, is largely a
generalization from the procedure of the inductive sciences.
In so far as it lays stress upon the importances of induction, I
find myself in agreement with it; and as to the nature of in-
duction also, I think it is far more nearly right than are most
of the traditional accounts. But on fundamental questions of
philosophy I find myself wholly opposed to it, and unable to
see that inductive procedure gives any warrant for its con-
clusions. To make this clear, I will very briefly explain how I
conceive the nature and scope of induction.

When we survey our beliefr, we find that we hold different
beliefr with very Afferent degrees of conviction. Some — such
as the belief that I am sitting in a chair, or that 2 + 3 = 4 — can
be doubted by few except those who have had a long training
in philosophy. Such beliefi are held so firmly that non-
philosophers who deny them are put into lunatic asylums.
Other beliefi, such as Ae facts of hfitory, are held rather less
firmly, but s^'in the main without much doubt where they
are wdl authenticated. Beliefi about the future, as that the
sun will rise tomorrow and that the trains will run approxi-
matdy as in Bradshaw, may be held witii almost as great con-
viction as beliefi about the past. Scientific laws are generally

126


JAMES’S CONCEPTION OF TRUTH

believed less firmly, and there is a gradation among them
firom such as seem nearly certain to such as have only aslight
probability in their favour. Philosophical beliefi, fin^y, will,
with most people, take a still lower place, since the opposite
beliefi of otiiers can hardly fail to induce doubt. Belief, there-
fore, is a matter of degree. To speak of belief, disbelief, doubt,
and suspense of judgment as the only possibilities is as if,
from the writing on the thermometer, we were to suppose
that blood heat, summer heat, temperate, and freeing were
the only temperatures. There is a continuous gradation in
belief, and the more firmly we believe anything, the less will-
ing we are to abandon it in case of conflict.

Besides the degree of our belief, there is another important
respect in which a belief may vary, namely, in the extent to
which it is spontaneous or derivative. A belief obtained by in-
ference may be called derivative', one not so obtained, spontane-
ous. When we do not need any outside evidence to make us
entertain a belief, we may say that what we believe is obvious.
Our belief in the existence of sensible objects is of this nature:
'seeing is believing’, and we demand no further evidence. The
same applies to certain logical principles, e.g. that whatever
follows ^m a true proposition must be true. A proposition
may be obvious in very varying degrees. For example, in
matters of aesthetic taste we have to judge immediately
whether a work of art is beautiful or not, but the degree of
obviousness involved is probably small, so that we feel no
very great confidence in our judgment. Thus our spontane-
ous beliefi are not necessarily stronger than derivative beliefi.
Moreover, few beliefi, if any, are wholly spontaneous in an
educated man. The more a man has organized his knowledge,
the more his beliefi will be interdependent, and the more will
obvious truths be reinforced by their connection with other
obvious truths. In spite of this fact, however, obviousness
remains always the ultimate source of our beliefi; for what
is called verification or deduction consists always in being
brought into relation with one or more obvious propositions.
This process of verification is necessary even for propositions


127


PHILOSOPHICAI. ESSAYS

which seem obvious, since it appears on examination that two
apparently obvious propositions may be inconsistent, and
hence that apparent obviousness is not a sufficient guarantee
of truth. We dierefore have to subject our beliefi to a process
of organization, making groups of such as are mutually con-
sistent, and when two such groups are not consistent with
each other, selecting that group which seems to us to contain
the most evidence, account being taken both of the degree of
obviousness of the propositions it contains and of the number
of such propositions. It is as the result of such a process, for
example, t^t we are led, if we are led, to conclude that
colours are not objective properties of things. Induction, in a
broad sense, may be described as the process of selecting
hypotheses which will organize our spontaneous beliefi, pre-
serving as many of them as possible, and interconnecting
them by general propositions which, as is said, ‘explain’
them, i.e. give a ground from which they can be deduced. In
this sense, all knowledge is inductive as soon as it b reflective
and organized. In any science, there b a greater or less
degree of obviousness about many of its propositions: those
that are obvious are called data', other propositions are only
accepted because of their connection with the data. This con-
nection itself may be of two kinds, either that the propositions
in question can be deduced from the data, or that the data
can be deduced from the propositions in question, and we
know of no way of deducing the data without assuming the
propositions in question. The latter b the case of working
hypotheses, which covers all the general laws of science and
aU the metaphysics both of common sense and of professed
philosophy. It b, apparently, by generalizing the conception
of ‘wor^ng hypoth^b’ that pragmatism has arisen. But three
points seem to me to have been overlooked in thb generaliza-
tion. First, working hypotheses are only a small part of
our beliefi, not the whole, as pragmatism seems to think.
Secondly, prudent people give only a low degree of belief to
working hypotheses; it b therefore a curious procedure to
select them as the very types of belieb in general. Thirdly,

128


JAMES’S CONCEPTION OF TRUTH

pragmatism seems to confound two very different concep-
tions of ‘working’. When seietue says that a hypothesis works,
it means that from this hypothesis we can deduce a number
of propositions which are verifiable, i.e. obvious under suit-
able circumstances, and that we cannot deduce any proposi-
tions of which the contradictories are verifiable. But when
pragmatim says that a hypothesis works, it means that the
effects of believing it are good, including among the effects
not only the beliefr which we deduce from it, but also the
emotions entailed by it or its perceived consequences, and the
actions to which we are prompted by it or its perceived con-
sequences. This is a totally different conception of ‘working’,
and one for which the authority of scientific procedure can-
not be invoked. I infer, therefore, that induction, rightly
analysed, does not lead us to pragmatism, and that the in-
ductive results which pragmatism takes as the very type of
truth are precisely those among our beliefr which should be
held with most caution and least conviction.

To sum up: while agreeing with the empirical temper of
pragmatism, with its readiness to treat all philosophical
tenets as ‘working hypotheses’, we cannot agree that when
we say a belief is true we mean that it is a hypothesis which
‘works’, especially if we mean by this to take account of the
excellence of its effects, and not merely of the truth of its con-
sequences. If, to avoid disputes about words, we agree to
accept the pragmatic definition of the word ‘truth’, we find
that the belief that A exists may be ‘true’ even when A does
not exist. This shows that the conclusions arrived at by prag-
matism in the sphere of religion do not have the meaning
which they appear to have, and arc incapable, when rightly
understood, of yielding us the satisfaction which theypromise.
The attempt to get rid of ‘fact’ turns out to be a failure, and
thus the old notion of truth reappears. And if the pragmatist
states that utility is to be merely a criterion of truth, we shall
reply first, that it is not a useful criterion, because it is usually
harder to discover whether a belief is useful than whether it
is true; secondly, that since no a priori reason is shown why


129


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

truth and utility should always go togcther, utility can only
be shown to be a criterion at all by showing inductively that
it accompanies truth in all known instances, which requires
that we should already know in many instances what thin^
are true. Finally, therefore, the pragmatist theory of tmth is
to be condemned on the ground that it does not ‘work*.


VI


THE MONISTIC THEORY OF TRUTHS


I

In any inquiry into the nature of truth, two questions meet
us on the threshold: (i) In what sense, if any, is truth depen-
dent upon mind? (2) Are there many different truths, or b
there only the Truth? These two questions are largely inter-
connected, and it is more or less optional whether we begin
with the first or with the second. But, on the whole, the
second, namely, the question whether we ought to speak of
truths or of the Truths seems the more fundamental, and the
bulk of the present essay will be occupied with this question.
The view that truth is one may be called logical monism’; it
is, of course, closely connected with ontological monism, i.e.
the doctrine that Reality is one. The following essay will
consist of two parts. In the first I shall state the monistic
theory of truth, sketching the philosophy with which it is
bound up, and shall then consider certain internal difficulties
of this philosophy, which suggests a doubt as to the axioms
upon which the philosophy is based. In the second part I
shall consider the chief of these axioms, namely, the axiom
that relations are always grounded in the natures of their
terms, and I shall try to show that there are no reasons in
favour of this axiom and strong reasons against it.*

That the truth itself’, Mr Joachim says, ‘is one, and whole,

‘ The following essay consists of the first two sections of an article mtitl^
‘The Nature of Truth*, which appeared in the Proceedings of the Aristotelian
Society, 190&-7.

* I ^all throughout often refer to Mr Joachim’s book, The Nature of Truth
(Oxford, 1906), because it gives what seems to me the best recent statenmt of
certain views which I wish to discuss. I shall refer to this book as ‘Joachim*.

13*


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

and complete, and that all thinking' and all experience move
within its recognition and subject to its manifest authority;
this I have never doubted* (p. 178).

This doctrine, which is one of the foundation-stones of
monistic idealism, has a sweep which might not be obvio\is at
once. It means that nothing is wholly true except the whole
truth, and that what seem to be isolated truths, such as 2 -|-2
=4, are really only true in the sense that they form part of
the system which is the whole truth. And even in this sense
isolated truths are only more or less true; for when artificially
isolated they are bereft of aspects and relations which make
them parts of the whole truth, and are thus altered firom what
they are in the system. If account were taken of all the rela-
tions of a certain partial truth to other partial truths, we
should be brought to the whole system of truth, and thus the
partial truth firom which we started would have developed into
the one absolute truth. The truth that a certain partial truth
is part of the whole is a partial truth, and thus only partially
true; hence we can never say with perfect truth ‘this is part of
the Truth*. Hence there can be no sense of truth wUch is
completely applicable to a partial truth, because everything
that can be said about a partial truth is only a partial truth.

The whole of truth, or indeed whatever b genuinely a
whole, b an organic unity or significant whole, i.e. it b ‘such that
all its constituent elements reciprocally involve one another,
or reciprocally determine one another*s being as contributory
features in a single concrete meaning* (Joachim, p. 66). Thb
b an obvious consequence of the view that only the whole of
truth b quite true; for, if thb b the case, the truth about any
part of the whole must be the same as the whole truth; thus
the complete truthitbout any part b the same as the complete
truth about any other part, since each b the whole of truth.

The position which I have been trying to represent b
always considered, by those who hold it, a very diflicult one
to apprehend; so much so that the word ‘crude* has been
consecrated to those arguments and philosophies which do
not accept thb position. As I believe that the more ‘crude* a


132


THE MONISTIC THEORY OF TRUTH

philosophy is, the nearer it comes to being true, I cannot hope
to persuade idealists that I have understood their position; I
can only assure them that I have done my best.

There are in the above theory — so it seems to me — certain
intrinsic difficulties which ought to make us suspicious of the
premisses from which it follows. The first of these difficulties
— and it is one which is very candidly faced by Mr Joachim
— that, if no partial truth is quite true, it cannot be quite
true that no partial truth is quite true; unless indeed the
whole of truth is contained in the proposition ‘no partial
truth is quite true’, which is too sceptical a view for the philo-
sophy we are considering. Connected with this is the difficulty
that human beings can never know anything quite true,
because their knowledge is not of the whole of truth. Thus
the philosophy with which the view in question is bound up
cannot be quite true, since, if it were, it could not be known
to idealists. And it may be that the elements in their know-
ledge which require correction are just those which are essen-
tial to establishing their view of truth; so long as oqr premisses
are more or less faulty, we cannot know that, if corrected,
they would give the results we have deduced from them. But
this objection — that truth, if it is as alleged, must remain un-
knowable to us — b met by challenging the dbtinction
between finite minds and Mind. A dbtinction b necessarily a
partial truth; hence, if we dbtingubh a and h, we are offiy
partly right: in another aspect, a and b are identical. Thus,
although in a sense we may distingubh our finite knowledge
from absolute knowledge, yet in another sense we may say
that our knowledge b only real in so far as it b not finite; for
the reality of what b finite b the whole of which it b a con-
stituent. Thus we, so far as we are real, do really know all
truth; but only idealbts know that they know all truth.

The objections we have just been considering are based
upon the difficulty as to what monbm means by a whoU, and
in what sense it conceives that a whole has parts. The un-
initiated might imagine that a whole b made up of parts,
each of which b a genuine constituent of the whole, and b


133


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

something on its own account. But this view is ‘crude*. The
parts of a whole are not self-subsistent, and have no being
except as parts. We can never enumerate parts a, b,c, .. . of
a whole W; for the proportion *a is part of W’ is only a partial
truth, and therefore not quite true. Not only is this proposi-
tion not quite true, but the past a is not quite real. Thus W
is a whole of parts all of which are not quite real. It follows
that W is not quite really a whole of parts. If it is not quite
true that W has parts, it cannot be quite true that W is a
whole. In short, the diversity which modem monism tries
to synthesise with identity vanishes, leaving reality wholly
without structure or complexity of any kind. For though it is
essential to its being a whole that it should have parts, it is
essential to its being a significant whole that its parts should
not quite truly be its parts, since every statement about them,
including the statement that they are its parts, must be more
or less untrue.

A connected difficulty is the following: In a ‘significant
whole*, each part, since it involves the whole and every other
part, is just as compl» as the whole; the parts of a part, in
turn, are just as complex as the part, and therefore just as
complex as the whole. Since, moreover, the whole is constitu-
tive of the nature of each part, just as much as each part is of
the whole, we may say that the whole is part of each part. In
these circumstances it becomes perfectly arbitnuy to say that
a is part of W rather than that W is part of a. If we are to say
this, we shall have to supplement the monist*s notion of whole
and part by a more commonplace notion, which I think is
really present, though unconsciously, in all monistic thinking;
for otherwise the distinction of whole and part evaporates,
and with it the entire notion of a ‘significant whole*.

Another difficulty of the monistic theory of truth is as to
error. Every separate proposition, on the monistic theory,
expresses a partial truth: no proposition expresses something
quite true, and none expresses something quite false. Under
these circumstances, the distinctive characteristic of error
cannot lie in the judgment aflirmed, since every possible


*34


THE MONISTIC THEORY OF TRUTH

judgment is partially true and partially fake. Mr Joachim,
who has considered very carefully the whole question of error,
comes to the conclusion — ^which seems the only possible one
for a monistic theory of truth — that the essential character-
istic of error is the claim to express truth unqualified (p. 143).
He says: ‘The erring subject’s confident belief in the truth of
his knowledge distinctively characterizes error, and converts
a partial apprehension of the truth into fakity’ (p. 162). Now
thk view has one great merit, namely, that it makes error
conskt wholly and solely in rejection of the monistic theory
of truth. As long as thk theory k accepted, no judgment k an
error; as soon as it k rejected, every judgment k an error. But
there are some objections to ^ urged against thk comfortable
conclusion. If I affirm, with a ‘confident belief in the truth of
my knowledge’, that Bishop Stubbs used to wear episcopal
gaiters, that k an error; if a monktic philosopher, remember-
ing that all finite truth k only partially true, affirms that
Bishop Stubbs was hanged for murder, that k not an error.
Thus it seems plain that Mr Joachim’s criterion does not
dktingukh between right and wrong judgments as ordinarily
understood, and that its inability to make such a dktincdon
k a mark of defect. If a jury, for example, has to decide
whether a man has committed a crime, Mr Joachim’s
criterion gives no means of dktingukhing between a right
and a wrong verdict. If the jury remember the monktic
philosophy, either verdict k right; if they forget it, either k
wrong. What I wkh to make plain k, that there k a sense in
which such a proposition as ‘A murdered B’ k true or fake;
and that in thk sense the proposition in question does not
depend, for its truth or fakehood, upon whether it k regarded
as a partial truth or not. And thk sense, it seems to me, k
presupposed in constructing the whole of truth; for the whole of
truth k composed of propositions which are true in thk sense,
since it k impossible to believe that the proposition ‘Bkhop
Stubbs was hanged for murder’ k part of the whole of truth.

The adherent of the monktic theory of truth may reply
that one who remembers thk theory will not assert that


»35


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

Bishop Stubbs was hanged for murder, since he will realize
that such an assertion would clash with knoMm facts, and
would be incapable of fitting into the coherent whole of truth.
Now it might be enough to reply that the supposed immunity
from errors of fact is not secured by the theory that truth is
coherence; since, for example, Hegel was mistaken as to the
number of the planets. But this would be an inadequate
reply. The true reply is, that we are concerned with the
question, not how far a belief in the coherence-theory is a
cause of avoidance of error, but how far this theory is able to
explain what we mean by error. And the objection to the
coherence-theory lies in this, that it presupposes a more usual
meaning of truth and falsehood in constructing its coherent
whole, and that this more usual meaning, though indispens-
able to the theory, cannot be explained by means of the
theory. The proposition ‘Bishop Stubbs was hanged for
murder’ is, we are told, not coherent with the whole of truth
or with experience. But that means, when we examine it,
that something is known which is inconsistent with this pro-
position. Thus what is inconsistent with the proposition must
be something true: it may be perfectly possible to construct a
coherent whole of false propositions in which ‘Bishop Stubbs
was hanged for murder’ would find a place. In a word, the
partial truths of which the whole of truth is composed must be
such propositions as would commonly be called true, not such
as would commonly be called false; there is no explanation,
on the coherence-theory, of the distinction commonly expressed
by the words ‘true’ and ‘false’, and no evidence that a system
of false propositions might not, as in a good novel, be just as
coherent as the system which is the whole of truth.

The answer to this possibility of several coherent systems is
an appeal to ‘experience’. Mr Joachim says (p. 78): ‘Truth,
we said, was the systematic coherence which characterized a
significant whole. And we proceeded to identify a significant
whole with “an organized individual experience, self-fulfilling
and self-fulfilled’’. Now there can be one and only one such
experience: or only one significant whole, the significance of

136


THE MONISTIC THEORY OF TRUTH

which is self-contained in the sense required. For it is absolute
self-fulfilment, absolutely self-contained significance, that is
postulated; and nothing short of absolute individuality —
nothing short of the completely whole experience — can satisfy
this postulate. And human knowledge — not merely ny know-
ledge or yours, but the best and fullest knowledge in the world
at any stage of its development — is clearly not a significant
whole in this ideally complete sense. Hence the Jruth, which
our sketch described, is — -from the point of view of human
intelligence — an Ideal, and an Ideal which can never, as such,
or in its completeness, be actual as human experience.’

This passage introduces two aspects of the monistic theory
which we have not yet considered, namely, its appeal to what
it calls ‘experience’ and its use of the deus ex machina. Of these,
the first, at least, deserves some discussion.

The distinction between knowing something and the some-
thing which we know — between, for example, knowing that
the pavements are wet and the actual wetness of the pave-
ments — cannot be accepted by the monistic theory of truth,
for this theory, as we said, is compelled to regard all distinc-
tions as only partially valid. According to this theory, the
wetness of the pavements and my knowledge of this wetness,
like every other pair of apparently distinct objects, really
exhibit a combination of identity in difference. Thus know-
ledge is in a sense different from its object, but is also in a
sense identical with its object. The sense in which it is iden-
tical may be further defined as whatever sense is necessary to
refute those who reject the monistic theory of truth.

I will not now consider the main question of the dependence
of truth upon experience, which cannot well be discussed
except in connection with the theory of relations. I am con-
tent for the present to point out an ambiguity in the notion
of ‘experience*. The proposition ‘Bishop Stubbs was hanged
for murder’ consists of parts given in experience, and put
together in a manner which, in other cases, is unfortunately
also given in experience. And it is possible to apprehend the
proposition, so that in one sense the proposition can be

137


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

experienced. That is to say, we caii 'have an experience which
consists of realizing what the proposition is: we can see a
picture of Bishop Stubbs dangling from the gallows. Such are
the experiences in novel-reading: we do not btlim what we
read, we merely apprehend it. Thus experience may consist
in merely apprehending, not in believing.^ When we appre-
hend the proposition ‘Bishop Stubbs was hanged for murder’,
this proposition is, in a sense, a part of our experience; but in
anodier sense, which is that relevant in constructing the whole
of truth, we do not experience this proposition, since we are
not led to believe it. This distinction shows that experience,
in the sense required by Mr Joachim, consists of apprehension
of truth, and that there is much apprehension which, though
experience in one sense, is experience in a sense in which what
is false can also be experienced.* Thus here, again, experience,
as used in establishing the monistic theory of truth, is a
notion involving a conception of truth other than that which
the monistic theory declares to be alone legitimate. For
experience is either no help towards constructing the whole of
truth, or it is apprehension of the truUi of single propositions,
which are true in a sense in which their contradictories are
not true. But this conclusion, if sound, is fatal to the monistic
theory of truth.

As for the deus ex tnachina, the ideal experience in which the
whole of truth is actualized, I will merely observe that he is in
general somewhat discredited, and that idealists themselves
are rather ashamed of him, as appears by the fact that they
never mention him when they can help it, and that when
they do, they introduce him with apologetic words, such as
‘what b true in the end * — as though what b true ‘in the end’
were anything difEwent from what b true.

We have thus the following objections to the monbtic
theory of truth: (i) If no partial truth b quite true, thb must

' Cf. Meinong, Ueber Annahmen (Leipzig, 1902), passim.

^ This distinction is connected with the question of Floating Ideas, dis-
cussed by Mr Bradley in Mind, N.S., No. 60. He argues that the distinc-
tion between the real and the imaginary is not absolute, but his argument
explicitly assumes what I have called the 'axiom of internal relations’. Gf.,
e g-. PP- 457-61. -


THE MONISTIC THEORY OF TRUTH

apply to the partial truths which embody the monistic
philosophy. But if these are not quite true, any deductions
we may make from them may depend upon their false aspect
rather than their true one, and may therefore be erroneous,
(a) It is a consequence of the monistic theory that the parts
of a whole are not really its parts. Hence there cannot be any
genuine whole on this theory, since nothing can be really a
whole unless it really has parts. (3) The theory is unable to
explain in what sense one partial judgment is said to be true
and another false, though both are equally partial. (4) In
order to prove that there can be only one coherent whole, the
theory is compelled to appeal to ‘experience’, which must
consist in knowing particular truths, and thus requires a
notion of truth that the monistic theory cannot admit.

But each of these arguments is of the nature of a reduetio ad
absurdum. We must now turn to what 1 believe to be the
fundamental assumption of the whole monistic theory,
namely, its doctrine as to relations. If we can show that this
doctrine is groundless and untenable, we shall thereby com-
plete the refutation of the monistic theory.

n

The doctrines we have been considering may all be deduced
from one central logical doctrine, which may be expressed
thus: ‘Every relation is grounded in the natures of the related
terms.’ Let us call this the axiom of internal relations. If this
axiom holds, the fact that two objects have a certain relation
implies complexity in each of the two objects, i.e. it implies
something in the ‘natures’ of the two objects, in virtue of
which they have the relation in question. According to the
opposite view, which is the one that I advocate, there are
such facts as that one object has a certain relation to another,
and such facts cannot in general be reduced to, or inferred
from, a fact about the one object only together with a fact
about the other object only: they do not imply that the two
objects have any complexity, or any intrinsic property distin-


139


PHILOSOPHIC2AL ESSAYS

guishing them from two objects which do not have the rela-
tion in question.

Before examining the arguments for and against the axiom
of internal relations, let us consider some of its consequences.
It follows at once from this axiom that the whole of reality or
of truth must be a significant whole in Mr Joachim’s sense.
For each part will have a nature which exhibits its relations
to every other part and to the whole; hence, if the nature of
any one part were completely known, the nature of the whole
and of every other part would also be completely known;
while conversely, if the nature of the whole were completely
known, that would involve knowledge of its relations to each
part, and therefore of the relations of each part to each other
part, and therefore of the nature of each part. It is also
evident that, if reality or truth is a significant whole in
Mr Joachim’s sense, tbe axiom of internal relations must be
true. Hence the axiom is equivalent to the monistic theory of
truth.

Further, assuming that we are not to distinguish between a
thing and its ‘nature’, it follows from the axiom that nothing
can be considered quite truly except in relation to the whole.
For if we consider ‘A is related to B’, the A and the B are also
related to everything else, and to say what the A and the B
are would involve referring to everything else in the universe.
When we consider merely that part of A’s nature in virtue of
which A is related to B, we are said to be considering A qua
related to B; but this is an abstract and only partially true
way of considering A, for A’s nature, which is the same thing
as A, contains the grounds of its relations to everything else as
well as to B. Thus nothing quite true can be said about A
short of taking account of the whole universe; and then what
is said about A, will be the same as what would be said about
anything else, since the natures of different things must, like
those of Leibniz’s monads, all express the same system of
relations.

Let us now consider more closely the meaning of the axiom
of internal relations and the grounds for and against it. We


140


THE MONISTIC THEORY OF TRUTH

have, to begin with, two possible meanings, according as it is
held that every relation is really constituted by the natures of
the terms or of the whole which they compose, or merely that
every relation has a ground in these natures. I do not o^rve
that idealists distinguish these two meanings; indeed, speak-
ing generally, they tend to identify a proposition with its
consequences,^ thus embodying one of the distinctive tenets
of pragmatism. The distinction of the two meanings is, how-
ever, less important than it would otherwise be, owing to the
fact that both meanings lead, as we shall see, to the view that
there are no relations at all.

The axiom of internal relations in either form involves, as
Mr Bradley has justly urged, ^ the conclusion that there are
no relations and that there are not many things, but only one
thing. (Idealists would add: in the end. But that only means
that the consequence is one which it is often convenient to
forget.) This conclusion is reached by considering the relation
of diversity. For if there really are two things, A and B, which
are diverse, it is impossible to reduce this diversity wholly to
adjectives of A and B. It will be necessary that A and B should
have different adjectives, and the diversity of these adjectives
cannot, on pain of an endless regress, be interpreted as mean-
ing that they in turn have different adjectives. For if we say
that A and B differ when A has the adjective ‘different from
B’ and B has the adjective ‘different from A’, we must
suppose that these two adjectives differ. Then ‘different from
A’ must have the adjective ‘different from “different from
B” ’, which must differ from ‘different from “different from
A” ’, and so on oof iffinitum. We cannot take ‘different from B’
as an adjective requiring no further reduction, since we must
ask what is meant by ‘different’ in this phrase, which, as it
■stands, derives an a^ective from a relation, not a relation
from an adjective. Thus, if there is to be any diversity, there

* Of., e.g., Joachim, p. io8.

' Cf. Appiormc* and Reality, itt ed., p. 519: ‘Reality is one. It must be single,
because plurality, taken as real, contradicts itself. Plurality implies rebtions,
and, through its relations, it unwillin^y asserts always a superior unity.’


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

must be a diversity not reducible to difference of adjectives,
i.e. not grounded in the ‘natures* of the diverse terms. Con-
sequently, if the axiom of internal relations is true, it follows
that there is no diversity, and that there is only one thing.
Thus the axiom of internal relations is equivalent to the
assumption of ontological monism and to the denial that there
are any relations. Wherever we seem to have a relation, this
is really an adjective of the whole composed of the terms of
the supposed relation.

The axiom of internal relations is thus equivalent to the
assumption that every proposition has one subject and one
predicate. For a proposition which asserts a relation must
always be reduced to a subject-predicate proposition con-
cerning the whole composed of the terms of the relation.
Proceeding in this way to larger and larger wholes, we
gradually correct our first crude abstract judgments, and
approximate more and more to the one truth about the whole.
The one final and complete truth must consist of a proposition
with one subject, namely the whole, and one predicate. But
since this involves distinguishing subject from predicate, as
though they could be diverse, even this is not quite true. The
best we can say of it is, that it is not HnUlkctually corrigible’,
i.e. it is as true as any truth can be; but even absolute truth
persuts in being not quite true.^

If we ask ourselves what are the grounds in favour of the
axiom of internal relations, we are left in doubt by those who
believe in it. Mr Joachim, for example, assumes it through-
out, and advances no argument in its favour.* So far as one
can discover the grounds, they seem to be two, though these
are perhaps really indistinguishable. There is first the law of

^ Cf. Appearance and Reality, ist cd., p. 544: 'Even absolute truth in the end
seems thus to turn out to be erroneous. And it must be admitted that, in the
end, no possible truth is quite true. It is a partial and inadequate translation of
that which it professes to give bodily. And this internal discrepancy belongs
irremovably to truth's proper character. Still, the difference, drawn between
absolute and finite truth, must none the less be upheld. For the former, in a
word, is not inteUectualty corrigible.*

* See MM, October 1906, pp. 530-1.

142


THE MONISTIC THEORY OF TRUTH

sufficient reason, according to which nothing can be just a
brute fact, but must have some reason for being thus and
not otherwise, ‘ Secondly, there is the fact that, if two terms
have a certain relation, they cannot but have it, and if they
did not have it they would be different; which seems to show
that there is something in the terms themselves which leads
to their being related as they are.

(1) The law of sufficient reason is hard to formulate pre-
cisely. It cannot merely mean that every true 'proposition u
logically deducible from some other true proposition, for thu
is an obvious truth which does not yield the consequences
demanded of the law. For example, 2+2 =4 can be deduced
from 44-4=8, but it would be absurd to regard 44-4=8 as a
reason for 2 4 ~ 2 = 4 « The reason for a proposition is always
expected to be one or more simpler propositions. Thus the law
of sufficient reason should mean that every proposition can
be deduced from simpler propositions. This seems obviously
false, but in any case it cannot be relevant in considering
idealism, which holds propositions to be less and less true the
simpler they are, so that it would be absurd to insist on start-
ing from simple propositions. I conclude, therefore, that, if
any form of the law of sufficient reason is relevant, it is rather
to be discovered by examining the second of the grounds in
favour of the axiom of internal relations, namely, that related
terms cannot but be related as they are.

(2) The force of this argument depends in the main, I
think, upon a fallacious form of statement. Tf A and B are
related in a certain way’, it may be said, ‘you must admit that
if they were not so related they would be other than they are,
and that consequently there must be something in them which
is essential to their being related as they are.’ Now if two

. terms are related in a certain way, it follows that, if they were
not so related, every imaginable consequence would ensue.

^ Gf. J^tarme* and StaSty, sod ed., p. 575; ‘If the terms from their own inner
nature do not enter into the relation, then, so far as they are concerned, they
seem related ibr no reason at all, and, so far as they are concerned, the relation
seems arbitrarily made.* Cf. also p. 577.


*43


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

For, if they are so related, the hypothesis that they are not so
related is false, and from a false hypothesis anytUng can be
deduced. Thus the above form of statement must be altered.
We may say: Tf A and B are related in a certain way, then
anything not so related must be other than A and B, hence,
etc.’ But this only proves that what is not related as A and B
are must be numerically diverse from A or B; it will not prove
difference of adjectives, unless we assume the axiom of inter-
nal relations. Hence the argument has only a rhetorical force,
and cannot prove its conclusion without a vicious circle.

It remains to ask whether there are any grounds against the
axiom of internal relations. The first argument that naturally
occurs to an opponent of this axiom is the difficulty of actually
carrying it out. We have had one instance of this already as
regards diversity: in many other instances the difficulty is
even more obvious. Suppose, for example, that one volume is
greater than another. We may reduce the relation ‘greater
than’ between the volumes to adjectives of the volumes, by
saying that one is of such and such a size and the other of such
and such another size. But then the one size must be greater
than the other size. If we try to reduce this new relation to
adjectives of the two sizes, the adjectives must still have a
relation corresponding to ‘greater than’, and so on. Hence we
cannot, without an endless regress, refuse to admit that sooner
or later we come to a relation not reducible to' adjectives of
the related terms. This argument applies especially to all
asymmetrical relations, i.e. to such as, when they hold between
A and B, do not hold between B and A.^

A more searching argument against the axiom of internal
relations is derived from a consideration of what is meant by
the ‘nature’ of a term. Is this the same as the term itself, or is
it different? If it is different, it must be related to the term,
and the relation of a term to its nature cannot without an
endless regress be reduced to something other than a relation.
Thus if the axiom is to be adhered to, we must suppose that a

^The argument which is merely indicated above is set forth fully in my
PHneipUs rf MathmaHeSf §§ 912-16.


144


THE MONISTIC THEORY OF TRUTH

term ia not other than its nature. In that case, every true
proposition attributing a predicate to a subject is purely
analytic, since the subject is its own whole nature, and the
predicate is part of that nature. But in that case, what is the
bond that unites predicates into predicates of one subject?
Any casual collection of predicates might be supposed to
compose a subject, if subjects are not other than the system of
their own predicates. If the ‘nature’ of a term is to consist of
predicates, and at the same time to be the same as the term
itself, it seems impossible to understand what we mean when
we ask whether S has the predicate P. For this cannot mean:
Ts P one of the predicates enumerated in explaining what we
mean by S?’ and it is hard to see what else, on the view in
question, it could mean. We cannot attempt to introduce a
relation of coherence between predicates, in virtue of which
they may be called predicates of one subject; for this would
base predication upon a relation, instead of reducing rela-
tions to predications. Thus we get into equal difficulties
whether we affirm or deny that a subject is other than its
‘nature’.^

Again, the axiom of internal relation is incompatible with
all complexity. For this axiom leads, as we saw, to a rigid
monism. There is only one thing and only one proposition.
The one proposition (which is not merely the only true
proposition, but the only proposition) attributes a predicate
to the one subject. But this one proposition is not quite true,
because it involves distinguishing the predicate from the
subject. But then arises the difficulty: if predication involves
difference of the predicate from the subject, and if the one
predicate is not distinct from the one subject, there cannot,
even, one would suppose, be a false proposition attributing
the one predicate to the one subject. We shall have to sup-
pose, therefore, that predication does not involve difference
of the predicate from the subject, and that the one predicate
is identical with the one subject. But it is essential to the
philosophy we are examining to deny absolute identity and
> On this subject cf. my ftubs^ ^ IMMc, f§ ai, 34, 35.

*45


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

retain 'identity in difference’. The apparent multiplicity of
the real world is otherwise inexplicable. The difficulty is that
'identity in difference’ is impossible, if we adhere to strict
monism. For 'identity in difference’ involves many partial
truths, which combine, by a kind of mutual give and take,
into the one whole of truth. But the partial truths, in a strict
monism, are not merely not. quite true; they do not subsbt
at all. If there were such propositions, whether true or false,
that would give plurality. In short, the whole conception
of 'identity in difference’ is incompatible with the axiom of
internal relations; yet without this conception monism can
give no account of the world, which suddenly collapses like
an opera-hat. I conclude that the axiom is false, and that
those parts of idealism which depend upon it are therefore
groundless.

There would seem, therefore, to be reasons against the
axiom that relations are necessarily grounded in the ‘nature’
of their terms or of the whole composed of the terms, and
there would seem to be no reason in favour of this axiom.
When the axiom is rejected, it becomes meaningless to speak
of the 'nature’ of the terms of a relation: relatedness is no
longer a proof of complexity, a given relation may hold
between many different pairs of terms, and a given term may
have many different relations to different terms. ‘Identity in
difference’ duappears : there is identity and there is difference,
and complexes may have some elements identical and some
different, but we are no longer obliged to say of any pair of
objects that may be mentioned that they are both identical
and different — ^‘in a sense’, this ‘sense’ being something which
it is vitally necessary to leave \mdefined. We thus get a world
of many things, with relations which are not to be deduced
from a supposed ‘nature’ or scholastic essence of the related
things. In this world, whatever is complex is composed of
related simple things, and analysb is no longer confronted at
every step by an endless regress. Assuming this kind of world,
it remains to ask what we are to say concerning the nature
of truth. This question is considered in the following essay.

146


ON THE NATURE OF TRUTH AND
FALSEHOOD


The question ‘What is Truth?’ is one which may be under*
stood in several different ways, and before be ginning our
search for an answer, it will be well to be quite clear as to the
sense in which we are asking the question. We may mean to
ask what things are true: is science true? is revealed religion
true? and so on. But before we can answer such questions as
these, we ought to be able to say what these questions mean:
what is it, exactly, that we are asking when we say, ‘is science
true?’ It is this preliminary question that I wish to discuss.
The question whether this or that is true is to be settled, if at
all, by considerations concerning this or that, not by general
considerations as to what ‘truth’ means; but those who ask
the question presumably have in their minds already some
idea as to what ‘truth’ means, otherwise the question and its
answer could have no definite meaning to them.

When, however, we have agreed that the question we are
concerned with is ‘What does “truth” mean?’ we have by no
means come to an end of possible ambiguities. There is the
question ‘How is the word “truth” properly used?’ This is a
question for the dictionary, not for philosophy. Moreover, the
word has some perfecdy proper uses which are obviously
irrelevant to our inquiry: a ‘true’ man, a ‘true’ poet, are
‘true’ in a different sense from that with which we are con-
cerned. Again, there is the question ‘What do people usually
have in mind when they use the word “truth”?’ This question
comes nearer to the question we have to ask, but is still
different from it. The question what idea people have when


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

they use a word is a question of psychology; moreover, there
is very little in common between the ideas which two different
people in fact attach to the same word, though there would
often be more agreement as to the ideas which they would
consider it proper to attach to the word.

The question we have to discuss may be explained by
pointing out that, in the case of such a word as ‘truth’, we aU
feel that some fundamental concept, of great philosophical
importance, is involved, though it is difficult to be dear as to
what this concept is. What we wish to do is to detach this
concept from the mass of irrelevandes in which, when we use
it, it is normally embedded, and to bring clearly before the
mind the abstract opposition upon which our distinction of
true and false depends. The process to be gone through is
essentially one of analysis: we have various complex and more
or less confused belieft about the true and the false, and we
have to reduce these to forms which are simple and dear,
without causing any avoidable conflict between our initial
complex and confused belieft and our final simple and clear
assertions. These final assertions are to be tested pardy by
their intrinsic evidence, partly by their power of accounting
for the ‘data’; and the ‘data’, in such a problem, are the
complex and confused belieft with which we start. These
beliefi must necessarily suffer a change in becoming clear,
but the change should not be greater than is warranted by
their initial confusion.

Although the question what things are true rather than
false does not form part of our inquiry, yet it will be useful to
consider for a moment the nature of the things to which we
attribute dther truth or fakehood. Broadly speaking, the
things that are trueror false, in the sense with which we are
concerned, are statements, and beliefi or judgments.^ When,
for example, we see the sun shining, the sun itself is not ‘true’,
but the judgment ‘the sun is shining’ is true. The truth or
falsehood of statements can be defined in terms of the truth or
falsehoods of beliefi. A statement is true when a person who

^ I ihall use the words ‘belief’ and ‘judgment’ as synonyms.

148


ON THE NATURE OF TRUTH

believes it believes truly, and false when a person who believes
it believes falsely. Thus in considering the nature of truth we
may confine ourselves to the truth of beliefs, since the truth of
statements is a notion derived from that of beliefi. The ques-
tion we have to discuss is therefore: What is the difference
between a true belief and a fabe belief? By this I mean, What
is the difference which actually constitutes the truth or false-
hood of a belief? I am not asking for what is called a criterion
of truth, i.e. for some quality, other than truth, which belongs
to whatever is true and to nothing else. This distinction be-
tween the nature of truth and a criterion of truth is important,
and has not always been sufficiently emphasized by philo-
sophers. A criterion is a sort of trade-mark, i.e some com-
paratively obvious characteristic which is a guarantee of
genuineness. ‘None genuine without the label’ : thus the label
is what assures us that such and such a firm made the article.
But when we say that such and such a firm made the article
we do not mean that the article has the right label; thus there
is a difference between meaning and criterion. Indeed, it is
just this difference which makes a criterion useful. Now I do
not believe that truth h2u, universally, any such trade-mark:
I do not believe that there is any one label by which we can
always know that a judgment is true rather than false. But
this is not the question which I wish to discuss: I wish to
discuss what truth and falsehood actually are, not what
extraneous marks they have by which we can recognize
them.

The first point upon which it is important to be clear is the
relation of truth and falsehood to the mind. If we were right in
saying that the things that are true or false are always judg-
ments, then it is plain that there can be no truth or falsehood
unless there are minds to judge. Nevertheless it is plain, also,
that the truth or falsehood of a giyen judgment depends in no
way upon the person judging, but solely upon the facts about
which he judges. If I judge that Charles I died in his bed, I
judge falsely, not because of anything to do with me, but
because in fact he did not die in his bed. Similarly, if I judge


149


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

that he died on the scaffold, I judge truly, because of an event
which in fact occurred 260 years ago. Thus the truth or false-
hood of a judgment always has an objective ground, and it is
natural to ask whether there are not objective truths and
falsehoods which are the objects, respectively, of true and
false judgments. As regards truths, this view is highly plaus-
ible. But as regards falsehoods, it is the very reverse of plaus-
ible; yet, as we shall see, it is hard to maintain it with regard
to truths without being forced to maintain it also as regards
falsehoods.

In all cognitive acts, such as believing, doubting, disbeliev-
ing, apprehending, perceiving, imagining, the mind has
objects other than itself to which it stands in some one of
these various relations. In such a case as perception this is
sufficiently obvious: the thing perceived is necessarily some-
thing different from the act of perceiving it, and the perceiv-
ing is a relation between the person perceiving and the thing
perceived. The same thing holds, though less obviously, with
regard to imagination. If I imagine, say, a certain colour, the
colour is an object before my mind just as triily as if I per-
ceived the colour, though the relation to my mind is different
from what it would be if I perceived the colour, and does not
lead me to suppose that the colour exists in the place where I
imagine it. Judgments, also, consist of relations of the mind to
objects. But here a distinction has to be made between two
different theories as to the relation which constitutes judg-
ment. If I judge (say) that Charles I died on the scaffold, is
that a relation between me and a single Tact’, namely,
Charles I’s death on the scaffold, or That Charles I died on
the scaffold’, or is it a relation between me and Charles I and
dying and the scafiMd? We shall find that the possibility of
false judgments compels us to adopt the latter view. But let us
first examine the view that a judgment has a single object.

If every judgment, whether true or false, consists in a
certain relation, called ^judging’ or 'believing’, to a single
object, which is what we judge or believe, then the distinction
of true and false as applied to judgments is derivative from


ON THE NATURE OF TRUTH

the distinction of true and false as applied to the objects of
judgments. Assuming that there are such objects, let us,
following Meinong, give them the name ‘Objectives*. Then
every judgment has an objective, and true judgments have
true objectives, while false judgments have fake objectives.
Thus the question of the meaning of truth and fakehood will
have to be considered first with regard to objectives, and we
shall have to find some way of dividing objectives into those
that are true and those that are fake. In this, however, there
k great difficulty. So long as we only consider true judgments,
the view that they have objectives k plausible: the actual
event which we describe as ‘Charles I’s death on the scaffold*
may be regarded as the objective of the judgment ‘Charles I
died on the scaffold*. But what k the objective of the judg-
ment ‘Charles I died in hk bed*? There was no event such as
‘Charles Ts death in hk bed*. To say that there ever was such
a thing as ‘Charles I*s death in hk bed* k merely another way
of saying that Charles 1 died in hk bed. Thus, if there k an
objective, it must be something other than ‘Charles Ts death
in hk bed*. We may take it to be ‘that Charles I died in hk
bed*. We shall then have to say the same of true judgments:
the objective of ‘Charles I died on the scaffold* will be ‘that
Charles I died on the scaffold*.

To thk view there are, however, two objections. The first
k that it k difficult to believe that there are such objects as
‘that Charles I died in hk bed*, or even ‘that Charles I died
on the scaffold*. It seems evident that the phrase ‘that so and
so* has no complete meaning by itself, which would enable it
to denote a de^te object as (c.g.) the word ‘Socrates* does.
We feel that the phrase ‘that so and so* k essentially incom-
plete, and only acquires full significance when words are
added so as to express a judgment, e.g. ‘I believe that so and
so*, ‘I deny that so and so*, ‘I hope that so and so*. Thus, if we
can avoid regarding ‘that so and so* as an independent
entity, we shall escape a paradox. Thk argument k not
deckive, but it must be allowed a certain weight. The second
ol^ection k more fatal, and more germane to the considera-

*51


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

tion of truth and falsehood. If we 'allow that all judgments
have objectives, we shall have to allow that there are objec-
tives which are false. Thus there will be in the world entities,
not dependent upon the existence of judgments, which can be
described as objective falsehoods. This is in itself almost
incredible; we feel that there could be no falsehood if there
were no minds to make mistakes. But it has the further draw-
back that it leaves the difference between truth and falsehood
quite inexplicable. We feel that when we judge truly some
entity ‘corresponding’ in some way to our judgment is to be
found outside our judgment, while when we judge falsely
there is no such ‘corresponding* entity. It is true we cannot
take as this entity simply the grammatical subject of our
judgment: if we judge, e.g., ‘Homer did not exist’, it is obvious
that Homer is not the entity which is to be found if our judg-
ment is true, but not if it is fake. Nevertheless it is difficult to
abandon the view that, in some way, the truth or fakehood
of a judgment depends upon the presence or absence of a
‘corresponding’ entity of some sort. And if we do abandon
thk view, and adhere to the opinion that there are both true
and fake objectives, we shall be compelled to regard it as an
ultimate and not further explicable fact that objectives are of
two sorts, the true and the false. This view, though not logic-
ally imp>ossible, is unsatisfactory, and we shall do better, if
we can, to find some view which leaves the difference between
truth and fakehood less of a mystery.

It might be thought that we could say simply that true
judgments have objectives while fake ones do not. With a
new definition of objectives thk view might become tenable,
but it k not tenable so long as we hold to the view that judg-
ment actually is a pelation of the mind to an objective. For
thk view compek us, since there certainly are fake judgments,
and a relation cannot be a relation to nothing, to admit that
fake judgments as well as true ones have objectives. We must
therefore abandon the view that judgments consist in a rela-
tion to a single object. We cannot maintain thk >dew with
regard to true jud^ents while rejecting it with regard to


152


ON THE NATURE OF TRUTH

false ones, for that would make an intrinsic difference be-
tween true and false judgments, and enable us (what is
obviously impossible) to discover the truth or falsehood of a
judgment merely by examining the intrinsic nature of the
judgment. Thus we must turn to the theory that no judgment
consists in a relation to a single object.

The difficulty of the view we have been hitherto consider-
ing was that it compelled us either to admit objective false-
hoods, or to admit that when we judge falsely there is nothing
that we are judging. The way out of the difficulty consists in
maintaining that, whether we judge truly or whether we
judge falsely, there is no one thing that we are judging. When
we judge that Charles I died on the scaffold, we have before
us, not one object, but several objects, namely, Charles I
and dying and the scaffold. Similarly, when we judge that
Charles 1 died in his bed, we have before us the objects
Charles I, dying, and his bed. These objects are not fictions:
they are just as good as the objects of the true judgment. We
therefore escape the necessity of admitting objective false-
hoods, or of admitting that in judging falsely we have nothing
before the mind. Thus in this view judgment is a relation of
the mind to several other terms: when these other terms have
inter se a ‘corresponding’ relation, the judgment is true; when
not, it is false. This view, which I believe to be the correct one,
must now be further expanded and explained.

In saying that judgment is a relation of the mind to several
things, e.g. to Charles I and the scaffold and dying, I do not
mean that the mind has a certain relation to Charles I and
also has this relation to the scaffold and also has it to dying. I
do not, however, wish to deny that, when we are judging, we
have a relation to each of the constituents of our judgment
separately, for it would seem that we must be in some way
conscious of these constituents, so that during any judgment
we must have, to each constituent of the judgment, ffiat
relation which we may call ‘being conscious of it’. This is a
very important fact, but it docs not give the essence of judg-
ment. Nothing that concerns Charles I and dying and the


*53


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

scaffold separately and severally will give the judgment
‘Charles I ^ed on the scaffold’. In order to obtain this judg-
ment, we must have one single unity of the mind and Charles I
and dying and the scaffold, i.e. we must have, not several
instances of a relation between two terms, but one instance of
a relation between more than two terms. Such relations,
though familiar to mathematicians, have been unduly
ignored by philosophers. Since they appear to me to give the
key to many puzzles about truth, I shall make a short
digression to show that they are common and ought to be
familiar.

One of the commonest ways in which relations between
more than two terms occur is in propositions about what
happened at some particular time. Take such a proposition
as ‘A loved B in May and hated him in June’, and let us sup-
pose this to be true. Then we cannot say that, apart from
dates, A has to B either the relation of loving or that of hating.
This necessity for a date does not arise with all ordinary
relationships; for example, if A is the brother of B, no date is
required: the relationship holds always or never, or (more
strictly) holds or does not hold without regard to time. But
love and hate are ‘time’s fool’: they are not relations which
hold without regard to date. ‘A loved B in May’ is a relation,
not between A and B simply, but between A and B and May.^
This relation between A and B and May cannot be analysed
into relations between A and B, A and May, B and May: it is
a single unity. It is partly the failure to perceive that the date
is one of the terms in such relations which has caused such
difficulty in the philosophy of time and change.

As another illustradon, take the relation of jealousy. Time
comes in here exactly as it did with love and hate, but we will
for the moment ignore time, because the point to be noticed
about jealousy is that it involves three people. The simplest

^ I do not want to assume any theory as to the nature of time: *May’ can be
interpreted as the reader likes. The statement in the text may then have to be
made a little more complicated, but the necessity for a relation of more than
two terms will remain.


*54


ON THE NATURE OF TRUTH

possible proposition asserting jealousy is such as ‘A is jealous
of B’s love for C’, or ‘A is jealous of B on account of C’. It
might be thought that ‘B’s love for C’ was one term, and A
the other term. But this interpretation will not apply to cases
of mistaken jealousy: if A is Othello, there is no such thing as
‘B’s love for C’. Thus this interpretation is impossible, and we
are compelled to regard jealousy as a relation of tlnee per-
sons, i.e. as having for its unit a relation which is what we may
call ‘triangular’. If we further take into account the necessity
for a date, the relation becomes ‘quadrangular’, i.e. the
timplest possible proposition involving the relation will be
one which concerns four terms, namely, three people and a
date.

We will give the name 'imdHple relations’ to such as require
more than two terms. Thus a relation is ‘multiple’ if the
simplest propositions in which it occurs are propositions
involving more than two terms (not counting the relation).
From what has been said it is obvious that multiple relations
are conunon, and that many matters cannot be understood
without their help. Relations which have only two terms we
shall call ‘dual relations’.

The theory of judgment which I am advocating is, that
judgment is not a dual relation of the mind to a single
objective, but a multiple relation of the mind to the various
other terms with which the judgment is concerned. Thus if I
judge that A loves B, that is not a relation of me to ‘A’s love
for B’, but a relation between me and A and love and B. If it
were a relation of me to ‘A’s love for B’, it would be impossible
unless there were such a thing as ‘A’s love for B’, i.e. unless A
loved B, i.e. unless the judgment were true; but in fact false
judgments are possible. When the judgment is taken as a
.relation between me and A and love and B, the mere fact that
the judgment occurs docs not involve any relation between
its objects A and love and B; thus the possibility of felsc judg-
ments is fully allowed for. When the judgment is true, A loves
B; thus in this ease there is a relation between the objects of the
judgment. We naay therefore state the difference between


*55


PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS

truth and falsehood as follows: Every judgment is a relation
of a mind to several objects, one of which is a relation; the
judgment is tnu when the relation which is one of the objects
relates the other objects, otherwise it is false. Thus in the
above illustration, love, which is a relation, is one of the
objects of the judgment, and the judgment is true if love
relates A and B. The above statement requires certain addi*
dons which will be made later; for the present, it is to be
taken as a first approximadon.

One of the merits of the above theory is that it explains the
difference between judgment and percepdon, and the reason
why percepdon is not liable to error as judgment is. When we
were considering the theory that judgment is a dual reladon
of the mind to a single objecdve, we found that so far as true
judgments were concerned this theory worked admirably, but
that it would not account for false judgments. Now this diffi-
culty will not apply against a corresponding theory of per-
cepdon. It is true that there are cases where percepdon
a^^ears to be at fault, such as dreams and hallucinadons. But
I believe that in all diese cases the percepdon itself is correct,
and what is wrong is a judgment based upon the percepdon.
It would take us too far fiom our subject to develop this theme,
which requires a discussion of the reladon between sense-data
(i.e. the things we inunediately perceive) and what we may
call physical reality, i.e. what is there independendy of us
and our percepdons. Assuming the result of ^s discussion, I
shall take it as agreed that percepdon, as opposed to judg-
ment, is never in error, i.e. that, whenever we perceive any-
thing, what we perceive exists, at least so long as we are
perceiving it.

If the infallibilityjof percepdon is admitted, we may apply
to percepdon the theory of the single objecdve which we
found inapplicable to judgment. Take, for example, such a
case as spadal relations. Suppose I see simultaneously on my
table a knife and a book, the knife being to the left of the
book. Percepdon presents me with a complex object, con-
sbdng of the knife and the book in certain relad^'e posidons

156


ON THE NATURE OF TRUTH

(as well as other objects, which we may ignore). If I attend
to this complex object and analyse it, I can arrive at the
judgment ‘the knife u to the left of the book*. Here the Vnifr
and the book and their spatial relation are severally before
my mind; but in the perception I had the single whole
*knife-to-left-of-book’. Thus in perception I perceive a single
complex object, while in a judgment based upon the percep*
don I have the parts of the complex object separately though
simultaneously before me. In order to perceive a complex
object, such as ‘knife-to>left-of-book’, there must be such an
object, since otherwise my perception would have no object,
i.e. there would not be any perceiving, since the relation of
perception requires the two terms, Ae perceiver and the
thing perceived. But if there is such an object as ‘knife-to-
left-of-book’, then the knife must be to the left of the book;
hence the judgment ‘the knife is to the left of the book’ must
be true. Thus any judgment of perception, i.e. any judgment
derived immediately from perception by mere analysis, must
be true. (This does not enable us, in any given case, to be
quite certain that such and such a judgment is true, since we
may inadvertently have failed merely to analyse what was
given in perception.) We see that in the case of the judgment
of perception there is, corresponding to the judgment, a
certain complex object which is perceived, as one complex,
in the perception upon which the judgment is based. It is
because there is such a complex object that the judgment is
true. This complex object, in the cases where it is perceived,
is the objective of the perception. Where it is not perceived,
it is still the necessary and sufficient condition of the truth
of the judgment. There was such a complex event as 'Charles
I’s death on the scaffold’ ; hence the judgment ‘Charles I died
on the scaffold’ is true. There never was such a complex
event as ‘Charles I’s death in his bed’; hence ‘Charles I died
in his bed’ is false. If A loves B, there is such a complex object
as ‘A’s love for B’, and vice versa; thus the existence of this
complex object gives the condition for the truth of the judg-
ment ‘A loves B’. And the same holds in all other cases.

*57


PHILOSOPHICAL. ESSAYS

We may now attempt an exact account of the ‘correspon-
dence’ which constitutes truth. Let us take the judgment ‘A
loves B’. This consists of a relation of the person judging to A
and love and B, i.e. to the two terms A and B and the relation
‘love’. But the judgment is not the same as the judgment ‘B
loves A’; thus the relation must not be abstractly before the
mind, but must be before it as proceeding from A to B rather
than from B to A. The ‘corresponding' complex object which
is required to make our judgment true consists of A related to
B by the relation which was before us in our judgment. We
may distinguish two ‘senses’ of a relation according as it goes
from A to B or from B to A. Then the relation as it enters into
the judgment must have a ‘sense’,- and in the corresponding
complex it must have the same ‘sense’. Thus the judgment
that two terms have a certain relation R is a relation of the
mind to the two terms and the relation R with the appropriate
sense: the ‘corresponding’ complex consists of the two terms
related by the relation R with the same sense. The judgment
is true when there is such a complex, and false when there is
not. The same account, mutatis mutandis, will apply to any
other judgment. This gives the definition of truth and
falsehood.

We see that, according to the above account, truth and
falsehood are primarily properties of judgments, and there-
fore there would be no truA or falsehood if there were no
minds. Nevertheless, the truth or falsehood of a given judg-
ment does not depend upon the person making it or the time
when it is made, since the ‘corresponding’ complex, upon
which its truth or falsehood depends, does not contain the
person judging as a constituent (except, of course, when the
judgment happens tqj>e about oneself). Thus the mixture of
dependence upon mind and independence of mind, which
we noticed as a characteristic of truth, is fully preserved by
our theory.

The questions what things are true and what false,
whether we know anything, and if so, how we come to know
it, are subseq.uent to the question ‘What is truth?’ and except

158


ON THE NATURE OF TRUTH

briefly in the case of the judgment of perception, I have
avoided such questions in the above discussion, not because
they are of less interest, but in order to avoid confusing the
issue. It is one of the reasons for the slow progress of philo*
sophy that its fundamental questions are not, to most people,
the most interesting, and therefore there is a tendency to
hurry on before the foundations are secure. In order to check
this tendency, it is necessary to isolate the fimdamental
questions, and consider them without too much regard to the
later developments; and this is what, in respect of one such
question, I have tried to do in the foregoing pages.


*59
