The Philosophy of Logical Atomism (Bertrand Russell, 1918)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/jstor-27900704). The 1918 lectures laying out logical atomism: facts, propositions, and the structure of the world.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

STOP


Early  Journal  Content  on  JSTOR,  Free  to  Anyone  in  the  World

This  article  is  one  of  nearly  500,000  scholarly  works  digitized  and  made  freely  available  to  everyone  in
the  world  by  JSTOR.

Known  as  the  Early  Journal  Content,  this  set  of  works  include  research  articles,  news,  letters,  and  other
writings  published  in  more  than  200  of  the  oldest  leading  academic  journals.  The  works  date  from  the
mid-seventeenth  to  the  early  twentieth  centuries.

We  encourage  people  to  read  and  share  the  Early  Journal  Content  openly  and  to  tell  others  that  this
resource  exists.  People  may  post  this  content  online  or  redistribute  in  any  way  for  non-commercial
purposes.

Read  more  about  Early  Journal  Content  at  http://about.jstor.org/participate-jstor/individuals/early-
journal-content.


JSTOR  is  a  digital  library  of  academic  journals,  books,  and  primary  source  objects.  JSTOR  helps  people
discover,  use,  and  build  upon  a  wide  range  of  content  through  a  powerful  research  and  teaching
platform,  and  preserves  this  content  for  future  generations.  JSTOR  is  part  of  ITHAKA,  a  not-for-profit
organization  that  also  includes  Ithaka  S+R  and  Portico.  For  more  information  about  JSTOR,  please
contact  support@jstor.org.


THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  LOGICAL  ATOMISM.

(The  following  articles  are  the  first  two  lectures  of  a  course
of  eight  lectures  delivered  in  London  in  the  first  months  of  1918,
and  are  very  largely  concerned  with  explaining  certain  ideas  which
I  learnt  from  my  friend  and  former  pupil  Ludwig  Wittgenstein.
I  have  had  no  opportunity  of  knowing  his  views  since  August,  1914,
and  I  do  not  even  know  whether  he  is  alive  or  dead.  He  has  there-
fore no  responsibility  for  what  is  said  in  these  lectures  beyond  that
of  having  originally  supplied  many  of  the  theories  contained  in
them.  The  six  other  lectures  will  appear  in  the  three  following
numbers  of  The  Monist. — B.  R.)

I.  FACTS  AND  PROPOSITIONS.

THIS  course  of  lectures  which  I  am  now  beginning  I
have  called  the  Philosophy  of  Logical  Atomism.  Per-
haps I  had  better  begin  by  saying  a  word  or  two  as  to
what  I  understand  by  that  title.  The  kind  of  philosophy
that  I  wish  to  advocate,  which  I  call  Logical  Atomism,  is
one  which  has  forced  itself  upon  me  in  the  course  of  think-
ing about  the  philosophy  of  mathematics,  although  I  should
find  it  hard  to  say  exactly  how  far  there  is  a  definite  logical
connection  between  the  two.  The  things  I  am  going  to  say
in  these  lectures  are  mainly  my  own  personal  opinions  and
I  do  not  claim  that  they  are  more  than  that.

As  I  have  attempted  to  prove  in  The  Principles  of
Mathematics,  when  we  analyze  mathematics  we  bring  it
all  back  to  logic.  It  all  comes  back  to  logic  in  the  strictest
and  most  formal  sense.  In  the  present  lectures,  I  shall  try
to  set  forth  in  a  sort  of  outline,  rather  briefly  and  rather


496  THE  MONIST.

unsatisfactorily,  a  kind  of  logical  doctrine  which  seems  to
me  to  result  from  the  philosophy  of  mathematics — not  ex-
actly logically,  but  as  what  emerges  as  one  reflects :  a  cer-
tain kind  of  logical  doctrine,  and  on  the  basis  of  this  a
certain  kind  of  metaphysic.  The  logic  which  I  shall  ad-
vocate is  atomistic,  as  opposed  to  the  monistic  logic  of  the
people  who  more  or  less  follow  Hegel.  When  I  say  that
my  logic  is  atomistic,  I  mean  that  I  share  the  common-sense
belief  that  there  are  many  separate  things ;  I  do  not  regard
the  apparent  multiplicity  of  the  world  as  consisting  merely
in  phases  and  unreal  divisions  of  a  single  indivisible  Real-
ity. It  results  from  that  that  a  considerable  part  of  what
one  would  have  to  do  to  justify  the  sort  of  philosophy  I
wish  to  advocate  would  consist  in  justifying  the  process  of
analysis.  One  is  often  told  that  the  process  of  analysis  is
falsification,  that  when  you  analyze  any  given  concrete
whole  you  falsify  it  and  that  the  results  of  analysis  are  not
true.  I  do  not  think  that  is  a  right  view.  I  do  not  mean
to  say,  of  course,  and  nobody  would  maintain,  that  when
you  have  analyzed  you  keep  everything  that  you  had  before
you  analyzed.  If  you  did,  you  would  never  attain  anything
in  analyzing.  I  do  not  propose  to  meet  the  views  that  I
disagree  with  by  controversy,  by  arguing  against  those
views,  but  rather  by  positively  setting  forth  what  I  believe
to  be  the  truth  about  the  matter,  and  endeavoring  all  the
way  through  to  make  the  views  that  I  advocate  result  in-
evitably from  absolutely  undeniable  data.  When  I  talk  of
"undeniable  data"  that  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  synon-
ymous with  "true  data,"  because  "undeniable"  is  a  psycho-
logical term  and  "true"  is  not.  When  I  say  that  something
is  "undeniable,"  I  mean  that  it  is  not  the  sort  of  thing  that
anybody  is  going  to  deny ;  it  does  not  follow  from  that  that
it  is  true,  though  it  does  follow  that  we  shall  all  think  it
true — and  that  is  as  near  to  truth  as  we  seem  able  to  get.
When  you  are  considering  any  sort  of  theory  of  knowledge,


THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  LOGICAL  ATOMISM.  497

you  are  more  or  less  tied  to  a  certain  unavoidable  subjec-
tivity, because  you  are  not  concerned  simply  with  the  ques-
tion what  is  true  of  the  world,  but  "What  can  I  know  of  the
world?"  You  always  have  to  start  any  kind  of  argument
from  something  which  appears  to  you  to  be  true ;  if  it  ap-
pears to  you  to  be  true,  there  is  no  more  to  be  done.  You
cannot  go  outside  yourself  and  consider  abstractly  whether
the  things  that  appear  to  you  to  be  true  are  true ;  you  may
do  this  in  a  particular  case,  where  one  of  your  beliefs  is
changed  in  consequence  of  others  among  your  beliefs.

The  reason  that  I  call  my  doctrine  logical  atomism  is
because  the  atoms  that  I  wish  to  arrive  at  as  the  sort  of
last  residue  in  analysis  are  logical  atoms  and  not  physical
atoms.  Some  of  them  will  be  what  I  call  "particulars," —
such  things  as  little  patches  of  color  or  sounds,  momentary
things — and  some  of  them  will  be  predicates  or  relations
and  so  on.  The  point  is  that  the  atom  I  wish  to  arrive  at
is  the  atom  of  logical  analysis,  not  the  atom  of  physical
analysis.

It  is  a  rather  curious  fact  in  philosophy  that  the  data
which  are  undeniable  to  start  with  are  always  rather  vague
and  ambiguous.  You  can,  for  instance,  say:  "There  are
a  number  of  people  in  this  room  at  this  moment."  That  is
obviously  in  some  sense  undeniable.  But  when  you  come
to  try  and  define  what  this  room  is,  and  what  it  is  for  a
person  to  be  in  a  room,  and  how  you  are  going  to  distin-
guish one  person  from  another,  and  so  forth,  you  find  that
what  you  have  said  is  most  fearfully  vague  and  that  you
really  do  not  know  what  you  meant.  That  is  a  rather
singular  fact,  that  everything  you  are  really  sure  of,  right
off  is  something  that  you  do  not  know  the  meaning  of,  and
the  moment  you  get  a  precise  statement  you  will  not  be
sure  whether  it  is  true  or  false,  at  least  right  off.  The
process  of  sound  philosophizing,  to  my  mind,  consists  mainly
in  passing  from  those  obvious,  vague,  ambiguous  things,


498  THE  MONIST.

that  we  feel  quite  sure  of,  to  something  precise,  clear,  defi-
nite, which  by  reflection  and  analysis  we  find  is  involved  in
the  vague  thing  that  we  started  from,  and  is,  so  to  speak,
the  real  truth  of  which  that  vague  thing  is  a  sort  of  shadow.
I  should  like,  if  time  were  longer  and  if  I  knew  more  than
I  do,  to  spend  a  whole  lecture  on  the  conception  of  vague-
ness. I  think  vagueness  is  very  much  more  important  in
the  theory  of  knowledge  than  you  would  judge  it  to  be  from
the  writings  of  most  people.  Everything  is  vague  to  a
degree  you  do  not  realize  till  you  have  tried  to  make  it
precise,  and  everything  precise  is  so  remote  from  every-
thing that  we  normally  think,  that  you  cannot  for  a  moment
suppose  that  is  what  we  really  mean  when  we  say  what
we  think.

When  you  pass  from  the  vague  to  the  precise  by  the
method  of  analysis  and  reflection  that  I  am  speaking  of,
you  always  run  a  certain  risk  of  error.  If  I  start  with  the
statement  that  there  are  so  and  so  many  people  in  this  room,
and  then  set  to  work  to  make  that  statement  precise,  I  shall
run  a  great  many  risks  and  it  will  be  extremely  likely  that
any  precise  statement  I  make  will  be  something  not  true
at  all.  So  you  cannot  very  easily  or  simply  get  from  these
vague  undeniable  things  to  precise  things  which  are  going
to  retain  the  undeniability  of  the  starting-point.  The  pre-
cise propositions  that  you  arrive  at  may  be  logically  prem-
ises to  the  system  that  you  build  up  upon  the  basis  of  them,
but  they  are  not  premises  for  the  theory  of  knowledge.  It
is  important  to  realize  the  difference  between  that  from
which  your  knowledge  is,  in  fact,  derived,  and  that  from
which,  if  you  already  had  complete  knowledge,  you  would
deduce  it.  Those  are  quite  different  things.  The  sort  of
premise  that  a  logician  will  take  for  a  science  will  not  be
the  sort  of  thing  which  is  first  known  or  easiest  known:
it  will  be  a  proposition  having  great  deductive  power,  great
cogency  and  exactitude,  quite  a  different  thing  from  the


THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  LOGICAL  ATOMISM.  499

actual  premise  that  your  knowledge  started  from.  When
you  are  talking  of  the  premise  for  theory  of  knowledge,
you  are  not  talking  of  anything  objective,  but  of  something
that  will  vary  from  man  to  man,  because  the  premises  of
one  man's  theory  of  knowledge  will  not  be  the  same  as
those  of  another  man's.  There  is  a  great  tendency  among
a  very  large  school  to  suppose  that  when  you  are  trying
to  philosophize  about  what  you  know,  you  ought  to  carry
back  your  premises  further  and  further  into  the  region  of
the  inexact  and  vague,  beyond  the  point  where  you  yourself
are,  right  back  to  the  child  or  monkey,  and  that  anything
whatsoever  that  you  seem  to  know — but  that  the  psychol-
ogist recognizes  as  being  the  product  of  previous  thought
and  analysis  and  reflection  on  your  part — cannot  really  be
taken  as  a  premise  in  your  own  knowledge.  That,  I  say,  is
a  theory  which  is  very  widely  held  and  which  is  used
against  that  kind  of  analytic  outlook  which  I  wish  to  urge.
It  seems  to  me  that  when  your  object  is,  not  simply  to  study
the  history  or  development  of  mind,  but  to  ascertain  the
nature  of  the  world,  you  do  not  want  to  go  any  further
back  than  you  are  already  yourself.  You  do  not  want  to
go  back  to  the  vagueness  of  the  child  or  monkey,  because
you  will  find  that  quite  sufficient  difficulty  is  raised  by  your
own  vagueness.  But  there  one  is  confronted  by  one  of  those
difficulties  that  occur  constantly  in  philosophy,  where  you
have  two  ultimate  prejudices  conflicting  and  where  argu-
ment ceases.  There  is  the  type  of  mind  which  considers
that  what  is  called  primitive  experience  must  be  a  better
guide  to  wisdom  than  the  experience  of  reflective  persons,
and  there  is  the  type  of  mind  which  takes  exactly  the  oppo-
site view.  On  that  point  I  cannot  see  any  argument  what-
soever. It  is  quite  clear  that  a  highly  educated  person  sees,
hears,  feels,  does  everything  in  a  very  different  way  from
a  young  child  or  animal,  and  that  this  whole  manner  of
experiencing  the  world  and  of  thinking  about  the  world  is


500  THE  MONIST.

very  much  more  analytic  than  that  of  a  more  primitive  ex-
perience. The  things  we  have  got  to  take  as  premises  in
any  kind  of  work  of  analysis  are  the  things  which  appear
to  us  undeniable — to  us  here  and  now,  as  we  are — and  I
think  on  the  whole  that  the  sort  of  method  adopted  by  Des-
cartes is  right :  that  you  should  set  to  work  to  doubt  things
and  retain  only  what  you  cannot  doubt  because  of  its  clear-
ness and  distinctness,  not  because  you  are  sure  not  to  be
induced  into  error,  for  there  does  not  exist  a  method  which
will  safeguard  you  against  the  possibility  of  error.  The
wish  for  perfect  security  is  one  of  those  snares  we  are  al-
ways falling  into,  and  is  just  as  untenable  in  the  realm  of
knowledge  as  in  everything  else.  Nevertheless,  granting
all  this,  I  still  think  that  Descartes's  method  is  on  the  whole
a  sound  one  for  the  starting-point.

I  propose,  therefore,  always  to  begin  any  argument
that  I  have  to  make  by  appealing  to  data  which  will  be
quite  ludicrously  obvious.  Any  philosophical  skill,  that  is
required  will  consist  in  the  selection  of  those  which  are
capable  of  yielding  a  good  deal  of  reflection  and  analysis,
and  in  the  reflection  and  analysis  themselves.

What  I  have  said  so  far  is  by  way  of  introduction.

The  first  truism  to  which  I  wish  to  draw  your  attention
— and  I  hope  you  will  agree  with  me  that  these  things
that  I  call  truisms  are  so  obvious  that  it  is  almost  laugh-
able to  mention  them — is  that  the  world  contains  facts,
which  are  what  they  are  whatever  we  may  choose  to  think
about  them,  and  that  there  are  also  beliefs,  which  have  ref-
erence to  facts,  and  by  reference  to  facts  are  either  true  or
false.  I  will  try  first  of  all  to  give  you  a  preliminary  ex-
planation of  what  I  mean  by  a  "fact."  When  I  speak  of
a  fact — I  do  not  propose  to  attempt  an  exact  definition,  but
an  explanation,  so  that  you  will  know  what  I  am  talking
about — I  mean  the  kind  of  thing  that  makes  a  proposition
true  or  false. If  I  say  "It  is  raining,"  what  I  say  is  true


THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  LOGICAL  ATOMISM.  50I

in  a  certain  condition  of  weather  and  is  false  in  other  con-
ditions of  weather.  The  condition  of  weather  that  makes
my  statement  true  (or  false  as  the  case  may  be),  is  what
I  should  call  a  "fact."  If  I  say  "Socrates  is  dead,"  my
statement  will  be  true  owing  to  a  certain  physiological  oc-
currence which  happened  in  Athens  long  ago.  If  I  say,
"Gravitation  varies  inversely  as  the  square  of  the  distance,"
my  statement  is  rendered  true  by  astronomical  fact.  If  I
say,  "Two  and  two  are  four,"  it  is  arithmetical  fact  that
makes  my  statement  true.  On  the  other  hand,  if  I  say
"Socrates  is  alive,"  or  "Gravitation  varies  directly  as  the
distance,"  or  "Two  and  two  are  five,"  the  very  same  facts
which  made  my  previous  statements  true  show  that  these
new  statements  are  false.

I  want  you  to  realize  that  when  I  speak  of  a  fact  I  do
not  mean  a  particular  existing  thing,  such  as  Socrates  or
the  rain  or  the  sun.  Socrates  himself  does  not  render  any
statement  true  or  false.  You  might  be  inclined  to  suppose
that  all  by  himself  he  would  give  truth  to  the  statement
"Socrates  existed,"  but  as  a  matter  of  fact  that  is  a  mistake.
It  is  due  to  a  confusion  which  I  shall  try  to  explain  in  the
sixth  lecture  of  this  course,  when  I  come  to  deal  with  the
notion  of  existence.  Socrates1  himself,  or  any  particular
thing  just  by  itself,  does  not  make  any  proposition  true  or
false.  "Socrates  is  dead"  and  "Socrates  is  alive"  are  both
of  them  statements  about  Socrates.  One  is  true  and  the
other  false.  What  I  call  a  fact  is  the  sort  of  thing  that  is
expressed  by  a  whole  sentence,  not  by  a  single  name  like
"Socrates."  When  a  single  word  does  come  to  express  a
fact,  like  "fire"  or  "wolf,"  it  is  always  due  to  an  unex-
pressed context,  and  the  full  expression  of  a  fact  will  al-
ways involve  a  sentence.  We  express  a  fact,  for  example,
when  we  say  that  a  certain  thing  has  a  certain  property,

1 1  am  here  for  the  moment  treating  Socrates  as  a  "particular." But  we
shall  see  shortly  that  this  view  requires  modification.


502  THE MONIST.

or  that  it  has  a  certain  relation  to  another  thing;  but  the
thing  which  has  the  property  or  the  relation  is  not  what  I
call  a  "fact."

It  is  important  to  observe  that  facts  belong  to  the  ob-
jective world.  They  are  not  created  by  our  thoughts  or
beliefs  except  in  special  cases.  That  is  one  of  the  sort  of
things  which  I  should  set  up  as  an  obvious  truism,  but,  of
course,  one  is  aware,  the  moment  one  has  read  any  philos-
ophy at  all,  how  very  much  there  is  to  be  said  before  such
a  statement  as  that  can  become  the  kind  of  position  that
you  want.  The  first  thing  I  want  to  emphasize  is  that  the
outer  world — the  world,  so  to  speak,  which  knowledge  is
aiming  at  knowing — is  not  completely  described  by  a  lot
of  "particulars,"  but  that  you  must  also  take  account  of
these  things  that  I  call  facts,  which  are  the  sort  of  things
that  you  express  by  a  sentence,  and  that  these,  just  as  much
as  particular  chairs  and  tables,  are  part  of  the  real  world.
Except  in  psychology,  most  of  our  statements  are  not  in-
tended merely  to  express  our  condition  of  mind,  though
that  is  often  all  that  they  succeed  in  doing.  They  are  in-
tended to  express  facts,  which  (except  when  they  are  psy-
chological facts)  will  be  about  the  outer  world.  There  are
such  facts  involved,  equally  when  we  speak  truly  and  when
we  speak  falsely.  When  we  speak  falsely  it  is  an  objective
fact  that  makes  what  we  say  true  when  we  speak  truly.

There  are  a  great  many  different  kinds  of  facts,  and  we
shall  be  concerned  in  later  lectures  with  a  certain  amount
of  classification  of  facts.  I  will  just  point  out  a  few  kinds  of
facts  to  begin  with,  so  that  you  may  not  imagine  that  facts
are  all  very  much  alike.  There  are  particular  facts,  such
as  "This  is  white";  then  there  are  general  facts,  such  as
"All  men  are  mortal."  Of  course,  the  distinction  between
particular  and  general  facts  is  one  of  the  most  important.
There  again  it  would  be  a  very  great  mistake  to  suppose
that  you  could  describe  the  world  completely  by  means  of


THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  LOGICAL  ATOMISM.  503

particular  facts  alone.  Suppose  that  you  had  succeeded
in  chronicling  every  single  particular  fact  throughout  the
universe,  and  that  there  did  not  exist  a  single  particular
fact  of  any  sort  anywhere  that  you  had  not  chronicled,  you
still  would  not  have  got  a  complete  description  of  the  uni-
verse unless  you  also  added :  "These  that  I  have  chronicled
are  all  the  particular  facts  there  are."  So  you  cannot  hope
to  describe  the  world  completely  without  having  general
facts  as  well  as  particular  facts.  Another  distinction,  which
is  perhaps  a  little  more  difficult  to  make,  is  between  positive
facts  and  negative  facts,  such  as  "Socrates  was  alive" — a
positive  fact, —  and  "Socrates  is  not  alive" — you  might
say  a  negative  fact.2  But  the  distinction  is  difficult  to  make
precise.  Then  there  are  facts  concerning  particular  things
or  particular  qualities  or  relations,  and,  apart  from  them,
the  completely  general  facts  of  the  sort  that  you  have  in
logic,  where  there  is  no  mention  of  any  constituent  what-
ever of  the  actual  world,  no  mention  of  any  particular
thing  or  particular  quality  or  particular  relation,  indeed
strictly  you  may  say  no  mention  of  anything.  That  is  one
of  the  characteristics  of  logical  propositions,  that  they  men-
tion nothing.  Such  a  proposition  is:  "If  one  class  is  part
of  another,  a  term  which  is  a  member  of  the  one  is  also  a
member  of  the  other."  All  those  words  that  come  in  the
statement  of  a  pure  logical  proposition  are  words  really
belonging  to  syntax.  They  are  words  merely  expressing
form  or  connection,  not  mentioning  any  particular  con-
stituent of  the  proposition  in  which  they  occur.  This  is,  of
course,  a  thing  that  wants  to  be  proved;  I  am  not  laying
it  down  as  self-evident.  Then  there  are  facts  about  the
properties  of  single  things;  and  facts  about  the  relations
between  two  things,  three  things,  and  so  on ;  and  any  num-
ber of  different  classifications  of  some  of  the  facts  in  the
world,  which  are  important  for  different  purposes.

2  Negative  facts  are  further  discussed  in  a  later  lecture.


504  THE  MONIST.

It  is  obvious  that  there  is  not  a  dualism  of  true  and
false  facts ;  there  are  only  just  facts.  It  would  be  a  mistake,
of  course,  to  say  that  all  facts  are  true.  That  would  be  a
mistake  because  true  and  false  are  correlatives,  and  you
would  only  say  of  a  thing  that  it  was  true  if  it  was  the  sort
of  thing-  that  might  be  false.  A  fact  cannot  be  either  true
or  false.  That  brings  us  on  to  the  question  of  statements
or  propositions  or  judgments,  all  those  things  that  do  have
the  duality  of  truth  and  falsehood.  For  the  purposes  of
logic,  though  not,  I  think,  for  the  purposes  of  theory  of
knowledge,  it  is  natural  to  concentrate  upon  the  proposition
as  the  thing  which  is  going  to  be  our  typical  vehicle  on  the
duality  of  truth  and  falsehood.  A  proposition,  one  may
say,  is  a  sentence  in  the  indicative,  a  sentence  asserting
something,  not  questioning  or  commanding  or  wishing.  It
may  also  be  a  sentence  of  that  sort  preceded  by  the  word
"that."  For  example,  "That  Socrates  is  alive,"  "That
two  and  two  are  four,"  "That  two  and  two  are  five,"  any-
thing of  that  sort  will  be  a  proposition.

A  proposition  is  just  a  symbol.  It  is  a  complex  symbol
in  the  sense  that  it  has  parts  which  are  also  symbols:  a
symbol  may  be  defined  as  complex  when  it  has  parts  that
are  symbols.  In  a  sentence  containing  several  words,  the
several  words  are  each  symbols,  and  the  sentence  com-
posing them  is  therefore  a  complex  symbol  in  that  sense.
There  is  a  good  deal  of  importance  to  philosophy  in  the
theory  of  symbolism,  a  good  deal  more  than  at  one  time
I  thought.  I  think  the  importance  is  almost  entirely  nega-
tive, i.  e.,  the  importance  lies  in  the  fact  that  unless  you  are
fairly  self-conscious  about  symbols,  unless  you  are  fairly
aware  of  the  relation  of  the  symbol  to  what  it  symbolizes,
you  will  find  yourself  attributing  to  the  thing  properties
which  only  belong  to  the  symbol.  That,  of  course,  is  espe-
ically  likely  in  very  abstract  studies  such  as  philosophical
logic,  because  the  subject-matter  that  you  are  supposed  to


THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  LOGICAL  ATOMISM.  505

be  thinking  of  is  so  exceedingly  difficult  and  elusive  that
any  person  who  has  ever  tried  to  think  about  it  knows  you
do  not  think  about  it  except  perhaps  once  in  six  months
for  half  a  minute.  The  rest  of  the  time  you  think  about
the  symbols,  because  they  are  tangible,  but  the  thing  you
are  supposed  to  be  thinking  about  is  fearfully  difficult  and
one  does  not  often  manage  to  think  about  it.  The  really
good  philosopher  is  the  one  who  does  once  in  six  months
think  about  it  for  a  minute.  Bad  philosophers  never  do.
That  is  why  the  theory  of  symbolism  has  a  certain  im-
portance, because  otherwise  you  are  so  certain  to  mistake
the  properties  of  the  symbolism  for  the  properties  of  the
thing.  It  has  other  interesting  sides  to  it  too.  There  are
different  kinds  of  symbols,  different  kinds  of  relation  be-
tween symbol  and  what  is  symbolized,  and  very  important
fallacies  arise  from  not  realizing  this.  The  sort  of  con-
tradictions about  which  I  shall  be  speaking  in  connection
with  types  in  a  later  lecture  all  arise  from  mistakes  in  sym-
bolism, from  putting  one  sort  of  symbol  in  the  place  where
another  sort  of  symbol  ought  to  be.  Some  of  the  notions
that  have  been  thought  absolutely  fundamental  in  philos-
ophy have  arisen,  I  believe,  entirely  through  mistakes  as
to  symbolism — e.  g.,  the  notion  of  existence,  or,  if  you  like,
reality.  Those  two  words  stand  for  a  great  deal  that  has
been  discussed  in  philosophy.  There  has  been  the  theory
about  every  proposition  being  really  a  description  of  reality
as  a  whole  and  so  on,  and  altogether  these  notions  of  reality
and  existence  have  played  a  very  prominent  part  in  phi-
losophy. Now  my  own  belief  is  that  as  they  have  occurred
in  philosophy,  they  have  been  entirely  the  outcome  of  a
muddle  about  symbolism,  and  that  when  you  have  cleared
up  that  muddle,  you  find  that  practically  everything  that
has  been  said  about  existence  is  sheer  and  simple  mistake,
and  that  is  all  you  can  say  about  it. I  shall  go  into  that  in


506  the  monist.

a  later  lecture,  but  it  is  an  example  of  the  way  in  which
symbolism  is  important.

Perhaps  I  ought  to  say  a  word  or  two  about  what  I  am
understanding  by  symbolism,  because  I  think  some  people
think  you  only  mean  mathematical  symbols  when  you  talk
about  symbolism.  I  am  using  it  in  a  sense  to  include  all
language  of  every  sort  and  kind,  so  that  every  word  is  a
symbol,  and  every  sentence,  and  so  forth.  When  I  speak
of  a  symbol  I  simply  mean  something  that  "means"  some-
thing else,  and  as  to  what  I  mean  by  "meaning"  I  am  not
prepared  to  tell  you.  I  will  in  the  course  of  time  enumerate
a  strictly  infinite  number  of  different  things  that  "mean-
ing" may  mean,  but  I  shall  not  consider  that  I  have  ex-
hausted the  discussion  by  doing  that.  I  think  that  the
notion  of  meaning  is  always  more  or  less  psychological,
and  that  it  is  not  possible  to  get  a  pure  logical  theory  of
meaning,  nor  therefore  of  symbolism.  I  think  that  it  is  of
the  very  essence  of  the  explanation  of  what  you  mean  by
a  symbol  to  take  account  of  such  things  as  knowing,  of
cognitive  relations,  and  probably  also  of  association.  At
any  rate  I  am  pretty  clear  that  the  theory  of  symbolism  and
the  use  of  symbolism  is  not  a  thing  that  can  be  explained
in  pure  logic  without  taking  account  of  the  various  cogni-
tive relations  that  you  may  have  to  things.

As  to  what  one  means  by  "meaning,"  I  will  give  a
few  illustrations.  For  instance,  the  word  "Socrates,"  you
will  say,  means  a  certain  man;  the  word  "mortal"  mean's
a  certain  quality;  and  the  sentence  "Socrates  is  mortal"
means  a  certain  fact.  But  these  three  sorts  of  meaning  are
entirely  distinct,  and  you  will  get  into  the  most  hopeless
contradictions  if  you  think  the  word  "meaning"  has  the
same  meaning  in  each  of  these  three  cases.  It  is  very  im-
portant not  to  suppose  that  there  is  just  one  thing  which
is  meant  by  "meaning,"  and  that  therefore  there  is  just
one  sort  of  relation  of  the  symbol  to  what  is  symbolized.


THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  LOGICAL  ATOMISM.  507

A  name  would  be  a  proper  symbol  to  use  for  a  person;  a
sentence  (or  a  proposition)  is  the  proper  symbol  for  a  fact.

A  belief  or  a  statement  has  duality  of  truth  and  false-
hood, which  the  fact  does  not  have.  A  belief  or  a  statement
always  involves  a  proposition.  You  say  that  a  man  be-
lieves that  so  and  so  is  the  case.  A  man  believes  that  Soc-
rates is  dead.  What  he  believes  is  a  proposition  on  the  face
of  it,  and  for  formal  purposes  it  is  convenient  to  take  the
proposition  as  the  essential  thing  having  the  duality  of
truth  and  falsehood.  It  is  very  important  to  realize  such
things,  for  instance,  as  that  propositions  are  not  names  for
facts.  It  is  quite  obvious  as  soon  as  it  is  pointed  out  to  you,
but  as  a  matter  of  fact  I  never  had  realized  it  until  it  was
pointed  out  to  me  by  a  former  pupil  of  mine,  Wittgenstein.
It  is  perfectly  evident  as  soon  as  you  think  of  it,  that  a
proposition  is  not  a  name  for  a  fact,  from  the  mere  circum-
stance that  there  are  two  propositions  corresponding  to
each  fact.  Suppose  it  is  a  fact  that  Socrates  is  dead.  You
have  two  propositions:  "Socrates  is  dead"  and  "Socrates
is  not  dead."  And  those  two  propositions  corresponding
to  the  same  fact,  there  is  one  fact  in  the  world  which  makes
one  true  and  one  false.  That  is  not  accidental,  and  illus-
trates how  the  relation  of  proposition  to  fact  is  a  totally
different  one  from  the  relation  of  name  to  the  thing  named.
For  each  fact  there  are  two  propositions,  one  true  and  one
false,  and  there  is  nothing  in  the  nature  of  the  symbol  to
show  us  which  is  the  true  one  and  which  is  the  false  one.
If  there  were,  you  could  ascertain  the  truth  about  the  world
by  examining  propositions  without  looking  round  you.

There  are  two  different  relations,  as  you  see,  that  a
proposition  may  have  to  a  fact:  the  one  the  relation  that
you  may  call  being  true  to  the  fact,  and  the  other  being
false  to  the  fact.  Both  are  equally  essentially  logical  rela-
tions which  may  subsist  between  the  two,  whereas  in  the
case  of  a  name,  there  is  only  one  relation  that  it  can  have


508  THE  MONIST.

to  what  it  names.  A  name  can  just  name  a  particular,  or,
if  it  does  not,  it  is  not  a  name  at  all,  it  is  a  noise.  It  cannot
be  a  name  without  having  just  that  one  particular  relation
of  naming  a  certain  thing,  whereas  a  proposition  does  not
cease  to  be  a  proposition  if  it  is  false.  It  has  these  two
ways,  of  being  true  and  being  false,  which  together  corre-
spond to  the  property  of  being  a  name.  Just  as  a  word
may  be  a  name  or  be  not  a  name  but  just  a  meaningless
noise,  so  a  phrase  which  is  apparently  a  proposition  may
be  either  true  or  false,  or  may  be  meaningless,  but  the  true
and  false  belong  together  as  against  the  meaningless.  That
shows,  of  course,  that  the  formal  logical  characteristics  of
propositions  are  quite  different  from  those  of  names,  and
that  the  relations  they  have  to  facts  are  quite  different,  and
therefore  propositions  are  not  names  for  facts.  You  must
not  run  away  with  the  idea  that  you  can  name  facts  in  any
other  way ;  you  cannot.  You  cannot  name  them  at  all.  You
cannot  properly  name  a  fact.  The  only  thing  you  can  do
is  to  assert  it,  or  deny  it,  or  desire  it,  or  will  it,  or  wish  it,
or  question  it,  but  all  those  are  things  involving  the  whole
proposition.  You  can  never  put  the  sort  of  thing  that
makes  a  proposition  to  be  true  or  false  in  the  position  of  a
logical  subject.  You  can  only  have  it  there  as  something
to  be  asserted  or  denied  or  something  of  that  sort,  but  not
something  to  be  named.

DISCUSSION.

Do  you  take  your  starting-point  "That  there  are  many

things"  as  a  postulate  which  is  to  be  carried  along  all  through,
or  has  to  be  proved  afterward?

Mr.  Russell :  No,  neither  the  one  nor  the  other.  I  do  not  take  it  as
a  postulate  that  "There  are  many  things."  I  should  take  it
that,  in  so  far  as  it  can  be  proved,  the  proof  is  empirical,
and  that  the  disproofs  that  have  been  offered  are  a  priori.
The  empirical  person  would  naturally  say,  there  are  many
things.  The  monistic  philosopher  attempts  to  show  that  there
are  not. I  should  propose  to  refute  his  a  priori  arguments.


THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  LOGICAL  ATOMISM.  5OO.

I  do  not  consider  there  is  any  logical  necessity  for  there  to
be  many  things,  nor  for  there  not  to  be  many  things.
I  mean  in  making  a  start,  whether  you  start  with  the  em-
pirical or  the  a  priori  philosophy,  do  you  make  your  state-
ment just  at  the  beginning  and  come  back  to  prove  it,  or
do  you  never  come  back  to  the  proof  of  it?

Mr.  Russell:  No,  you  never  come  back.  It  is  like  the  acorn  to  the
oak.  You  never  get  back  to  the  acorn  in  the  oak.  I  should
like  a  statement  which  would  be  rough  and  vague  and  have
that  sort  of  obviousness  that  belongs  to  things  of  which  you
never  know  what  they  mean,  but  I  should  never  get  back  to
that  statement.  I  should  say,  here  is  a  thing.  We  seem
somehow  convinced  that  there  is  truth  buried  in  this  thing
somewhere.  We  will  look  at  it  inside  and  out  until  we  have  ex-
tracted something  and  can  say,  now  that  is  true.  It  will  not
really  be  the  same  as  the  thing  we  started  from  because  it
will  be  so  much  more  analytic  and  precise.

Does  it  not  look  as  though  you  could  name  a  fact  by  a

date?

Mr.  Russell:  You  can  apparently  name  facts,  but  I  do  not  think
you  can  really :  you  would  always  find  that  if  you  set  out  the
whole  thing  fully,  it  was  not  so.  Suppose  you  say  "The
death  of  Socrates."  You  might  say,  that  is  a  name  for  the
fact  that  Socrates  died.  But  it  obviously  is  not.  You  can
see  that  the  moment  you  take  account  of  truth  and  falsehood.
Supposing  he  had  not  died,  the  phrase  would  still  be  just
as  significant  although  there  could  not  be  then  anything  you
could  name.  But  supposing  he  had  never  lived,  the  sound
"Socrates"  would  not  be  a  name  at  all.  You  can  see  it  in
another  way.  You  can  say  "The  death  of  Socrates  is  a  fic-
tion." Suppose  you  had  read  in  the  paper  that  the  Kaiser
had  been  assassinated,  and  it  turned  out  to  be  not  true.  You
could  then  say,  "The  death  of  the  Kaiser  is  a  fiction."  It
is  clear  that  there  is  no  such  thing  in  the  world  as  a  fiction,
and  yet  that  statement  is  a  perfectly  sound  statement.  From
this  it  follows  that  "The  death  of  the  Kaiser"  is  not  a  name.

II.  PARTICULARS,  PREDICATES,  AND  RELATIONS.

I  propose  to  begin  to-day  the  analysis  of  facts  and  prop-
ositions, for  in  a  way  the  chief  thesis  that  I  have  to  main-


5IO  THE  MONIST.

tain  is  the  legitimacy  of  analysis,  because  if  one  goes  into
what  I  call  Logical  Atomism  that  means  that  one  does  be-
lieve the  world  can  be  analyzed  into  a  number  of  separate
things  with  relations  and  so  forth,  and  that  the  sort  of
arguments  that  many  philosophers  use  against  analysis  are
not  justifiable.

In  a  philosophy  of  logical  atomism  one  might  suppose
that  the  first  thing  to  do  would  be  to  discover  the  kinds  of
atoms  out  of  which  logical  structures  are  composed.  But
I  do  not  think  that  is  quite  the  first  thing;  it  is  one  of  the
early  things,  but  not  quite  the  first.  There  are  two  other
questions  that  one  has  to  consider,  and  one  of  these  at  least
is  prior. You  have  to  consider :

i.  Are  the  things  that  look  like  logically  complex  en-
tities really  complex?
2.  Are  they  really  entities?

The  second  question  we  can  put  off ;  in  fact,  I  shall  not
deal  with  it  fully  until  my  last  lecture.  The  first  question,
whether  they  are  really  complex,  is  one  that  you  have  to
consider  at  the  start.  Neither  of  these  questions  is,  as  it
stands,  a  very  precise  question.  I  do  not  pretend  to  start
with  precise  questions.  I  do  not  think  you  can  start  with
anything  precise.  You  have  to  achieve  such  precision  as
you  can,  as  you  go  along.  Each  of  these  two  questions,
however,  is  capable  of  a  precise  meaning,  and  each  is  really
important.

There  is  another  question  which  comes  still  earlier,
namely:  what  shall  we  take  as  prima  facie  examples  of
logically  complex  entities  ?  That  really  is  the  first  question
of  all  to  start  with.  What  sort  of  things  shall  we  regard
as  prima  facie  complex?

Of  course,  all  the  ordinary  objects  of  daily  life  are  ap-
parently complex  entities :  such  things  as  tables  and  chairs,


THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  LOGICAL  ATOMISM.  5II

loaves  and  fishes,  persons  and  principalities  and  powers —
they  are  all  on  the  face  of  it  complex  entities.  All  the  kinds
of  things  to  which  we  habitually  give  proper  names  are  on
the  face  of  them  complex  entities:  Socrates,  Piccadilly,
Rumania,  Twelfth  Night  or  anything  you  like  to  think  of,
to  which  you  give  a  proper  name,  they  are  all  apparently
complex  entities.  They  seem  to  be  complex  systems  bound
together  into  some  kind  of  a  unity,  that  sort  of  a  unity  that
leads  to  the  bestowal  of  a  single  appellation.  I  think  it  is
the  contemplation  of  this  sort  of  apparent  unity  which  has
very  largely  led  to  the  philosophy  of  monism,  and  to  the
suggestion  that  the  universe  as  a  whole  is  a  single  complex
entity  more  or  less  in  the  sense  in  which  these  things  are
that  I  have  been  talking  about.

For  my  part,  I  do  not  believe  in  complex  entities  of  this
kind,  and  it  is  not  such  things  as  these  that  I  am  going  to
take  as  the  prima  facie  examples  of  complex  entities.  My
reasons  will  appear  more  and  more  plainly  as  I  go  on.
I  cannot  give  them  all  to-day,  but  I  can  more  or  less  explain
what  I  mean  in  a  preliminary  way.  Suppose,  for  example,
that  you  were  to  analyze  what  appears  to  be  a  fact  about
Piccadilly.  Suppose  you  made  any  statement  about  Picca-
dilly, such  as:  "Piccadilly  is  a  pleasant  street."  If  you
analyze  a  statement  of  that  sort  correctly,  I  believe  you  will
find  that  the  fact  corresponding  to  your  statement  does  not
contain  any  constituent  corresponding  to  the  word  "Picca-
dilly." The  word  "Piccadilly"  will  form  part  of  many  sig-
nificant propositions,  but  the  facts  corresponding  to  these
propositions  do  not  contain  any  single  constituent,  whether
simple  or  complex,  corresponding  to  the  word  "Piccadilly."
That  is  to  say,  if  you  take  language  as  a  guide  in  your
analysis  of  the  fact  expressed,  you  will  be  led  astray  in  a
statement  of  that  sort.  The  reasons  for  that  I  shall  give
at  length  in  Lecture  VI,  and  partly  also  in  Lecture  VII,  but
I  could  say  in  a  preliminary  way  certain  things  that  would


512  THE  MONIST.

make  you  understand  what  I  mean.  "Piccadilly,"  on  the
face  of  it,  is  the  name  for  a  certain  portion  of  the  earth's
surface,  and  I  suppose,  if  you  wanted  to  define  it,  you  would
have  to  define  it  as  a  series  of  classes  of  material  entities,
namely  those  which,  at  varying  times,  occupy  that  portion
of  the  earth's  surface.  So  that  you  would  find  that  the
logical  status  of  Piccadilly  is  bound  up  with  the  logical
status  of  series  and  classes,  and  if  you  are  going  to  hold
Piccadilly  as  real,  you  must  hold  that  series  of  classes  are
real,  and  whatever  sort  of  metaphysical  status  you  assign
to  them,  you  must  assign  to  it.  As  you  know,  I  believe
that  series  and  classes  are  of  the  nature  of  logical  fictions :
therefore  that  thesis,  if  it  can  be  maintained,  will  dissolve
Piccadilly  into  a  fiction.  Exactly  similar  remarks  will  apply
to  other  instances :  Rumania,  Twelfth  Night,  and  Socrates.
Socrates,  perhaps,  raises  some  special  questions,  because
the  question  what  constitutes  a  person  has  special  difficul-
ties in  it.  But,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  one  might  identify
Socrates  with  the  series  of  his  experiences.  He  would  be
really  a  series  of  classes,  because  one  has  many  experiences
simultaneously.  Therefore  he  comes  to  be  very  like  Picca-
dilly.

Considerations  of  that  sort  seem  to  take  us  away  from
such  prima  facie  complex  entities  as  we  started  with  to
others  as  being  more  stubborn  and  more  deserving  of  ana-
lytic attention,  namely  facts.  I  explained  last  time  what  I
meant  by  a  fact,  namely,  that  sort  of  thing  that  makes  a
proposition  true  or  false,  the  sort  of  thing  which  is  the
case  when  your  statement  is  true  and  is  not  the  case  when
your  statement  is  false.  Facts  are,  as  I  said  last  time,
plainly  something  you  have  to  take  account  of  if  you  are
going  to  give  a  complete  account  of  the  world.  You  can-
not do  that  by  merely  enumerating  the  particular  things
that  are  in  it :  you  must  also  mention  the  relations  of  these
things,  and  their  properties,  and  so  forth,  all  of  which  are


THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  LOGICAL  ATOMISM.  513

facts,  so  that  facts  certainly  belong  to  an  account  of  the
objective  world,  and  facts  do  seem  much  more  clearly  com-
plex and  much  more  not  capable  of  being  explained  away
than  things  like  Socrates  and  Rumania.  However  you  may
explain  away  the  meaning  of  the  word  "Socrates,"  you  will
still  be  left  with  the  truth  that  the  proposition  "Socrates
is  mortal"  expresses  a  fact.  You  may  not  know  exactly
what  Socrates  means,  but  it  is  quite  clear  that  "Socrates
is  mortal"  does  express  a  fact.  There  is  clearly  some  valid
meaning  in  saying  that  the  fact  expressed  by  "Socrates  is
mortal"  is  complex.  The  things  in  the  world  have  various
properties,  and  stand  in  various  relations  to  each  other.
That  they  have  these  properties  and  relations  are  facts,
and  the  things  and  their  qualities  or  relations  are  quite
clearly  in  some  sense  or  other  components  of  the  facts  that
have  those  qualities  or  relations.  The  analysis  of  appar-
ently complex  things  such  as  we  started  with  can  be  re-
duced by  various  means,  to  the  analysis  of  facts  which  are
apparently  about  those  things.  Therefore  it  is  with  the
analysis  of  facts  that  one's  consideration  of  the  problem  of
complexity  must  begin,  not  by  the  analysis  of  apparently
complex  things.

The  complexity  of  a  fact  is  evidenced,  to  begin  with,
by  the  circumstance  that  the  proposition  which  asserts  a
fact  consists  of  several  words,  each  of  which  may  occur  in
other  contexts.  Of  course,  sometimes  you  get  a  proposi-
tion expressed  by  a  single  word,  but  if  it  is  expressed  fully
it  is  bound  to  contain  several  words.  The  proposition
"Socrates  is  mortal"  may  be  replaced  by  "Plato  is  mortal"
or  by  "Socrates  is  human";  in  the  first  case  we  alter  the
subject,  in  the  second  the  predicate.  It  is  clear  that  all  the
propositions  in  which  the  word  "Socrates"  occurs  have
something  in  common,  and  again  all  the  propositions  in
which  the  word  "mortal"  occurs  have  something  in  com-
mon, something  which  they  do  not  have  in  common  with


514  THE  MONIST.

all  facts  but  only  to  those  which  are  about  Socrates  or  mor-
tality. It  is  clear,  I  think,  that  the  facts  corresponding  to
propositions  in  which  the  word  "Socrates"  occurs  have
something  in  common  corresponding  to  the  common  word
"Socrates"  which  occurs  in  the  propositions,  so  that  you
have  that  sense  of  complexity  to  begin  with,  that  in  a  fact
you  can  get  something  which  it  may  have  in  common  with
other  facts,  just  as  you  may  have  "Socrates  is  human"  and
"Socrates  is  mortal,"  both  of  them  facts,  and  both  having
to  do  with  Socrates,  although  Socrates  does  not  constitute
the  whole  of  either  of  these  facts.  It  is  quite  clear  that  in
that  sense  there  is  a  possibility  of  cutting  up  a  fact  into
component  parts,  of  which  one  component  may  be  altered
without  altering  the  others,  and  one  component  may  occur
in  certain  other  facts  though  not  in  all  other  facts.  I  want
to  make  it  clear,  to  begin  with,  that  there  is  a  sense  in  which
facts  can  be  analyzed.  I  am  not  concerned  with  all  the
difficulties  of  any  analysis,  but  only  with  meeting  the  prima
facie  objections  of  philosophers  who  think  you  really  can-
not analyze  at  all.

I  am  trying  as  far  as  possible  again  this  time,  as  I  did
last  time,  to  start  with  perfectly  plain  truisms.  My  desire
and  wish  is  that  the  things  I  start  with  should  be  so  obvious
that  you  wonder  why  I  spend  my  time  stating  them.  That
is  what  I  aim  at,  because  the  point  of  philosophy  is  to  start
with  something  so  simple  as  not  to  seem  worth  stating,  and
to  end  with  something  so  paradoxical  that  no  one  will  be-
lieve it.

One  prima  facie  mark  of  complexity  in  propositions  is
the  fact  that  they  are  expressed  by  several  words.  I  come
now  to  another  point,  which  applies  primarily  to  proposi-
tions and  thence  derivatively  to  facts.  You  can  understand
a  proposition  when  you  understand  the  words  of  which  it
is  composed  even  though  you  never  heard  the  proposition
before. That  seems  a  very  humble  property,  but  it  is  a


THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  LOGICAL  ATOMISM.  515

property  which  marks  it  as  complex  and  distinguishes  it
from  words  whose  meaning  is  simple.  When  you  know  the
vocabulary,  grammar,  and  syntax  of  a  language,  you  can
understand  a  proposition  in  that  language  even  though  you
never  saw  it  before.  In  reading  a  newspaper,  for  example,
you  become  aware  of  a  number  of  statements  which  are
new  to  you,  and  they  are  intelligible  to  you  immediately,
in  spite  of  the  fact  that  they  are  new,  because  you  under-
stand the  words  of  which  they  are  composed.  This  charac-
teristic, that  you  can  understand  a  proposition  through  the
understanding  of  its  component  words,  is  absent  from  the
component  words  when  those  words  express  something
simple.  Take  the  word  "red,"  for  example,  and  suppose
— as  one  always  has  to  do — that  "red"  stands  for  a  par-
ticular shade  of  color.  You  will  pardon  that  assumption,
but  one  never  can  get  on  otherwise.  You  cannot  under-
stand the  meaning  of  the  word  "red"  except  through  seeing
red  things.  There  is  no  other  way  in  which  it  can  be  done.
It  is  no  use  to  learn  languages,  or  to  look  up  dictionaries.
None  of  these  things  will  help  you  to  understand  the  mean-
ing of  the  word  "red."  In  that  way  it  is  quite  different
from  the  meaning  of  a  proposition.  Of  course,  you  can
give  a  definition  of  the  word  "red,"  and  here  it  is  very  im-
portant to  distinguish  between  a  definition  and  an  analysis.
All  analysis  is  only  possible  in  regard  to  what  is  complex,
and  it  always  depends,  in  the  last  analysis,  upon  direct  ac-
quaintance with  the  objects  which  are  the  meanings  of  cer-
tain simple  symbols.  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  observe  that
one  does  not  define  a  thing  but  a  symbol.  (A  "simple"
symbol  is  a  symbol  whose  parts  are  not  symbols. )  A  simple
symbol  is  quite  a  different  thing  from  a  simple  thing.  Those
objects  which  it  is  impossible  to  symbolize  otherwise  than
by  simple  symbols  may  be  called  "simple,"  while  those
which  can  be  symbolized  by  a  combination  of  symbols  may
be  called  "complex." This  is,  of  course,  a  preliminary


5l6  THE  MONIST.

definition,  and  perhaps  somewhat  circular,  but  that  does
not  much  matter  at  this  stage.

I  have  said  that  "red"  could  not  be  understood  except
by  seeing  red  things.  You  might  object  to  that  on  the
ground  that  you  can  define  red,  for  example,  as  "The  color
with  the  greatest  wave-length."  That,  you  might  say,  is
a  definition  of  "red"  and  a  person  could  understand  that
definition  even  if  he  had  seen  nothing  red,  provided  he
understood  the  physical  theory  of  color.  But  that  does  not
really  constitute  the  meaning  of  the  word  "red"  in  the  very
slightest.  If  you  take  such  a  proposition  as  "This  is  red"
and  substitute  for  it  "This  has  the  color  with  the  greatest
wave-length,"  you  have  a  different  proposition  altogether.
You  can  see  that  at  once,  because  a  person  who  knows
nothing  of  the  physical  theory  of  color  can  understand  the
proposition  "This  is  red,"  and  can  know  that  it  is  true,  but
cannot  know  that  "This  has  the  color  which  has  the  great-
est wave-length."  Conversely,  you  might  have  a  hypothet-
ical person  who  could  not  see  red,  but  who  understood  the
physical  theory  of  color  and  could  apprehend  the  proposi-
tion "This  has  the  color  with  the  greatest  wave-length,"
but  who  would  not  be  able  to  understand  the  proposition
"This  is  red,"  as  understood  by  the  normal  uneducated
person.  Therefore  it  is  clear  that  if  you  define  "red"  as
"The  color  with  the  greatest  wave-length"  you  are  not
giving  the  actual  meaning  of  the  word  at  all ;  you  are  simply
giving  a  true  description,  which  is  quite  a  different  thing,
and  the  propositions  which  result  are  different  propositions
from  those  in  which  the  word  "red"  occurs.  In  that  sense
the  word  "red"  cannot  be  defined,  though  in  the  sense  in
which  a  correct  description  constitutes  a  definition  it  can  be
defined.  In  the  sense  of  analysis  you  cannot  define  "red."
That  is  how  it  is  that  dictionaries  are  able  to  get  on,  be-
cause a  dictionary  professes  to  define  all  the  words  in  the
language  by  means  of  words  in  the  language,  and  therefore


THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  LOGICAL  ATOMISM.  $1J

it  is  clear  that  a  dictionary  must  be  guilty  of  a  vicious  circle
somewhere,  but  it  manages  it  by  means  of  correct  descrip-
tions.

I  have  made  it  clear,  then,  in  what  sense  I  should  say
that  the  word  "red"  is  a  simple  symbol  and  the  phrase
"This  is  red"  a  complex  symbol.  The  word  "red"  can
only  be  understood  through  acquaintance  with  the  object,
whereas  the  phrase  "Roses  are  red"  can  be  understood  if
you  know  what  "red"  is  and  what  "roses"  are,  without
ever  having  heard  the  phrase  before.  That  is  a  clear  mark
of  what  is  complex.  It  is  the  mark  of  a  complex  symbol,
and  also  the  mark  of  the  object  symbolized  by  the  complex
symbol.  That  is  to  say,  propositions  are  complex  symbols,
and  the  facts  they  stand  for  are  complex.

The  whole  question  of  the  meaning  of  words  is  very  full
of  complexities  and  ambiguities  in  ordinary  language.
When  one  person  uses  a  word,  he  does  not  mean  by  it  the
same  thing  as  another  person  means  by  it.  I  have  often
heard  it  said  that  that  is  a  misfortune.  That  is  a  mistake.
It  would  be  absolutely  fatal  if  people  meant  the  same  things
by  their  words.  It  would  make  all  intercourse  impossible,
and  language  the  most  hopeless  and  useless  thing  imagin-
able, because  the  meaning  you  attach  to  your  words  must
depend  on  the  nature  of  the  objects  you  are  acquainted
with,  and  since  different  people  are  acquainted  with  dif-
ferent objects,  they  would  not  be  able  to  talk  to  each  other
unless  they  attached  quite  different  meanings  to  their
words.  We  should  have  to  talk  only  about  logic — a  not
wholly  undesirable  result.  Take,  for  example,  the  word
"Piccadilly."  We,  who  are  acquainted  with  Piccadilly,
attach  quite  a  different  meaning  to  that  word  from  any
which  could  be  attached  to  it  by  a  person  who  had  never
been  in  London :  and,  supposing  that  you  travel  in  foreign
parts  and  expatiate  on  Piccadilly,  you  will  convey  to  your
hearers  entirely  different  propositions  from  those  in  your


518  THE  MONIST.

mind.  They  will  know  Piccadilly  as  an  important  street  in
London;  they  may  know  a  lot  about  it,  but  they  will  not
know  just  the  things  one  knows  when  one  is  walking  along
it.  If  you  were  to  insist  on  language  which  was  unam-
biguous, you  would  be  unable  to  tell  people  at  home  what
you  had  seen  in  foreign  parts.  It  would  be  altogether  in-
credibly inconvenient  to  have  an  unambiguous  language,
and  therefore  mercifully  we  have  not  got  one.

Analysis  is  not  the  same  thing  as  definition.  You  can
define  a  term  by  means  of  a  correct  description,  but  that
does  not  constitute  an  analysis.  It  is  analysis,  not  defini-
tion, that  we  are  concerned  with  at  the  present  moment,
so  I  will  come  back  to  the  question  of  analysis.

We  may  lay  down  the  following  provisional  definitions :

That  the  components  of  a  proposition  are  the  sym-
bols we  must  understand  in  order  to  understand
the  proposition;

That  the  components  of  the  fact  which  makes  a  prop-
osition true  or  false,  as  the  case  may  be,  are  the
meanings  of  the  symbols  which  we  must  under-
stand in  order  to  understand  the  proposition.

That  is  not  absolutely  correct,  but  it  will  enable  you  to
understand  my  meaning.  One  reason  why  it  fails  of  cor-
rectness is  that  it  does  not  apply  to  words  which,  like  "or"
and  "not,"  are  parts  of  propositions  without  corresponding
to  any  part  of  the  corresponding  facts.  This  is  a  topic  for
Lecture  III.

I  call  these  definitions  preliminary  because  they  start
from  the  complexity  of  the  proposition,  which  they  define
psychologically,  and  proceed  to  the  complexity  of  the  fact,
whereas  it  is  quite  clear  that  in  an  orderly,  proper  proce-
dure it  is  the  complexity  of  the  fact  that  you  would  start
from.  It  is  also  clear  that  the  complexity  of  the  fact  can-
not be  something  merely  psychological. If  in  astronomical


THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  LOGICAL  ATOMISM.  519

fact  the  earth  moves  round  the  sun,  that  is  genuinely  com-
plex. It  is  not  that  you  think  it  complex,  it  is  a  sort  of
genuine  objective  complexity,  and  therefore  one  ought  in
a  proper,  orderly  procedure  to  start  from  the  complexity
of  the  world  and  arrive  at  the  complexity  of  the  proposition.
The  only  reason  for  going  the  other  way  round  is  that  in
all  abstract  matters  symbols  are  easier  to  grasp.  I  doubt,
however,  whether  complexity,  in  that  fundamental  objec-
tive sense  in  which  one  starts  from  complexity  of  a  fact,
is  definable  at  all.  You  cannot  analyze  what  you  mean  by
complexity  in  that  sense.  You  must  just  apprehend  it —
at  least  so  I  am  inclined  to  think.  There  is  nothing  one
could  say  about  it,  beyond  giving  criteria  such  as  I  have
been  giving.  Therefore,  when  you  cannot  get  a.  real  proper
analysis  of  a  thing,  it  is  generally  best  to  talk  round  it
without  professing  that  you  have  given  an  exact  definition.
It  might  be  suggested  that  complexity  is  essentially  to
do  with  symbols,  or  that  it  is  essentially  psychological.  I
do  not  think  it  would  be  possible  seriously  to  maintain
either  of  these  views,  but  they  are  the  sort  of  views  that
will  occur  to  one,  the  sort  of  thing  that  one  would  try,  to
see  whether  it  would  work.  I  do  not  think  they  will  do  at
all.  When  we  come  to  the  principles  of  symbolism  which
I  shall  deal  with  in  Lecture  VII,  I  shall  try  to  persuade
you  that  in  a  logically  correct  symbolism  there  will  always
be  a  certain  fundamental  identity  of  structure  between  a
fact  and  the  symbol  for  it ;  and  that  the  complexity  of  the
symbol  corresponds  very  closely  with  the  complexity  of  the
facts  symbolized  by  it.  Also,  as  I  said  before,  it  is  quite
directly  evident  to  inspection  that  the  fact,  for  example,
that  two  things  stand  in  a  certain  relation  to  one  another —
e.  g.,  that  this  is  to  the  left  of  that — is  itself  objectively
complex,  and  not  merely  that  the  apprehension  of  it  is
complex.  The  fact  that  two  things  stand  in  a  certain  rela-
tion to  each  other,  or  any  statement  of  that  sort,  has  a


520  THE  MONIST.

complexity  all  of  its  own.  I  shall  therefore  in  future  as-
sume that  there  is  an  objective  complexity  in  the  world,
and  that  it  is  mirrored  by  the  complexity  of  propositions.

A  moment  ago  I  was  speaking  about  the  great  advan-
tages that  we  derive  from  the  logical  imperfections  of  lan-
guage, from  the  fact  that  our  words  are  all  ambiguous.
I  propose  now  to  consider  what  sort  of  language  a  logically
perfect  language  would  be.  In  a  logically  perfect  language
the  words  in  a  proposition  would  correspond  one  by  one
with  the  components  of  the  corresponding  fact,  with  the
exception  of  such  words  as  "or,"  "not,"  "if,"  "then,"  which
have  a  different  function.  In  a  logically  perfect  language,
there  will  be  one  word  and  no  more  for  every  simple  object,
and  everything  that  is  not  simple  will  be  expressed  by  a
combination  of  words,  by  a  combination  derived,  of  course,
from  the  words  for  the  simple  things  that  enter  in,  one
word  for  each  simple  component.  A  language  of  that  sort
will  be  completely  analytic,  and  will  show  at  a  glance  the
logical  structure  of  the  facts  asserted  or  denied.  The  lan-
guage which  is  set  forth  in  Principia  Mathematica  is  in-
tended to  be  a  language  of  that  sort.  It  is  a  language
which  has  only  syntax  and  no  vocabulary  whatsoever.  Bar-
ring the  omission  of  a  vocabulary  I  maintain  that  it  is  quite
a  nice  language.  It  aims  at  being  that  sort  of  a  language
that,  if  you  add  a  vocabulary,  would  be  a  logically  perfect
language.  Actual  languages  are  not  logically  perfect  in
this  sense,  and  they  cannot  possibly  be,  if  they  are  to  serve
the  purposes  of  daily  life.  A  logically  perfect  language,
if  it  could  be  constructed,  would  not  only  be  intolerably
prolix,  but,  as  regards  its  vocabulary,  would  be  very  largely
private  to  one  speaker.  That  is  to  say,  all  the  names  that
it  would  use  would  be  private  to  that  speaker  and  could
not  enter  into  the  language  of  another  speaker.  It  could
not  use  proper  names  for  Socrates  or  Piccadilly  or  Ru-
mania for  the  reasons  which  I  went  into  earlier  in  the  lee-


THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  LOGICAL  ATOMISM.  521

ture.  Altogether  you  would  find  that  it  would  be  a  very-
inconvenient  language  indeed.  That  is  one  reason  why
logic  is  so  very  backward  as  a  science,  because  the  needs  of
logic  are  so  extraordinarily  different  from  the  needs  of
daily  life.  One  wants  a  language  in  both,  and  unfortunately
it  is  logic  that  has  to  give  way,  not  daily  life.  I  shall,  how-
ever, assume  that  we  have  constructed  a  logically  perfect
language,  and  that  we  are  going  on  state  occasions  to  use
it,  and  I  will  now  come  back  to  the  question  which  I  in-
tended to  start  with,  namely,  the  analysis  of  facts.

The  simplest  imaginable  facts  are  those  which  consist
in  the  possession  of  a  quality  by  some  particular  thing.
Such  facts,  say,  as  "This  is  white."  They  have  to  be  taken
in  a  very  sophisticated  sense.  I  do  not  want  you  to  think
about  the  piece  of  chalk  I  am  holding,  but  of  what  you  see
when  you  look  at  the  chalk.  If  one  says,  "This  is  white"
it  will  do  for  about  as  simple  a  fact  as  you  can  get  hold  of.
The  next  simplest  would  be  those  in  which  you  have  a  rela-
tion between  two  facts,  such  as:  "This  is  to  the  left  of
that."  Next  you  come  to  those  where  you  have  a  triadic
relation  between  three  particulars.  (An  instance  which
Royce  gives  is  "A  gives  B  to  C")  So  you  get  relations
which  require  as  their  minimum  three  terms,  those  we  call
triadic  relations ;  and  those  which  require  four  terms,  which
we  call  tetradic,  and  so  on.  There  you  have  a  whole  in-
finite hierarchy  of  facts, — facts  in  which  you  have  a  thing
and  a  quality,  two  things  and  a  relation,  three  things  and  a
relation,  four  things  and  a  relation,  and  so  on.  That  whole
hierarchy  constitutes  what  I  call  atomic  facts,  and  they  are
the  simplest  sort  of  fact.  You  can  distinguish  among  them
some  simpler  than  others,  because  the  ones  containing  a
quality  are  simpler  than  those  in  which  you  have,  say,  a
pentadic  relation,  and  so  on.  The  whole  lot  of  them,  taken
together,  are  as  facts  go  very  simple,  and  are  what  I  call


522  THE  MONIST.

atomic  facts.  The  propositions  expressing  them  are  what
I  call  atomic  propositions.

In  every  atomic  fact  there  is  one  component  which  is
naturally  expressed  by  a  verb  (or,  in  the  case  of  quality,
it  may  be  expressed  by  a  predicate,  by  an  adjective).  This
one  component  is  a  quality  or  dyadic  or  triadic  or  tetradic
.  . .  relation.  It  would  be  very  convenient,  for  purposes  of
talking  about  these  matters,  to  call  a  quality  a  "monadic
relation"  and  I  shall  do  so ;  it  saves  a  great  deal  of  circum-
locution.

In  that  case  you  can  say  that  all  atomic  propositions
assert  relations  of  varying  orders.  Atomic  facts  contain,
besides  the  relation,  the  terms  of  the  relation — one  term  if
it  is  a  monadic  relation,  two  if  it  is  dyadic,  and  so  on.  These
"terms"  which  come  into  atomic  facts  I  define  as  "par-
ticulars."

Particulars  =  terms  of  relations  in  atomic  facts.

Definition.

That  is  the  definition  of  particulars,  and  I  want  to  em-
phasize it  because  the  definition  of  a  particular  is  some-
thing purely  logical.  The  question  whether  this  or  that  is
a  particular,  is  a  question  to  be  decided  in  terms  of  that
logical  definition.  In  order  to  understand  the  definition  it
is  not  necessary  to  know  beforehand  "This  is  a  particular"
or  "That  is  a  particular".  It  remains  to  be  investigated
what  particulars  you  can  find  in  the  world,  if  any.  The
whole  question  of  what  particulars  you  actually  find  in  the
real  world  is  a  purely  empirical  one  which  does  not  interest
the  logician  as  such.  The  logician  as  such  never  gives  in-
stances, because  it  is  one  of  the  tests  of  a  logical  proposi-
tion that  you  need  not  know  anything  whatsoever  about
the  real  world  in  order  to  understand  it.

Passing  from  atomic  facts  to  atomic  propositions,  the
word  expressing  a  monadic  relation  or  quality  is  called  a


THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  LOGICAL  ATOMISM.  523

"predicate,"  and  the  word  expressing  a  relation  of  any
higher  order  would  generally  be  a  verb,  sometimes  a  single
verb,  sometimes  a  whole  phrase.  At  any  rate  the  verb  gives
the  essential  nerve,  as  it  were,  of  the  relation.  The  other
words  that  occur  in  the  atomic  propositions,  the  words  that
are  not  the  predicate  or  verb,  may  be  called  the  subjects  of
the  proposition.  There  will  be  one  subject  in  a  monadic
proposition,  two  in  a  dyadic  one,  and  so  on.  The  subjects
in  a  proposition  will  be  the  words  expressing  the  terms  of
the  relation  which  is  expressed  by  the  proposition.

The  only  kind  of  word  that  is  theoretically  capable  of
standing  for  a  particular  is  a  proper  name,  and  the  whole
matter  of  proper  names  is  rather  curious.

Proper  Names  =  words  for  particulars.

Definition.
I  have  put  that  down  although,  as  far  as  common  lan-
guage goes,  it  is  obviously  false.  It  is  true  that  if  you  try  to
think  how  you  are  to  talk  about  particulars,  you  will  see
that  you  cannot  ever  talk  about  a  particular  particular  ex-
cept by  means  of  a  proper  name.  You  cannot  use  general
words  except  by  way  of  description.  How  are  you  to  ex-
press in  words  an  atomic  proposition?  An  atomic  propo-
sition is  one  which  does  mention  actual  particulars,  not
merely  describe  them  but  actually  name  them,  and  you  can
only  name  them  by  means  of  names.  You  can  see  at  once
for  yourself,  therefore,  that  every  other  part  of  speech  ex-
cept proper  names  is  obviously  quite  incapable  of  standing
for  a  particular.  Yet  it  does  seem  a  little  odd  if,  having
made  a  dot  on  the  blackboard,  I  call  it  "John."  You  would
be  surprised,  and  yet  how  are  you  to  know  otherwise  what
it  is  that  I  am  speaking  of.  If  I  say,  "The  dot  that  is  on
the  right-hand  side  is  white"  that  is  a  proposition.  If  I
say  "This  is  white"  that  is  quite  a  different  proposition.
"This"  will  do  very  well  while  we  are  all  here  and  can  see


524  THE  MONIST.

it,  but  if  I  wanted  to  talk  about  it  to-morrow  it  would  be
convenient  to  have  christened  it  and  called  it  "John."  There
is  no  other  way  in  which  you  can  mention  it.  You  cannot
really  mention  it  itself  except  by  means  of  a  name.

What  pass  for  names  in  language,  like  "Socrates,"
"Plato,"  and  so  forth,  were  originally  intended  to  fulfil
this  function  of  standing  for  particulars,  and  we  do  accept,
in  ordinary  daily  life,  as  particulars  all  sorts  of  things  that
really  are  not  so.  The  names  that  we  commonly  use,  like
"Socrates,"  are  really  abbreviations  for  descriptions;  not
only  that,  but  what  they  describe  are  not  particulars  but
complicated  systems  of  classes  or  series.  A  name,  in  the
narrow  logical  sense  of  a  word  whose  meaning  is  a  particu-
lar, can  only  be  applied  to  a  particular  with  which  the
speaker  is  acquainted,  because  you  cannot  name  anything
you  are  not  acquainted  with.  You  remember,  when  Adam
named  the  beasts,  they  came  before  him  one  by  one,  and
he  became  acquainted  with  them  and  named  them.  We  are
not  acquainted  with  Socrates,  and  therefore  cannot  name
him.  When  we  use  the  word  "Socrates,"  we  are  really
using  a  description.  Our  thought  may  be  rendered  by  some
such  phrase  as,  "The  Master  of  Plato,"  or  "The  philos-
opher who  drank  the  hemlock,"  or  "The  person  whom  logi-
cians assert  to  be  mortal,"  but  we  certainly  do  not  use  the
name  as  a  name  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  word.

That  makes  it  very  difficult  to  get  any  instance  of  a
name  at  all  in  the  proper  strict  logical  sense  of  the  word.
The  only  words  one  does  use  as  names  in  the  logical  sense
are  words  like  "this"  or  "that."  One  can  use  "this"  as  a
name  to  stand  for  a  particular  with  which  one  is  acquainted
at  the  moment.  We  say  "This  is  white."  If  you  agree
that  "This  is  white,"  meaning  the  "this"  that  you  see,  you
are  using  "this"  as  a  proper  name.  But  if  you  try  to  ap-
prehend the  proposition  that  I  am  expressing  when  I  say
"This  is  white,"  you  cannot  do  it. If  you  mean  this  piece


THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  LOGICAL  ATOMISM.  525

of  chalk  as  a  physical  object,  then  you  are  not  using  a
proper  name.  It  is  only  when  you  use  "this"  quite  strictly,
to  stand  for  an  actual  object  of  sense,  that  it  is  really  a
proper  name.  And  in  that  it  has  a  very  odd  property  for
a  proper  name,  namely  that  it  seldom  means  the  same  thing
two  moments  running  and  does  not  mean  the  same  thing  to
the  speaker  and  to  the  hearer.  It  is  an  ambiguous  proper
name,  but  it  is  really  a  proper  name  all  the  same,  and  it  is
almost  the  only  thing  I  can  think  of  that  is  used  properly
and  logically  in  the  sense  that  I  was  talking  of  for  a  proper
name.  The  importance  of  proper  names,  in  the  sense  of
which  I  am  talking,  is  in  the  sense  of  logic,  not  of  daily
life.  You  can  see  why  it  is  that  in  the  logical  language  set
forth  in  Principia  Mathematica  there  are  not  any  names,
because  there  we  are  not  interested  in  particular  particulars
but  only  in  general  particulars,  if  I  may  be  allowed  such
a  phrase.

Particulars  have  this  peculiarity,  among  the  sort  of  ob-
jects that  you  have  to  take  account  of  in  an  inventory  of
the  world,  that  each  of  them  stands  entirely  alone  and  is
completely  self-subsistent.  It  has  that  sort  of  self-subsis-
tence that  used  to  belong  to  substance,  except  that  it  usually
only  persists  through  a  very  short  time,  so  far  as  our  ex-
perience goes.  That  is  to  say,  each  particular  that  there  is
in  the  world  does  not  in  any  way  logically  depend  upon  any
other  particular.  Each  one  might  happen  to  be  the  whole
universe;  it  is  a  merely  empirical  fact  that  this  is  not  the
case.  There  is  no  reason  why  you  should  not  have  a  uni-
verse consisting  of  one  particular  and  nothing  else.  That
is  a  peculiarity  of  particulars.  In  the  same  way,  in  order
to  understand  a  name  for  a  particular,  the  only  thing  neces-
sary is  to  be  acquainted  with  that  particular.  When  you
are  acquainted  with  that  particular,  you  have  a  full,  ade-
quate, and  complete  understanding  of  the  name,  and  no
further  information  is  required. No  further  information


526  THE  MONIST.

as  to  the  facts  that  are  true  of  that  particular  would  enable
you  to  have  a  fuller  understanding  of  the  meaning  of  the
name.

Bertrand  Russell.
London,  England.

DISCUSSION.

Mr.  Carr:  You  think  there  are  simple  facts  that  are  not  complex.
Are  complexes  all  composed  of  simples  ?  Are  not  the  simples
that  go  into  complexes  themselves  complex?

Mr.  Russell:  No  facts  are  simple.  As  to  your  second  question,
that  is,  of  course,  a  question  that  might  be  argued — whether
when  a  thing  is  complex  it  is  necessary  that  it  should  in
analysis  have  constituents  that  are  simple.  I  think  it  is  per-
fectly possible  to  suppose  that  complex  things  are  capable  of
analysis  ad  infinitum,  and  that  you  never  reach  the  simple.
I  do  not  think  it  is  true,  but  it  is  a  thing  that  one  might  argue,
certainly.  I  do  myself  think  that  complexes — I  do  not  like
to  talk  of  complexes — but  that  facts  are  composed  of  simples,
but  I  admit  that  that  is  a  difficult  argument,  and  it  might  be
that  analysis  could  go  on  forever.

Mr.  Carr:  You  do  not  mean  that  in  calling  the  thing  complex,  you
have  asserted  that  there  really  are  simples?

Mr.  Russell:  No,  I  do  not  think  that  is  necessarily  implied.

Mr.  Neville :  I  do  not  feel  clear  that  the  proposition  "This  is  white"
is  in  any  case  a  simpler  proposition  than  the  proposition  "This
and  that  have  the  same  color."

Mr.  Russell:  That  is  one  of  the  things  I  have  not  had  time  for.
It  may  be  the  same  as  the  proposition  "This  and  that  have
the  same  color."  It  may  be  that  white  is  defined  as  the  color
of  "this,"  or  rather  that  the  proposition  "This  is  white"  means
"This  is  identical  in  color  with  that,"  the  color  of  "that"
being,  so  to  speak,  the  definition  of  white.  That  may  be,  but
there  is  no  special  reason  to  think  that  it  is.

Mr.  Neville :  Are  there  any  monadic  relations  which  would  be  better
examples  ?


THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  LOGICAL  ATOMISM.  527

Mr.  Russell:  I  think  not.  It  is  perfectly  obvious  a  priori  that  you
can  get  rid  of  all  monadic  relations  by  that  trick.  One  of  the
things  I  was  going  to  say  if  I  had  had  time  was  that  you  can
get  rid  of  dyadic  and  reduce  to  triadic,  and  so  on.  But  there
is  no  particular  reason  to  suppose  that  that  is  the  way  the
world  begins,  that  it  begins  with  relations  of  order  n  instead
of  relations  of  order  1.  You  cannot  reduce  them  downward,
but  you  can  reduce  them  upward.

If  the  proper  name  of  a  thing,  a  "this,"  varies  from  in-
stant to  instant,  how  is  it  possible  to  make  any  argument?

Mr.  Russell :  You  can  keep  "this"  going  for  about  a  minute  or  two.
I  made  that  dot  and  talked  about  it  for  some  little  time.  I
mean  it  varies  often.  If  you  argue  quickly,  you  can  get
some  little  way  before  it  is  finished.  I  think  things  last  for
a  finite  time,  a  matter  of  some  seconds  or  minutes  or  what-
ever it  may  happen  to  be.

You  do  not  think  that  air  is  acting  on  that  and  chan-
ging it?

Mr.  Russell:  It  does  not  matter  about  that  if  it  does  not  alter  its
appearance  enough  for  you  to  have  a  different  sense-datum.
